*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) 9104 OF 2007
Reserved on : April 02, 2008.

%

Date of Decision: April 08, 2008

# Dhan Singh
!

..... Appellant
Through Mr. G.C. Tongaria, Advocate.
versus

$ U.O.I. & Ors.

..... Respondent

^

Through Ms. Preetika Dwivedi, Adv. for
Ms. Geetanjali Mohan, Adv.

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SARIN
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest? No.
JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J:
1.

The Petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226

and 227 of the Constitution of India seeking quashing of the orders
dated 22nd March, 2007 passed in OA No.469/2007 as well as order
dated 5th July, 2007 passed in RA No.141/2007 and Respondent No.2’s
order dated 16th August, 2001 removing the Petitioner from service.
FAO(OS) 9104 of 2007

page 1 of 4

The Central Administrative Tribunal had dismissed the Petitioner’s
original OA No.469/2007 primarily on the ground that the arguments
advanced by the Petitioner had no substance and further the petition
filed by the Petitioner was barred by limitation inasmuch as it had been
filed after a lapse of more than six years from the date of order of
removal from service.
2.

Counsel for the Petitioner in the present proceedings contended

that the bar of limitation would not apply as the order removing him from
service passed in August, 2001, was a nullity. The counsel contended
that the dismissal order was in a printed form and it gave no reasons.
Counsel for the Petitioner also relied upon State of Madhya Pradesh
Vs. Syed Qamarali reported in 1967 SLR 228. In the said judgment it
has been held, "the order of dismissal having been made in breach of a
mandatory provision of the rules subject to which only the power of
punishment under section 7 could be exercised, is totally invalid. The
order of dismissal had therefore no legal existence and it was not
necessary for the Respondent to have the order set aside by a court.
The defence of limitation which was based only on the contention that
the order had to be set aside by a court before it became invalid must
therefore be rejected.”

FAO(OS) 9104 of 2007

page 2 of 4

3.

However, we have perused the order removing the Petitioner from

service.

We find that the printed form states that the reasons for

removal of the Petitioner from service are mentioned in the annexure
attached.

The annexure to the printed form reads as under:”As per record of service the employee is habitual
absentee and does not seems to be interested in
working with the Railways. His record of service
also go to prove that he is uneconomical in the
Railways. The charges also proved. The employee
also failed to report to the E.O. Report within the
stipulated period.
He was previously removed from the service but
failed to improve when put back in service.
This all force me to inflict the following penalty with
immediate effect. Removed from service.”

4.

From a perusal of the annexure to the printed form, it is apparent

that the Petitioner’s removal is based on reasons and the said order is,
therefore, not a nullity.

We also find that the Petitioner had never

participated in the Enquiry proceedings despite service and opportunity.
Consequently Petitioner’s reliance on the aforesaid Supreme Court
judgment is clearly misconceived on facts.
5.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner then sought to rely upon the

Railway Board’s circular dated 24th September, 2002.

In the said

circular, the Railway Board has emphasized the need for Disciplinary
and Appellate Authority to pass reasoned and speaking orders.
FAO(OS) 9104 of 2007

page 3 of 4

Learned counsel for the Petitioner has contended that since the order
removing the Petitioner from service was passed in violation of a
mandatory Railway Board’s circular, the order removing the Petitioner
from service had no existence.

6.

We are of the view that the instructions dated 24th September,

2002 would offer no assistance to the Petitioner inasmuch as firstly the
said Circular is an administrative instruction and

it can never have

retrospective effect and operation. In any event, even if the Railway
Board’s circular were to apply then also the situation would not change
inasmuch as we have already concluded that the order removing the
Petitioner from service is a speaking order and it is based on reasons.
7.

Consequently, the present writ petition is dismissed but with no

order as to costs.

[MANMOHAN]
Judge.

[MANMOHAN SARIN]
Judge.
April 08, 2008.
vk/jt
FAO(OS) 9104 of 2007

page 4 of 4

