*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Cr. M.C. No. 1382/2008
Reserved on:- 5th May, 2008
Date of Decision: May 16th , 2008

%
Dr. Amrit Lal Garg & Anr.
Through

..... Petitioner
Ms. Anusuya Salwan and
Ms. Renuka Arora, Advocates
for Petitioners

Versus
The State
Through

..... Respondents
Mr. Sanjeev Bhandari,
Standing Counsel for the State.

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes.
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
Yes.
in the digest?

JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J :
1.

The present petition has been filed under Section 482 Code

of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter referred to as Cr. P.C.) against
the order dated 28th February, 2008 passed by learned Additional

Crl. M.C. 1382/2008

Page 1 of 8

Sessions Judge, Delhi upholding framing of charges against the
petitioners under Section 498A of Indian Penal Code (hereinafter
referred to as IPC).

2.

The brief facts of this case are that the petitioners are the

inlaws of the complainant. The complainant was married to Dr.
Ritesh Garg son of the petitioners on 29th August, 1999.

It is

stated that after marriage the newly wed moved to Devengiri in
Karnataka for their higher medical studies. After completing the
course, husband of the complainant came back to Delhi and joined
PGIMS at Rohtak in July 2001.

Complainant also, after

completing her course, joined her husband and took up a job
there. It is further stated that the relation between the complainant
and her husband were not cordial and complainant refused to stay
at the rented accommodation at Rohtak. Then she along with her
husband shifted to Delhi and stayed at the rented accommodation
at Majlis Park, New Delhi – 110 033, as the complainant refused to
stay with the petitioners as well. Thereafter the complainant and
her husband have been living separately at Ashok Vihar, New

Crl. M.C. 1382/2008

Page 2 of 8

Delhi.

Since the marital life between the complainant and her

husband was not cordial, the husband filed a petition of divorce
under Hindu Marriage Act on 16th January, 2004. Thereafter the
complainant lodged a complaint before CAW cell on 6th February,
2004 alleging demand of dowry, harassment, torture, mental and
physical cruelty against the petitioners, their son and a married
daughter.

3.

On the basis of said complaint FIR No. 204/2004 under

Section 498A, 406 & 34 IPC, PS Preet Vihar was registered. The
charge sheet was filed after investigation on 3rd August, 2007. Trial
court framed charges under Section 498A, 406, 34 IPC.
Aggrieved from the order dated 3rd August, 2007, petitioner
preferred criminal revision petition 99/2007.

The learned

Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi vide order dated 28th October,
2007 held that no charges against the sister-in-law are made out,
but against the petitioners only a prima facie case under Section
498A IPC is made out, as there were no specific allegations under
section 406 IPC against the petitioners.

Crl. M.C. 1382/2008

Page 3 of 8

4.

Learned Counsel for petitioners submits that the complainant

after her marriage never resided with petitioner so the allegations
against the petitioners of dowry and mental and physical torture
are vague and false in nature. It is also said that the petitioners
are senior citizens and enjoy good reputation in the society.
Learned counsel also referred to a letter dated 25th June, 2006
annexed as P-6 written by complainant’s father. She also relies
on the judgement of this court reported in 144 (2007) Delhi Law
Times, 483 titled as “Surjeet Kaur Chopra Vs. State & Anr.”
wherein this Hon’ble Court considered the following circumstances
as relevant :“34………
(c) Allegations in the FIR are primarily directed against
the husband. Prima facie it appears to be a case of
temperamental difference between the husband and
the wife.
(e) Allegations of dowry demand against the father-inlaw only relate to transfer of ownership rights of 2
floors in a property at Sunder Nagar in the name of the
husband of the complainant. The allegation is of a
general nature. The time, date and month of demand
has not been specified”

Crl. M.C. 1382/2008

Page 4 of 8

5.

Before I proceed any further, I may refer to the relevant part

of the complaint filed by Complainant wife against her in-laws.
The said relevant paras are reproduced herein below for ready
reference :“In the month of January 2002, my parents-in-law and
my sister-in-law (Sonum) suggested that Ritesh’s job
at Rohtak was not financially rewarding, therefore, it is
advisable and essential to renovate my in-laws’
existing clinic and to install latest equipment for
Ultrasound, Colour Dopple, Mammography, X-Ray,
etc., for a full-fledged clinic and good financial return.
My parents-in-law demanded a sum of Rs. 50 lacs
from my father, for the said renovation and purchase of
above-said machinery.
I was sent to my paternal home for one month during
March 2002 at Preet Vihar for bringing the money and
almost every day the demand was raised and I was
asked to arrange for the money. My parents could not
arrange the above-said huge amount and showed their
inability to pay the same. My parents-in-law clearly
declared that in case my parents did not pay at least
Rs. 25 lacs immediately, I have no place in their life
and my plight started from the said day. They
threatened me and appeared to have entered into a
deep-rooted conspiracy in a very planned manner to
separate us……
In the month of September 2002, my in-laws and
sister-in-law threw me out from my matrimonial house
C-41, Mahendru Enclave, G.T. Karnal Road, a palatial
3-storey house having more than 30 rooms built on a
plot of 400 sq. yards. I was shifted to a single room in
Crl. M.C. 1382/2008

Page 5 of 8

rented premises at Majlis Park. All my istridhan,
jewellery, valuable clothes and other articles remained
at C-41, Mahendru Enclave, G.T. Karnal Road in
power, control and possession of my in-laws. I was
allowed to take only my necessary things and clothes
in a suitcase that was packed by my mother-in-law
herself. I started living at Majlis Park in tenanted
premises where my husband seldom visited late in the
night and used to leave early in the morning. My
humiliation and torture though started in the month of
March 2002 but it increased day by day.
My in-laws further took a well-planned step to show
that they have not taken any money and dowry from
my parents. The amount of more than Rs. 5 lacs,
which was lying in my savings bank account, was used
and misappropriated by my in-laws and my husband
from September, 1999. All of sudden they purchased
a car in my name in March 2002, however, the same
remained in the use of my in-laws. My father-in-law
further deposited a sum of Rs. 2 lacs in my bank
account in the month of June 2003 to show that my
accounted money has been returned to me and there
is no other liability and demand of dowry on their part.
Similarly, in the month of June, 2003, I was asked to
take a locker on rent in Bank in our joint name but all
my jewellery including diamond and gold sets were not
handed over to me by my mother-in-law, intentionally
and deliberately……
During all these years I suffered grave mental and
physical torture, cruelties, harassment, which led me to
feel totally neglected, helpless and hapless due to the
conduct of my husband, parents-in-law and sister-inlaw. My life became totally dejected and sometimes all
these cruelties drove me to commit suicide. I tolerated
all this inhuman behavior only to save my matrimonial
life and prestige and dignity of my parents.
Crl. M.C. 1382/2008

Page 6 of 8

As such I am placing some of the acts and cruelties of
my in-laws in this complaint, though there are many
other grave cruelties, torture, misbehavior and demand
of dowry. My all the dowry articles, cash, jewellery and
valuables are still in power and control of my parentsin-law and husband, which they have retained with
them.
I, therefore, request your good self to get and recover
all my istri dhan, jewellery, cash and other articles and
a case be registered for cruelty, demand of dowry,
breach of trust and other offence against the abovesaid four persons.”
6.

It is a settled law that a court while framing charges under

the Code of Criminal Procedure has the undoubted power to sift
and weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out
whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been
made out. However, on perusal of the charge-sheet I cannot say
that the material placed before the court do not disclose grave
suspicion against the Petitioners. I may mention that at the stage
of framing charges a court is not supposed to make a roving
enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the
evidence as if it were conducting a trial. Even the judgment of
Surjit Kaur Chopra (Supra) relied upon by the Petitioners deals

Crl. M.C. 1382/2008

Page 7 of 8

with grant of anticipatory bail and not with discharge. Therefore,
the said case has no relevance to the facts of the present case.

7.

Consequently, the present petition is dismissed but with no

order as to costs. However, it is clarified that any observation
made in the present order would not prejudice either of the parties
and the trial court would apply its mind independently and decide
the case in accordance with law.

[MANMOHAN]
Judge.
May 16th, 2008
rn

Crl. M.C. 1382/2008

Page 8 of 8

