*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Reserved on :- 7th May, 2008
Date of Decision: May 14th , 2008

%

+

WP (C) 1122 OF 2007

Dr. L.K. Behl
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr. Sudhir Nandrajog &
Ms. Titni Basu, Advocates

Versus
I.D.P.L. Employees Co-operative
Group Housing Society Ltd.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. R.N. Bhardwaj, Advocate
CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SARIN
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes.
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the digest?

Yes.

JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J :1.

The present writ petition has been filed under Article 226 of

the Constitution of India for issuance of an appropriate writ, order
or direction to set aside the order of the Delhi Cooperative Tribunal
WP (C) 1122/07

Page 1 of 7

dated 26th September, 2006 and to restore the award passed by
the Arbitrator for refund of the money deposited with the
Respondent Society with 18% interest and costs.

2.

Briefly stated the material facts of this case are that in the

year 1974 the Petitioner was enrolled as a member of the
Respondent Cooperative Society.

At that stage, Petitioner was

neither a member of any other cooperative housing society nor did
he own any other residential property in Delhi. However, in the
year 1978 Petitioner enrolled himself as a member of another
cooperative housing society. On realising that he could not be a
member of two cooperative societies, Petitioner in 1984 allegedly
resigned from the membership of the other cooperative housing
society. However, in 1986 the Respondent Cooperative Society
ceased the membership of the Petitioner on the ground that he was
a member of two societies of the same class. Even while ceasing
the membership of the Petitioner, the Respondent Cooperative
Society did not refund the amount paid by the Petitioner amounting
to Rs. 1,31,420/- (Rupees One Lakh Thirty One Thousand Four
Hundred Twenty only). Petitioner challenged the order of cessation
WP (C) 1122/07

Page 2 of 7

right up to the Supreme Court.

However, Petitioner was

unsuccessful in his challenge. Thereafter Petitioner requested the
Cooperative Society to refund the amount deposited by him with
interest @ 18% per annum. Since the Respondent Society refused
to refund the said amount, Petitioner filed an arbitration

claim

petition. On 30th July, 2003, Arbitrator passed an award in favour
of Petitioner for refund of the amount deposited by him along with
simple interest @ 18% per annum and cost of Rs. 5,000/-.
However, the Delhi Cooperative Tribunal on an appeal being filed
by the Respondent Society set aside the award on the ground that
Regulation 13 of the Respondent Cooperative Society gives power
to the Society to forfeit the amount deposited by its member, if the
Society finds that the information given by the sub-lessee was
incorrect.

3.

Learned counsel for Petitioner submitted that Petitioner had

merely been allotted a flat and no sub-lease had been executed in
his favour and hence invocation of Regulation 13 was totally
unwarranted. Learned counsel for the Petitioner further submitted
that Regulation 13 had never been relied upon by the Cooperative
WP (C) 1122/07

Page 3 of 7

Society before the Arbitrator. In fact, the counsel for the Petitioner
claimed refund of the amount deposited by the Petitioner on the
strength of Rule 36(a) of Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules 1973.

4.

Mr. Bhardwaj, learned counsel for the Respondent Society

submitted that the Cooperative Society was entitled to forfeit the
amount deposited by the Petitioner on the strength of Regulation
13. He further submitted that the claim of the Petitioner was barred
by limitation.

5.

Before we proceed further we may reproduced Rule 36 (a)

and Regulation 13 which has been referred to and relied upon by
the counsel for the parties.

“36A. Penalty for belated payment or equalization charges for
new membership on enrollment at the advanced stage of
construction, and payment of interest to a member who has
resigned his membership in a group housing cooperative
society.

1.
In case of default in payment of demand in cooperative
group housing society by the member’s, equalisation charges
on enrolment as a member against vacancy and payment of
interest on resignation by member, the maximum rate of
WP (C) 1122/07

Page 4 of 7

interest charges shall be as under, which shall be approved
by a resolution of the general body of the society :(a)

for default of payment of installment up to
six months
- @ 12% per annum

(b)

for default of payment of installment
up to one year
- @ 15% per annum

(c)

for default of payment of installment
for more than one year
- @ 18% per annum

(d)

Equalisation charges / interest to be
charge from the member enrolled
at the advance stage of construction - @ 24% per
annum.
(e)

interest to be paid by a ground housing
society to a resigned / expelled member
on the amount deposited after deducting
the administrative expenditure incurred
by the society
- @ 7% per annum.

Regulation 13:- If at any stage it is found that the
information given by the sub-lessee concerned at the time of
application or subsequently were incorrect, the society shall
have the power to forfeit his rights over the house allotted to
him without any refund and to get the house vacated
immediately.”

6.

In our view Regulation 13 would not apply to the Petitioner as

no sub-lease had been executed in his favour. In any event, after
ceasing the Petitioner’s membership, the Petitioner could not be
levied with a second penalty of forfeiture of the amount deposited
WP (C) 1122/07

Page 5 of 7

by him. This is more so because the Respondent Society would in
any event be charging equalization charge or premium from the
new member that it would enroll in the place of the Petitioner. In
our view if Regulation 13 is held to be applicable to the Petitioner
then it would amount to legitimization of two penalties on the
Petitioner for the same offence and it would also amount to unjustly
enriching the Respondent Society.

7.

We are also of the view that the Petitioner’s claim is well

within time, in as much as the issue of cessation of the Petitioner’s
membership only attained finality in the year 2000, when the
Hon’ble Supreme Court dismissed the Special Leave Petition filed
by the Petitioner.

As far as Mr. Bhardwaj’s argument that the

Respondent Society needs to be reimbursed the cost it had
incurred during the litigation at the cessation stage is concerned,
we are of the view that in the present proceedings these costs can
not be reimbursed and if the Society was entitled to cost it would
have been granted the same in the initial litigation with regard to
the issue of cessation. Though strictly speaking Rule 36 (a) refers
to resigned or expelled member, in our view the principle stated
WP (C) 1122/07

Page 6 of 7

therein can be extended even to a member whose membership
had been ceased. Consequently, we direct the Respondent Society
to refund the Petitioner the amount of Rs. 1,31,420/- (Rupees One
Lakh Thirty One Thousand Four Hundred Twenty only) deposited
by him along with simple interest @ 7% per annum. The present
petition is allowed in above terms but with no order as to costs.

[MANMOHAN]
Judge.

[MANMOHAN SARIN]
Judge.
May 14th, 2008
rn

WP (C) 1122/07

Page 7 of 7

