*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI

%

Reserved on : . 02.05.2008
Date of Decision: May 14th, 2008

+

WP (C) 3385 OF 2008

Mr. J.L. Kapur

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. K.K. Rohtagi, Advocate.
Versus

Burmah Shell Co-operative Housing
Society & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through None for Respondent No. 1.
Mr. Mohd. Sajid, Advocate for
Respondent No. 2.
Ms. Madhu, Advocate for
Respondent No. 3.
CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SARIN
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes.
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
Yes.
in the digest?

JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J :1.

The present petition has been filed under Article 226/227 of

the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ, order or direction for
setting aside the order dated 10th January, 2008 of the Delhi
WP (C) 3385/2008

Page 1 of 6

Cooperative Tribunal as well as the ex-parte arbitration award
dated 2nd March, 2007 and for a direction to the Respondent No. 1
to offer a legally valid sale deed of flat No. 401 for registration in
favour of the Petitioner.

2.

Though there are multifarious litigations between the parties,

the facts relevant to the present case are that on 12th October,
2006 the Respondent No. 1 Society raised a claim against the
Petitioner and filed an arbitration petition under Section 70 of the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act 2007 praying for an award of Rs.
65,178/- (Rupees sixty five thousand one hundred seventy eight
only) along with 18% interest on account of :(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)

Sweeping
Cleaning of area
Maintenance of roads including zonal roads.
Maintenance of sewage lines.
Maintenance of lawns and parks etc.

The Society had also prayed for a direction to the Petitioner to
submit requisite stamp papers for execution of a sale deed.

3.

On 5th January, 2007 the Deputy Registrar referred the

disputes for arbitration.

WP (C) 3385/2008

However, the Petitioner challenged the

Page 2 of 6

reference order by way of an appeal before the Delhi Cooperative
Tribunal on the ground that the reference order was passed without
application of mind and without deciding whether NDMC ought to
be a party and whether disputes sought to be raised by the Society
could be referred for arbitration under the Delhi Cooperative
Societies Act.

4.

The Tribunal did not grant stay of the arbitration proceedings

but the Petitioner did not appear before the Arbitrator and
consequently the award was passed ex-parte against the
Petitioner.

Thereafter, the Petitioner filed a statutory appeal

against the ex-parte award dated 2nd March, 2007.

The Delhi

Cooperative Tribunal disposed of both the appeals filed by the
Petitioner by way of the impugned order dated 10th January, 2008.
The Tribunal held that as NDMC had refused to take over the
municipal services of the Cooperative Society, the Managing
Committee of the Society was left with no alternative but to provide
the external services at its own expense and to recover the same
from its members, including the Petitioner.

WP (C) 3385/2008

Page 3 of 6

5.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner states that there has been

failure on the part of the Cooperative Society to hand over the
external services to NDMC. He further submits that the actions of
the Respondent Society are motivated in as much as its intention
was to circumvent Section 94 of the Delhi Cooperative Societies
Act 2003 so as to avoid the Respondent Society being wound up.

6.

The Petitioner’s second grievance is with regard to the sale

deed offered to him for execution as according to him some of the
terms incorporated therein were discriminatory as they were
different from the terms which were offered to other similarly
situated members of the Cooperative Society.

7.

On a perusal of the impugned order, we find that the

Respondent Society has been developed on private land which the
NDMC claims is not within its territorial limits. Despite requests by
the Cooperative Society, NDMC has refused to provide external
municipal services to the Society and the Managing Committee has
been left with no other alternative but to provide such services and
to recover its costs from its members. It is pertinent to mention that
WP (C) 3385/2008

Page 4 of 6

resolutions to this effect have been passed by the General Body of
the Respondent Cooperative Society for providing at members cost
external services such as sweeping, cleaning, maintenance of
roads, sewerages, lawns, park etc. It is also not understood as to
how the Petitioner could ask for NDMC to be made a party to an
arbitration proceedings under Delhi Cooperative Societies Act 2003
when NDMC was not a party to any arbitration agreement. We
further find that neither the grievance regarding Section 94 of the
Delhi Cooperative Societies Act 2003 not being implemented, nor
the issue of discriminatory terms of the sale deed were raised
either in the arbitration proceedings or before the Delhi Cooperative
Tribunal. In any event the grievance with regard to section 94 is
misconceived on facts, in as much as we have already concluded
that non-transfer of basic civic services to a local civic body not on
account of failing of the Respondent Society. Further since the
issue of discriminatory terms in the sale deed was not raised before
the Arbitrator, the same cannot be permitted to be raised in these
proceedings. However, keeping in view the well reasoned order
passed by the Delhi Cooperative Tribunal and the finding of the
Tribunal that in the past also the Petitioner had not paid the service
WP (C) 3385/2008

Page 5 of 6

dues of the Respondent Society, we do not think that it is a fit case
for interference in writ jurisdiction.

Consequently, the present

petition being devoid of merit is dismissed but with no order as to
costs.

[MANMOHAN]
Judge.

[MANMOHAN SARIN]
Judge.
May 14th, 2008
rn

WP (C) 3385/2008

Page 6 of 6

