*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

%

Reserved on : April 22 , 2008
Date of Decision: May 20th, 2008

M/s Canbank Financial Services Ltd.

.... Appellant

Through Mr. Anil Airi, Advocate
Versus
M/s Haryana Petrochemicals Ltd. & Anr

.... Respondents

Through Mr. B. Ghosal, Advocate

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SARIN
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest? Yes

JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN , J :
1.

The Appellant has filed the present first appeal being FAO

(OS) No. 71/2006 under Order XLIII read with Order XLIIA read
with Section 10 of Delhi High Court Act, 1966, against the order
FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 1 of 11

dated 29th August, 2005 passed by the learned Single Judge of
this Court. By way of impugned order, the learned Single Judge
has allowed the Respondent No. 1’s application for referring the
disputes raised in the suit by the Appellant/Plaintiff to arbitration.
In fact, the learned Single Judge specifically directed, “that the
parties should take recourse to arbitration and the Arbitrators be
appointed in terms of the Arbitration Clause.”

2.

The learned counsel for the Appellant contends that the

Plaintiff is dominus litus and has the right to choose the parties
and the forum to enforce the rights legally available to him. He
further contends that the Single Judge failed to appreciate that
the Respondent/Defendant No. 2 is neither a signatory nor a
party to the Master Lease Agreement or the supplementary
agreement incorporating the Arbitration Clause. The Appellant’s
counsel also relied on the judgment of the apex Court in
Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd. Vs. Jayesh H. Pandya reported in
(2003 ) 5 SCC 531 to contend that there can be no splitting of
causes of actions or parties. He further states that even though
today

Plaintiff/Appellant

may

have

no

relief

against

Defendant/Respondent No. 2 yet the Single Judge failed to
appreciate that the subject matter of the suit has to be seen at
FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 2 of 11

the time when the Appellant/Plaintiff instituted the suit. According
to the counsel for the Appellant, the subject matter of the suit
was not the subject of the Arbitration Agreement, at the time of
institution of the suit.

3.

The learned counsel for the Respondent No. 1 raises a

preliminary objection to the maintainability of the present appeal.
He contends that in view of Section 37(1) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, it is not open to the Appellant to file the
present appeal before a Division Bench of this Court.

He

submits that the present appeal is not maintainable as the two
contingencies in which appeal is maintainable as provided under
sub-sections (a) & (b) of Section 37(1) are admittedly not there
namely (a) it is not an order granting or refusing to grant any
measure under Section 9 or (b) setting aside or refusing to set
aside an arbitral award under Section 34. Emphasis is laid by
Respondent’s counsel on the use of words “and from no others”
to say that appeal in all other cases is excluded. Section 37(1)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is reproduced
hereinbelow for ready reference.

FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 3 of 11

“37(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders
(and from no others) to the Court authorized by law to
hear appeals from original decrees of the Court
passing the order, namely:(a)

(b)

4.

granting or refusing to grant any measure under
section 9;
setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral
award under section 34.”

The learned counsel for Appellant submits that the act of

allowing Section 8 application tantamounts to a plaint being
rejected and therefore, Appellant could maintain this appeal
under Section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure Code. The
Appellant’s counsel further submits that the impugned order
being in the nature of a judgment deciding valuable rights of the
Plaintiff to maintain a civil suit is challengeable under Section 10
of the Delhi High Court Act, 1966.

In this connection the

Appellant also relies upon judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court rendered in Shah Babulal Khimji Vs. Jayaben D. Kania
reported in AIR 1981 SCC 1786.

5.

To our mind the embargo on appeals in Section 37 is an

absolute and categorical one. Moreover, in the instant case the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

which is a special act

dealing with the arbitrations, specially limits the extent of judicial
FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 4 of 11

intervention inasmuch as it provides that no judicial authority
shall intervene except where so provided.

Section 5 of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is reproduced hereinbelow
for ready reference :-

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
5. Extent of judicial intervention. – Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, in matter governed by this Part, no judicial
authority shall intervene except where so provided in
this Part.

6.

It is also well settled in catena of cases that an appeal is a

creature of the statue, the right to appeal inheres in no one.
Since in the present case Section 37 uses an expression that an
appeal shall lie from the following orders and from no others, it to
our mind consciously takes away the right of appeal against
other orders. Any other interpretation, to our mind, would render
the expression “and from no others” as otiose or nugatory. The
Apex Court in catena of cases has held that any interpretation
which renders words of a statue “otiose” is to be avoided and
eschewed. Consequently, appeal to the Division Bench lies only
from the two orders mentioned in Section 37 (1) and reliance of
the Appellant on Section 96 of CPC is misconceived.

FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 5 of 11

7.

We may also refer to the interpretation placed by the

Supreme Court with regard to similar provision namely Section
39 (1) of the Old Arbitration Act, 1940. The said provision is
reproduced herein below for ready reference :“39. Appealable orders. (1) An appeal shall lie from the
following orders passed under this Act (and from no
others) to the Court authorised by law to hear appeals
from original decrees of the Court passing the order:An order(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

superseding an arbitration;
on an award stated in the form of a special
case;
modifying or correcting an award;
filing or refusing to file an arbitration
agreement;
staying or refusing to stay legal proceedings
where there is an arbitration agreement;
setting aside or refusing to set aside an
award;

Provided that the provisions of this section shall
not apply to any order passed by a Small Cause
Court.

(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in
appeal under this section, but nothing in this section
shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the
[Supreme Court].”

FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 6 of 11

8.

The Supreme Court while interpreting the said provision in

Union of India vs. Mohinder Supply reported at AIR 1962 SC
256 held as under:
“(5) ….. Under S. 39 (1), an appeal lies from the orders
specified in that sub-section and from no others. The
legislature has plainly expressed itself that right of
appeal against orders passed under the Arbitration Act
may be exercised only in respect of certain orders.
The right to appeal against other orders is expressly
taken away. If by the express provision contained in S.
39(1), a right to appeal from a judgment which may
otherwise be available under the Letters patent is
restricted, there is no ground for holding that cl. (2)
does not similarly restrict the exercise of appellate
power granted by the Letters Patent...
(6) … But the right to appeal is a creature of statute; no
litigant has an inherent right to appeal against a
decision of a Court…
(14) The intention of the legislature in enacting sub-s.
(1) of S. 104 is clear : the right to appeal conferred by
any other law for the time being in force is expressly
preserved. This intention is emphasized by S. 4 which
provides that in the absence of any specific provision to
the contrary, nothing in the Code is intended to limit or
otherwise affect any special jurisdiction or power
conferred by or under any other law for the time being
in force…
(19)…. The Arbitration Act which is a consolidating and
amending Act, being substantially in the form of a code
relating to arbitration must be construed without any
assumption that it was not intended to alter the law
relating to appeals. The words of the statute are plain
and explicit and they must be given their full effect and
must be interpreted in their natural meaning,
uninfluenced by any assumptions derived from the
previous state of the law and without any assumption
that the legislature must have intended to leave the
FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 7 of 11

existing law unaltered. In our view the legislature has
made a deliberate departure from the law prevailing
before the enactment of Act of 1940 by codifying the
law relating to appeals in S. 39...”

9.

In Union of India Vs. A.S. Dhupia repoted in AIR 1970

Delhi 108 a full bench of this Court held that Section 39 of the
Arbitration Act 1940 cannot be said to be repealed by implication
by Section 10 (1) of Delhi High Court Act 1966. The relevant
portion of the said judgement is reproduced herein below :“2. We have already held in F.A. O. (O.S.) 6 of 1968 (by
separate judgment of today) (now reported in AIR 1972
Delhi 102) (FB) that Section 10 (1) of the Act of 1966
provides only a forum of appeal from the judgment of
the single judge to a Division Court. We have repelled
the argument that the word „judgment‟ under Section 10
(1) of the Act of 1966 is to be read as having a meaning
which judicial decisions have given to the expression
„judgment‟ in Letters Patent.
According to our
judgment, the appeal from the order of a single judge to
a Division Court under Section 10 (1) of the Act of 1966
will lie only against orders mentioned in Section 104
read Order 43, Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(hereinafter called the Code). The contention therefore
that Sec. 10 (1) of the Act 1966 confers unfettered right
of appeal without any limitation cannot be accepted….
…The Act is a specific Code dealing with the arbitration
matters and Section 39 (1) is a special provision
indicating the orders which alone are appealable. It is
wrong, therefore, to say that Section 10 of the Act of
1966 which only provides for a forum of appeal is
special provision and will override Section 39 (1) of the
Act….
…Section 39 of the Act which is a special provision
dealing with the right of appeal in arbitration matters
FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 8 of 11

cannot be said to have been repealed by implication by
Section 10 (1) of the Act of 1966.”

10.

In the year 1983, Section 39(1) again came up for

interpretation before this Hon’ble Court.

It was sought to be

urged that in view of the subsequent judgment of the Supreme
Court in Shah Babulal Khimji vs. Jayaben De Kanya AIR
1981 SC 1786, the earlier Full Bench decisions of this Court in
University of Delhi’s case reported in AIR 1972 Delhi 102
and N.K. Pvt. Ltd.’s case reported in AIR 1972 Delhi 202 were
no longer good law. However, this contention was repelled by a
Division Bench of this Court in M/S. Banwari Lal Radhey
Mohan, Delhi Vs. The Punjab State Co-operative Supply and
Marketing Federation Ltd. repoted in AIR 1983 Delhi 402 by
holding as under :-

“18. All the above arguments fail to notice one salient
feature and that is that appeals from the
judgment/order of a trial Judge to a larger bench of the
High Court would be maintainable unless otherwise so
provided either expressly or by implication of any law.
Section 4 of the Civil P.C. in terms lays down that when
anything in the Civil P.C. is in conflict with anything in
the special or local law or with any special jurisdiction
or power conferred or any special forum or procedure
prescribed by or under any other law, the Code will not,
in the absence of specific provision to the contrary,
prevail so as to override such inconsistent provision. In
the cases cited and considered by the Supreme Court
FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 9 of 11

in Shah Babulal Khimji‟s case (AIR 1981 SC1786) no
inconsistency was pointed out between the provisions
of the Code or the provisions of the Letters Patent. In
the present case it is not so. Section 39 of the
Arbitration Act in terms says that no other orders would
be appealable except those specified in the section.
Therefore, on the ratio of Shah Babulal Khimji‟s case,
which approves the rule enunciated by the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council in Chowdry‟s case
(1882-10 Ind App 4) it has to be held that no appeal is
competent from the judgment under appeal before us.
Indeed, if we are to read paras 33 and 34 of the
Judgment in Shah Babulal Khimiji‟s case it would
become apparent that the Supreme Court, while
upholding the right of first appeal against judgment of a
trial Judge from orders from which appeal is
permissible under S. 39 of the Arbitration Act impliedly
also held that the provisions of Sec. 39 of the
Arbitration Act would apply in appeals from orders from
which appeal is permissible under Section 39 or was
impermissible.
Their Lordships in Shah Babulal
Khimji‟s case, a decision rendered by a Division Bench
of the Supreme Court, comprising of three Hon‟ble
Judges noticed with approval the decision of the
Supreme Court in the Mohindra Supply Co.‟s case (AIR
1962 SC 256) given by a Bench of four Hon‟ble
Judges. As noticed earlier, maintainability of an appeal
from an order amounting to a judgment from which
appeal is not permissible on a reading of Section 39 of
the Arbitration Act was specifically ruled out in
Mohindra Supply Co.‟s case. We are bound by that
decision.

11.

Though the present case has not been filed under Clause

10 of Letters Patent, but in view of Mohinder Supply, A.S.
Dhupia and M/s. Banwari Lal (which considers Babulal Khimji)
even an appeal under Clause 10 of Letters Patent would not be
maintainable against an order referring the parties to arbitration.
FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 10 of 11

Consequently, the present

appeal is dismissed as not

maintainable. However, the Appellant is given the liberty to file
appropriate proceedings as may be available to it in accordance
with law.
[MANMOHAN]
Judge.

[MANMOHAN SARIN]
Judge.
May 20th, 2008
rb

FAO (OS) No. 71 OF 2006

Page 11 of 11

