*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2175 OF 2008

Reserved on : March
%

18, 2008.

Date of Decision: March 31, 2008

# Govt. of NCT of Delhi
Through Directorate of Education
!

..... Petitioner
Through - Mr. V.K. Tandon, Advocate

versus
$ Shri Bhagwan Singh Gautam
^

..... Respondent
Through - Nemo

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SARIN
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?

No
Yes
Yes

JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J:

1.

The issue that arises for consideration in the present writ petition is whether interest is

payable on delayed payment of pensionary dues.

2.

Briefly stated the material facts for this case are that on 5th February, 1993, full

pensionary benefit amounting to Rs.1,16,976/- were payable to the Respondent. However, the
first payment of pensionary benefits was released to the Respondent only on 3rd August, 1993,
while the second, third and fourth payments were made from 2004 onwards and the last one on

WP(C) 2175 of 2008

page 1 of 3

22nd June, 2006. From the facts narrated in paras 2 and 3 of the impugned judgment of the
Tribunal it is apparent that the petitioner had taken 9 years to complete various formalities before
the first pensionary benefit was released on 3rd August, 1993 and thereafter the arrears in
calculation had to be pursued by the Respondent with various departments of the Petitioner
including its Public Grievance Commission over an extended period of time before all the
pensionary benefits could be released.

3.

The Petitioner has neither before the Central Administrative Tribunal nor before us

expressed any objection either to the calculation or the amount and the rate of interest as claimed
by the Respondent over the outstanding pensionary benefits. However, the only submission of
the Petitioner is that there is no provision in the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 for
payment of interest on delayed payment of pension and commuted value of pension and as such
the Respondent could not have been granted any interest by the Tribunal.

4.

It is pertinent to mention that in the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, there is

no Rule or provision which prohibits the grant of interest as claimed by the Respondent. In fact,
Rule 68 of the said Rules provides for payment of interest on delayed payment of gratuity. Rule
3 of the said Rules, at sub-clause (1)(o), provides that unless the context otherwise requires,
pension includes gratuity. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Union of India and others vs. G.
Anayutsam (dead) by L.Rs. reported in 1997 (5) SLR (SC) 298 has held that for the purposes of
Rule 9 of the said Rules, pension must be construed to include gratuity. Consequently, in our
view, the principle and rate of interest as stipulated in Rule 68 would apply with equal vigour to
outstanding pensionary dues.

5.

The Hon’ble Supreme Court in a catena of cases has held that pension is akin to property

and is not a bounty or charity. It has further been held that pension is not only compensation for
loyal service rendered in the past but it is also a measure of socio economic justice which inheres

WP(C) 2175 of 2008

page 2 of 3

economic security in the fall of life when physical and mental prowess is ebbing corresponding
to aging process and, therefore, one is required to fall back on savings. According to the Hon’ble
Supreme Court the discernible purpose underlying the pension scheme or Rules must inform the
interpretive process and accordingly it should receive a liberal construction and the courts cannot
so interpret such a statute or Rules as to render them inane.

6.

The Tribunal in its impugned judgment has referred to a large number of judgment and

orders passed by the Tribunal itself wherein interest has always been awarded on delayed
payment of pensionary benefits. Even in our Hon’ble High Court the practice has been to
award interest on delayed release of pensionary benefits. In this connection, we may refer to
Delhi Transport Corporation vs. K.K. Berry and others reported in 2006 (IX) AD (Del.) 778,
Chhammi Lal vs. MCD reported in 2001 (94) DLT 148. We may also mention that in a catena
of cases it has been held that interest is nothing but compensation granted for delay in making
payments to a person who has a right to receive it prior in time.

7.

In the present case, since we find that the Petitioners had arbitrarily withheld payment of

pension and the same was released on piecemeal basis to the Respondent over a period of many
years, it would be unfair and unreasonable to deny interest to the Respondent on the withheld
pensionary benefit. Consequently, the present writ petition is dismissed in limine but with no
order as to costs.

[MANMOHAN]
Judge.

[MANMOHAN SARIN]
Judge.
March 31, 2008.
jt.

WP(C) 2175 of 2008

page 3 of 3

