R-18
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 321/1999

%

Date of decision: 1.2.2008
VIMAL PRASAD & ORS.
Through:None

..... Appellants

versus
UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through :Ms. Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate with
Ms. Nidhi Gupta, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?
yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
1.

This appeal is preferred by the appellants challenging the

legality of the judgment and order passed by the learned Single
LPA No.321/1999

page 1 of 10

Judge on 14th May, 1999 whereby the writ petition filed by the
appellants was dismissed.
2.

The appellants herein are the Laboratory Assistants and

they filed the writ petition seeking parity of pay scale with that of
Primary

Teachers

contending,

inter

alia,

that

Laboratory

Assistants and the Primary Teachers are having almost identical
nature of work and discharge almost similar duties and,
therefore, there should be parity of pay scales between them. It
was contended that the Primary Teachers have been given a pay
scale recommended by the Fourth Pay Commission, but the
Laboratory Assistants have not been given the same benefit. The
appellants relied on an office order dated 23.10.1998 issued by
Navyug School Education Society, New Delhi which reads as
under:“As per the decision taken by the Board of
Governors of Navyug School Education Society in
its meeting held on 04.09.98 (item No.7 (b) ), the
pay scale of Lab. Assistant working in Navyug
Schools in the pay scale of Rs.1200-2040 (prerevised) is hereby revised to the pay scale of Rs.
1400-2600(pre-revised) with immediate effect.”
3.

The aforesaid contentions raised before the learned Single

Judge were considered in-depth by him. However, after referring

LPA No.321/1999

page 2 of 10

to the facts of the case and also upon reference to various
decisions of the Supreme Court, it was held that the appellants
cannot claim the reliefs as claimed in the writ petition.

It was

also held that the decisions which were relied upon and referred
to, arose in different circumstances and the ratio decidendi of
those cases cannot be of any help to the appellants. With the
aforesaid observations the writ petition was dismissed.
4.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order, this appeal was

filed. We have considered the issue raised in the present appeal
in the light of the records placed before us.

The appellants are

claiming parity of pay scale with the Primary Teachers who are
placed in a better pay scale as the nature of duties and
responsibilities

discharged by the Laboratory Assistants are

similar to those of Primary Teachers. Our attention was drawn to
a letter of 4th June, 1998, issued by the Department of Education,
Ministry of Human Resource Development wherein reference is
made to a representation

of the Delhi School Laboratory

Assistants Association asking for equivalent pay scale as that of
the Primary School Teachers.

In connection with the said

representation, it was stated that the claim of the Laboratory

LPA No.321/1999

page 3 of 10

Assistants for parity with Primary Teachers was examined by the
Department and a speaking order was passed on 24.1.1997 in
pursuance of the directions of the Central Administrative Tribunal,
Principal Bench, New Delhi. It was also indicated in the said letter
that on the basis of recommendations of the Fifth Central Pay
Commission, Primary Teachers have been provided improved pay
scales whereas the Lab. Assistants have been provided only
replacement pay scales.

The Lab. Assistants were never

considered equivalent to Primary Teachers, therefore, there is no
anomaly in respect of the revised pay scales for Lab. Assistants
on the basis of recommendations of the Fifth Central Pay
Commission.
5.

We find from the records also that

certain Original

Applications had also been filed by the Laboratory Assistants
before the Central Administrative Tribunal in respect of a similar
relief claiming parity of pay scale

with the Primary Teachers.

The Tribunal issued an order on 2.12.1996 directing the
Department

of

Education,

Ministry

of

Development to reconsider the matter.
directions,

the

LPA No.321/1999

Ministry

of

Human

Human

Resource

Pursuant to the said

Resource

Development

page 4 of 10

reconsidered the entire issue regarding parity of pay scales of
Laboratory

Assistants

and

the

Primary

Teachers

and

on

consideration thereof it was conveyed by their letter dated 24th
January, 1997 as under:“(i) The claim of Laboratory Assistants is for pay
scales as granted to Primary School Teachers.
The pay scale of Primary School Teacher is -(i)
Basic Scale - Rs.1200-2040, (ii) Senior Scale after
12 years – Rs. 1400-2600, and (iii) Selection Scale
after 12 years in Senior Scale and attainment of
qualification laid down for TGTs – Rs.1640-2900.
The pay scale of Laboratory Assistants is – (i) Rs.
1200-2040; and (ii) Rs.1350-2200 as personal to
those Laboratory Assistants who were in the prerevised Selection Grade of Rs. 530-610.
The
Laboratory Assistants do not possess professional
qualifications comparable to Primary School
Teachers(PSTs). For the appointment of PSTs, 2
years JBT/ETT or equivalent is an essential
qualification. The Laboratory Assistants employed
under the schools of Govt. of NCT of Delhi are
required
only
to
possess
Senior
Secondary/Intermediate with Science for direct
recruits and Matriculation with Science for
promotees. Hence, the qualifications of PSTs are
much higher. The duties and responsibilities are
also not the same as of Primary Schools
Teachers(PSTs). It has also been represented that
the Laboratory Assistants be granted teachers pay
scale as has been extended to the Librarians and
Sports Coaches. It is clarified that the Librarians
and the Coaches of the different streams have
been provided teachers pay scales as they
possess certain professional qualifications which
the Laboratory Assistants are not required to have
since their duties and responsibilities are quite
LPA No.321/1999

page 5 of 10

different.
The essential qualifications for the
appointment of Coaches are – (i) Graduate from a
recognized university with diploma in physical
education or Bachelor in Physical Education (ii)
Three years service as Physical Education Teacher
and; (iii) Certificate from NIS as Coach in the
games concerned.
Similarly the essential
qualifications for the appointment of Librarians are
graduate from a recognized university with
diploma in library science or Bachelor in Library
Science.
(ii) That the Lab Assistants have been given
certain service benefits as has been extended to
teachers such as age of retirement, teaching
allowances, medical allowances, etc.
The
extension of these benefits alone cannot be
considered a ground for pay parity between Lab
Assistants and Primary School Teachers.
(iii) That the Fifth Central Pay Commission is
presently considering the revision in the pay
scales and other service benefits of different
categories of employees. The Commission has
also obtained comments of the Department of
Education on a memorandum submitted by one
Shri Y.P. Sharma, R/o C/221, Minto Road Complex,
New Delhi, relating to grant of teachers pay scales
to Lab Assistants. This is a further reason why at
this stage, it would not be appropriate for this
Deptt. to take a decision on the question of the
revision of the pay scales of Lab Assistants.
2.
In view of the position stated above, the
Department of Education in the Ministry of Human
Resource Development would not be in a position
to consider any change in the existing pay scales
being enjoyed by the Laboratory assistants
employed under the Government of Delhi.”

LPA No.321/1999

page 6 of 10

6.

Therefore, so far the question of parity is concerned, a

decision has already been taken that there cannot be parity of
pay scales between Laboratory Assistants and the Primary
Teachers for they discharge duties and responsibilities which are
dissimilar to each other.
7.

In this connection we may also refer to a decision of the

Supreme Court in Union of India v. Tarit Ranjan Das (2003) 11
SCC 658 in which the Supreme Court has considered the issue of
parity in employment and equal pay for equal work. What was
involved in the said case was pay scale of Stenographers Grade
'C' in the Central Secretariat and Stenographers of subordinate
offices of Geological Survey of India. In the context of the said
case it was held that equality cannot be based on designation or
the nature of work alone, but there are several other factors like,
responsibilities, reliabilities, experience, confidentiality involved,
functional need and requirements commensurate with the
position in the hierarchy, the qualifications required which are
equally relevant. By referring to its own earlier decisions in the
cases of State of U.P. v. J.P.. Chaurasia (1989) 1 SCC 121, State
of M.P. v. Pramod Bhartiya (1993) 1 SCC 539 and Shyam Babu
LPA No.321/1999

page 7 of 10

Verma v. Union of India (1994) 2 SCC 521, it was held thus:“ ....whether two posts are equal or should carry
equal pay, depends on several factors. It does not
depend just upon either the nature of work or the
volume of work done. Primarily it requires among
others, evaluation of duties and responsibilities of
the respective posts by the competent authorities
constituted for the purpose and courts cannot
ordinately substitute themselves in the place of
those authorities. The quantity of work may be the
same but the quality may be different. That
cannot be determined by relying upon averments
in affidavits of interested parties. It must be
determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission
and the Government, who would be the best
judges, to evaluate the nature of duty,
responsibility and all relevant factors.”
8.

In our considered opinion, the ratio of the aforesaid

decisions of the Supreme Court is applicable to the facts of the
present case for the Government has made an extensive
evaluation of the nature of duties and of other factors and
thereafter come to the conclusion that their nature of work and
responsibilities are dissimilar.

In this connection, we may also

refer to a decision of the Division Bench of this Court in the case
titled as Siya Ram Rai & Ors. v. The Chairperson, Navyug School
Educational Society & Ors in LPA No.131-136/2006 dated 17th
May, 2007.

LPA No.321/1999

In the said case the issue was of Laboratory

page 8 of 10

Assistants working in Navyung Schools claiming pay scale at par
with the pay scale of Primary Teachers working in the schools run
by Delhi Administration and New Delhi Municipal Council. In the
said case the Division Bench of this Court also held that there
cannot be any dispute to the fact that both the Primary Teachers
and Lab Assistants belong to distinct, different and separate
cadres. In the said case reference was also made to Shyam Babu
Verma v. Union of India reported in (1994) 2 SCC 521 and State
of Orissa v. Balaram Sahu reported in (2003) 1 SCC 250 and also
the decision in the case of U.P. State Sugar Corporation Ltd. v.
Sant Raj Singh reported in (2006) 9 SCC 82. After referring to the
aforesaid decisions it was held that there is visible difference
between the two cadres of Primary Teachers and Laboratory
Assistants for the minimum educational qualification is different.
The criteria for admission is also different in the two cadres.
There is also difference in the promotion quota for Lab Assistants
to the post of T.G.T. Therefore, there is difference between the
posts of Laboratory Assistants and the Primary Teachers.
9.

We are of the opinion that on the basis of the ratio of the

aforesaid decisions of the Supreme Court and the Division Bench

LPA No.321/1999

page 9 of 10

decision of this Court, this appeal has no merit. We find no error
in the judgment of the learned Single Judge for arriving at a
conclusion that both the cadres are distinct and separate and
there cannot be parity of pay scales between the two cadres.
10.

We, therefore, find no merit in this appeal and the same

is dismissed. No costs.
CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY
Rohtash

LPA No.321/1999

01, 2008

page 10 of 10

