*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 2021/2006

%

Date of Decision: 1st April, 2008
MUKESH KUMAR

…….APPELLANT
Through: Dr.K.S. Chauhan with Ms.Gyan
Mitra and Mr.Chand Kiran, Advocates
Versus

UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS
……RESPONDENTS
Through:Mr.H.S. Phoolka, Sr.Advocate with
Ms.Meena Chaudhary Sharma,
Mr.Hiren Sharma and Mr.Anil Kumar,
Advocates.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
no
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
no
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? no
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ
1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 4th

October, 2006, passed by the learned Single Judge upholding the action
of the respondents in issuing the transfer order dated 11th March, 2006.
2.

The appellant joined the Indian Iron and Steel Company (IISCO

for short) on 10th June, 1991 as a Management Trainee.

The offer of

appointment was annexed as Annexure R-5 to the counter affidavit filed
by the respondent. In the aforesaid offer of appointment it was stated
that he has been selected as Management Trainee (Administration) and
(LPA2021-2006)

Page 1 of 11

has been posted to IISCO. It was also stated that the other terms and
conditions of his appointment are the ones which are attached with the
said offer of appointment. In Clause-3.1 of the Terms and Conditions of
Appointment it was stipulated as follows:
“3.1 .............You will have to undergo an
intensive training for a period of 12 months to
learn about the technical, managerial and
administrative aspects of your job including on
the job training under the company’s Training
Scheme....”

The other stipulation which is incorporated therein and is relevant for
the purpose of our discussion is as follows:
“3.2 After successful completion of training you
will be entrusted with the independent job
responsibilities as a regular Executive in the
company’s Managerial Cadre.”

In Clause 6.2 his liability to transfer is stipulated as follows:
“6.2 Your services are liable to be transferred
to any of the Steel Plants/Units/Subsidiaries of
Steel Authority of India Ltd., or any of the Steel
Plants/Units in Public Sector at any time and in
that case the contract of your employment
shall stand transferred and assigned to that
Subsidiary/Plant/Unit, as the case may be, upon
the same terms and conditions as contained in
this offer of appointment and the same would
be applicable to you as if the said offer of
appointment was issued to you by that
Subsidiary/Plant/Unit.”

3.

The appellant accepted the aforesaid terms and conditions of his

appointment and joined IISCO. On 19th August, 1991 he requested for
change of department from Personnel to Marketing, which was
accepted. But even then on the same date i.e. on 19th August, 1991 he
(LPA2021-2006)

Page 2 of 11

submitted his resignation on personal grounds, which he
immediately on the same date.

withdrew

Thereafter he was posted in the

Marketing Department and was transferred to New Delhi. Keeping in
mind the organisational requirements and exigencies of service, on 28th
December, 1992 the appellant was transferred to Batala as Sales
Executive with full transfer benefits.

However, from the second week

of September, 1994, the appellant did not report for duty without any
information, consequent upon which the respondent sent a letter to him
on 31st October, 1994 directing him to report for duty.

He was also

directed to report at Burnpur Hospital for medical treatment if he had
any medical problem, but he failed to do so.

Later, when the Batala

branch was closed down by the respondents, the appellant was
transferred to Chandigarh in February, 1995. On 1st September. 1996
the appellant with other officials was sent to Nathpa site, near Bhabha
Nagar, about 350 kilometers from Chandigarh for urgent official work.
Thereafter the petitioner was transferred administratively to Burnpur
Stockyard on 9th June, 1996. However, as the appellant did not join his
duties at Burnpur his services were terminated, which order was later
revoked on 10th February, 1998 treating the period from 30th January,
1997 to 9th February, 1998 as dies non and he was posted at Burnpur
Stockyard.

Thereafter, on his request he was transferred to New Delhi

and was posted in the Stockyard of IISCO.

(LPA2021-2006)

Page 3 of 11

4.

In February, 2006 IISCO was merged with Steel Authority of India

Limited and all employees in the Sales Department of IISCO throughout
India were transferred to the Central Marketing Organisation and were
posted at the same station, except the appellant who was transferred to
Burnpur in the month of March, 2006. The said transfer order dated 11th
March, 2006 by which the appellant was transferred to Burnpur as
Manager (Civil Maintenance) was challenged by the appellant by filing a
writ petition before the learned Single Judge of this Court.
5.

In the writ petition, the main prayer of the appellant was for

quashing of the said order of transfer. Prayers made in the writ petition
are extracted herein-below for reference:
“(a) A writ, order or direction in the nature of
certiorari for quashing the illegal and malafide
transfer order dated March 11, 2006
transferring the petitioner to Burnpur.
(b) A writ, order or direction in the nature of
mandamus directing the respondents to post
the petitioner in any branch/office of ISCO-Steel
Plant of Steel Authority of India at Delhi.
(c) Directions to the respondents to pay the
cost of this writ petition in favour of the
petitioner.”

6.

A bare reading of the aforesaid prayers would indicate that the

appellant challenged the transfer order as illegal on the ground that the
appellant could not have been transferred to Burnpur, and that the
respondents

should

be

directed

to

post

the

appellant

in

any

branch/office of IISCO-Steel Plant of Steel Authority of India at
(LPA2021-2006)

Page 4 of 11

Delhi. While issuing notice in the writ petition and the stay application
a submission of the counsel for the appellant was recorded as follows:
“..... It is submitted by the counsel that the
appellant is only claiming for continuing in
Delhi till the end of the academic session in
March-April, 2007.......”

7.

One of the submissions made before the learned Single Judge

was to the effect that as the appellant was pursuing his MBA from the
Faculty of Management Studies, University of Delhi with the permission
of the respondents, he may be allowed to remain in Delhi till the end of
the academic session in March-April, 2007.

The learned Single Judge

while dismissing the writ petition by a speaking order dated 4 th October,
2006 observed that the appellant could have availed the study leave for
completing his MBA.
8.

Being aggrieved by the said order dated 4th October, 2006, the

present appeal was filed by the appellant in this Court. At the time of
entertaining the appeal, the submission of the

counsel

for the

respondents was recorded to the effect that study leave shall be
granted to the appellant to finish off his MBA Course from Delhi
University, without prejudice to the pleas of the appellant that the
impugned order was not warranted. We are informed that the appellant
has since completed his MBA course. Thereafter, the matter was listed
for final hearing upon which we have heard the learned counsel for the
parties who have also taken us through the relevant documents, which
(LPA2021-2006)

Page 5 of 11

we have perused.
9.

Mainly two contentions have been advanced by the counsel

appearing for the appellant.

The first submission is that the

respondents have served both the orders of transfer dated 11th March,
2006 and the relieving order dated 19th April, 2006 on 20th April, 2006 in
the same envelope whereas both the letters were issued after a gap of
about 40 days, which itself proves and establishes mala fides on the
part of the respondents. The next grievance is that the appellant was
appointed as Management Trainee (Administration) and has been
allotted Sales Department and that all along he has been kept in the
Sales Department and, therefore, the respondents could not have
changed his Department/service conditions from Sales Department to
Civil Maintenance Department, as both the aforesaid Departments are
completely independent cadres having independent identity.
10.

On the other hand, the counsel for the respondents while

refuting the aforesaid submissions of the counsel for the appellant, has
drawn our attention to the terms and conditions of appointment of the
appellant in support of the contention that the appellant has an open
transfer liability. Counsel for the respondents has also pointed out that
the appellant was transferred from the Personnel Department to the
Marketing Department on his own request, which could be done only
because he had a transfer liability. It was further submitted that being

(LPA2021-2006)

Page 6 of 11

appointed as a regular executive in the company’s Managerial Cadre, he
not only had a transfer liability, but in addition also had a transfer
liability to all the branches as per the terms and conditions of his
appointment.
11.

In the light of the aforesaid submissions of counsel for the

parties we may now proceed to determine the issues which are raised
before us.
12.

So far as the issue with regard to the service of transfer order

and the relieving order on the same day is concerned, we do not find
any reason to hold that the aforesaid action on the part of the
respondents in any manner establishes any mala fides against the
appellant. Neither any mala fides as against any particular individual or
officer is alleged by the appellant nor any such person is made a party.
13.

In order to prove mala fides there must be specific, cogent

statements alleging mala fides.

The Supreme Court in the case of

Rajendra Rao v. Union of India reported in (1993) 1 SCC 148 has held
that it may not be always possible to establish malice on facts in a
straight-cut manner.

In an appropriate case it is possible to draw

reasonable inference of mala fide action from the pleadings and
antecedent facts and circumstances. But for such inference there must
be firm foundation of facts pleaded and established, and such inference
cannot be drawn on the basis of insinuations and vague suggestions.

(LPA2021-2006)

Page 7 of 11

Therefore in the light of the aforesaid observations, as the allegations in
the present appeal are vague, cryptic and without any details, the
aforesaid contention is found to be without any merit.
14.

We have also analysed the second contention that the

appellant could not have been sent to the Engineering Department as
Manager (Civil Maintenance).

The stipulations in his terms and

conditions of appointment, which are reproduced hereinabove, clearly
establish that he could be transferred in the managerial cadre to any of
the steel plants/units/subsidiaries of the Steel Authority of India Limited
or any of the steel plants/units in the public sector at any time. The
appellant

was

also

given

training

in technical,

managerial

and

administrative aspects of his job under the company’s training scheme.
He was entrusted with independent job responsibilities as regular
executive in the company’s managerial cadre. Therefore it cannot be
said that the appellant was posted in
branch.

a particular department or

The aforesaid conclusion is also fortified by the fact that it was

on the request of the the appellant that he was transferred from
Personnel Department to Marketing Department on 19th August, 1991.
The reason for placing the services of the appellant at Batala is also
given which is found to be
exigencies of service.

IISCO was merged with the SAIL as IISCO was

declared a sick company.

(LPA2021-2006)

justified and also in the administrative

Resultantly the Marketing Department of

Page 8 of 11

IISCO was also closed and for organisational requirements and in the
exigencies of service, the appellant, being a Civil Engineer and having
received training in technical department also, was transferred to
Burnpur in Civil Maintenance Department. It is the settled position that
transfer is an incidence of service and that the respondents, in terms of
the terms and conditions of the appointment of the appellant, could
transfer and utilise his services wherever they thought fit based on the
exigencies of service. In fact the ‘Other Conditions’ of the terms and
conditions start with the clause that the appellant will be liable to serve
in any part of India. The appellant himself has stated before the learned
Single Judge that he may be allowed to stay in Delhi till the academic
session of 2006-2007 was over. The said period has now expired. As
the appellant was posted in Delhi for quite a long period, it cannot be
said that the aforesaid order of transfer is in any manner illegal, without
jurisdiction or in any manner mala fide.
15.

The learned Single Judge has also referred to various decisions

of the Supreme Court which clearly lay down the exact position, as to
who should be transferred and posted where, is a matter for the
administrative authority to decide. There are umpteen number of
decisions of this Court and the Supreme Court reiterating that the
transfer of an employee being a part of the service conditions is not
normally required to be interfered by the Court in exercise of its

(LPA2021-2006)

Page 9 of 11

discretionary jurisdiction, unless an order of transfer is shown to be an
out come of mala fide exercise or stated to be in violation of statutory
provision prohibiting any such transfer. Reference in this regard can be
made to the observations made by the Supreme Court in the case of
National

Hydroelectric

Power

Corporation

Limited

v.

Shri

Bhagwan reported in (2001) 8 SCC 574, which is reproduced
hereinbelow:
“5. ........It is by now well settled and often
reiterated by this Court that no government
servant or employee of a public undertaking
has any legal right to be posted for ever at any
one particular place since transfer of a
particular employee appointed to the class or
category of transferable post from one place to
other is not only an incident, but a condition of
service, necessary to in public interest and
efficiency in the public administration. Unless
an order of transfer is shown to be an outcome
of mala fide exercise of power or stated to be
in violation of statutory provisions prohibiting
any such transfer, the Courts or the Tribunals
cannot interfere with such orders as a matter
of routine, as though they are the appellate
authorities substituting their own decision for
that of the management, as against such
orders passed in the interest of the
administrative exigencies of the service
concerned......”
(Also see State of Uttar Pradesh v. Siya
Ram reported n (2004) 7 SCC 405).

16.

Even in the cases where one of the spouse is posted at a

particular station the other cannot as a matter of right claim posting at
the same station. Reference in this regard can be made to the decision
of the Supreme Court in the case of Bank of India v. Jagjit
(LPA2021-2006)

Singh

Page 10 of 11

Mehta reported in (1992) 1 SCC 306 wherein it was was observed as
under:
“5. There can be no doubt that ordinarily and
as far as practicable the husband and wife
who are both employed should be posted at
the same station even if their employers be
different. The desirability of such a course is
obvious. However, this does not mean that
their place of posting should invariably be one
of their choice even though their preference
may be taken into account while making the
decision in accordance with administrative
needs. In the case of all-India services, the
hardship resulting from the two being posted
at different stations may be unavoidable at
times particularly when they belong to
different services and one of them cannot be
transferred to the place of other’s posting.
While choosing the career and a particular
service, the couple has to bear in mind this
factor and be prepared to face such a hardship
if the administrative needs and transfer policy
do not permit the posting of both at one place
without sacrifice of the requirement of the
administration and the needs of other
employees.”

17.

In view of the ratio of the aforesaid decisions, we find no reason

to interfere with the order passed by the learned Single Judge.

The

appeal has no merit and is accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE
1st April, 2008
“v”

(LPA2021-2006)

Page 11 of 11

