*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 428/2006

%

Date of decision : 1st April, 2008
Smt.Shammi Madan
Through Mr.R.K. Saini

..... Appellant

versus
Gaon Sabha, Nangali Sakharavati & Ors
..... Respondents
Through Mr.Sanjay Poddar, Advocate for L&DO
Mr.V.K. Tandon, Advocate for R-1-4.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ :
1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated

12th August, 2004 whereby the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ
petition filed by the appellant holding that the appellant and the other
two persons, who had purchased parts of khasra No.12/5, have not
sought partition and that in the revenue records the holding continues
to be one, and consequently erection of partition wall on the land in

LPA No.428/2006

page 1 of 9

question resulted in plots being carved out because of which the
provisions of Section 81 are contravened. The aforesaid findings and
the conclusions arrived at by the learned Single Judge are under
challenge in this appeal on which we have heard the learned counsel
for the parties.
2.

The appellant has unsuccessfully approached various revenue

courts which recorded a uniform finding of fact holding that the
provisions of Section 81 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954
(hereinafter referred to as 'Act') are violated by the appellant and,
therefore, the reliefs sought for by the appellant were rejected by all
the revenue courts by they orders which are upheld by the learned
Single Judge under the impugned judgment and order. A notice dated
9th August, 1997 was issued to the appellant in which it was recorded
that the land belonging to the appellant i.e. 1 bigha and 2 biswas
comprised in khasra No.12/5 in the revenue estate of Village Nangli
Sakrawati was being put to non-agricultural use and, therefore, there
was contravention and violation of the provisions of Section 81 of the
Act. The appellant was directed to show cause as to why the said land
be not vested in the Gaon Sabha.
3.

The appellant submitted his reply dated 1st December, 1997

wherein the appellant did not deny the fact of purchasing land
measuring approximately 1000 sq. yds, but denied putting the said

LPA No.428/2006

page 2 of 9

land to non-agricultural use.
4.

After considering the reply submitted by the appellant, the

Revenue Assistant proceeded to consider the matter and passed an
order on 29th July, 1998 holding that there was violation and
contravention of the provisions of Section 81 of the Act, and vesting
the land in the Gaon Sabha of Village Nangli Sakrawati in terms of the
provisions of Section 81 of the Act. The appellant challenged the said
order by filing an appeal before the Deputy Commissioner (District
South West). The said appeal was considered and was dismissed by
order dated 5th April, 2001 as against which a revision was filed by the
appellant before the Financial Commissioner, who dismissed the said
revision petition by an order dated 4th July, 2002.
5.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid orders passed by the various

revenue authorities, the appellant filed a writ petition in this Court,
which was dismissed by order dated 12th August, 2004 as against
which the present appeal has been preferred.
6.

Counsel appearing for the appellant drew our attention to the

notice issued by the Revenue Assistant and also the report submitted
by the Halka Patwari dated 27th December, 1996 in support of his
submission that all the orders are required to be set aside and
quashed.

It was submitted that in the report of the Halka Patwari

dated 27th December, 1996, which was stated to be the basis of issuing

LPA No.428/2006

page 3 of 9

the aforesaid show cause notice, the Halka Patwari had not stated that
the appellant had constructed any boundary wall.

It was also

submitted that the statement recorded in the said report to the effect
that the appellant had constructed a road is incorrect, as it is not the
appellant but the Authorities which had constructed the road in front of
the appellant's land, for which action the appellant cannot be held
responsible.

During the course of his submissions, he also made

reference to the khasra Girdawari for the year 1997-98 i.e. after the
purchase of the land by the appellant, wherein, it is shown that the
aforesaid land of 1000 sq. yds. had been used for the purpose of bajra
cultivation. It appears to us that similar contentions were raised by the
appellant even before the revenue authorities and also in the reply
submitted by her to the show cause notice.
7.

A reference to the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner

(District South West), which was the first appellate authority, would
indicate that there was originally a land holding which was purchased
by several persons including the 1000 sq. yds. purchased by the
appellant. These purchasers got the said land holding plotted amongst
themselves, and each one of them is separately occupying his/her
share by erecting a boundary wall. A close analysis of the order of the
first appellate authority, would show that the appellant had relied upon
the khasra Girdawari for the year 1997-98 in order to establish that the

LPA No.428/2006

page 4 of 9

land was being used for agricultural purposes only and had never been
used for non-agricultural purposes as is sought to be made out. The
land was purchased by the appellant in 1996 whereas the aforesaid
document was for the year 1997-98, which is subsequent to the date of
purchase.

The appellant had purchased only 1000 sq. yds. of

agricultural land and all the purchasers of the entire land are
occupying

the

land

independently,

partition

walls

have

been

constructed by the other two purchasers and, therefore, the plot of the
appellant measuring 1000 sq. yds. is identifiable and is independent.
The specific case of the appellant is that she is using the said land only
for agricultural purposes, which stands belied by the size of the plot,
which is too small for the purpose of carrying out any agricultural
activity. It is not possible to carry out any agricultural activity within
the said small piece of land. These are also the findings of all the three
revenue courts.
8.

The inspection report of the Patwari dated 27th December, 1996

indicates that the road had been constructed in the entire land
purchased.

The said findings are findings of fact, and sitting as an

appellate court we cannot re-appreciate the evidence to come to a
finding that the aforesaid road was not constructed by the appellant,
but was constructed by some authorities. The report of the Halka
Patwari and the findings recorded thereon by the Revenue Courts as

LPA No.428/2006

page 5 of 9

also by the learned Single Judge on the basis of evidence placed on
record cannot be said to be in any manner erroneous.

Photographs

placed on record by the appellant also do not show that any kind of
agricultural activity was being carried out in the aforesaid land and
that the said road was not constructed by the appellant and was
constructed by some authorities. On the contrary, the photographs
reveal that the plotting of the land had already been done by erection
of the boundary walls.

The said photographs also establish that no

agricultural activity as claimed and as shown in the khasra Girdawari
exists on the said land and, therefore, no reliance could be placed on
the said khasra Girdawari.
9.

The Sub Divisional Magistrate also submitted a fresh report

pertaining to the land after carrying out inspection under his
supervision, which report was filed under the signature of the Revenue
Assistant along with an affidavit dated 7th May, 2004. The said report,
which was filed in the Writ Court, revealed that khasra No.12/5,
measuring 4 bigha and 8 biswas, was sold to three persons, and that at
the site boundary walls had been constructed, which had resulted in
the land being segregated into three plots. They had not sought any
partition of the land from the revenue authorities, but had plotted the
land by making construction of boundary walls. The said report, which
was called for by the Writ Court and submitted by the Sub Divisional

LPA No.428/2006

page 6 of 9

Magistrate, was relied upon by the learned Single Judge for coming to
the conclusion that the land was plotted and that there was
construction in the said land, and also that there was violation and
contravention of the provisions of Section 81.
10.

If we allow such sort of activity being carried out, the intention

of bringing the Land Reforms Act would have no meaning and the
aforesaid provisions would prove to be nugatory. One of the Division
Benches of this Court in the case of Sahib Singh v. The Lt. Governor
of Delhi and Ors. reported in 2007 III AD (DELHI) 125 has also held
that the Act seeks to do away with the uneconomic holdings of small
farmers in the sense that it seeks to prevent the fragmentation of land
holdings, which might result in the holdings being reduced to
uneconomic ones. We may also appropriately refer to the decision of
the Supreme Court in Gaon Sabha and another v. Nathi and
Others, 110 (2004) DLT 549 (SC).

In paragraph 10 and 11 of the

judgment, it was stated thus:
“10. The effect of Section 154(1) is that all lands and
all other kinds of properties enumerated therein shall
vest in the Gaon Sabha on the commencement of the
Act, with an exception that land for the time being
comprised in any holding or grove shall not so vest
and in such land in view of Section 4, Bhumidhar's or
Asami's right would accrue. The proprietors ceased
to exist with effect from the commencement of the
Act. Ownership rights have also been conferred over
all private wells in or outside holdings, tanks, groves
and Abadis, all trees in abadi and all buildings
situated within the limits of an estate belonging to or
LPA No.428/2006

page 7 of 9

held by a proprietor tenant or other person by virtue
of Section 8 of the Act. The scheme of the Act and
also the creation of rights thereunder has been
examined by this Court in Hatti v. Sunder Singh,
1970 (2) SCC 841, and relevant part of para 3 of the
Report where this matter has been discussed is being
reproduced below:
“....... Sections 6, 11, 13 and 154 of the
Act read together, thus, show that, after
the Act came into force, proprietors of
agricultural land as such ceased to exist.
If any land was part of a holding of a
proprietor, he came a Bhumidhar of it. If
it was a part of a holding of some other
person, such as a tenant or a sub-tenant
etc., he became either a Bhumidhar or an
Asami, whereupon the rights of the
proprietor in that land ceased. Lands,
which were not holdings of either the
proprietor or any other person, vested in
the Gaon Sabha......”
11. A Division Bench of Delhi High Court (Prakash
Narain, C.J. and S.S. Chadha, J.) in Nathu v. Hukam
Singh, 21 (1982) 219 = AIR 1983 Delhi 216,
examined the provisions of the Act in considerable
detail. The Bench took note of the Statement of
Objects and Reasons for making the Act which is as
under:.....

.....

.....

.....

.....

The Bench then held that the proprietors of
agricultural land ceased to exist and new classes of
tenures known as Asami and Bhumidhar came into
existence after the commencement of the Act. Para
8 of the report is being reproduced below:
“......... Except to this limited extent of
certain rights in private wells, trees in
abadi and buildings, the proprietors of
agricultural land as such ceased to exist
after the Act came into force.”
LPA No.428/2006

page 8 of 9

Therefore, the legal position is absolutely clear that a
person can be either a Bhumidhar or an Asami of the
agricultural land in a village. He can also be an
owner of the property of the type which is
enumerated in Section 8 of the Act, like private wells,
tanks, groves, Abadis, trees and buildings. Except for
these, all other kinds of lands and property would
vest in the Gaon Sabha. The proprietors and the
concept of proprietors of land stands totally abolished
with the enforcement of the Act. The respondents
neither claimed to be Bhumidhar nor an Asami of the
land which has been acquired. The acquired land
does not come within the purview of Section 8 of the
Act.
In such circumstances the only inference
possible is that the land stood vested with the Gaon
Sabha on the date of the commencement of the Act
and it was the Gaon Sabha which was the owner
thereof and was entitled to receive the entire amount
of compensation.”
11.

In the light of the aforesaid observations, we find no infirmity

in the orders passed by the revenue courts and the Learned Single
Judge. The appeal, therefore, has no merit and is dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL
JUDGE
1st April, 2008
nm

LPA No.428/2006

page 9 of 9

