*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 1636/2006

%

Date of Decision: 1st April, 2008
ADITYA COLLEGE OF PHARMACY & SCIENCE
AND ANOTHER
…….APPELLANTS
Through: Mr.Aseem Mehrotra, Advocate
Versus
GOVERNMENT OF DELHI & ANOTHER
…RESPONDENTS
Through:Mr. V.K.Tandon with
Ms.Manpreet Kaur, Advocates for R-1
Mr.Shobhit Mahant, Advocate for R-2
Mr.Ajay Verma, Advocate for DDA
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?Y
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ

1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order

dated 10th May, 2006 passed by the learned Single Judge
dismissing the writ petition of the appellants herein.
2.

The

second

appellant

is

a

society

imparting

education in the field of medicine and management.
(LPA 1636/2006)

higher

With the

Page 1 of 13

intention of setting up a College of Pharmacy in Delhi, the second
appellant established the Aditya College of Pharmacy & Science,
the appellant No.1 herein, and in the year 1998 approached the
DDA for the allotment of land. It also sought for permission from
the respondent No.2-All India Council for Technical Education
(AICTE for short) to set up the above Pharmacy College. Though
AICTE granted the said permission to the appellants on 18th
November, 1998, the same was only on a year to year basis, as
certain conditions could not be fulfilled by the appellants.

The

terms and conditions which are imposed and are required to be
complied with both for recommendation and also for granting
approval are the minimum standards which a college of pharmacy
must adhere to.
3.

In April, 1999 the Land Allotment Committee of DDA

considered the application filed by the appellant No.2 and took a
decision to allot Plot No.2, Pocket-11, Sector-B, Vasant Kunj, New
Delhi measuring about 1850 sq.mtrs to the second appellant. On
11th October, 1999, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University,
under their letter, granted provisional affiliation to the second
appellant for intake of 30 students in the first appellant-college for
the B.Pharma degree of the University. The said provisional
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 2 of 13

affiliation was subject to fulfilment of the conditions enumerated in
the said letter. Counsel appearing for the the appellants has also
placed before us copy of letter dated 5th July, 2007 conveying the
approval of the competent authority for provisional affiliation of
appellant No1-college to conduct B.Pharma programme of four
years duration with maximum permitted intake capacity of 30
students for the academic session 2007-08, subject to the terms
and conditions mentioned therein.
4.

Although the Land Allotment Committee of the DDA took a

decision to allot land, but the DDA did not make the allotment on
the ground that the appellant No.1 did not have the requisite
sponsorship.

Appellant No. 1 is now imparting education in

B.Pharma from a rented premises.
5.

Aggrieved, the appellants filed a writ petition in this Court

which was registered as WP(C) No.3694/2000. By judgment and
order dated 18th December, 2002 the said writ petition was
dismissed holding that till the appellants did not obtain necessary
sponsorship from the State Government in compliance with Rule
20(e) of the Nazul Land Rules, allotment could not be made.
Thereafter the appellants took up the issue of sponsorship with
the Department of Training and Education, Government of Delhi.
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 3 of 13

On 12th January, 2004 an order was passed rejecting the request
for sponsorship of the appellant No.1 College. The aforesaid order
was challenged in this Court by filing the writ petition out of which
the present appeal arises.
6.

The learned Single Judge considering all the aspects and

also the fact that the appellants filed seven successive writ
petitions which were dismissed,

dismissed the present writ

petition also on the ground that AICTE has not continued with the
approval granted to the appellants and that there are serious
deficiencies in the institute established by the appellants.

Being

aggrieved by the said judgment and order, the present appeal is
filed on which we have heard the learned counsel appearing for
the parties.
7.

There is no denial of the fact that the aforesaid writ petition

which was dismissed and as against which the present appeal is
filed was the eighth writ petition. The issue that was involved in
the writ petition was regarding allotment of land to the appellants.
The said allotment could be made by the DDA only when such
institution has received sponsorship or recommendation by a
department of the Government of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi or a Ministry of the Central Government.
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 4 of 13

8.

It can be clearly said that when the appellant No.2 sought

for allotment of land, such allotment has to be necessarily of nazul
land which would be governed by the provisions of Rule 5 of the
DDA (Disposal of Developed Nazul Lands) Rules, 1981. Rule 20(e)
envisages the pre-condition of sponsorship or recommendation by
a Department of the Delhi Administration or a Ministry of the
Central Government for allotment of land under Rule 5. The
relevant Rules existing at the relevant time are reproduced below
for reference:
“Rule 5: Rules of premium for
allotment of Nazul land to certain
public institutions:- The Authority
may allot Nazul land to schools,
colleges, universities, hospitals, other
social
or
charitable
institutions,
religious,
political,
semi-political
organisations and local bodies for
remunerative, semi-remunerative or unremunerative purposes at the permit
and ground rent in force immediately
before the coming into force of these
rules, or at such rates as the Central
Government may determine from time
to time.”
“Rule 20: Allotment to certain
public institutions:- (1) No allotment
of Nazul land to public institutions
referred to in rule 5 shall be made
unless,
.............
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 5 of 13

(e) allotment to such institutions is
sponsored or recommended by a
Department of the Delhi Administration
or
a
Ministry
of
the
Central
Government.”
9.

The counsel for the appellants during the course of

arguments referred to and relied upon the legal principles laid
down by the Supreme Court in the case of

Jaya Gokul

Educational Trust v. Commissioner & Secretary to Govt
Higher

Education

Department,

Thiruvananthapuram,

Kerala State, reported in (2000) 5 SCC 23 in order to contend
that in the matter of

granting approval to new

technical

institutions and introduction of new courses or programmes, no
State Government can have a policy outside the AICTE Act, and
that such policy cannot be used as a ground for refusing
permission for setting up of a technical institution when the
Council set up under AICTE Act as already granted approval. We
find that the said decision deals with the legal principles and
parameters connected with affiliations and grant of approval for
establishment of technical institutions.

It also lays down that

where fresh facts come to light after approval is granted by the
Council, or some institution does not fulfil the conditions imposed
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 6 of 13

by the Council, the State Government may write to the Council for
the latter to take appropriate action. In our considered opinion the
aforesaid judgment would not be applicable to the facts of the
present case as the question regarding granting approval to a
technical institution is not in issue.
10.

In

the

present

case

admittedly

there

was

only

a

provisional affiliation granted by the University in view of nonfulfilment of certain conditions, which are required to be complied
with by an institute before it can be given due recognition and
affiliation.

The approval which was granted by the AICTE for

establishing the institution was also not permanent and was need
based, as the appellants were unable to fulfil various mandatory
requirements, which are required to be complied with. It is proved
and established from the records that AICTE has dis-continued
with the approval granted to the appellants. It is also proved that
the appellants did not hold any certificate issued by the AICTE
permitting the appellants to conduct a degree or diploma course in
pharmacy.

The

Expert

Committee

of

AICTE

found

serious

deficiencies and non-compliance of the norms and standards of
the AICTE in the running of

the institute. Consequently, the

Council passed an order keeping the institute under ‘No Admission
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 7 of 13

Category’ during 2000-2001 and the students already admitted
were shifted to the Government College of Pharmacy.

As the

institute still did not remove the deficiencies, based on the report
of the Expert Committee, the AICTE decided to withhold fresh
admissions to the appellant No.1 institution for the academic
session 2002-2003 and the appellant No.1 institution was kept
under the ‘No Admission Category’.

Even thereafter, the same

conditions prevailed for the next academic year also i.e. 2003-04
when the AICTE placed the appellant No.1 institution again under
the ‘No Admission Category’ for the said academic session. It was
also the case of the AICTE that the appellant society deliberately
violated the provisions of AICTE standards and norms and,
therefore, was not entitled for any relief until all such deficiencies
as pointed out by the AICTE are complied with.

One of the

conditions that was imposed by the AICTE for not giving approval
seems to be that the appellant society failed to shift to its
permanent site in spite of giving several opportunities. The stand
of the appellants was that the appellant society could shift to a
permanent site only if the students were allotted to its college,
which condition was not acceptable to the AICTE as there was no
such provision in the AICTE Regulations.
(LPA 1636/2006)

Since the appellant
Page 8 of 13

institute failed to comply with the norms and standards of the
AICTE,

the AICTE did not grant extension of approval to the

appellants.
11.

The State Government also filed the counter affidavit. It

was submitted on behalf of the State Government that the Society
was granted NOC in the year 1999 for B.Pharma course and the
approval of the AICTE and affiliation with Indraprastha University
was also granted to run the aforesaid course of B.Pharma.
Pursuant to the aforesaid, admissions were also made for the
B.Pharma course, with intake of 30 students for the academic
sessions 1999-2000. It is the case of the State Government that
the Society was allowed to operate from the temporary site for
one year with the condition that the institute would shift to its
permanent site within a period of one year. The State Government
also sought for certain information from the Principal of the
appellant No.1-college to process their application for sponsorship
of land, but the Society failed to provide the same. It is further the
case of the State Goverment that a number of complaints were
received from students and parents regarding poor infrastructure
and non-academic performance by the institute.

Consequently,

the Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University constituted a High
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 9 of 13

Power

Committee

under

the

Chairmanship

of

Professor

P.N.Shrivastava, Ex-Vice Chancellor, JNU for inspection of the
institute. The said Committee visited the institute and submitted a
report recommending that the college may not be allowed to run
for the academic session 2000-2001 as the institute has failed to
remove the deficiencies. Due to the protests of the students and
the parents, the students who were admitted were also shifted to
the Government College of Pharmacy.

It is also stated in the

affidavit that a High Power Committee was also constituted by the
State Government to consider the application of the appellantSociety, and the said Committee decided not to recommend the
case of the Society to the DDA for allotment of land for running
B.Pharma

course

for

various

reasons

as

stated

in

the

recommendations, which are extracted in the said affidavit and
reproduced below for reference.
“Whereas, while examining the case of sponsorship
for allotment of land the following facts came to
light:
(i) The society was allowed to provisionally run a
B.Pharma course with an intake of 30 students
w.e.f. sessions 1999-2000.
While granting
provisional affiliation GGSIP University vide its
letter dated 11.10.1999 had inter alia, laid down
the conditions that the Institute will shift to its
permanent site within a period of one year. The
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 10 of 13

society failed to fulfil this condition.
(ii) The Department of Training & Technical
Education vide their letter No.196/27/land/9798/DDTE/2302 dated 7.8.2000 sought certain
information from the Principal, Aditya Institute of
Technology, to process their application for
sponsorship of land. The society did not bother
to furnish complete information. Accordingly the
sponsorship request of the society for allotment
of land from the Govt. of Delhi which is
mandatory could not be made.
(iii) A committee under the Chairmanship of
Prof.P.N.Shrivastava, Ex.Vice Chancellor JNU,
New Delhi visited the institute on 27.4.2000 to
monitor and evaluate the academic functioning
of the institute. The committee found the faculty
including
the
Principal
inadequate,
the
infrastructure in terms of lab, classrooms, library,
equipment of poorest quality and the campus
congested. The Institute was advised to remove
the deficiencies but when a subsequent visit was
made on 27.6.2000 by a committee consisting of
Prof
S.S.Aggarwal,
Principal,
College
of
Pharmacy, New Delhi, Prof.R.Zafar, Head of
Department
of
Pharmacology
Hamdard
University, Dr.A.A.Siddique, Reader Professor.
AIIMS and Shri Dalip Kumar, Deputy Registrar, IP
University, the situation of lack of space, lack of
faculty, poor condition of labs still persisted and
the committee recommended that the College
may not be allowed to admit students during the
sessions 2000-2001.
In the meanwhile the
situation turned so ugly with the protest by the
students and parents that the admitted batch of
students had to be shifted to College of
Pharmacy under Govt. of Delhi. Thereafter, no
admission was made for the course w.e.f. 2000
as the society was unsuccessful in running the
course.
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 11 of 13

(iv) The situation in other diploma courses being
run by the society has been no better. Pharmacy
Council of India not satisfied with the running of
diploma course in Pharmacy withdrew the
recognition affecting the career of large number
of students. The intake in the disciplines of
Electronics,
Computer Engg.
Medial
Lab,
Technology had to be reduced. For academic
session 2003-2004 the State level Committee of
the Government of Delhi had to stop admission
to the Computer Engg. Course on account of
deficiency in the matter of faculty, equipment,
computer and space norms of AICTE. In fact the
society was allowed to run these courses since
1995 under the condition that these courses will
be shifted to the permanent site but the society
has not bothered to construct a building even
though DDA had long back allotted land to the
society for this purpose. The present premises
are not at all suitable to run the courses.”
12.

From the aforesaid, it appears that there were a number

of complaints and non-compliance of various standards and norms
and, therefore, the State Government thought it fit not to make a
recommendation in favour of the appellants. Unless the State
Government sponsors the case for allotment of land, under the
Rule 20(e) prevailing at the relevant time no such allotment could
be made by the DDA and, therefore, the DDA cannot also be held
responsible for non-allotment of land, particularly for want of
sponsorship by the State Government. It is also be be mentioned
at this stage that there has been amendment to the aforesaid
(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 12 of 13

Rules and as of now allotment of such land is to be made through
auction procedure only. But in this case we are only concerned
with the Rules prevailing at the relevant time which are reproduced hereinabove.
13.

The decision taken by the State Government

for not

sponsoring the case of the appellants is a considered and
conscious decision, based on cogent reasons, which are extracted
herein-before. The said reasons are found also to be convincing in
the light of the fact that they are based on the recommendations
of the Committee, who after considering all the facts, submitted
its recommendations. There is no error apparent on the face of
the records.

The appellants could not make out a case for

interference. We find no merit in this appeal which is dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE
1st April, 2008
“v”

(LPA 1636/2006)

Page 13 of 13

