*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 100/2008

%

Date of decision: 3.3.2008
BHAGWAN DASS

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Sanjoy Ghose, Advocate

versus
LALA RAM SARUP T.B.HOSPITAL
Through nemo

..... Respondent

CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? No
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 24th January,

2008 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition
filed by the appellant.
2.

By filing the aforesaid writ petition, the appellant challenged the

award passed by the Labour Court answering the reference against the
workman and in favour of the management. The appellant herein was
working as Safai Karamchari with the respondent – management since
1970. On 31st May, 1987, a Staff Nurse on duty complained that the
appellant was drunk and had misbehaved with her along with two
other workers, namely, Bansi Lal and Ramesh.
LPA No.100/2008

page 1 of 4

3.

On the basis of the aforesaid allegation, a departmental inquiry

was conducted by the management hospital and on completion of the
inquiry, the appellant was found guilty of the misconduct and an order
of dismissal from service was passed against him. So far the other two
accused are concerned, one was awarded punishment of withholding of
two increments and the other with punishment of censure by the
management.
4.

In view of the aforesaid position, the appellant raised a dispute

upon which a reference was made for adjudication by the industrial
adjudicator, namely, the Labour Court.

On receipt of the aforesaid

reference, the Labour Court received the pleadings filed by the parties
and thereafter recorded the evidence adduced by the parties.

On

completion of the trial, the learned Industrial Adjudicator passed an
award holding the appellant guilty of the charge and also held that the
order of dismissal passed in the case was legal and justified.
5.

Being aggrieved by the said award, the appellant filed the

aforesaid writ petition, where several contentions were raised by the
appellant.

The learned Single Judge heard the counsel for the

appellant and thereafter passed the judgment and order dated 24th
January, 2008 dismissing the writ petition.
6.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the present appeal is

filed on which we have heard the learned counsel appearing for the

LPA No.100/2008

page 2 of 4

appellant.
7.

On going through the records and particularly the judgment and

order passed by the learned Single Judge, we find that the said order
contains cogent reasons and findings for coming to the conclusion that
the order passed by the management was legal and justified.

The

learned Single Judge considered all the submissions made before him
by the counsel for the appellant and has dealt in depth with all the said
submissions.
8.

One of the submissions, which was raised before him and also

before us, is that the punishment awarded to the appellant is
disproportionate to the misconduct alleged. We are, however, unable
to accept the aforesaid contention for the simple reason that the
appellant not only misbehaved with the Staff Nurse, but also abused
her in the manner which is recorded in the impugned judgment and
order. The words used by him prove and establish that he was trying
to browbeat the nurse and was trying to establish his might. So far the
other two co-accused

are concerned, they have been let off

comparatively lightly due to the fact that they had tendered their
apology.

So far the gravity of the offence alleged against them is

concerned, the same was also less grave in comparison with that of the
appellant. The findings recorded by the learned Adjudicator so far as
the appellant is concerned are all findings of facts, which are also

LPA No.100/2008

page 3 of 4

upheld now by the learned Single Judge and, therefore, this Court
sitting in appeal should not and cannot re-appreciate the evidence so
as to agree with the counsel appearing for the appellant that the
aforesaid findings require modification at the hands of the appellate
court.
9.

We are of the considered opinion that the punishment awarded

is legal and just and that the appellant is guilty of misconduct as
alleged against him.

There is no merit in this appeal, which is

dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
MARCH 03, 2008
nm

LPA No.100/2008

page 4 of 4

