*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) 105/2008

%

Date of decision: 3.3.2008
ANURADHA JHA

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Pradeep Dewan with
Mr.Rajiv Samaiyan, Advocates

versus
SANTOSH SINGH & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through Ms.Kamlesh Mahajan, Advocate
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? No
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
CM No.3166/2008 (exemption)
Allowed, subject to just exceptions.
FAO(OS) No.105/2008 & CM 3165/08, Cav. 68/08
1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 15th January,

2008 passed by the learned Single Judge.

The appellant, who is

defendant No.1, is aggrieved by the said order as according to her, the

FAO(OS) No.105/2008

page 1 of 4

person who is appointed as guardian ad litem of the defendant No.2 /
respondent No.4 herein could have interest adverse to the interest of
the said person of unsound mind.

Counsel for the plaintiffs

(respondents herein) is also present in court. We have also heard her.
2.

After hearing counsel appearing for the defendant No.1 –

appellant we find that the contention raised in this appeal pertains to
the order of the learned Single Judge appointing the defendant No.5/
respondent No.7 herein, being the elder sister of the defendant No.2,
as guardian ad litem for the purpose of the present suit.
3.

The suit is instituted by the plaintiffs – respondents in which an

application is also filed by the plaintiffs – respondents seeking
appointment of guardian of the defendant No.2 on the ground that the
said defendant No.2 is mentally infirm and is of unsound mind and that
he is incapable of protecting his interests in the present case. The said
application was opposed by the appellant - defendant No.1 and also by
the defendants No.7 to 9 being respondents No.9 to 11 herein. In
view of the objections taken, the said defendant No.2 was got
examined by the Medical Board.

In fact the defendant No.2 was

examined twice by the Medical Board and two reports have been
submitted.

Both the aforesaid reports of the Medical Board are

consistent in nature and they establish that the defendant No.2 is
suffering from schizophrenia residual type and that he is incapable of

FAO(OS) No.105/2008

page 2 of 4

taking care of himself and defending the present litigation pending
against him.

The appellant did not dispute before us the aforesaid

reports submitted by the Medical Board. The only submission that is
sought to be made is that the stand being taken on behalf of the
defendant No.2 is adverse to his interest.
4.

We have considered the said submission in the light of the

findings recorded by the learned Single Judge.

We find that the

learned Single Judge discussed with the defendant No.2 and found that
his elder sister being defendant No.5 has no adverse interest against
him and that he would be supporting the case of the plaintiffs –
respondents, for he finds that there is no adverse interest so far as he
is concerned with his sister, who is defendant No.5. He has also stated
before the learned Single Judge that he is aware of the contents of the
joint written statement, which is also filed on his behalf and along with
defendants No.3 and 5 and according to him, he has voluntarily
admitted the claim of the plaintiffs.
5.

Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the

learned Single Judge found that the defendant No.5 has no adverse
interest with that of the defendant No.2 and, therefore, she was
appointed his guardian ad litem.
6.

In any case since the Court appointed guardian ad litem, it will

have the responsibility to see that the interest of the defendant No.2 is

FAO(OS) No.105/2008

page 3 of 4

fully protected during the trial and, therefore, such responsibility will
be discharged by the Court in all earnestness while passing orders in
the suit. The learned Single Judge has stated that the very fact as to
whether or not the defendants No.3 to 5 are in collusion with the
plaintiffs could be gone into only after all the parties produce their
evidence on the aforesaid aspect. We fully agree with the aforesaid
findings.
7.

We find no merit in this appeal. The same is dismissed. The suit

shall be proceeded with in accordance with the orders passed by the
learned Single Judge and during the trial the observations made herein
shall also be noticed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
MARCH 03, 2008
nm

FAO(OS) No.105/2008

page 4 of 4

