*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 84/2008

%

Date of decision: 3.3.2008
VED VRAT SINGH

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Abhay Kumar with
Mr.Rajesh Anand, Advocates

versus
UOI& ORS.

..... Respondents
Through Mr.Rajat Arora, Advocate

CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
CM No.2764-65/2008 (exemption)
Allowed, subject to just exceptions.
LPA No.84/2008 and CM Nos.2763/2008 (delay)
1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 23rd November,

2007 whereby the learned Single Judge upheld the award dated 5 th
October, 2005 passed by the Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court – II,

LPA No.84/2008

page 1 of 5

New Delhi.
2.

The appellant, while seeking employment in the Bank of India

(respondent No.3 herein) as subordinate staff (sepoy), submitted an
educational certificate dated 24th June, 1970, wherein his date of birth
was shown as 1st December, 1954 and his roll number was shown as
17170. On the basis of the aforesaid certificate exhibiting age of the
appellant, the Bank of India found him eligible and appointed him in
the Sub-Staff Cadre with effect from 11th February, 1980.

The

aforesaid certificate was sent for verification, subsequent to which a
report was received that the said certificate was fake and that the
information regarding the age of the appellant provided therein was
false. Consequently, a departmental inquiry was initiated against the
appellant and a charge sheet dated 20th July, 1993 was issued to him
on the ground that he had submitted a false and doctored certificate as
proof of age in order to get employment in the bank. In the aforesaid
departmental inquiry instituted against the appellant, the charges
levelled were found to be proved. Consequently, an order was passed
by the bank dismissing the appellant from service effective from 27th
December, 1996.
3.

Pursuant to the said order passed, an industrial dispute was

raised by the appellant, which was referred by the Central Government
to the Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court on the following terms:

LPA No.84/2008

page 2 of 5

“Whether the action of the General
Manager, Zonal Office, Bank of India,
Connaught Place, New Delhi and the
Branch

Manager,

Chitranjan

Park,

Bank

of

India,

New

Delhi

in

dismissing from services of the bank to
Shri Ved Varat Singh, Ex.Subordinate
Staff w.e.f. 27.12.1996 is justified,
valid and reasonable?

If not, what

relief and benefits he is entitled to.”
4.

The Labour Court received pleadings filed by the parties and

thereafter received evidence adduced by the parties. On conclusion of
the trial, the Labour Court passed its award dated 5th October, 2005
holding that the appellant had obtained employment with the
respondent – bank by submitting a false certificate. The action of the
respondent – bank in dismissing the appellant from service was found
to be legal and valid.
5.

Being aggrieved by the said award passed by the Industrial

Adjudicator, writ petition was filed by the appellant. The learned Single
Judge considered the contentions raised before him in depth and
thereafter passed a detailed speaking order giving cogent reasons for
dismissing the writ petition.
6.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the present appeal is

now filed by the appellant on which we have heard the learned counsel
LPA No.84/2008

page 3 of 5

appearing for the appellant. Our attention is also drawn to the various
documents which are placed on record.

The educational certificate

dated 24th June, 1970 was submitted by the appellant while seeking
employment with the bank. So far that aspect is concerned, there is no
dispute. In the said certificate, the date of birth of the appellant was
shown as 1st December,

1954 and his roll number was shown as

17170. The evidence adduced also establishes that the actual date of
birth of the appellant is 15th October, 1949 and that the aforesaid date
of birth, which is the actual date of birth of the appellant, was changed
to 1st December, 1954 with the mala fide intention of procuring
employment in the bank.

If the date of birth of the appellant is

calculated on the basis of 15th October, 1949, he was over-aged on the
date of seeking employment and, therefore, he resorted to the
aforesaid act of forging and fabricating a document so as to lower his
age by manipulating his date of birth, in order to obtain appointment
in the bank fraudulently and by way of misrepresentation of the date.
7.

Counsel appearing for the appellant states that forging a

document cannot be held to be nor even said to be a misconduct in
terms of the regulations of the bank.

Counsel appearing for the

respondents, however, has pointed out to us that forging a document
is held to be misconduct under the regulations of the bank. Even
otherwise, we believe that a person, who is accused of and is proved to

LPA No.84/2008

page 4 of 5

have manipulated and fabricated official records and tried to project an
age, which was not the actual age, is guilty of misconduct. Therefore,
the Inquiry Officer was justified in returning a verdict of guilt against
the appellant, holding that the appellant was guilty of misconduct ,
which decision the learned Industrial Adjudicator as also the learned
Single Judge have upheld.
8.

The aforesaid findings of the inquiry and the order passed by

the disciplinary authority and the learned Single Judge are findings of
fact and rather concurrent findings of fact.

We are not inclined to

interfere with the aforesaid findings of fact in exercise of our appellate
jurisdiction. The appeal has no merit and is dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
MARCH 03, 2008
nm

LPA No.84/2008

page 5 of 5

