*
+

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO(OS) No.319/2007 and CM Nos.11360-61/2007 & 4314/2008

%

Date of decision : 3rd April, 2008
Pearson Education Inc.
..... Appellant
Through Mr.Rajiv Nayar, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Akash Chittranshi and Mr.Rahul
Berwar, Advocates
versus
S.M. Saifullah and others
..... Respondents
Through Md. Mobin Akhtar, Advocate for R-1.
Mr.Vishal Arun, Advocate for R-2-3.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ :
1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed

by the learned Single Judge disposing of a number of applications. The
appellant herein is particularly aggrieved by the order passed whereby
two applications, one under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of
Civil Procedure moved by the appellant / plaintiff and the other under
order XXXIX Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure moved by the
respondents / defendants were disposed of. At the time of issuance of
summons in the suit, an ad interim injunction in respect of alleged
(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)
page 1 of 14

violation of copyright by the defendants was granted. The respondents
/ defendants filed a reply to the aforesaid application and also filed an
independent application under Order XXXIX Rule 4 of the Code of Civil
Procedure praying for vacation of interim injunction which was granted.
2.

After hearing arguments on both the aforesaid applications, the

impugned order was passed, which is under challenge in this appeal.
The learned Single Judge, while passing the aforesaid order held that
the respondent / defendant has merely reproduced some definitions,
arrangement of topics, arrangement of analysis and, therefore, it
cannot be prima facie said that the books of the defendant /
respondent were copies of the plaintiff’s books.
3.

Having held thus, the learned Single Judge proceeded to

observe that it is an undisputed fact that the books of the respondents
were on scientific and technical subjects written to meet the
requirements of the students of universities pursuing studies in MCA
etc. and that the said books were bound to have discussion only on the
common engineering topics. After recording the aforesaid findings, the
learned Single Judge held that on the basis of a few definitions, it
cannot be said that the respondents have infringed the copyright of the
appellant and that the appellant has miserably failed in showing prima
facie that there was an infringement of copyright of the plaintiff’s work.
The aforesaid findings and the conclusions arrived at by the learned
Single Judge are under challenge in this appeal on which we have
(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)
page 2 of 14

heard learned counsel appearing for the parties.
4.

The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has submitted

before us that the learned Single Judge has misread and misapplied the
law relating to violation of copyright and thereby recorded a wrong
finding.

Counsel appearing for the respondents, however, submitted

before us that the books of the respondents were highly scientific and
technical books and the principles and theories being of a technical
nature would always have to be identical and same to those of the
theories and principles mentioned in the books of the appellant and,
therefore, the same cannot in any manner amount to infringement or
violation of the copyright.
5.

Counsel appearing for the parties during the course of their

arguments referred to and relied upon the decision of the Supreme
Court in R.G. Anand v. M/s Delux Films and others reported as AIR
1978 SC 1613. The said decision relates to the question of violation of
copyright and specifically deals with as to how such a fact could be
determined. In paragraph 45 of the said judgment, the Supreme Court
elucidated the law when it observed as follows:
“45. Thus, the position appears to be that an idea, principle,
theme, or subject matter or historical or legendary facts
being common property cannot be the subject matter of
copyright of a particular person. It is always open to any
person to choose an idea as a subject matter and develop it
in his own manner and give expression to the idea by
treating it differently from others. Where two writers write on
the same subject similarities are bound to occur because the
central idea of both is the same but the similarities or

(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

page 3 of 14

coincidences by themselves cannot lead to an irresistible
inference of plagiarism or piracy. Take for instance the great
poet and dramatist Shakespeare most of whose plays are
based on Greek-Roman and British mythology or legendary
stories like Merchant of Venice, Hamlet, Romeo Juliet, Julius
Caesar etc. But the treatment of the subject by Shakespeare
in each of his dramas is so fresh, so different, so full of
poetic exuberance, elegance and erudition and so novel in
character as a result of which the end product becomes an
original in itself. In fact, the power and passion of his
expression, the uniqueness, eloquence and excellence of his
style and pathos and bathos of the dramas become peculiar
to Shakespeare and leaves precious little of the original
theme adopted by him. It will thus be preposterous to level a
charge of plagiarism against the great play-wright. In fact,
throughout his original thinking, ability and incessant labour
Shakespeare has converted an old idea into a new one, so
that each of the dramas constitutes a master-piece of
English literature. It has been rightly said that "every drama
of Shakespeare is an extended metaphor". Thus, the
fundamental fact which has to be determined where a
charge of violation of the copyright is made by the plaintiff
against the defendant is to determine whether or not the
defendant not only adopted the idea of the copyrighted work
but has also adopted the manner, arrangement, situation to
situation, scene to scene with minor changes or super
additions or embellishment here and there. Indeed, if on a
perusal of the copyrighted work the defendant's work
appears to be a transparent rephrasing or a copy of a
substantial and material part of the original, the charge of
plagiarism must stand proved. Care however must be taken
to see whether the defendant has merely disguised piracy or
has actually reproduced the original in a different form,
different tone, different tenor so as to infuse a new life into
the idea of the copyrighted work adapted by him. In the
latter case there is no violation of the copyright.”

6.

In paragraph 46, after careful consideration and elucidation of

the various authorities and the case law on the subject, the Supreme
Court laid down the following propositions:
“46. Thus, on a careful consideration and elucidation of the
various authorities and the case law on the subject
discussed above, the following propositions emerge :
1. There can be no copyright in an idea, subject matter,

(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

page 4 of 14

themes, plots or historical or legendary facts and violation of
the copyright in such cases is confined to the form, manner
and arrangement and expression of the idea by the author of
the copyrighted work.
2. Where the same idea is being developed in a different
manner, it is manifest that the source being common,
similarities are bound to occur. In such a case the courts
should determine whether or not the similarities are on
fundamental or substantial aspects of the mode of
expression adopted in the copyrighted work. If the
defendant's work is nothing but a literal imitation of the
copyrighted work with some variations here and there it
would amount to violation of the copyright. In other words, in
order to be actionable the copy must be a substantial and
material one which at once leads to the conclusion that the
defendant is guilty of an act of piracy.
3. One of the surest and the safest test to determine
whether or not there has been a violation of copyright is to
see if the reader, spectator or the viewer after having read
or seen both the works is clearly of the opinion and gets an
unmistakable impression that the subsequent work appears
to be a copy of the original.
4. Where the theme is the same but is presented and
treated differently so that the subsequent work becomes a
completely new work, no question of violation of copyright
arises.
5. Where however apart from the similarities appearing in
the two works there are also material and broad
dissimilarities which negative the intention to copy the
original and the coincidences appearing in the two works are
clearly incidental no infringement of the copyright comes
into existence.
6. As a violation of copyright amounts to an act of piracy it
must be proved by clear and cogent evidence after applying
the various tests laid down by the case law discussed above.
7. Where however the question is of the violation of the
copyright of stage play by a film producer or a Director the
task of the plaintiff becomes more difficult to prove piracy. It
is manifest that unlike a stage play a film has a much
broader perspective, wider field and a bigger background
where the defendants can by introducing a variety of
incidents give a colour and complexion different from the
manner in which the copyrighted work has expressed the
idea. Even so, if the viewer after seeing the film gets a

(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

page 5 of 14

totality of impression that the film is by and large a copy of
the original play, violation of the copyright may be said to be
proved.”

7.

Counsel for the parties also placed before us a number of

foreign judgments other than the aforesaid judgment.

However, we

are of the considered opinion that the aforesaid decision of the
Supreme Court is binding on all of us, which was rendered after
noticing all laws on the subject.

In the light of the aforesaid legal

propositions laid down by the Supreme Court, we may now proceed to
examine the facts of the present case.
8.

We have carefully examined the decision rendered by the

learned Single Judge.

He has also made reference to the aforesaid

decision in R.G. Anand (supra). Unfortunately, while referring to the
aforesaid judgment, the learned Single Judge added certain words,
which are in fact not stated in the decision of the Supreme Court. The
learned Single Judge while referring to the aforesaid decision stated
that the Supreme Court held that “there can be no copyright in a
subject matter, themes, plots or historical or legendary or scientific
facts and violation of copyright in such cases is confined to the form,
manner, arrangement and expression of the topics by the author of
copyright work.”
9.

We have scanned through the aforesaid judgment of the

Supreme Court very carefully and we are unable to find therein the
expression “or scientific facts” referred to by the learned Single
(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)
page 6 of 14

Judge in the aforesaid judgment. The original version reads as “there
can be no copyright in an idea, subject-matter, themes, plots or
historical or legendary facts and violation of …….” Scientific facts are
not expressly and specifically referred to in the aforesaid expression as
found in paragraph 46 of the said judgment. What is to be examined,
therefore, is whether there is any similarity in the form, manner and
arrangement and expression of the idea and whether there is any
dissimilarity or difference in the treatment of the subject.
10.

There is no doubt that the books involved in the present case

are scientific and technical books. The themes in those books could be
the same, but the presentation, treatment and the expression of the
same theme would be different and cannot be identical.

We have

examined the original books and compared them with the books
against which allegation of infringement is made in order to find out
whether there was any intention to copy the original, and particularly
the portions thereof which are shown to be reproduction by the
appellant from their books.

Some of the passages from the books

published by both the parties, where similarity in the passages is
apparent, find mention below:

(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

page 7 of 14

Appellant's publication titled
– Computer Networks – by
Tannenbaum

Defendant’s
publication
titled- Computer Networks –
by Subramanyam

Chapter 1 : Page 1

Unit 1:Page 1-2

Introduction : Each of the past
three
centuries
has
been
dominated
by
a
single
technology. The 19th Century was
the age of steam engine. The 18th
century was the era of the great
mechanical
systems
accompanying
the
Industrial
Revolution.

Introduction : Each of the past
three
centuries
has
been
dominated by a single technology.
The 19th Century was the age of
steam engine. The 18th century
was the era of the great
mechanical systems accompanying
the Industrial Revolution.

During the 20th century, the key
technology
was
information
gathering,
processing,
and
distribution.

During the 20th century, the key
technology
was
information
gathering,
processing,
and
distribution.

As a result of the technological
progress, these areas are rapidly
converging and the differences
between collecting, transporting,
sorting,
and
processing
information
are
quickly
disappearing.

Because of rapid technological
process,
there
is
a
rapid
converging
and
differences
between collecting, transporting,
sorting,
and
processing
information
are
quickly
disappearing.

During the first two decades of Earlier computer systems were
their
existence,
computer highly centralized ideally with in a
systems were highly centralized, single room.
usually within a single large
room.
Chapter 1:Page 5

Unit 1: Section 1.3.1:Page 5

When one worker makes a
change to an online document,
the others can see the change
immediately, instead of waiting
several days for a letter.

If one changes the on-line report,
the other can see the change
immediately, instead of waiting
for several days for a letter.

(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

page 8 of 14

Chapter 1:1.1.2:Page 6

Unit 1:1.3.2:Page 5 & 6

1.Access to remote information

1.Access to remote information

2.Person-to-person
communication

2.Person-to-person
communication

3.Interactive entertainment

3.Interactive entertainment

Access to remote information
comes in many forms. It can be
surfing the World Wide Web for
information or just for fun.
Information available includes
the arts, business, cooking,
government,
health,
history,
hobbies,
recreation,
science,
sports, travel, and many others.
Fun comes in too many ways to
mention, plus some ways that
are better left unmentioned.

Access to remote information will
come in a category of interaction
between person and remote data
base.
Many people their bills
managing bank accounts, home
shopping, making reservations,
booking cinema tickets, on-line
news paper, on-line digital library.
Another application which fall on
this
category
to
access
information on WWW, which
contains information about arts,
business, government, health,
society, sports, travel and too
many other topics.

CHAPTER 4:Page 247

Unit-2:2-2

In any broadcast network, the
key issue is how to determine
who gets to use the channel
when there is competition for it.

In any broadcast network, the key
issue is how to determine who
gets to use the channel when
there is competition for it.

Chapter 4: Page 251

Unit 2:Page 2-5, Page 2-6

The basic idea of an ALOHA
system is simple: let users
transmit whenever they have
data to be sent.

The basic idea of an ALOHA
system is simple: let users
transmit whenever they have
data to be sent.

Chapter 5:Page 343

Unit 3.0:Page 3-2

These issues include the service It includes service provided to the
provided to the transport layer transport layer and the internal
and the internal design of the design of the subnet.
subnet.

(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

page 9 of 14

Appellant’s publication titled Defendant’s publication titled
“Compilers
Principles, “Language
Processors”
Techniques, and Tools” by S.Ruparani
Alfred V. AHO, Ravi Sethi,
Jeffrey D.Ullman
Chapter 1, Sec.1.1, page 1-2

Unit 1.5, page 1-5

COMPILERS
Simply stated, a compiler is
program that reads a program
written in one language - the
source language – and translates
it into an equivalent program in
another language – As an
important part of this translation
process, the compiler reports to
its user the presence of errors in
the source program.

COMPILERS
Compiler is a program that reads a
program written in one language
(source language) and translates it
into an equivalent program in
another
language
(target
language).
In this translation
process the compiler reports to its
user the presence of errors in the
source program.

Compilers
are
sometimes
classified as single pass, multi
pass, load and go, debugging, or
optimizing, depending on how
they have been constructed or on
what function they are supposed
to perform.

Compilers are classified as single
pass, multi pass, load and go,
debugging
or
optimizing,
depending on how they are
constructed and what function
they perform.

Chapter 3, Sec.3.5

Unit 1.14

A language for Specifying Lexical 1.4 Lex Programs to perform
Analyzers : Page 105 & 107
Lexical Analysis of Pascal & C:
Page 1-28 & 1-29
We describe a particular tool,
called Lex, that has been widely
used to specify lexical analyzers
for a variety of languages. We
refer to the tool as the Lex
compiler, and to its input
specification as the Lex language.

(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

Lex is a tool which is used to
specify lexical analyzers for a
variety of languages. This tool is
referred to as the Lex compiler,
and its input specification is called
as the Lex language.

page 10 of 14

First, a specification of a lexical
analyzer is prepared by creating a
program
lex.1
in
the
Lex
language.
Then, lex.1 is run
through the Lex compiler to
produce a C Programme lex.yy.c.
The program lex.yy.c consists of a
tabular
representation
of
a
transition diagram constructed
from the regular expressions of
lex.1, together with a standard
routine that uses the table to
recognized lexmes.

First, a specification of a lexical
analyzer is prepared by creating a
program lex.1 in the Lex language.
Then, lex.1 is run through the Lex
compiler to produce a C program
lex.yy.c. The programme lex.yy.c
consists
of
a
tabular
representation of a transition
diagram together with a table to
recognize lexmes.

Finally, lex.yy.c is run through the
C compiler to produce an object
program a.out, which is th lexical
analyzer that transforms an input
stream into a sequence of tokens.

Finally, lex.yy.c. is run through the
C compiler to produce an object
program a.out, which is the lexical
analyzer that transforms an input
stream into a sequence of tokens.

Figure 3.17 Creating a Lexical Figure 1.16 Creating
Analyzer with Lex
Analyzer with Lex

a Lexical

Plaintiff’s
book
titled Defendant’s
book
titled
“Introduction
to Automata “Theory of Computation” by
Theory” by John E.Hopcroft, P.Niranjan Reddy
Rajeev Motwani, Jeffery D.
Ullman
Chapter 1, Unit 1.1, page 2

Unit I, Chapter 2, page2-2

Applications:
For the moment, let us jut list The following are some of the
some of the most important important applications of the finite
kinds:
automation.
1. Software for designing and 1. Software for designing and
checking the behaviour of digital checking the behaviour of digital
circuits
circuits
2. The “lexical analyzer” of a 2. In the lexical phase of a typical
typical compiler, that is, the compiler, that is to break up given
compiler component that breaks input text into logical units.
the input into logic, units, such as
identifiers,
keywords
and
punctuation.

(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

page 11 of 14

3. Software for scanning large
bodies of text such as collection
of web pages, to find occurrences
of words, phrases, or other
patterns

3.Software scanning large bodies
of text, such as collections of web
pages, to find occurrences of
words, phrases, or other patterns

4. Software for verifying systems
of all types that have a finite
number of distinct states, such as
communications
protocols
or
protocols for secure exchange or
information

4. Software for verifying systems
of all types that have finite number
of
distinct
states,
such
as
communications
protocols
or
protocols for secure exchange of
information.

The afore-extracted comparisons are only specimens of the voluminous
similar data placed on record by the appellant in the form of
Annexures- C,D,E, and F. The said comparisons would clearly establish
that there are similarities in the expressions used. There are also a
number of similarities in the introduction chapter wherein almost
identical expression of the idea is used from the books of the appellant.
The authors, who have written the books on behalf of the respondent
No.1, appears to have not only taken the facts and materials from the
books of the appellant, but also the treatment and the expression
appear to be the same at material places, both in the form and in the
manner of expression of the idea.

There are voluminous materials

extracted from the various parts of the books and from different
chapters thereof which are verbatim or near verbatim reproduction
from the books of the appellant. Despite the fact that the aforesaid
reproduced materials have been brought to our notice which are found
(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)

page 12 of 14

to be similar and identical with those of the books of the appellant,
which are used by the respondent in their books, the learned Single
Judge held that as the books are on scientific and technical subject,
therefore, there would be definitely discussion only on the common
aspects and common engineering aspects and, therefore, it cannot be
said that the defendants / respondents have infringed the copyright of
the plaintiff / appellant. The said deduction, in our considered opinion,
cannot be held to be justified and we find the same to be erroneous.
11.

We could have understood if the reproduction is only limited

and restricted to the subject-matter or the themes, and in that event
possibly the position would have been different, but here is a case
where there is total reproduction and complete imitation of the
copyrighted work in some places. Most of the materials placed before
us would indicate that in many theories and expressions used in the
various chapters of the book, one or two sentences from the original
books are dropped whereas the rest are used and reproduced in the
same manner and with similar expression as that of the original books.
Once the said materials are compared, it would be established that
what is used by the respondents in their books is substantial and
material reproduction of the work of the appellant. Being a scientific
and technical book, theme could be said to be the same but
unfortunately in the present case, the same is not presented differently
from the books of the appellant and it appears to be verbatim
(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)
page 13 of 14

reproduction in many passages, as is evident from the materials which
are available on record. The same indicates the intention to copy the
original. It, therefore, cannot be said that the work of the respondent
is completely new or primary. The respondents have not been able to
show any broad material dissimilarities in the passages and in the
materials which are part of the records.
12.

The appeal is, therefore, allowed and the order of the learned

Single Judge is set aside. There shall be an injunction restraining the
respondents from publishing, offering for sale or advertising their
publications titled

'Computer Networks',

'Language Processors' and

'Theory of Computation'.
13.

It is also made clear that the observations made herein are

only for the purpose of deciding the present appeal arising from the
order passed by the learned Single Judge in the applications under
Order XXXIX Rules 1&2 and Order XXXIX Rule 4 of the Code of Civil
Procedure and it shall have no bearing on the merits of the suit, which
shall be decided independently on its own merits after allowing the
parties to lead their evidence.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
3 April, 2008
nm
(FAO(OS) No.319/2007)
rd

page 14 of 14

