*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Co.APP No.46/2006

%

Date of decision : 4th March, 2008

M/S.MAGMA LEASING LIMITED
.....APPELLANT
Through:Mr.B.B.Sawhney, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.S.Singhani and
Mr.V.K.Mishra, Advocates
Versus
M/S. HCL INFOSYSTEMS LIMITED
......RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. V.N.Koura with
Ms.Divya Bahl, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment ? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? yes
3.Whether the Judgment should be reported in the Digest? yes

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ :
1.

By filing this appeal the appellant challenges legality of

the order dated 10th July, 2006 passed by the learned
Company Judge in C.P. No.105/2005, holding that some of the
claims of the appellant for payment of interest

would be

barred by limitation and some other claims would be within
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 1 of 13

limitation. The direction issued by the learned Company Judge
to the parties to carry out fresh calculations and to file a chart
calculating interest payable under Clause 4 of the Agreement
dated 11/12th November, 1998 is also under challenge in this
appeal.
2.

In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties it

is necessary to place on record a few facts leading to the
filing of the present appeal.
3.

The appellant herein filed a Company Petition under

Section 433 read with Section 434 of the Companies Act,
1956 for winding up of the respondent company on the
ground that the respondent had failed to make payment of
lease rentals and also interest accrued thereon.

On 25th

September, 1998 the respondent entered into an Agreement
for Rental and Maintenance Service with Bharat Heavy
Electricals Limited (BHEL for short). In the said agreement it
was also stipulated that the respondent agreed to supply,
install and maintain various hardwares being computer
accessories and peripherals, at various establishments of
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 2 of 13

BHEL, for which respondent had entered into a separate
agreement with the BHEL for different locations.

After

entering into the aforesaid agreements, the respondent
approached

the

appellant

for

financing

the

aforesaid

transaction. The appellant agreed to provide finance to the
respondent which was repayable in 20 quarterly instalments
covering a period of five years from the date of installation of
computers at each of the locations in respect whereof the
respondent

had

entered

into

rental

and

maintenance

agreements with BHEL. Agreement dated 11/12th November,
1998 entered into between the HCL Infosystems Limited, the
respondent herein,

and the appellant

is placed on record.

The said agreement relates to the Rental and Maintenance
Service Agreement executed on 21st October, 1998 by and
between the respondent and the BHEL.

Clause 4 of the

agreement dated 11/12th November, 1998 reads as follows:
“4. HCL hereby ensures payment of lease
rentals as due and payable by BHEL to be
paid to MLL directly which rental is due and
payable every quarter and is due to
commence from the date of installation of the
equipments at BHEL's site payable within 30
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 3 of 13

days of the end of the particular quarter
during which the equipment is installed at
BHEL and MLL will be treated as “lessor” for
the purpose of the same.
It is further clarified that HCL will pay
interest for the delay in obtaining receipt of
lease rentals from BHEL pursuant to the
performance under the Lease Agreement @
2% per month after 30 days from the
respective due dates until payment thereof
and further HCL will also make good to MLL
the short fall if any, in the respective lease
rental due and payable together with interest
@ 2% per month till the date of payment.”
4.

By the aforesaid clause, the respondent has given

assurance of payment of lease rentals which was due and
payable every quarter by BHEL to be paid to the appellant
directly. There is no dispute with regard to the fact that there
are other agreements also between the parties with an
identical clause.

In the aforesaid Company Petition the

dispute arose with regard to liability of payment of interest by
the respondent company to the appellant on the delayed
payment of lease instalments by BHEL, as per clause 4 of the
aforesaid agreement dated 11/12th November, 1998.

In

terms of the said clause there was a liability to pay interest
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 4 of 13

@ 2% per month to the appellant for any default/delay in
payment of instalment by BHEL beyond 30 days

from the

due date. On behalf of the respondent company a stand was
taken that the claim for payment of interest raised by the
appellant for alleged defaults in payment of instalments was
barred by limitation. The learned Company Judge considered
the said aspect and by order dated 10th July, 2006 held that
each default in payment of instalment would constitute a
separate cause of action as in the case of payment of
monthly rent and interest, each default has to be separately
calculated and that interest is payable for each period of
default and not after the entire instalment was paid.
Accordingly, It was held by the learned Company Judge that
some of the claims for payment of interest made by the
appellant would therefore be barred by limitation whereas
some other claims would be within the limitation. In the light
of the aforesaid observations, a direction was issued to the
appellant and the respondent to carry out fresh calculations
as aforesaid with reference to the date on which the winding
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 5 of 13

up petition was filed i.e. 17th March, 2005.

The aforesaid

order of the learned Company Judge is under challenge in his
appeal.
5.

In support of the appeal, the appellant relied upon

communication dated 17th April, 2001, annexed as Annexure
A-4 and also letter dated 11th October, 2002 which is
Annexure A-6.

Relying on the said communications, it was

submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant
that there was acknowledgment of default in the said letters
and, therefore, it was not proper for the learned Company
Judge to hold that some of the claims for payment of interest
accruing for non-payment of some instalments were barred
by limitation. It was also submitted by the counsel appearing
for the appellant that clauses 1&2 of the agreement dated
12th March, 1998, which is a Buy Back Agreement, would
make it clear that there was continuing cause of action and
continuing obligation to pay rentals and the interest accrued
thereon, which was required to be calculated only at the time
of final payment made and, therefore, the findings arrived at
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 6 of 13

by the learned Company Judge are required to be set aside
and quashed. The other submission of the counsel appearing
for the appellant was that the liability to pay instalments and
interest in lieu thereof could be said to have been extended
in view of clauses 4&5 of the aforesaid agreement which read
as follows:
“4. This agreement shall come into force
immediately and shall remain in full force and
effect and shall continue to be enforceable
until all the dues of MLL are fully paid to the
satisfaction of MLL and a certificate of
satisfaction as and when issued by MLL shall
be conclusive proof to that effect.
5. HCL undertakes to pay MLL the amount
due under this agreement immediately on
demand notwithstanding any dispute of
disputes raised by and between itself and
BHEL and also any suit or proceeding pending
before Court or Tribunal and the liability of
HCL under these presents is absolute and
unequivocal.”
6.

Strong reliance was placed by the appellant on clause-4

of the aforesaid agreement. Reliance was also placed by the
appellant on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Food Corporation of India v. Assam State Cooperative
Marketing & Consumer Federation Ltd and Others
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 7 of 13

reported in (2004) 12 SCC 360.
7.

Mr.V.N.Koura, the learned counsel appearing for the

respondent, however,

refuted the aforesaid submissions

contending inter alia that there was no acknowledgment as
sought to be made out by the appellant and, therefore, the
order passed by the learned Company Judge is legal and
valid. He also submitted that on a proper interpretation of
clauses 4 & 5, it

would

be established that there was no

continuing cause of action as sought to be pleaded and
argued by the appellant and what was enforceable was only
the agreement between the parties which could be only
enforced till all the dues were fully paid to the satisfaction of
the appellant, and the same never contemplated and
stipulated that the cause of action for payment of each rental
and interest thereon also stood extended which could be paid
at the end of the contract.

Counsel appearing for the

respondent also relied upon the Division Bench decisions of
this Court in the case of National Small Industrial
Corporation
(Co.App.46/2006)

Limited

v.

Takdir

Singh

reported

Page 8 of 13

in

120(2005) DLT 397 and in the case of Globe Motors
Limited v. Mehta Teja Singh & Co reported in 24 (1993)
DLT 214 and also a decision of the Madras High Court in the
case of Union of India v. Seyadu Beedi Co. & Another
reported in AIR 1970 Madras 108. The aforesaid decision of
the Madras High Court was also a Division Bench decision
wherein it was held

that

even if letter is written by the

Railway authorities to the effect that the claim of the plaintiff
was under investigation and he would be advised definitely
on the finalisation of the claim, the same cannot be construed
as even an implied admission of liability.
8.

In light of the aforesaid submissions of the counsel

appearing for the parties, we have looked into the various
clauses of the agreement for Rental and Maintenance Service
executed on 25th September, 1998 between the respondent
and BHEL. We have also perused the agreement executed on
11/12th November, 1998 as also the agreement entered on
30th November, 1998 between BHEL, the respondent and the
appellant and also the Buy Back Agreement dated 12th March,
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 9 of 13

1998 between the respondent and the appellant. There is an
irrevocable power of attorney executed on 12/13th November,
1998 by the respondent in favour of the appellant and a
supplemental

agreement

executed

on

23th

June,

1999

between BHEL, the respondent and the appellant, Clause 2
of which is relevant which we have perused.
9.

A perusal of the aforesaid

documents makes it clear

that the fixed lease rentals were payable in 20 quarterly
instalments covering a period of five years. There is also a
stipulation that in the event of a default in the payment of
the instalment, either by short payment or delayed payment,
the appellant was entitled to recover from the respondent
interest at 2% per month after 30 days from the respective
due date of payment until payment and short fall in the lease
rental with interest @ 2% per month till the date of payment.
On going through the records we also find that the finding of
the learned Company Judge that the cause of action for
default of each instalment arose separately is justified. The
period

of

limitation

(Co.App.46/2006)

for

any

recovery

is

three

years

Page 10 of 13

commencing from the date on which the instalment becomes
due. The learned Company Judge was therefore justified in
holding that

since the appellant has filed the Company

Petition only on 17th March, 2005 therefore the parties would
go back three years from the said date with reference to the
date when the instalment was belatedly paid by BHEL. So far
as acknowledgments pointed out by the appellant in the
letters dated 17th April, 2001 and 11th October, 2002 are
concerned, in our considered opinion, the same could not be
interpreted and construed to be any acknowledgment in any
manner. The aforesaid letters only indicate that what was
communicated was only a statement that the claim of the
appellant would be looked into.

Madras High Court under

similar circumstances in the case of Seyadu Beedi Co.
(supra) has clearly held that such correspondence cannot be
interpreted as any form of acknowledgment.

In our

considered opinion, the interpretation that is sought to be
given to the aforesaid letters by the appellant is fallacious
and cannot be accepted.
(Co.App.46/2006)

Food Corporation of India
Page 11 of 13

(supra) was the decision of the Supreme Court which is relied
upon by the counsel appearing for the appellant. A close look
at the facts of the said case would prove and establish that
the facts in the said decision are distinctly different and
distinguishable from the facts of the present case. In the said
decision, the Supreme Court has found that the two letters
dated

29th

March,

1977

and

30th

July

1977

clearly

acknowledged the amount of Rs.2 crores, whether by way of
advance or by way of deposit against paddy procurement,
which was accepted as an admission of jural relationship of
buyer and seller, which stood converted into relation of
creditor and debtor on the failure of the principal transaction.
In the lease under reference in the present case, we have
already held that there is no acknowledgment of liability in
any of the aforesaid letters as sought to be made out and,
therefore, the said decision has no application to the facts of
the present case. The Division Bench decision of this Court in
National Small Industries Corporation Limited (supra)
that cause of action would accrue separately with regard to
(Co.App.46/2006)

Page 12 of 13

each instalment when that particular instalment became due,
and that period of limitation for that particular instalment is
three years commencing from the date that particular
instalment become payable, and also the other decision of
the Division Bench in Globe Motors Limited (supra) that
limitation would start from the date of default, would be
applicable to the facts of the present case.
10.

In this view of the matter we find no merit in this

appeal which is dismissed. The parties shall appear before
the learned Company Judge on 17th March, 2008, for
directions and further orders in this regard.

CHIEF JUSTICE

March 4th , 2008
“v”

(Co.App.46/2006)

REVA KHETRAPAL
JUDGE

Page 13 of 13

