*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 23/2008

%

Date of decision : 5.2.2008
J.B.KUMAR

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Atul T.N., Advocate
versus

SECRETARY LABOUR & ANR.
Through nemo

..... Respondents

CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
CM No.626, 628/2008 (exemption)
Allowed, subject to just exceptions.
LPA No.23/2008 and CM Nos.625, 627/2008
1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated

19th January, 2007 passed by the learned Single Judge whereby a
direction was issued to the management – respondent to pay a sum of
Rs.75,000/- to the appellant as a welfare measure in order to help the
LPA No.23/2008

page 1 of 5

appellant – workman. The said order was passed in the writ petition
which was filed by the appellant challenging the legality of the award
dated 26th April, 2001 passed by the Labour Court. By the said award,
reference, which was made by the appropriate Government, was
answered against the workman.
2.

The appellant was working as an Assistant Steward on monthly

salary of Rs.3,108/- with the respondent No.2 i.e. M/s The Oberoi. On
28th February, 1995, the appellant met with a road accident and
thereafter he absented from duty. After waiting for about a year and
four months to enable the workman to recover from the accident
injury, the management directed the appellant to report on duty. The
workman, however, failed to inform the management about his state of
health. Consequently, the management sent a letter to him on 2 nd July,
1996 as to when he would resume his duties.

As against the said

letter, the workman vide letter dated 6th July, 1996 asked the
management to wait for another six months.

The management

deputed its doctor to visit the residence of the appellant. The said
doctor examined the appellant and submitted a detailed report on 1st
October, 1996 giving his opinion that the workman would not be able
to perform the duties as an Assistant Steward at all even after
recovery. Consequently, the services of the workman were terminated
vide letter dated 2nd November, 1996 on the ground of his continued

LPA No.23/2008

page 2 of 5

illness and medical unfitness to perform duties. The aforesaid action
on the part of the management was challenged by the workman on the
ground that it was an unjustified and illegal termination. On the basis
of the request of the appellant a reference was also made to the
Labour Court in the following terms:
“Whether the termination of services of Shri J.B.
Kumar is illegal and/or unjustified and if so, what
relief is he entitled and what directions are
necessary in this respect?”
3.

The Labour Court, after recording evidence of the both sides,

came to the conclusion that the management had waited for sufficient
period for the workman to recover and join his duty and, therefore, the
said action cannot be said to be illegal or unjustified.
4.

Being aggrieved by the said award passed by the Labour Court,

the same was challenged by filing a writ petition. The learned Single
Judge considered the nature of action taken by the management. It
was held by the learned Single Judge that it could not be disputed that
due to the disability, the appellant has become incapable of doing the
job of an Assistant Steward since that requires an immense physical
movement inside the restaurant / hotel, which the appellant would not
be able to perform. The issue with regard to alternate job was also
explored by the Court. After looking into the matter, the learned Single
Judge came to the conclusion that it was not possible to give any
LPA No.23/2008

page 3 of 5

alternate

employment

to

the

appellant

because

he

was

not

educationally qualified for the alternate job and he was not qualified for
the physical job.
5.

Considering the nature of the injury suffered by the appellant

and his economic condition, the learned Single Judge directed that an
amount of Rs.75,000/- be paid to the appellant as a welfare measure in
order to help the workman. The learned Single Judge also held that It
cannot be disputed that the provisions of Section 47 of the Persons
with Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995 on which reliance was placed by the appellant
before the learned Single Judge are not applicable to the respondent,
the respondent not being a Government establishment and this being a
fact not disputed by the appellant.

The learned Single Judge also

considered the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Hindalco
Industries Ltd. v. Labour Court, Varanasi reported as 2001 (9)
SCC 178 wherein it was held that termination of service of workman on
account of continued ill health does not amount to retrenchment.
6.

The above being the legal position and it being established from

the records that the appellant is unable to perform and discharge the
duties as an Assistant Steward, as the job of Assistant Steward involves
immense physical movement inside the hotel / restaurant, we find no
reason to interfere with the order passed by the learned Single Judge.

LPA No.23/2008

page 4 of 5

An amount of Rs.75,000/- is directed to be paid to the appellant, which
is already received by the appellant. It is also pointed out before us by
the counsel for the appellant that he has already filed a petition under
the Workmen Compensation Act and the same is pending. We make it
clear that the amount, which is directed to be paid under this
proceeding, is independent of any liability and is without reference to
any liability that may accrue under the provisions of the said Act or any
other statute. It is also made clear that the observations made by the
Labour Court, which are upheld by the learned Single Judge, will be
considered as views and opinions for the purpose of deciding the
reference alone and not for any other purpose.
7.

The appeal stands disposed of in terms of the aforesaid order.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 05, 2008
nm

LPA No.23/2008

page 5 of 5

