*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 708/2001 and LPA No.138/2003

%
1.

Date of decision: 5.2.2008
LPA 708/2001
DR.R.R.GAUTAM

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Sudershan Rajan, Advocate
versus
M.C.D. & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through Mr.Amit K. Paul, Adv. for MCD
Mr.R.K. Saini, Adv. for private
respondents.
AND
2.

LPA 138/2003
POONAM SAREEN NEE KOHLI
..... Appellant
Through Mr.Anil Mittal, Advocate
versus
MCD
..... Respondent
Through Mr.Amit K. Paul, Adv. for MCD
Mr.R.K. Saini, Adv. for private
respondents.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?

no
no
no

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
1.

Both the appeals involve similar and identical issues. Therefore,

we propose to dispose of both these appeals by this common judgment
and order.
LPA No.708/2001

page 1 of 4

2.

The appeals are directed against the judgment and order dated

14th May, 1998 passed by the learned Single Judge allowing the writ
petition filed by the private respondents, namely, Dr.Vireshwar Singh
and others, who were working as doctors in the Municipal Corporation
of Delhi. These doctors filed the writ petition seeking for issuance of a
mandamus directing the respondent – MCD to regularise their services
in the Grade GDMO-II with effect from the date of their initial ad hoc
appointment with all consequential benefits and also to treat them as
regular employees of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
3.

The said writ petition was considered by the learned Single

Judge and the same was disposed of by the learned Single Judge
accepting the contentions of the writ petitioners and a direction was
issued that the said doctors and all other similarly situated doctors be
regularised from the date of their initial ad hoc appointment.
4.

The aforesaid order is challenged in this court on the ground

that the said order was passed by the learned Single Judge without
considering the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in
Dr.Anuradha Bodi and others v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi
and others reported as (1998) 5 SCC 293, which lays down law to the
contrary.
5.

It appears that during the pendency of the appeals in this Court,

the Municipal Corporation of Delhi being aware of the aforesaid

LPA No.708/2001

page 2 of 4

judgment passed a fresh order on 15th June, 2007 whereby they have
virtually denied the relief of regularisation to those persons from the
date of their initial ad hoc appointment on the ground that the
aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court permits such benefit to be
given only from the date of their names being approved by the Union
Public Service Commission. It is also pointed out by the counsel for the
MCD that the decision was rendered by the learned Single Judge about
a week after the aforesaid decision was rendered by the Supreme
Court on 8th May, 1998.

It appears that the ratio of the aforesaid

decision was not brought to the notice of the learned Single Judge.
6.

Be that as it may, by passing the aforesaid order dated 15th

June, 2007, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi has practically nullified
the reliefs which were granted by the MCD to the private respondents
herein, who were the writ petitioners before the learned Single Judge.
The said order dated 15th June, 2007 is again a matter of challenge
before the learned Single Judge through a writ petition, which is
pending for consideration.
7.

The decision of the learned Single Judge is shown to be against

the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Dr.Anuradha Bodi
and others v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi and others (supra)
and accordingly an order was passed by the Municipal Corporation of
Delhi giving effect to the orders of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid

LPA No.708/2001

page 3 of 4

decision.
8.

In that view of the matter, practically nothing survives for

consideration in these appeals, which stand disposed of accordingly.
All the pending applications also stand disposed of.
9.

It is made clear that whatever opinions and views are expressed

by the learned Single Judge would have no bearing or relevance on the
court deciding the writ petition(s), which is/are pending before the
learned Single Judge as against the order dated 15th June, 2007, which
shall be considered in the light of the records of that case and also in
the light of the various decisions, which have been rendered by the
Supreme Court on the aforesaid issue.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 05, 2008
nm

LPA No.708/2001

page 4 of 4

