*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA No.1961-1962/2006

%

Date of Decision: 6th February, 2008
SAFARI INTERNATIONAL & ANOTHER
……. Appellants
Through: Mr.Shailen Bhatia with Ms.Amita
Kapur and Mr.D.K. Dhingra,
Advocates
Versus
SUBHASH GUPTA & OTHERS
……Respondents
Through:Mr.Neeraj Grover, Advocate for
respondent No.1.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ

1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated

28th July, 2006 whereby the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ
petition filed by the appellant herein against the order of the
Intellectual Property Appellate Board. Vide order dated 9th March, 2006
the Intellectual Property Appellate Board allowed the application of the

LPA No.1961-1962/2006

page 1 of 8

Respondent No. 1 against the order of Assistant Registrar of Trade
Marks.
2.

Respondent No.1 herein had been manufacturing tricycles,

bicycles and baby cycles under his sole proprietorship concern M/s.
Shagun Udyog since 1974 under the trademark ‘SAFARI’. In April 1979
he filed an application for registration of the said trademark and the
same was registered in July, 1988 bearing
No.348290.

registered trade mark

In the meantime, in the year 1981 respondent No.1

incorporated a private limited company under the name and style
‘M/s.Safari Cycles Private Limited’ wherein the respondent No.1 and his
brother were equal shareholders. Though the said company did not
carry on any business but the respondent No.1 continued the business
in his individual capacity.

In December 1984 brother of respondent

No.1 resigned from the company transferring his shareholding in the
name

of

the

respondent

No.1

and

respondent

No.1’s

wife.

Consequently, the respondent No.1 and his wife became shareholders
in the ratio of 70:30. From January 1985 business activities of
manufacture and sale of goods under the trade mark ‘SAFARI’ were
taken over and continued by Safari Cycles Private Limited.
3.

In February, 1995, the appellant herein filed an application

before the Trade Marks Registry, New Delhi for registration of a similar
trade mark and also initiated rectification proceedings on the ground of

LPA No.1961-1962/2006

page 2 of 8

non user by the respondent No.1. In the said proceedings, the learned
Assistant Registrar of Trade Marks allowed the said application and
directed removal of the respondent No.1’s registered trade mark
‘SAFARI’ on the ground that the respondent No.1 had obtained the said
registration by playing a fraud and also on the ground of non user by
the respondent No.1.
4.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the respondent No.1 filed an

appeal being CM(M) No.793/2000 in this Court. However, the said
appeal was transferred to the learned Intellectual Property Appellate
Board in terms of Section 100 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999.

The

learned Appellate Board considered the pleadings of the parties and
thereafter allowed the appeal filed by respondent No.1 holding that
respondent No.1 did not commit any fraud at all inasmuch as
respondent No.1 remained the managing force of the company and
under that impression and without knowing the consequences of the
technicalities he might have stated that he was the proprietor of the
trademark without any intention to deceive anybody. It was also held
that the use of trade mark by a private limited company where the
respondent No.1 and his wife are the shareholders to the extent of
70% and 30% respectively should be and must be construed as use of
trade mark either by the respondent No.1 himself or with his implied

LPA No.1961-1962/2006

page 3 of 8

permission or licence.

Consequently, the order passed by the learned

Assistant Registrar of Trade Marks was set aside and quashed.
5.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the appellant filed a writ

petition in this Court. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties
and having perused the records, the learned Single Judge, agreeing
with the conclusions arrived at by the Appellate Board, dismissed the
writ petition filed by the appellant herein by order dated 28th July,
2006. The said order of the learned Single Judge is under challenge in
this appeal, on which we have heard the learned counsel appearing for
the parties and have also perused the records placed before us.
6.

The arguments of the learned counsel for the appellant mainly

centered around the contention of fraud allegedly played by the
respondent No.1 on Registrar of Trade Marks. It was contended that
the finding of facts of the Registrar should not have been upset by the
Appellate Board and also by the learned Single Judge.

It was also

submitted that the Appellate Board did not deal with the findings of the
Registrar with regard to user of the trademark and, therefore, the
conclusions arrived at by the Board are liable to be set aside and
quashed. Next it was contended that it was a case of non-user as the
the proprietor never used the trade mark ‘SAFARI’.

The learned

counsel appearing for the respondent however refuted all the said
allegations.

LPA No.1961-1962/2006

page 4 of 8

7.

The respondent had been using the trade mark 'SAFARI' since

1974 for the cycles manufactured under his sole proprietorship concern
M/s. Shagun Udyog. In the year 1979 he applied for registration of the
said mark and registration certificate was issued in the year 1988.
During the pendency of the said application, in 1981 respondent No.1
incorporated a private limited company with his brother as the Director
having equal share, under the name 'Safari Cycles Private Limited'.
There is no dispute to the fact that the said company did not function
till 1984. It is also a fact that respondent No.1 continued the business
in his individual capacity. Later, in the year 1984, on resignation of
the respondent No.1's brother from Safari Cycles Private Limited by
transferring his shares in the name of respondent No.1 and his wife,
the respondent No.1 along with his wife became shareholders of the
said company with 70:30 shareholding.

Therefore for all practical

purposes, the respondent No.1 was running the aforesaid company
being the major shareholder whereas the remaining 30% shares were
owned by none other than his wife, making the company a family
concern.

From January, 1985 the business activities of manufacture

and sale of goods under the trade mark ‘SAFARI' were taken over by
the said private limited company. When the respondent No.1 made the
statement before the Registrar in 1986, he along with his wife was the
owner of the company which was using the trademark. It can be safely

LPA No.1961-1962/2006

page 5 of 8

assumed that he being the managing force of the company, he might
have stated that he is the proprietor of the trade mark, without any
intention to deceive anybody as none others were using the said trade
mark. In fact the Appellate Board found that the appellant herein did
not put forth any plea to the effect that the respondent had any
intention to deceive anybody when he stated so. The Appellate Board
also recorded that it was also not the case of the appellant herein that
the respondent No.1 herein is using the trade mark which belongs to
any other third party and played fraud in claiming the ownership of
such trade mark to the detriment of the real owner. We also agree
with the conclusion recorded by the Appellate Board that in the
absence of any details to establish the allegation of fraud, the said
contention was liable to be rejected. In this context we may also refer
to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of A.C.
Ananthaswamy and Others v. Boraiah (Dead) by LRs reported in
(2004) 8 SCC 588 wherein the Supreme Court has held that fraud
pleaded has to be proved. The Court in para-5 of the said judgment
observed:
“ ............. Fraud is to be pleaded and proved. To
prove fraud, it must be proved that representation
made was false to the knowledge of the party
making such representation or that the party could
have no reasonable belief that it was true. The level
of proof required in such case is extremely higher.
An ambiguous statement cannot per se make the
representator guilty of fraud. To prove a case of
LPA No.1961-1962/2006

page 6 of 8

8.

fraud, it must be proved that the representation
made was false to the knowledge of the party
making such representation. (See: Pollock & Mulla
:Indian Contract & Specific Relief Acts (2001) 12th
Edn. p.489)”
In the present case, except for stating in the statement of the

case that the impugned registration was obtained by playing fraud on
the Registrar of Trade Mark as well as the honest members of the trade
and business, no material was placed on record to support the said
claim. It is also pertinent to mention that the respondent No.1 did not
derive any advantage on the assumption of the trade mark 'SAFARI'
from the proprietorship concern to the private limited company as the
private limited company was again a family concern of respondent
No.1. For establishing the allegation of fraud the appellant should have
placed on record sufficient and cogent evidence. In the present case
there are no details given as to how the fraud of the nature alleged
was committed. In our considered opinion no fraud could be deduced
on the part of respondent No.1 on the basis of the pleadings available
on record. Pleadings that have been advanced to establish fraud are
mere surmises and conjectures. Thus the findings recorded by the
Registrar that there was fraud committed, therefore, was rightly not
accepted by the Appellate Board as also by the learned Single Judge.
9.

Insofar as the contention of non-user is concerned, there is no

dispute to the fact that the respondent No.1 had applied for
registration in the year 1979 and obtained the same in the year 1988.
LPA No.1961-1962/2006

page 7 of 8

Though the private limited company did not do any business
immediately after incorporation in 1981 but the respondent No.1
continued the business in his individual capacity. In 1985 the limited
company took over the business under the said trade mark. The mark
was continuously in use either by the respondent No.1 in his individual
capacity or later by the private limited company.
10.

In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that the

learned Single Judge has rightly upheld the order of the Appellate
Board. We find no merit in this appeal and the same is accordingly
dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
6th February, 2008
nm

LPA No.1961-1962/2006

page 8 of 8

