*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA No.154/2007

%

Date of Decision: 8th February, 2008
Smt. Kishni Devi and another
... Appellants
Through: Mr.Manish Malhotra, Advocate
Versus
Indian Hydraulic Industries Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. ... Respondents
Through:Mr.P.K. Malik, Advocate for
respondent No.1.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes
Yes

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ :
1.

The present appeal is directed against the judgment and order

passed by the learned Single Judge on 3rd January, 2008 whereby the
learned Single Judge has partly modified the award passed by the
Labour Court.
2.

The appellants herein alleged that while they were working as

helpers at the monthly salary of Rs.750/- per month each, their
services

were

terminated

by

the

management

illegally

and

unjustifiably and without following the procedure under Section 25-F of
LPA No.154/2007

page 1 of 10

the Industrial Disputes Act. They also sought for a reference from the
appropriate Government to adjudicate upon the aforesaid aspect
regarding their illegal and unjustified termination.

The appropriate

Government referred the following issue to the Labour Court:
“Whether the services of Smt.Kishan Devi and
Smt.Bhagwati Devi have been terminated illegally
and/or unjustifiably by the management, if so, to
what relief are they entitled and what directions are
necessary in this respect.”
3.

Before the Labour Court the management took up a stand that

there was no woman labour in their factory and that the appellants
herein were working as part time Sweepers. Their job was to sweep
the floors only for two hours a day at the time of opening of the factory
and after finishing their work, they used to go back and that they did
not work under the supervision of any one. It was also the stand of the
management that both the said part time Sweepers stopped coming to
office on their own and that they were not employees of the
management inasmuch as no appointment letter was issued to them
and that they were not even covered by EPF and ESI, although all other
employees of the management were covered under such beneficial
legislation like Employees Provident Fund and Employees State
Insurance Scheme.

It was, therefore, contended that there was no

termination of service as alleged.
LPA No.154/2007

page 2 of 10

4.

The

learned

Labour

Court

after

receiving

the

aforesaid

pleadings, fixed the matter for recording evidence, and after recording
the same, heard arguments and thereafter passed the award on 24th
September, 2001.

In the said award it was held that even if the

employees were part time employees and were working as Sweepers,
they were workmen within the definition of Section 2(s) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, for they were not obliged to work for the whole
day for becoming a workman within the definition of Section 2(s) of the
Industrial Disputes Act. The learned Labour Court proceeded to hold
that since they were workmen, their services were terminated without
following the due procedure under Section 25-F and, therefore, their
termination was illegal.

It was held that even assuming that the

workmen had absented from duty without any intimation, the
management was required to conduct a departmental inquiry against
the said employees and since no inquiry was conducted, the
abandonment of service cannot be inferred and, therefore, the Tribunal
directed reinstatement with 50% back wages.
5.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the management filed a

writ petition in this Court, which was heard by the learned Single Judge
and by the impugned order the writ petition was disposed of with the
following modification in the award.

It was held that even if the

termination is held to be illegal, it was not mandatory for the Labour

LPA No.154/2007

page 3 of 10

Court to direct reinstatement along with full back wages and that relief
should have been moulded according to the facts and circumstances of
the case.

It was held that there are number of decisions of the

Supreme Court that the Labour Court instead of directing for
reinstatement of service can allow payment of compensation to a
workman. The learned Single Judge after referring to the decisions of
the Supreme Court in Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and another
v. S.C. Sharma 2005 (2) SCC 363; HUDA v. Jagmal Singh 2006 SCC
(L&S) 1193; Allahabad Jal Sansthan v. Daya Shankar Rai 2005
SCC (L&S) 631; K.C. Sharma v. Delhi Stock Exchange and others
2005 SCC (L&S) 496 held that in view of the facts of the present case,
it was established that the appellants were part time employees
working only for two hours a day and that they absented from duty on
their own and, therefore, payment of compensation should be
adequate relief.

In terms of the said findings an order was passed

directing for payment of compensation of Rs.36,000/- to each
workman, stating that the same would meet the ends of justice.
6.

The aforesaid judgment and order is under challenge in this

appeal on which we have heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.

There is no doubt regarding the findings of fact recorded by the

Labour Court, which are also affirmed by the learned Single Judge, that
the appellants were part time employees and were working as

LPA No.154/2007

page 4 of 10

Sweepers only. It is also an admitted fact that the appellants used to
go to the office of the management for sweeping floors only for two
hours i.e. at the time of opening of the factory and before the closure
of factory i.e. after finishing of the work in the factory. As they were
part time employees, there was no appointment letter issued to them.
It is also established from the records as also admitted by the
appellants themselves that there is no other female helper in the entire
factory and the office of the management. Therefore, on the face of it
the claim of the appellants that they were helpers cannot be accepted
and was rightly rejected by the learned Labour Court as also by the
learned Single Judge, holding that they were part time employees and
were working only for two hours as Sweepers.
8.

The findings of fact that they were workmen and that their

services were terminated without following due process of law are also
final and binding.

The management has not challenged the said

findings. The present appeal is thus directed against the quantum of
compensation only and, therefore, we are required to examine only the
aforesaid issue in this appeal.

Since the learned Single Judge has

upheld the award of compensation, therefore, it is deduced that he has
also held the order to be illegal and unjustifiable.
9.

The said findings of the learned Single Judge are not challenged

by the management and, therefore, we are not required to enter into

LPA No.154/2007

page 5 of 10

the legality of the said order. What we are required to examine is as to
whether the award of payment of an amount of Rs.36,000/- each as
compensation could be said to be adequate compensation in the facts
and circumstances of the case. The learned Single Judge was definitely
justified in holding that in such cases where a person has worked only
for two hours a day and that also on a part time basis, there should not
be an order of reinstatement of service and compensation would be
the adequate relief in the back drop of the facts and circumstances of
the present case.
10.

In paragraph 17 of U.P. State Brassware Corpn. Ltd. and

another v. Uday Narain Pandey reported in (2006) 1 SCC 479, the
Supreme Court has held as follows:
“17. Before adverting to the decisions relied upon
by the learned counsel for the parties, we may
observe that although direction to pay full back
wages on a declaration that the order of termination
was invalid used to be the usual result but now, with
the passage of time, a pragmatic view of the matter
is being taken by the court realising that an industry
may not be compelled to pay to the workman for the
period during which he apparently contributed little
or nothing at all to it and/or for a period that was
spent

unproductively

as

a

result

whereof

the

employer would be compelled to go back to a

LPA No.154/2007

page 6 of 10

situation which prevailed many years ago, namely,
when the workman was retrenched.”
11.

In paragraph 22 of the said judgment, the Supreme Court held

in the following manner:
“22. No precise formula can be laid down as to
under what circumstances payment of entire back
wages should be allowed. Indisputably, it depends
upon the facts and circumstances of each case. It
would, however, not be correct to contend that it is
automatic. It should not be granted mechanically
only because on technical grounds or otherwise an
order of termination is found to be in contravention
of the provisions of Section 6-N of the U.P. Industrial
Disputes Act.”
12.

In the said decision after referring to a number of earlier

decisions of the Supreme Court, it was held that payment of back
wages having a discretionary element involved in it has to be dealt
with in the facts and circumstances of each case and no straight-jacket
formula can be evolved, though, however, there is statutory sanction
to direct payment of back wages in its entirety.
13.

In paragraphs 41 and 42 of the decision in U.P. State

Brassware Corpn. Ltd. and another (supra), the Supreme Court
held thus:

LPA No.154/2007

page 7 of 10

“41. The Industrial Courts while adjudicating on
disputes between the management and the
workmen, therefore, must take such decisions
which would be in consonance with the purpose
the law seeks to achieve.

When justice is the

buzzword in the matter of adjudication under the
Industrial Disputes Act, it would be wholly
improper on the part of the superior courts to
make them apply the cold letter of the statutes
to act mechanically. Rendition of justice would
bring within its purview giving a person what is
due to him and not what can be given to him in
law.
42. A person is not entitled to get something
only because it would be lawful to do so. If that
principle is applied, the functions of an industrial
court shall lose much of their significance.”
14.

In paragraph 50 of the said judgment the Supreme Court

referred to its earlier decisions in Ruby General Insurance Co. Ltd.
v. P.P. Chopra (1969) 3 SCC 653 and Hindustan Steels Ltd. v. A.K.
Roy (1969) 3 SCC 513 and held that before granting reinstatement,
the court must weigh all the facts and exercise discretion whether to
grant reinstatement or to award compensation.
15.

In Allahabad Jal Sansthan v. Daya Shankar Rai reported

as (2005) 5 SCC 124, the Supreme Court held as under:
LPA No.154/2007

page 8 of 10

“16. We have referred to certain decisions of this
Court to highlight that earlier in the event of an
order of dismissal being set aside, reinstatement
with full back wages was the usual result. But
now with the passage of time, it has come to be
realised that industry is being compelled to pay
the workman for a period during which he
apparently contributed little or nothing at all, for
a period that was spent unproductively, while
the workman is being compelled to go back to a
situation which prevailed many years ago when
he was dismissed. It is necessary for us to
develop a pragmatic approach to problems
dogging industrial relations. However, no just
solution can be offered but the golden mean
may be arrived at.”
16.

In the instant case, the Labour Court directed reinstatement of

the appellants with 50% of the back wages, but finally the learned
Single Judge modified the said order and directed for payment of
compensation of a total amount of Rs.36,000/- each in lieu of
reinstatement.
17.

We have considered the ratio of the aforesaid judgments in

the light of the stand taken by the appellants.

Our attention was

drawn to the order dated 13th September, 2004 passed in Writ Petition
(Civil) No.14932/2004 wherein the respondent – management stated
LPA No.154/2007

page 9 of 10

that they were prepared to make payment to the appellants – workmen
and that there were also interested in giving work to the workmen.
However, the workmen stated that they had no interest in working with
the management.

Since the appellants are not interested to be

reinstated in service, it is presumed that they are working elsewhere to
earn their livelihood.

The total awarded amount comes to about

Rs.72,000/-, as recorded in the order dated 13th September, 2004. The
learned Single Judge has awarded 50% of the said amount as adequate
compensation to the appellants.
18.

In that view of the matter, we find no merit in this appeal,

which is dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE
8th February, 2008
nm

LPA No.154/2007

page 10 of 10

