*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA Nos. 1990/2006 and LPA 1992/2006

%
1.

Date of Decision:8th February, 2008
LPA 1990/2006
NARESH CHAND

..... Appellant
Through:Ms. Rani Chhabra, Advocate

versus
THE PRESIDING OFFICER , CGIT, New Delhi &
..... Respondents
510, Army Base Workshop
Through Ms.Barkha Babbar, Advocate for UOI
2.

LPA 1992/2006
VINAY KUMAR

..... Appellant
Through:Ms. Rani Chhabra, Advocate

versus
THE PRESIDING OFFICER , CGIT, New Delhi &
..... Respondents
510, Army Base Workshop
Through Ms.Raman Oberoi, Advocate for UOI
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ:
1.

These appeals raise similar and identical issues. The appeals

were heard together and they are also being disposed of by this

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 1 of 14

common judgment and order.
2.

The appellants herein challenged the legality of the judgment

and order passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ
petitions by judgment and order dated 21st July, 2006 and also against
the award dated 21st November, 1996 passed by the Industrial Tribunal,
New Delhi holding the reference against the workmen in respect of their
termination of service.

The appellants herein were engaged for

different posts by the respondent on 23.04.1990/23.07.1990.

In the

offer of appointment the engagement of the appellants was for a fixed
period, i.e., upto 29th January, 1991 and the terms and conditions for the
post for which they were engaged were also given in the offer of
appointment. The appellants accepted the aforesaid offer pursuant to
which the appointment letters were also issued to them on specific
terms and conditions to which reference shall

be made during the

course of discussion. Services of the appellants were also not dispensed
with within the date fixed in their order of engagement and they
continued to work.

However, their services were subsequently

dispensed with w.e.f. 21.3.1992.
3.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid dispensation of service, the

appellants raised industrial dispute. The appropriate government made
a reference pursuant thereto to the Industrial Tribunal to adjudicate
upon and decide as to whether or not the termination of the services of

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 2 of 14

the appellants was legal and justified, and if not, to what relief the
workmen would be entitled ?

The Tribunal allowed the parties to

adduce their evidence and on appreciation thereof and other records
held that the appellants were employed specifically for the purpose of
USSR specialists who had come for performance of the task entrusted to
them and with the completion of the said task the services of those
employees were no longer required and, therefore, it was a clear cut
case of ‘closure’ as the workmen were engaged only for a fixed period
for

the

specific

purpose

for

attending

those

specialists,

and

consequently the action of the management in disengaging the
appellants was fully justified.

The appellants being aggrieved by the

aforesaid award, filed writ petitions in this Court which were registered
as WP(C) Nos. 1785/1997 and 1787/1997. The aforesaid petitions were
heard by the learned Single Judge and by orders dated 21st July, 2006
they were dismissed.
4.

Being aggrieved by the said orders dated 21st July, 2006

rendered by the learned Single Judge, present appeals were filed which
were heard together as the facts are identical and the counsel
appearing for the appellants is also common. We now proceed to
dispose of both these appeals giving our reasons therefor.
5.

In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties, it will be

necessary to look into the nature of the appointment that was given to

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 3 of 14

the appellants. A copy of the offer of appointment is placed on record
which is dated 21st April, 1990.

The first two clauses of the offer of

appointment reads as follows:“1.
Consequent to the test carried out by this
establishment as well as completion of scrutiny of
relevant documents, your candidature for appointment
as Masalchi purely on a temporary capacity upto 29
January, 1991 is approved.
2.
The terms and conditions of the post of Masalchi
are given at Appendix ‘A’ to this letter (on reverse). If
these term and conditions are acceptable, please
contact this workshop on 23rd April, 90 at 0800 hours.”
6.

In the terms and conditions of service annexed therewith, it was

specifically mentioned against the column ‘Nature of Appointment’ as:
‘Temporary on nerrik rates’.

As against the column ‘Conditions of

Service’ it was mentioned that (a) the post is purely temporary upto 29th
January, 1991 on nerrik rates of pay.

There is no likelihood of this

appointment being extended or converted to any other types of
appointment and (b) Services are liable to be terminated without any
notice. It was also mentioned in the said terms and conditions that the
workmen would be liable to serve in 510 Army base Workshop. In the
letter of appointment it was specifically mentioned that if these term
and conditions are acceptable, please contact this workshop on 23rd
April, 1990.

Under their specific letter dated 21st April, 1990 the

appellants also accepted the terms and conditions mentioned in the
letter dated 21st April, 1990. The learned Single Judge in the impugned
(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 4 of 14

judgment has also extracted the contents of the offer of appointment,
the terms and conditions of service

and also the contents of the

appointment letter. The services of the appellants were not dispensed
with on 29.01.1991 and, therefore, their services were taken even after
expiry of 29.01.1991 which was the period for which they were
appointed and their services were dispensed with only on 21.3.1992,
meaning thereby that they continued to serve for approximately
another one year period.
7.

In view of the aforesaid position, the contention which has been

raised by the appellants is that although initially they might have been
appointed on contractual basis for a fixed period of time, yet by allowing
them to continue in service even after the expiry of the said period of
contract they would be deemed to be temporary employees and,
therefore, their termination of service is illegal and unjustified in view of
the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The
said contention was raised by the appellants in the reference which was
initiated and referred to the industrial adjudicator for which evidence
was also led by the appellants. Industrial adjudicator, however, was not
impressed and persuaded by the contention raised by the appellant, for
he held that the evidence on record had proved and established that
USSR specialists had come to Meerut Cantt, and some staff for them
was required, and that it was made clear by the Government of India as

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 5 of 14

well as by the appointing authority that the employees were being
recruited only for services to be rendered to this unit of USSR
specialists.

It was also held that the nature of the job of the said

persons was also like Masalchi, Cook, Gardner, Waiter etc.

and that

they were engaged for a specific period and were not even entitled to
leave. The learned industrial adjudicator after referring to the aforesaid
findings held as follows:“After having gone through the points urged before me
by the representatives for the parties, I am of the
opinion that there is no denying fact as proved from the
annexures filed by the management, which is part of
the defence services of the Government of India, that
USSR Specialists had come to Meerut Cantt. and some
staff for them was required. It was made clear by the
Government of India as well as by the appointment
Authority that the employees were being recruited only
for services to be rendered to this Unit of USSR
specialists. The nature of the job of these people was
also like Masalchi, Cook, Gardner, Waiter etc. They
were engaged for specific period and were not entitled
to even leave. As their appointment was only daily
basis which is recorded as nerrick rates of pay in the
Appendix attached in the terms and conditions in
respect of these candidates. It was recorded that there
was no likelihood of the appointment being extended or
converted to any other type of appointment. The terms
and conditions were recorded in letter dated
21.04.1990 and as a part of the defence services the
workmen were told that their services would no longer
be extended beyond the period of their appointment.
He also admitted the receipt of letter dated 23.04.1990
and accepted the offer of appointment on the terms
stated therein. In view of this situation I am of the
opinion that since the workman was employed along
with his other colleagues whose reference have also
been received specifically for the purpose of assisting
the USSR Specialists for the task entrusted to them and
(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 6 of 14

with the completion of the said task, the services of
these employees were no longer required. It was a
clear cut case of closure as the workman were
employed only for a fixed period on daily basis for
specific purpose for holding those specialists.
The
action of the management in this case in my opinion
was fully justified. However, parties are left to bear
their own costs.”
8.

The learned Single Judge before whom the writ petitions were

filed considered the plea of the appellants that the respondent has
contravened the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act which amounts to
retrenchment and, therefore, the appellants are entitled to protection as
granted under Section 25-F of the Act. The Learned Single Judge in that
context considered the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act and
also considered the ratio of the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Morinda Coop. Sugar Mill v. Ram Kishan & Ors. (1995) 5 SCC 653, and
Mahendra L. Jain v. Indore Development Authority (2005) SCC L&S 154
and also the decision in A. Uma Rani v. Registrar, Cooperative Societies
& Others (2004) 7 SCC 112 and upon reference and consideration of the
same held that the appellants were engaged only for the period when a
team of specialists from USSR was staying in the Mess and, therefore,
their termination of service was covered under Section 2(oo)(bb) of the
Act. The appellants had no right to get regularised. In the light of the
aforesaid findings recorded by the Industrial Adjudicator and also by the
learned Single Judge, the plea that is raised before us by the counsel
appearing for the appellants is that the appellants never sought for and
(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 7 of 14

requested for regularisation of services and that they only sought for
protection as provided for under Section 25-F of the Act, which provides
that their services cannot be retrenched without following the due
process of law as laid down in the provisions of the Act. The relevant
clauses of Section 2(oo)(bb) and also Section 25-F of the Act reads as
follows:“Section
2(oo):
“retrenchment” means the
termination by the employer of the service of a
workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as
a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action but
does not include ..............................
(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a
result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment
between the employer and the workman concerned on
its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a
stipulation in that behalf contained therein.”
“25F.
CONDITIONS
PRECEDENT
TO
RETRENCHMENT OF WORKMEN. - No workman
employed in any industry who has been in continuous
service for not less than one year under an employer
shall be retrenched by that employer until (a) the workman has been given one month's notice in
writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the
period of notice has expired, or the workman has been
paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the
notice;
(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of
retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent
to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year
of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of
six months; and
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the
appropriate Government or such authority as may be
specified by the appropriate Government by notification
in the Official Gazette. “
(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 8 of 14

9.

Counsel appearing for the respondents heavily relied on the ratio

of the decision of the Supreme Court in A. Uma Rani (supra). Specific
reference was made to the following passage

from the aforesaid

decision:“......Once the employees are employed for the purpose
of a scheme, they do not have vested interest after
project is over....(para 41 and 42)”.
10.

Counsel appearing for the appellant, however, submitted that

the aforesaid decision shall have no application to the facts of the
present case as the provisions of Section 2(oo)(bb) and Section 25-F of
the Act were not at all involved in the said decision.

It was also

submitted that the said decision was rendered in the context as to
whether or not the appellant could claim for regularisation when their
initial appointment was contractual.
11.

It is true that in the case of A. Uma Rani (supra) it was held by

the Supreme Court that the persons who are engaged on contractual
basis would not have right to get themselves regularised as their initial
appointment was not in accordance with the provisions of the statutory
rules of recruitment. However, while dealing with the said issue the
Supreme Court also happened to consider the nature of appointment of
contract employees. No notice is required to be served in cases where
employees are appointed only for a fixed period and their services stand
automatically expired on expiry of the date of contract of service. Same
(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 9 of 14

was also clearly stipulated in the terms and conditions of the letter of
offer of appointment which the appellants accepted without any
reservation that their appointment is contractual and their services
could be terminated without serving any notice on them. There can be
no dispute with regard to the fact that the initial engagement of the
appellants being contractual in nature, the appellants have no vested
right created in their favour to continue in service and also to be
regularised in service.

They were, however, allowed to be continued

and the respondent received their services, but it cannot be said that in
view of the said fact a vested right has accrued to them.
12.

The Supreme Court in MD, Karnataka Handloom Development

Corporation Limited v. Sri Mahadev Laxman Raval reported in (2006) 12
Scale 133 has stated thus:“.............................Even assuming that the respondent
had worked 240 days continuously he, in our opinion,
cannot claim that his services should be continued
because the number of 240 days does not apply to the
respondent inasmuch as his services were purely
contractual. The termination of his contract, in our view,
does not amount to retrenchment and, therefore, it
does not attract compliance of Section 25F of the I.D.
Act at all.”
13.

In A. Uma Rani’s case (supra) also it was held by the Supreme

Court that once the employees are employed for the purpose of a
project, they do not have any vested interest after the period of the
project is over.

The finding of fact herein which is recorded by the

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 10 of 14

Industrial Adjudicator is that the appellants were engaged for a
particular project and that the said project has come to an end. There is
also a stipulation in the offer of appointment which was accepted by the
appellants that no notice is required to be served on the appellants
before disengaging them from their service. Clause (bb) of sub-section
(oo) of Section 2 of the Act excludes the said termination of service of a
workman which is a result of the non renewal of the contract of
employment between the employer and the workman on its expiry or on
such contract being terminated under stipulation in that behalf
contained therein.

It, however, includes within its parameters such

termination of service which accrues and arises out of a contract which
is terminated under a stipulation that such services can be dispensed
without service of notice. If that be so, the same cannot strictly be said
to be a case of ‘retrenchment’, thus the provisions of Section 25-F would
not be applicable.
14.

We would like to fortify the aforesaid conclusion with the

decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Municipal Council, Samrala
v. Raj Kumar reported as (2006) 3 SCC 81. The aforesaid decision was
rendered by the Supreme Court in the context of the facts that the
workman was appointed on contract basis on a resolution being passed
therefor by the Municipal Executive Council to meet the exigencies of
the situation prevailing and were appointed on the terms and conditions

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 11 of 14

approved by the Municipal Council. In the said background facts, it was
held by the Supreme Court that where such terms and conditions
expressly include a term that the contract was a short lived one and
shall be liable to be terminated as and when the Municipal Council
thought it fit or appropriate or necessary to do so, the case would fall
under the second part of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the said Act and the
provisions of Section 25-F shall be inapplicable. The said decision also
takes note of the fact that the employee in the said case was an
employee of the Municipal Council which is governed by the provisions
of a statute and that the matter relating to the appointment of the
employees

as

also

the

terms

and

conditions

of

their

services

indisputably are governed by the relevant Act or the rules framed
thereunder and thus there is no doubt that the matter relating to the
employment should be governed by the statutory provisions.

The

Supreme Court in the facts of the said case held that there was neither
any doubt nor any dispute that the terms and conditions contained in
the offer of appointment on both these spells for which the respondent
was in service with

the appellant

was same and that so far as the

employment of a person in a Municipal Council , which is a ‘State’ under
Article 12 of the Constitution, is concerned, the same must be done in
terms of the provisions of the statute or the Rules framed thereunder.
The Supreme Court took notice of the fact that the employee was not

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 12 of 14

appointed on a permanent or a temporary basis. It was not the case of
the respondent that while making an offer of appointment, the Municipal
Council had complied with the requirements laid down in the statute or
statutory rules or even otherwise the same was in conformity with
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. The case would, therefore, fall in
the second part of Section 2(oo)(bb) of the Act.
15.

Almost a similar view was taken by the Supreme Court in

another case Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. Devki Devi and
others reported in (2006) 5 SCC 523. In the said case also the Supreme
Court held that the material which was placed before the Labour Court
would indicate that the contract was a job contract and no temporary
employment was terminated.
16.

We may also refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in

Harmohinder Singh v. Kharga Canteen reported in (2001) 5 SCC 540
wherein the Supreme Court has held that so far section 25-F is
concerned the same deals with conditions precedent to retrenchment
of a workman. It was also held that the same would not apply in those
cases which are expressly excluded as laid down under Section
2(oo)(bb). It was also held that the contracts of service for a fixed term
are excluded and in those cases the principle of natural justice are not
applicable where termination takes place on the expiry of the contract.
17.

Merely because the appellants in the instant case continued to

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 13 of 14

work for about a year after the expiry of the initial period of contract
would not, in any manner improve the status of the appellants for the
conditions of their appointment never came to be changed or altered in
their favour. In that view of the matter, we find no error in the judgment
passed by the industrial adjudicator and also by the learned Single
Judge. The appeals have no merit and are dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL
(JUDGE)
FEBRUARY 08, 2008
Rohtash

(LPA 1990&1992/2006)

Page 14 of 14

