*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA No.1037/2004

%

Date of Decision: 8th February, 2008
SATYA DEV TOMAR& ANOTHER
…….APPELLANTS
Through: Ms.S.Janani and
Mr.Deepak Goel, Advocates
Versus
MCD & OTHERS
……RESPONDENTS
Through:Ms.Amita Gupta, Advocate for MCD
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ
1.
The present appeal is filed as against the judgment and order
dated 7th May, 2004 passed by the learned Single judge in WP(C)
No.1548/1999.

The said writ petition was filed by some Assistant

Engineers (Civil) working with the respondent-Municipal Corporation of
Delhi (for short MCD) seeking issuance of

mandamus to the MCD to

treat the writ petitioners as Assistant Engineer (Civil) with effect from
the date they were entrusted current duty charge to the said post and
with consequential benefits. The learned Single Judge disposed of the
writ petition by passing the following order:“It
is
not
disputed
that
petitioners
in
W.P.3091/1997 were identically placed to the
petitioners herein. In said view of the matter,
(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 1 of 11

directions are issued to the MCD that service
rendered by the petitioners on current duty
charge will be counted towards their service for
determining their eligibility for promotion to the
next higher post. Needful be done in six weeks.
Writ petition stands disposed of. No costs.”
2.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order the present appeal is

filed by the appellants on the ground that the impugned order passed by
the learned Single Judge adversely affects their interest for promotion to
the next higher post of Executive Engineer.

However, at this stage, we

may mention that the appellants herein are direct recruits to the post of
Assistant Engineer in MCD and were not party to the above writ petition.
3.

Counsel appearing for the respondents raised an objection with

regard to maintainability of the appeal contending, inter alia, that the
appellants were not parties in the writ petition and, therefore, if they
were in any manner aggrieved they should have filed a review
application before the learned Single Judge instead of coming in appeal.
However, since we heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties
on merit, we proceed to dispose of the appeal without going into the
aforesaid issue.

Even otherwise, in our considered opinion, such an

appeal could be filed by the appellants although they were not parties in
the writ petition.

A 'person aggrieved' is a

person who has been

deprived of a benefit which he would have received if the order had
been contrary to what it actually is, or an order which causes him a legal
grievance by wrongfully depriving him of something. In this regard we
(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 2 of 11

may also refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Bar Council of
Maharashtra v. M.V. Dabholkar reported in reported in (1975) 2
SCC 702, wherein it is stated that :
“28. Where a right of appeal to courts against an
administrative or judicial decision is created by statute,
the right is invariably confined to a person aggrieved or a
person who claims to be aggrieved. The meaning of the
words a person aggrieved may vary according to the
context of the statute.

One of the meanings is that a

person will be held to be aggrieved by a decision if that
decision is materially adverse to him.

Normally, one is

required to establish that one has been denied or
deprived of something to which one is legally entitled in
order to make one a person aggrieved............”
4.

The respondent Nos. 5-13 herein, who were petitioners in the

writ petition were working as Junior Engineers (Civil) with the MCD. They
were entrusted current duty charge to the post of Assistant Engineer
(Civil) on various dates in the year 1985.

By Office Order dated 30 th

July, 1990 MCD created inter alia 60 supernumerary posts of Assistant
Engineer (Civil) for the purpose of accommodating those Junior
Engineers who were working on current duty charge to the post of
Assistant

Engineer

(Civil)

and

they

were

appointed

to

such

supernumerary posts with effect from 17th July, 1990. As per the said
Office Order, these supernumerary posts of Assistant Engineer were

(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 3 of 11

personal to the concerned persons and were to be abolished on their
regular promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.

Thereafter, vide

Office Order dated 30th December, 1997, the writ petitioners were
promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) on regular basis.
5.

For promotion to the next higher post i.e. Executive Engineers,

the Assistant Engineers are required to have the eligibility of ten years
service in the lower grade for Diploma holders and five years for Degree
holders.

The writ petitioners being Diploma holders, for promotion to

the post of Executive Engineer, they were required to have ten years
service in the lower cadre i.e. Assistant Engineer. In the writ petition
the writ petitioners challenged the order dated 30th December, 1997
praying for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing MCD for
considering the writ petitioners as Assistant Engineers from 17th July,
1990, the date when they were appointed to the supernumerary post of
Assistant Engineer, for all purposes including seniority, pay, promotion
etc. However, on 7th May, 2004 when the writ petition was listed before
the learned Single Judge

a statement was made by the counsel

appearing for the petitioners that the writ petitioners were

giving up

the claim for payment of wages with retrospective effect and were
restricting their prayer to the claim that they be brought at par with the
petitioners in WP(C) 3091/1997 titled Prem Singh Dahiya & Others v.
MCD decided on 22.5.2002. In the said case the Engineers, who were

(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 4 of 11

similarly situated as the petitioners, made a statement to the following
effect:“Learned counsel for the petitioners had made
a
statement on 15.2.2002 that the petitioners will be
satisfied in case the period which they spent on current
duty charge after they became eligible for being
considered by the DPC is counted towards their service
for determining the eligibility for promotion to the next
higher post and they would not claim the other reliefs in
case the respondents agree to the said proposition.
Learned counsel for the respondents states that the
aforesaid position is acceptable to their respondents,
subject to the condition that there should be a vacancy in
existence for the relevant post at the relevant date.
In view of the aforesaid, a direction is issued that service
rendered by the petitioners on current duty charge will
be counted towards their service for determining the
eligibility for promotion to the next higher post if the
petitioners were eligible, a vacancy existed and the DPC
was not held within a period of one year from the
vacancy arising.
The respondents shall do the needful and intimate it to
the petitioners within a period of 6 weeks from today.
Writ petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms”.

6.

On consideration of the aforesaid position, the learned Single

Judge passed the impugned order dated 7th May, 2004. Hence, this
appeal.
7.

Ms.Janani,

learned

counsel

appearing

for

the

appellants

submitted before us that 50% post of Assistant Engineers are
earmarked for promotee officers whereas 50% posts are earmarked for
the direct recruit officers and that the impugned order passed by the
(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 5 of 11

learned Single Judge would go against the aforesaid ratio as the said
writ petitioners, who have been given the benefit, would be given
promotion as against posts which are meant for direct recruits.
8.

In order to appreciate the aforesaid contentions, we have

considered the background facts leading to the filing of the aforesaid
writ petition. Respondent Nos. 5-13, who were petitioners in the writ
petition, were appointed as Junior Engineers (Civil) with Municipal
Corporation of Delhi between the year 1961 to 1971.

They became

eligible to be promoted as Assistant Engineers after five years of regular
service as Junior Engineer (Civil) but since Departmental Promotion
Committee (DPC) was not convened, they could not be considered for
giving such promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer. However, from
the year 1985 onwards, they have been assigned current duty charge of
Assistant Engineer (Civil). Therefore they were holding and discharging
the duties of the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil), although on current
duty charge. Accordingly, a decision was taken by the MCD on 30th July,
1990 to create a separate cadre just to accommodate the Junior
Engineers (Civil) and Junior Engineers (Electrical) who were holding the
posts of Assistant Engineer on current duty charge. In view of the fact
that the said Junior Engineers were working in that grade for about 1929 years and were holding the post of Assistant Engineer on current
duty charge basis, a decision was taken to create 60 supernumerary

(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 6 of 11

posts of Assistant Engineer (Civil) and 7 supernumerary posts of
Assistant Engineer (Electrical). The said posts, therefore, cannot be said
to be belonging to the cadre of direct recruits and they are posts which
are absolutely created for the first time by upgrading 60 posts of Junior
Engineer (Civil) and 7 posts of Junior Engineer (Electrical).
9.

It was contended by the counsel appearing for the appellant that

the concession that the period spent on current duty charge by the
petitioners would be counted towards their service for determining the
eligibility for promotion to the next higher post, could not have been
given by the respondent/MCD, for such concession would, at this stage,
affect the service and promotion of the appellants.
10.

The learned counsel also drew our attention to the circular

issued by the Government of India whereby restriction on ad hoc
appointment was imposed by the Government itself. It was submitted
that the aforesaid concession was also in violation of the restriction put
by the Government and as such the impugned order is required to be
set aside and quashed.
11.

We have very carefully considered the said submissions and

have also given our anxious consideration to the same.

However,

before dealing with the said submissions, we may mention a very
relevant factor, going to the root of the matter.

In this case, the

impugned order was passed in respect of the petitioners, who were

(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 7 of 11

initially arrayed as respondent Nos. 5-13 in the present appeal. During
the pendency of the appeal, an application being CM No.1727/2006 was
filed by the counsel appearing for the appellants on 9 th January, 2007
under Order 1 Rule 10 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure for deletion of the names of Sh.R.K.Gupta, and Sh.D.K.Singal,
Assistant Engineers, being respondent Nos.7 & 13 respectively, on the
ground that they have already superannuated from service. The said
application was allowed and the names of the above two persons were
deleted from the array of parties. In this connection, we may mention
here that the impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge gets
implemented and becomes final and binding in respect of those two writ
petitioners, whose names stand deleted from array of parties. The other
persons who are similarly situated are, therefore, entitled to the same
benefit, as they form one batch and identically positioned. Therefore,
same principle and standard has to be applied to the other petitioners
as well and the present appeal is, therefore, liable to be dismissed on
that ground.
12.

However, we would like to answer the issue raised by the

learned counsel appearing for the appellants, as part of the grievance of
the appellants would remain unanswered if we do not deal with the
contentions raised before us.

On going through the records, we find

that the decision to treat the writ petitioners in the aforesaid manner

(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 8 of 11

was taken in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, by
upgrading the post of Junior Engineer to the rank of Assistant Engineer
so as to accommodate the persons who were holding current duty
charge for a very long time, as to down grade them after serving for
such a long time would have prejudicially affected the interests of the
Corporation as also of the persons who are so situated. In order to save
the said situation and also to remove the anomaly, MCD created 60
supernumerary posts of Assistant Engineer (Civil) and 7 supernumerary
posts of Assistant Engineer (Electrical) w.e.f. 1st May, 1990 and they
were appointed to the said supernumerary posts with effect from 17 th
July, 1990 under promotion quota. Subsequent thereto DPC was
convened and the aforesaid respondents were promoted w.e.f 30th
December, 1997 as regular Assistant Engineers.
13.

In the case of H.B.Sharma v. Union of India reported in 1996 III

AD (Delhi) 637, this Court after referring to a catena of judgments held
that

the

persons

who

have

continued

uninterruptedly

till

the

regularisation of service by the DPC or the UPSC would be entitled to get
all

the

benefits

of

the

continuous

uninterrupted

service

for

determination of their seniority and consequently they would be entitled
to promotion from the date when they were given current duty charge.
Also in the case of D.K.Jain & Another v. Delhi Jal Board and Others
reported in 2005 VI AD (Delhi) 928 this Court, after referring to the

(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 9 of 11

decision of the Supreme Court in the case of K.Madhavan & Another v.
Union of India & Others reported in (1987) 4 SCC 566 held that with a
view to ensure that miscarriage of justice does not occur, promotion
should be deemed to have taken effect retrospectively from the
commencement of the so called ad hoc, stop gap and current duty
charge, provided the incumbent concerned fulfilled the essential criteria
for consideration for promotion on the initial date.
14.

So far as the argument that the respondents have themselves

accepted the condition that under the current duty charge they will not
claim any benefit accruing from the said post is concerned, we would
like to refer to the observation made by the Supreme Court in case of
Secretary-cum-Chief Engineer, Chandigarh v. Hari Om Sharma and
Others reported in (1998)5 SCC 87 wherein considering a contention
that the respondent was promoted in stop gap arrangement as Junior
Engineer-I and he had given undertaking to the appellant that on the
basis of stop gap arrangement, he would not claim promotion as of right
nor would he claim any benefit pertaining to that post, it was held by
the Supreme Court that apart from the fact that the Government in its
capacity as the model employer cannot be permitted to raise such an
argument, the undertaking which is set to constitute an agreement
between the parties cannot be enforced at law and will be contrary to
law and also against public policy.

(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 10 of 11

15.

The writ petitioners who have been arrayed as private

respondents in this appeal formed one separate class and were given
promotion under the aforesaid circumstances without disturbing in any
manner the quota of 50% meant for the direct recruits as against which
the appellants could be considered for promotion. There is, therefore,
no discrimination nor any interference with the right of the appellants
for being considered for their promotion.
16.

In view of the above discussion, we find no infirmity in the

impugned judgment and order. There is no merit in this appeal and the
same is dismissed.
CHIEF JUSTICE

(ARUNA SURESH)
JUDGE
______ February, 2008
sjs

(LPA 1037/2004)

Page 11 of 11

