*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 57/2008

%

Date of decision: 11.02.2008
JAGAT TALKIES DISTRIBUTORS & ORS
..... Appellants
Through:Mr. Harish Malhotra, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Rajender Aggarwal, Advocate
versus
M.C.D & ANR

..... Respondents
Through:Mr. Amit K. Paul, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL

1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ: (oral)
C.M. Nos. 1922-23/2008(exemption)
Exemption allowed subject to all just exceptions.
Applications stands disposed of.
LPA 57/2008 & C.M. Nos. 1921/2008(delay)
1.

The present appeal is directed against the order dated 3rd

LPA No.57/2008

page No.1 of

7

December, 2007 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the
writ petition filed by the appellant herein.
2.

The said writ petition was filed by the appellant being aggrieved

by the order of the Appellate Authority dated 25th October, 2007 which
was passed under the provisions of Section 9 of the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 upholding the eviction
order passed by the Estate Officer on 16th February, 2005. We have
heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant as well as the
counsel appearing for the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
3.

Counsel appearing for the appellant has submitted before us

that the order passed by the learned Single Judge is required to be set
aside and quashed as the reasons given by him for dismissing the writ
petition

are

erroneous.

In order to appreciate the

aforesaid

contentions we have examined the records.
4.

The appellant, namely, Jagat Talkies Distributors, was given a

lease by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi under its resolution dated
15th March, 1967 duly confirmed by the resolution dated 2nd May, 1967.
By the aforesaid resolution the appellant was given the lease of the
land and also the super-structure.

In that regard a deed was also

executed on 5th June, 1968. The lease was for a period of 10 years
effective from 1st April, 1960 with an option for one renewal. The stand
of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi is that the aforesaid lease came

LPA No.57/2008

page No.2 of

7

to an end by efflux of time after one renewal which was granted to the
appellant.

The respondent took up the plea that after expiry of the

said 20 years period, i.e., 1980 onwards the appellant has become an
unauthorized occupant in respect of the land and, therefore,

the

proceeding under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized
Occupants) Act, 1971

was initiated against the appellant.

The said

initiation of the proceeding and the show cause notice were challenged
by the appellant by filing a writ petition in this Court which was
dismissed by the impugned order dated 3rd December, 2007.
5.

Being aggrieved by the said order the present appeal is filed by

the appellant. Since the said appeal was filed belatedly, an application
for condonation of delay was also filed by the appellant. There was a
delay of 25 days in filing the present appeal. Reasons therefor have
been set out in the application. On going through the same and upon
hearing the learned counsel appearing for the parties, we are of the
considered

opinion that the appellant has been able to make out a

case of sufficient cause on the reasons given in the application.
Therefore, we allow the application seeking for condonation of delay.
CM No.1921/2008 seeking for condonation of delay is disposed of.
6.

The appellant has filed the present appeal contending, inter

alia, that since the appellant was in occupation of the premises by
virtue of a lease, therefore, the provisions of the Public Premises

LPA No.57/2008

page No.3 of

7

(Eviction of Unauthorized

Occupants)

Act, 1971 would not be

applicable. The said contention was noticed by the Division Bench of
this Court.

The learned Division Bench of this Court referred to the

decision of the Supreme Court in Ashoka Marketing Limited and Anr. v.
Punjab National Bank and Ors. AIR 1991 SC 855. Relying on the said
decision it was held that the provisions of the Public Premises (Eviction
of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 would be applicable. It was also
held by the Division Bench that in the case of the appellant, the right of
the appellant expired by efflux of time and the notice under Section 4
was preceded by a notice dated 26th December, 1979. It was also held
that the notice dated 26th December, 1979 was not determining the
tenancy of the appellant but was merely intimating the fact of tenancy
expiring by efflux of time. While disposing of the aforesaid appeal the
Division Bench also held that since the proceedings before the Estate
Officer were at the stage of notice, it is hoped and expected that the
Estate Officer would consider expeditious disposal of the proceedings
emanating from notices under Sections 4 and 7 of the PP Act. It was
also recorded by the Division Bench that the appellant has enjoyed the
benefit of stay obtained by it from this court for over 24 years and has
continued to occupy the site which as per the decision of the learned
Single Judge was required by the MCD for an urgent public purpose.
7.

Subsequent thereto, however, an Special Leave Petition was

LPA No.57/2008

page No.4 of

7

filed by the appellant which was

dismissed by the Supreme Court,

observing that all the pleas raised in this petition shall be available to
be urged against the order passed by the Estate Officer pursuant to the
direction made by the High Court in the event of an occasion arising for
the purpose. Finally an order under Section 4 of the Act was passed by
the Estate Officer directing for eviction of the appellant from the land
holding that the appellant is an unauthorised occupant of the said land.
The said order was challenged by filing an appeal which was again
dismissed by order dated 25th October, 2007.

Thereafter, the writ

petition was filed in this Court which was dismissed under the
impugned judgment and order dated 3rd December, 2007.
8.

The Division Bench of this Court has held that the tenancy had

expired by efflux of time and thereafter the appellant has become
unauthorized occupant and, therefore, the proceedings initiated could
go on which have now become final and binding under the Act. The
learned Estate Officer as also the Learned Single Judge have also held
that the appellant has been an unauthorized occupant in respect of the
public premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and
that no condition or stipulation existed which obliged the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi to give him a fresh lease or a renewed lease. The
learned Single Judge has considered in depth all the submissions made
and has found no merit in the said submissions. The learned Single

LPA No.57/2008

page No.5 of

7

Judge has recorded the findings of fact that there is no dispute that the
suit property falls within the scope of the expression “public premises”
under the Act and that the appellant was an unauthorized occupant
and, therefore, the Estate Officer has rightly exercised his jurisdiction
in directing for eviction of the appellant from the public premises.
9.

While recording the aforesaid findings of fact the learned Single

Judge also referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Jamshed
Hormusji Wadia v. Board of Trustees, Port of Mumbai (2004) 3 SCC
214. In paragraphs 18 and 19 of the said judgment the Supreme Court
has held thus:“18. In our opinion, in the field of contracts the State
and its instrumentalities ought to so design their
activities as would ensure fair competition and nondiscrimination. They can augment their resources but
the object should be to serve the public cause and to
do public good by resorting to fair and reasonable
methods. The State and its instrumentalities, as the
landlords, have the liberty of revising the rates of rent
so as to compensate themselves against loss caused
by inflationary tendencies. They can - and rather must
- also save themselves from negative balances caused
by the cost of maintenance, payment of taxes and
costs of administration. The State, as the landlord,
need not necessarily be a benevolent and good
charitable Samaritan. The felt need for expanding or
stimulating its own activities or other activities in the
public interest having once arisen, the State need not
hold its hands from seeking eviction of its lessees.
However, the State cannot be seen to be indulging in
rack-renting, profiteering and indulging in whimsical or
unreasonable evictions or bargains.
19. A balance has to be struck between the two
extremes. Having been exempted from the operation
LPA No.57/2008

page No.6 of

7

of rent control legislation, the courts cannot hold them
tied to the same shackles from which the State and its
instrumentalities have been freed by the legislature in
their wisdom and thereby requiring them to be ruled
indirectly or by analogy by the same law from which
they are exempt. Otherwise, it would tantamount to
defeating the exemption clause consciously enacted
by the legislature. At the same time the liberty given
to the State and its instrumentalities by the statute
enacted under the Constitution does not exempt them
from honouring the Constitution itself.”
10.

In the light of the aforesaid proposition of law laid down by the

Supreme Court we find no merit in this appeal, which is dismissed
accordingly.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 11, 2008
Rohtash

LPA No.57/2008

page No.7 of

7

