*
+

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO(OS) 196-197/2005 & FAO(OS) 205/2005

%
1.

Date of Decision: 11th March, 2008
FAO(OS) 196-197/2005
VIPUL INFRASTURCTURE DEVELOPERS
. ..... Appellants
LTD. & ANR.
Through Mr.Arun Bhardwaj, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Manish Sharma and Mr.Amit
Bhardwaj, Advocates
versus

2.

ROHIT KOCHHAR & ANR.
..... Respondents
Through Mr.P.V. Kapur, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Anish Kapur and Mr.Vimal Nagrath,
Advocates for respondent No.1.
Mr.Valmiki Mehta, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Rajeev M. Roy, Advocate for R-2
FAO(OS) 205/2005
PUNIT BERIWALA

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Valmiki Mehta, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Rajeev M. Roy, Advocate
versus

ROHIT KOCHHAR & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through Mr.P.V. Kapur, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Anish Kapur and Mr.Vimal Nagrath,
Advocates for respondent No.1.
Mr.Arun Bhardwaj, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Manish Sharma and Mr.Amit
Bhardwaj, Advocates for respondents
No.2 and 3.

FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 1 of

23

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?yes

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ:
1.

These appeals which involve similar issues are disposed of

by this common judgment and order.
2.

The issue that arise for consideration in these appeals is as

to whether or not the Delhi Court would have jurisdiction to
entertain the suit instituted by the respondent. In paragraph 46
of the plaint it was stated thus:“46. That the Corporate office of Defendants No.1
& 2 and the Registered office of Defendant No.3 is
at Saket, New Delhi and the Defendants carry on
business and work for gain at Delhi.
The
Defendants made the offer to sell the suit
premises to the Plaintiff at New Delhi and the
Plaintiff accepted the said offer also at New Delhi.
The payments were also made by the Plaintiff to
Defendant No.1 at New Delhi. Accordingly, the
Agreement was concluded at New Delhi. Further,
the Plaintiff is merely seeking the relief of specific
performance of the contract dated 16/20.01.2004
for sale concluded between the parties, which
relief can be entirely enforced through the
personal obedience of the Defendants. Therefore,
this Hon’ble Court has the territorial jurisdiction to
entertain and try the present suit.”

FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 2 of

23

3.

The aforesaid suit was based on the alleged contract dated

16/20.01.2004 alleging that the commercial property measuring
10,747 sq. ft. (1998.420 sq. mtrs.) on the second floor of the
Fortune Global Hotel and Commercial Complex, Gurgaon was
sought to be conveyed. In para 8 of the plaint it was stated thus:“8. That after discussions and negotiations Shri
Achal Raina, Vice President of Defendant No.1 sent
a written communication dated January 16, 2004
(hereinafter referred to as the “Offer Letter”)
containing the aforesaid offer to the Plaintiff, in
respect of the suit premises. The Offer Letter
contained the following terms and conditions:
PRICE
:Rs. 4200/- persq. ft.
PAYMENT SCHEDULE

:

Immediately on Booking

: 10% of the total sale
Consideration.

By 28.02.2004

: 85% of the total sale
consideration.

At the time of notice for
possession of the premises: Balance 5% of the
total sale consideration.
1.
The offer also includes 15 number of Car
parking spaces in the basement.
2.
Further the above price does not include the
cost towards registration/stamp duty, electricity
connection, maintenance deposit and other
miscellaneous charges for the registration of the
said premises.
3.

Any

delayed

payment

FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

shall

attract

an

page 3 of

23

interest @ 18% per annum
quarterly) for the period of delay.

4.

(compounded

4.
The above offer is valid till the close of
business hours, i.e., 20th February, 2004.”
The appellant, therefore, has extracted in the aforesaid

paragraph, the entire alleged contract which was allegedly
created

between

the

respondent

and

the

appellant.

In

paragraphs 42 and 43 it is stated by the respondent-plaintiff as
follows:
“42. That since the Defendants have not executed
the sale deed or any other document to transfer
the right, title and interest in the suit premises in
favour of the Plaintiff despite repeated requests
from the Plaintiff, the Plaintiff, as such, is left with
no other remedy, except for seeking specific
performance of the contract dated 16/20.01.2004
concluded between the parties, through the
intervention of this Hon’ble Court.

5.

43. That the Plaintiff is also entitled to claim
damages from the Defendants on account of the
loss suffered due to the delay in conclusion of the
sale and the consequent delay in the Plaintiff’s
plans of expansion and starting a new office at
Gurgaon. The delay is still continuing and the
exact loss suffered by the Plaintiff can be
computed only after the sale has been concluded,
hence the plaintiff seeks leave of this Hon’ble
Court to sue the Defendants for damages on
account of delay at a later date. The Plaintiff along
with the plaint is moving an appropriate
application under order 2 rule 2(3).”
When the prayer in the plaint is examined minutely, it is

crystal clear that in the said plaint the respondent has not prayed
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 4 of

23

for delivery of possession of the suit property. The respondentplaintiff has only prayed for a decree for specific performance,
commanding the defendants to transfer the right, title and
interest in the suit premises to the plaintiff, by executing and
getting registered the sale deed/document to transfer the title of
the suit premises in terms of the aforesaid alleged contract dated
16/20.01.2004.
6.

Upon being served with the summons, the appellants

entered appearance and they filed a written statement taking,
inter

alia,

a

preliminary

objection

with

regard

to

the

maintainability of the suit in Delhi Court. The said objection was
taken in the following manner:“46. Para No.46 of the plaint is absolutely wrong
and vehemently denied.
The suit property is
situated at Gurgaon. The defendants carry on
business and work for gain at Gurgaon.
The
defendants No.1 to 3 have also shifted their offices
to Gurgaon. Since the suit property is situated in
Gurgaon, the Courts at Gurgaon alone have got
the jurisdiction to try and decide the present suit.
The making of payment is irrelevant and
inconsequential for the purpose of conferring
jurisdiction upon this Hon’ble Court to decide the
present suit. It is wrong and denied that any
concluded contract came into existence between
the parties at any place including New Delhi. It is
false to contend that plaintiff is seeking relief of
specific performance of alleged contract dated
16/20.1.2004 and that same can be enforced
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 5 of

23

7.

through personal obedience of the defendants at
Delhi. Specific performance is being sought for in
relation to immovable property situated at
Gurgaon.
The question of this Hon’ble Court
enjoying territorial jurisdiction to entertain and try
the present suit does not arise. The plaint is liable
to be rejected on this ground alone.”
In paragraph 2 of the said written statement also the

following objection was taken:

8.

“This Hon’ble Court does not have the territorial
jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit or grant
any reliefs as prayed for. The suit is in respect of a
property which is admittedly situated at Gurgaon.
Courts at Gurgaon alone can have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit in respect of the relief claimed in
the suit, assuming without admitting there to be
any cause of action in favour of the Plaintiff and
assuming without admitting the Plaintiff to be
entitled to any relief.”
The learned Single Judge who considered the aforesaid

preliminary objection held that since only a declaration of right
and title to the suit property is sought for in the plaint and not
delivery

of

possession,

therefore,

Delhi

Court

will

have

jurisdiction. The learned Single Judge drew a distinction between
a suit relating to specific performance of a contract for sale of
immovable property simplicitor and a suit where additional relief
for delivery of possession is prayed for. It was held by the learned
Single Judge that if delivery of possession through the agency of
the court is sought for and has to be ordered, only in that case the

FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 6 of

23

location and situation of the property would have relevance, and if
only a declaration of right is sought for in that event the location
and situation of the property would have no relevance at all, and
that such a suit can be instituted even outside the territorial
jurisdiction of the court within which the aforesaid property is
situate. The learned Single Judge while coming to the aforesaid
conclusion referred to the following judgments:1. Sidharth Choudhary v. Mahamaya General Finance
:80(1999) DLT 460;
2. Karan Mahendru & Anr. v. M/s Vatika Plantations (P)
Ltd.: 111(2004) DLT 264;
3. Adcon Electronics Pvt. Ltd. v. Daulat & Anr.:(2001) 7
SCC 698; and
4. Babu Lal v. Hazari Lal Kishori Lal & Ors.:(1982) 3 SCR
94.
9.
Reference was also made by the learned Single Judge to
the provisions of Section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure and to
the provisions of Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act and also to
the provisions of Order 2 Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The aforesaid findings and conclusions recorded by the learned
Single Judge were challenged before us by filing the aforesaid
appeals by the two defendants, who are appellants herein.
10.

It was submitted on behalf of the appellants that the

learned Single Judge was not justified in making the aforesaid
distinction in a case of specific performance of the contract,
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 7 of

23

where, according to the appellants, decree of delivery of
possession is inherent in a decree for specific performance of
contract.

It was submitted that in a case where possession of

immovable property is vested with the vendor, even if any decree
for possession is not sought for and only a

decree of specific

performance of contract is sought for, the Court will be
empowered to grant decree for possession of

immovable

property in favour of the plaintiff, particularly in view of the fact
that the seller is bound to give possession of the property to the
buyer.

Section 16(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and

Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 read as follows:
Section 16(d) CPC
“16. Suits to be instituted where subjectmatter situate:- Subject to the pecuniary or
other limitations prescribed by any law, suits,(a)....
(b)....
(c)....
(d) for the determination of any other right to or
interest in immovable property,
(e)....
(f).....
shall be instituted in the Court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate.
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or
compensation for wrong to, immovable property
held by or on behalf of the defendant may, where
the relief sought can be be entirely obtained
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 8 of

23

through his personal obedience, be instituted
either in the Court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the property is situate, or in the Court
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
defendant actually and voluntarily resides, or
carries on business, or personally works for gain.”
Section 22 , Specific Relief Act, 1963
22. Power to grant relief for possession,
partition, refund of earnest money, etc.-(1)
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
any person suing for the specific performance of a
contract for the transfer of immovable property
may, in an appropriate case, ask for(a) possession, or partition and separate
possession, of the property, in addition to such
performance; or
(b) any other relief to which he may be entitled,
including the refund of any earnest money or
deposit paid or made by him, in case his claim for
specific performance is refused.
(2) No relief under clause (a) or clause (b) of subsection (1) shall be granted by the court unless it
has been specifically claimed:
Provided that where the plaintiff has not claimed
any such relief in the plaint, the court shall, at any
stage of the proceeding, allow him to amend the
plaint on such terms as may be just for including a
claim for such relief.
(3) The power of the court to grant relief under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be without
prejudice to its powers to award compensation
under section 21. “
11.

Section 16 is one of the provisions found in the Code of

FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 9 of

23

Civil Procedure which deals with territorial jurisdiction of the
Courts.

It provides that the suits

for recovery

or partition of

immovable property or for foreclosure, sale or redemption in the
case of a mortgage of or charge upon immovable property or for
determination of any other right to or interest in immovable
property, or for compensation for wrong to immovable property,
or for recovery of movable property actually under distraint or
attachment, shall be instituted in the Court within the local limits
of whose jurisdiction the property is situate. The proviso attached
to the aforesaid provisions provides that a suit to obtain relief
respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property
held by or on behalf of the defendant, may where the relief
sought can be entirely obtained through his personal obedience
be instituted either in the Court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the property is situate, or in the Court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and voluntarily
resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain.
12.

Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act, on the other hand,

provides that any person suing for specific performance of a
contract

for

transfer

of

immovable

property

may,

in

an

appropriate case sue, for possession, or partition and separate
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 10 of

23

possession, of the property, in addition to such performance. It is
further provided in the said provision that no relief under the said
provision shall be granted by the court unless it has been
specifically claimed,

provided that where the plaintiff has not

claimed any such relief in the plaint, the court shall, at any stage
of the proceeding, allow him to amend the plaint on such terms
as may be just for including a claim for such relief.
13.

The aforesaid provisions of Section 22 of the Specific Relief

Act came to be considered by the Supreme Court in the decision
of Babu Lal (supra).

In the said decision it was held by the

Supreme Court that Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act provides
that a person in a suit for specific performance of a contract for
the transfer of immovable property, may ask for appropriate
relief, namely, he may ask for possession, or for partition, or for
separate possession including the relief for specific performance.
The Supreme Court also took note of Sub-section (2) of this
section which specifically provides that these reliefs cannot be
granted by the Court, unless they have been expressly claimed by
the plaintiff in the suit.

The Supreme Court further went on to

hold that the proviso to Sub-section (2), however, says that where
the plaintiff has not specifically claimed these reliefs in his plaint
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 11 of

23

at the initial stage of the suit, the court shall permit the plaintiff,
at any stage of the proceedings, to include one or more of the
reliefs mentioned above by means of an amendment of the plaint
on such terms as it may deem proper. The Supreme Court
examined the object and purpose of enacting the aforesaid
provision and thereafter held that the said provision has been
enacted to avoid multiplicity of suits and that the plaintiff may get
appropriate

relief

without

being

hampered

by

procedural

complications. In the said decision the Supreme Court also took
note of the expression “in appropriate cases” as appearing in
Section 22 (1) which was found to be most significant.

While

interpreting the said provision it was held by the Supreme Court
that the said expression only indicates that it is not always
incumbent on the plaintiff to claim possession or partition or
separate possession in a suit for specific performance of a
contract for the transfer of the immovable property. That has to
be done where the circumstances demanding the relief for
specific performance of the contract of sale embraced within its
ambit not only the execution of the sale deed but also possession
over the property conveyed under the sale deed.

The aforesaid

proposition laid down by the Supreme Court was further explained
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 12 of

23

holding that it may not always be necessary for the plaintiff to
specifically claim possession over the property, the relief of
possession being inherent in the relief for specific performance of
the contract of sale. The Supreme Court went on to hold that in a
case where exclusive possession is with the contracting party, a
decree for specific performance of the contract of sale simpliciter
without specifically providing for delivery of possession, may give
complete relief to the decree-holder. In order to satisfy the decree
against him completely the judgment debtor is bound not only to
execute the sale-deed but also to put the property in possession
of the decree-holder. This is also in consonance with the
provisions of Section 55(1) of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
which provides that the seller is bound to give, on being so
required, to the buyer or such person as he directs, such
possession of the property as its nature admits.
14.

Relying on the said decision and also on the decision of

the Supreme Court in Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v. DLF
Universal Limited 85(2000)DLT 501, learned counsel appearing
for the appellant has submitted that the findings recorded by the
learned Single Judge are erroneous and, therefore, should be set
aside. Counsel appearing for the respondent, however, submitted
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 13 of

23

before us that since the appellant has only sought for a decree for
specific performance of the contract by declaring that the
respondent-plaintiff is the owner and title holder of the suit
property, and no decree for delivery of possession has been
sought for by the appellant, the distinction between a case for
declaration of right and title simplicitor and a suit where decree
for possession is additionally sought for, was justified. It was
submitted by him that Harshad Chiman Lal Modi’s case
(supra) which arose out of a decision of the Delhi High Court was
in the second category of cases. Therefore, the same will have no
application to the facts of the present case. Counsel submitted
that the decree for declaration of right and title in respect of the
property situate outside the jurisdiction of this Court could be
obtained through the personal obedience of the defendant and,
therefore, the proviso to Section 16 is applicable to the facts of
the present case and the learned Single Judge was justified in
holding that the Delhi Court will have jurisdiction.
15.

In the light of the aforesaid submissions we have

considered the facts of the case. It is established and proved, as
disclosed from the records and from the facts of the case, that in
the relief and prayer clause of the plaint there is no claim and no
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 14 of

23

prayer for a declaration of delivery of possession of the suit
property. However, in order to find out as to the nature of the
reliefs that could be granted by the Court, the whole of the plaint
is to be read and not only the relief part of the plaint.

In the

plaint, the respondent-plaintiff has referred to the contents of the
alleged agreement to sell.

When a decree is passed for specific

performance of the contract necessarily all the contents of the
said alleged contract shall have to be enforced and directed to be
verified. The said contract dated 16/20.01.2004 also contains a
payment schedule.

There is also a stipulation therein that

payment of the sale consideration has to be made in the manner
provided therein. It is stipulated that 10% of the total sale
consideration has to be paid immediately on booking, 85% of the
sale consideration has to be paid by 28th February, 2004 and the
balance 5% of the total sale consideration shall have to be paid at
the time of notice for possession of the premises.

The said

alleged contract also stipulates for delivery of possession of the
suit property on payment of balance 5% of the total sale
consideration, which has to be paid on receipt of notice issued by
the appellant to the respondent for possession of the premises.
Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 also casts an
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 15 of

23

obligation on the seller to deliver possession to the transferee
pursuant to a sale deed, as it is laid down that a seller is not only
bound on payment or tender of the amount due in respect of the
price to execute a proper conveyance of the property when the
buyer tenders it to him for execution at a proper time and place
but also to give, on being so required to the buyer, or to such
person as he directs, such possession of the property as its nature
admits.
16.

In Babu Lal’s case (supra)

it was also held that in

satisfaction of a decree for specific performance of a contract for
sale, the handing over of the possession of the property is
incidental. Thus the judgment debtor has to not only to execute
the sale deed, but also to deliver the property to decree holder.
Further reference was also made in the said case to a Division
Bench decision of the Calcutta High Court in a case titled as
Subodh Kumar Banerjee v. Hiramoni Dasi and Ors. reported
in AIR 1955 Cal 267, wherein it was held that in view of clause (1)
of Section 55 unless there is a contract to the contrary, giving
delivery of the possession to the buyer by the seller is an incident
of a contract for sale, and that right springs out of the contract
which is being specifically enforced and as a net result of the
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 16 of

23

execution and completion

of conveyance.

The aforesaid

provision has to be read harmoniously with the provisions of
Section 22 of the Specific Relief Act.

The decisions which are

referred to in this judgment and relied upon by the counsel
appearing for the parties at different stages also throw light on
the aforesaid aspect.

It is established from the ratio of the

aforesaid decisions that it could be possible by filing a suit not
only to seek a declaration of the right and title and to enforce an
agreement to sell, but an amendment thereto could also be
obtained seeking for decree of delivery of possession

at any

stage of the suit, even at the execution stage.
17.

The interpretation that is sought to be given by the

respondents herein, if accepted, would in view of the aforesaid
decision, lead to an incongruous situation, as a person who is
located in Delhi and buys a property in Gurgaon or in Mumbai,
would seek for declaration at Delhi and at the execution stage,
get the decree transfered to Gurgaon or Mumbai for its execution.
18.

In the present case, it is an admitted position that the

appellant had entered into the aforesaid alleged contract at its
Corporate office at Delhi. It is the specific stand of the appellant
that they were initially residents of Delhi and that they had moved
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 17 of

23

to Gurgaon and their corporate office is now also located at
Gurgaon.

It is the contention of the counsel appearing for the

respondents that the proviso to Section 16 of Code of Civil
Procedure is applicable which is sought to be invoked, for, the
relief which is sought for could be entirely enforced through the
personal obedience of the defendants in Delhi. There is however
not only a prayer in the plaint for declaration of the right and title,
but also to transfer the right, title and interest in the suit premises
situate at Gurgaon. As, in our opinion, the suit can be decreed in
favour of the plaintiff only when the Court can get the sale deed
executed and registered in favour of the plaintiff which would
confer the title of the suit premises on the plaintiff, and

the

execution and the registration of the sale document would have to
take place at Gurgaon and, for this the Court will also have to
pass a decree directing the defendant to get the sale deed
executed and registered at Gurgaon, implication of the same will
be that a direction will have to be given to the defendant that he
shall have to move out of Delhi and go to Gurgaon and get the
same registered. No sale deed is sought to be registered at Delhi
and, therefore, in our considered opinion such a relief cannot be
entirely

obtained

through

the

FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

personal

obedience

of

page 18 of

the
23

defendant, who in this case

has to go to the jurisdiction of

another court to get the decree executed and the sale deed
registered.
19.

Accordingly, we are of the considered opinion that the

submissions of the learned counsel for the respondent and the
findings recorded by the learned Single Judge that the present
case is covered by the proviso of Section 16 of the Code of Civil
Procedure are misplaced. In the facts and circumstances of the
case as delineated, the relief in the present suit cannot be entirely
obtained through the personal obedience of the defendants. The
proviso to Section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure would be
applicable to a case where the relief sought for by the plaintiff
was entirely obtainable through the personal obedience of the
defendant, i.e., the defendant has not at all to go out of the
jurisdiction of the Court for the aforesaid purpose. The present
case is not a case of the aforesaid nature. In the present case for
execution of the sale deed the defendants will have to go out of
the jurisdiction of this Court and get the same executed and
registered in Gurgaon.
20.

In the present case also it is an admitted position that

possession of the said property was with the seller and, therefore,
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 19 of

23

in terms of the provisions of Section 55(1) of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882, the relief of possession is inherent in the relief
of specific performance of the contract. In our considered opinion
the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Babu Lal(supra)
and the principles laid down in the case of Harshad Chiman Lal
Modi(supra) are applicable to the facts of the present case. In
Harshad Chiman Lal Modi (supra) it was found that in addition
to passing decree, the court was also required to deliver
possession of the property. It was held that such a relief can be
granted only by sending the concerned person responsible for
delivery of possession to Gurgaon and the court at Delhi does not
have the jurisdiction to get the aforesaid decree enforced for the
property situate outside territorial jurisdiction of Delhi High Court.
The Court while referring to the provisions of Section 16 of the
CPC held that the location of institution of a suit would be guided
by the location of the property in respect of which and for
determination of any right or interest whereof the suit is
instituted. The proviso to Section 16 CPC is also not applicable to
the case, as the relief sought for cannot be entirely granted or
obtained through the personal obedience of the respondent.
21.

The decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Adcon

FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 20 of

23

Electronics Pvt. Ltd. v. Daulat and Another (2001) 7 SCC
698, relied upon by the respondents, would also not be applicable
to the facts of the present case. The said decision was rendered
in the context of the expression ”suit for land”.

The Supreme

Court in the said decision held that suit for specific performance of
an agreement for sale of the suit property, without a claim for
delivery of possession, cannot be treated as a “suit for land” and
is, therefore, triable under clause 12 if the other conditions
thereunder are fulfilled. The facts of the said case are, therefore,
distinguishable and are not applicable to the case in hand. The
said decision was rendered due to specific provision therein and it
is also apparent from the fact that the case of Babu Lal(supra)
was not even referred to in that case.
22.

Another decision of the Supreme Court which needs

reference at this stage is the case of Begum Sabiha Sultan v.
Nawab Mohd. Mansur Ali Khan and others

(2007) 4 SCC

343. In para 12 of the said judgment it was held by the Supreme
Court that reading the plaint as a whole in this case, there cannot
be much doubt that the suit is essentially in relation to the relief
of partition and declaration in respect of the properties situate in
Village Pataudi, Gurgaon, outside the jurisdiction of court at Delhi.
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 21 of

23

In that view of the matter it was also held that the Delhi Court will
have no jurisdiction to try and decide the aforesaid suit. It was
also held in the said decision by following the decision of
Harshad Chiman Lal Modi(supra)

that the relief of partition,

accounting and declaration of invalidity of the sale executed in
respect

of

immovable

property

situate in Village

Pataudi,

Gurgaon, could not entirely be obtained by personal obedience to
the decree by the defendants in the suit.

It was further held that

applying the test laid down therein, it is clear that the present suit
could not be brought within the purview of the proviso to Section
16 of the Code or entertained relying on Section 20 of the Code
on the basis that three out of the five defendants are residing
within the jurisdiction of the court at Delhi.
23.

In view of the above facts and circumstances, we are of

the considered opinion that the Delhi court would not have the
territorial jurisdiction to entertain and decide the aforesaid suits.
Consequently, we hold that the decision rendered by the learned
Single judge cannot be upheld. The same is accordingly set aside
and quashed.
24.

The appeals are allowed.

Accordingly, the plaint be

returned to the plaintiff in accordance with law.
FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

page 22 of

23

CHIEF JUSTICE

March 11, 2008
Rohtash

FAO(OS) Nos. 196-97/2005 and 205/2005

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

page 23 of

23

