*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 13/2008

%

Date of Decision: 12th February, 2008
THE DIR. GEN. WORKS CPWD
..... Appellant
Through:Mr.Pankaj Batra, Advocate
versus
DAVINDER SINGH

..... Respondent
Through:Mr. Varun Prasad, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
1. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
2. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (ORAL):
C.M. No.402/2008 (exemption)
Exemption allowed subject to all just exceptions.
Application stands disposed of.
LPA 13/2008 and CM Nos. 400/2008(delay) & 401/2008(stay).
1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 18th

April, 2007 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ
petition of the appellant and upholding the award passed by the
Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, New
Delhi(hereinafter called the “Tribunal”).

LPA No.13/2008

page no.1 of

8

2.

The respondent was initially employed on 26th June, 1982 as a

Wireman on muster roll and was posted in the Asian Games, Electrical
Division-I, CPWD, Nehru Stadium, New Delhi.

His services were

terminated but the appellants themselves reinstated the respondent
with effect from 23rd November,1991 with full back wages and all the
consequential benefits. The respondent is a qualified Electrician with a
Diploma from ITI, and he has also licence of Wireman, Grade-II. There
were about 50 workers working in his category as Wiremen, who were
junior to him, who have been regularized. Specifically the case of Shri
Hari Shankar was pleaded, who although was junior to the respondent
and was appointed on the muster roll with effect from 30th June, 1982,
his services were regularized in the time scale with effect from 31 st
March, 1993.

The respondent, therefore, raised a claim that he too

should be regularised in service as a workman with effect from 31st
March, 1993, the date from which the services of his junior, namely,
Shri Hari Shankar were regularised.
3.

The aforesaid dispute was referred to the Central Government

Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, New Delhi for the purpose of
adjudication and decision on the following terms:“Whether the action of the management of CPWD in
not regularising the services of the workman Shri
Davinder Singh, Wireman w.e.f. 31.3.1993 the date
from which the services of his junior Shri Shankar were
regularised is legal and justified? If not, to what relief
the workman is entitled and from which date”.
LPA No.13/2008

page no.2 of

8

4.

The parties filed their written statement on the basis of which

evidence was allowed to be led.

After receiving evidence the learned

Industrial Adjudicator proceeded to decide the matter on the basis of
the evidence available on record.

The learned Industrial Adjudicator

passed his award on 13th June, 2006 holding that the action of the
appellant management CPWD in not regularising the services of the
respondent Shri Davinder Singh, Wireman w.e.f. 31st March, 1993 is
neither legal nor justified and also that he is entitled to be regularized
w.e.f. 31st March, 1993, i.e., the date on which
junior Shri Hari Shankar were regularised.

the services of his

The learned Industrial

Adjudicator also directed that the respondent should be paid all his
arrears which accrued to him on his regularisation w.e.f. 31st March,
1993.
5.

The appellant being aggrieved by the aforesaid award challenged

the legality of the same before the learned Single Judge by filing a writ
petition, which was considered and dismissed on the ground that the
plea that is sought to be raised by the appellant, that there is no
scheme at present under which the respondent could be regularised,
was never pleaded nor raised at any stage of the case and, therefore, a
new plea cannot be allowed to be raised in the writ petition.
6.

Counsel appearing for the appellant has drawn our attention to

the aforesaid orders passed by the learned Single Judge and has

LPA No.13/2008

page no.3 of

8

submitted before us that the said findings are contrary to the available
records.

He has specifically drawn our attention to one of the

contentions which was raised before the Industrial Adjudicator to the
effect that in the reference proceedings the plea was raised by the
appellant that the services of the respondent could not be regularised
as the Ministry of Finance had imposed a ban on filling up of the posts.
Therefore, a plea was raised before the learned Single Judge which in
fact was also a plea which was raised and argued before the Industrial
Adjudicator, therefore, it may not have been appropriate for the
learned Single Judge to dismiss the writ petition on the aforesaid
ground that no such plea was taken by the appellant herein.
7.

Since the respondent has entered his appearance through his

counsel, we have heard the counsel for the respondent on the appeal
as well. Counsel appearing for the appellant has submitted before us
that the services of the appellant were terminated at one stage and
that there was a criminal case instituted against him. Relying on the
said fact it was sought to be submitted before us that the respondent is
not a fit person who can be ordered to be regularised.

It is also

submitted by him that the services of the respondent cannot be
directed to be regularised in the manner in which it is being done in
view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Secretary,
State of Karnataka & Ors. v. Uma Devi (3) & Ors. (2006) 4 SCC 1. The

LPA No.13/2008

page no.4 of

8

aforesaid statement of the counsel for the appellant is, however,
refuted by the counsel for the respondent. In the light of the aforesaid
submissions and the documents placed on record we proceed to
dispose of the appeal by giving our reasons therefor.
8.

So far the contention that the respondent cannot be ordered to

be regularised in service because of his past conduct, we would only
record that the respondent was initially employed on 26th June, 1982
as workman. His services were in fact and in reality terminated by the
appellant. But the appellant themselves reinstated him in service with
full back wages and all consequential benefits w.e.f. 23rd November,
1991. The appellant themselves having reinstated the respondent in
service cannot now take up a plea that his services were terminated at
one stage. The respondent shall be deemed to be continued in service
in view of the order passed by the appellant themselves. So far the
issue with regard to the institution of a criminal case is concerned,
there was a criminal case registered against the respondent and he
was also kept in police custody but subsequently the said case was
dropped and, therefore, there was no stigma attached and, therefore,
the respondent is entitled to all the benefits for his service.

The

aforesaid fact of termination of service and institution of a criminal
case cannot be the material on the basis of which the appellant could
deny the respondent the benefits of regularisation of his service for

LPA No.13/2008

page no.5 of

8

which he was otherwise entitled.
9.

On going through the records, we are of the considered opinion

that there is a finding of fact recorded by the Industrial Adjudicator that
his junior has since been regularised in service w.e.f. from 31st March,
1993.

The appellant could not in any manner challenge the said

finding of fact which is arrived at.

We are also not inclined to re-

appreciate the evidence inasmuch as there is ample evidence on
record to prove and establish that his juniors have since been
regularised in service. Therefore, it is a case of discrimination and not
a case where the ratio of the decision of the case of Uma Devi case
(supra) would be attracted.
10.

In this connection we may appropriately refer to the decision of

the Supreme Court in the case of Bal Kishan v. Delhi Administration
and another (1990)1 LLJ 61. In paragraph 10 of the said judgment the
Supreme Court has also held as under:
“10. In service, there could be only one norm for
confirmation or promotion of persons belonging to the
same cadre. No junior shall be confirmed or promoted
without considering the case of his senior.
Any
deviation from this principle will have demoralising
effect in service apart from being contrary to Article
16(1) of the Constitution.”
11.

In U.P. State Electricity Board v. Pooran Chandra Pandey &

Others 2007 (12) Scale 304 the Supreme Court has held that the
judgment in Uma Devi’s case cannot be applied mechanically without

LPA No.13/2008

page no.6 of

8

seeing the facts of a particular case.

It was also held in the said

decision that the decision in Uma Devi’s case (supra)

is clearly

distinguishable. The said decision cannot be applied to a case where
regularization has been sought for in pursuance of Article 14 of the
Constitution.

In the aforesaid case of

U.P. State Electricity Board

there were two sets of employees who were daily wagers, i.e., (i) the
original employees of the appellant Board and (ii) the employees of the
Society, who subsequently became the employees of the appellant
Board.

The Single Judge held that there was no ground for

discriminating between the two sets of employees. The Division Bench
upheld the order of the Single Judge. The issue therefore which had
arisen before the Supreme Court was whether the respondents were
entitled to be regularised in the services of the appellant Board, which
according to the U.P. State Electricity Board was not permissible. The
said appeal of the Board was dismissed by the Supreme Court holding
that since the parties were all appointed in the Society before 4th May,
1990, they cannot be denied the benefit of the decision of the
Electricity Board dated 28th November,1996 permitting regularization
of the employees of the Electricity Board who were working from
before 4th May, 1990. It was held that to take a contrary view would
violate Article 14 of the Constitution, and we cannot read Uma Devi’s
case (supra) in a manner which will make it in conflict with Article 14.

LPA No.13/2008

page no.7 of

8

10.

Similar are the facts and situation of the respondents in the

present case as those of U.P. State Electricity Board case (supra).
Therefore, we are of the opinion that when similarly situated persons
have been given the benefit of regularisation there is no ground as to
why the respondent should also not be given the same treatment,
which has since been ordered to be given by the learned Industrial
Adjudicator and approved by the learned Single Judge.
11.

We find no merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed with

costs of Rs.10,000/- which shall be paid to the respondent by the
appellant within four weeks from the date of receipt of the order.
11.

Since, arguments were advanced before us by learned counsel

for the appellant on merit, we have heard the appeal on merits and
since we have dismissed the appeal, the application seeking for
condonation of delay and stay also stand disposed of accordingly.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 12, 2008
Rohtash

LPA No.13/2008

page no.8 of

8

