Regular-27
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 121/2001

%

Date of decision: 15.02.2008
MS. USHA HANDA

..... Appellant

Through: Mr. Ashok Aggarwal with Mr. Anuj
Aggarwal, Advocates
versus
THE LT. GOVERNOR, NCT OF DELHI & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through:Ms. Avnish Ahlawat with
Ms. Latika Chaudury, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
no
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
no
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?no
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ: (oral)

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 7th

February, 2001 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the
writ petition filed by the appellant. The appellant filed the writ
petition contending, inter alia, that although she was appointed
as a TGT(Science) by the respondent No.4, yet she was not given
LPA No.121/2001

page No. 1 of

6

the selection grade in TGT(Science) which action is challenged in
the writ petition. An advertisement was issued on 8th June, 1972
inviting applications for the post of Science Teacher(TGT).

The

appellant offered herself as one of the candidates. The appellant
was appointed as a TGT Teacher in Swami Shivanand Secondary
School under order dated 28th March, 1973. It was, however, not
indicated in the said letter that the appellant was appointed as a
Science Teacher(TGT).

However, another letter was issued on

29th March, 1973 which described the appellant as TGT Science
Teacher and she was shown to have been promoted to TGT Grade
as a Science Teacher in the pay scale of Rs.250-550 w.e.f. 1st
April, 1973 which was made subject to the approval of the
Department.
2.

The appellant placed strong reliance on the aforesaid

letter and contended that she was appointed to the TGT Grade as
a Science Teacher with the issuance of the aforesaid letter dated
29th March, 1973 and continued to work as such in the Science
Stream and, therefore, she was to be considered for grant of the
selection grade in the Science stream, whereas the respondent
acted illegally in taking up a plea that she is not eligible to be

LPA No.121/2001

page No. 2 of

6

promoted to the aforesaid grade.

Such a contention was also

raised before the learned Single Judge which was rejected in view
of the facts and circumstances of the case which would also be
delineated hereinafter in order to decide the issues raised before
us.
3.

In the aforesaid advertisement which was issued for filing

up the posts it was specifically stated that applications should be
submitted as against the said advertisement for filing up the post
of TGT Science by persons possessing B.Sc. Degree with a
combination of either (a) Physics, Chemistry and Math or (b)
Physics, Chemistry and Biology.

The appellant had only B.Sc.

Home Science and she had also filed an application, which
application was also considered. She was appointed to the said
post although she was not eligible for the said post. That was set
right and she was appointed as Domestic Science Teacher by
letter dated 16th November, 1974, rectifying the said mistake
wherein it was stated by the Education Officer that the change of
cadre of Miss Usha Verma, TGT(Science) to that of Domestic
Science Teacher in the scale of Rs.250-550 is approved with
immediate effect. It was also stated in the said letter that she

LPA No.121/2001

page No. 3 of

6

would not be given seniority of her last service under the existing
rules of the Department.
4.

A bare perusal of the aforesaid letter would indicate that

instead of terminating the services of the appellant on the ground
of her non eligibility for the said post of Science Teacher (TGT),
she was accommodated in the school as TGT (Home Science) and
that also as a fresh appointment for she was not entitled to
seniority of her past service rendered as TGT (Science).

The

aforesaid order was accepted by the appellant and she never
raised any dispute. The said order, therefore, has become final
and binding for all practical purposes. The respondent No.4 has,
therefore, become senior to the appellant and has been working
in a selection grade post in the Science stream, whereas the
appellant has been working in the

TGT Home Science stream.

The appellant being not eligible to the post of TGT(Science) has
also no right to claim selection grade in TGT Science and she
would be entitled only to ask for any further promotion or
appointment in the cadre of TGT (Home Science) only.

In any

event, the aforesaid order dated 16th November, 1974 having
become final and binding and the same having not been

LPA No.121/2001

page No. 4 of

6

challenged by the appellant at any subsequent stage, the
appellant now cannot take up a plea that she should be deemed
to be continued as TGT(Science), and consequently she also
cannot ask for grant of selection grade in TGT(Science), which
was the subject matter of the writ petition.
5.

The learned Single Judge has also held in para 29 of the

impugned judgment that the appellant was appointed when she
did not satisfy the requisite academic qualification and that was
set right and she was appointed as Domestic Science Teacher.
She was duly informed of the same. It is also brought out from
the records that the appellant herself in her subsequent
applications for leave and other communications had described
herself as Domestic Science Teacher and this would amount to
waiver and acquiescence on the part of the appellant. It is also
established from the records that respondent No.4 was granted
the selection grade in the year 1984 and the appellant filed the
writ petition as against the same only in the year 1990, i.e., after
the lapse of a period of six years, which was also found to be
barred under the principles of inordinate delay and laches. Even
the writ petition was filed after 20 years from the order of 1974

LPA No.121/2001

page No. 5 of

6

and, therefore, the aforesaid factual position also was a factor for
the dismissal of the writ petition.
6.

On perusal of the record we find that the learned Single

Judge has correctly and rightly appreciated the facts.

The

impugned judgment and order does not call for any interference.
The appeal has no merit and is dismissed. No costs.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 15, 2008
Rohtash

LPA No.121/2001

page No. 6 of

6

