*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 1080/2007 and CM Nos. 9586-87/2007

%

Date of decision: 15th February, 2008
TRIBAL CO-OPERATIVE MARKETING
..... Appellant
DEVELOPMENT FEDERATION OF INDIA
Through:Dr. Jose Verghese, Advocate
versus
SIDDHARTHA KUMAR
..... Respondent
Through :Mr. Sudershan Rajan, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?Y
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ:

1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order

dated 23rd March, 2007 passed by the learned Single Judge
whereby the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition filed
by the respondent herein holding that his request for withdrawal
was to be accepted and with a direction that the respondent
would return the benefits received by him under the Voluntary

LPA No.1080/2007

page 1 of 23

Retirement Scheme. A further direction was issued to the effect
that the order dated 4th December, 2001 passed by the appellant,
whereby the request of the respondent to withdraw himself from
the Voluntary Retirement Scheme was turned down, would stand
quashed with a further observation that the appellant would take
in service the respondent with immediate effect, and treat him to
be in service as if no application for voluntary retirement has
been preferred by him.
2.

The respondent was working with the appellant as Deputy

Manager. While he was so serving as Deputy Manager, a
Voluntary Retirement Scheme was introduced by the appellant
and

the

same

was

circulated

under

Circular

No.TFD/HO/P&A/2000-01[VRS]/CIR[03]1692 dated 24th July, 2000.
Some of the relevant clauses which would have bearing for
rendering

a

decision

in

the

present

case

are

extracted

hereinbelow:
“II. COMMENCEMENT
The Scheme will be in operation with effect
from 1.10.2000 and is offered to all employees of
the Federation.
IV. PROCEDURE
1...........................
LPA No.1080/2007

page 2 of 23

2.

An employee can be permitted to withdraw

his application for Voluntary Retirement, before
the Management notifies in writing to him about
the decision to accept his request for Voluntary
Retirement.
3.........................
4.

The Competent Authority, within a period of

30 days from the date of receipt of the said
application, shall take a decision to accept or
reject the said application and shall communicate
the decision to the official concerned.
5.........................
VI. BENEFITS:
..............................
a.

LUMP SUM COMPENSATION
An employee whose request for Voluntary

Retirement has been accepted would be entitled
to lump sum compensation equivalent to 3 months
salary for each completed year of past service and
part thereof or the monthly salary at the time of
Voluntary Retirement multiplied by the balance
months of service left before normal date of
retirement, whichever is less. For example, if an
employee who has put in 12 years of service and
has got only one year of service left for normal
retirement, he will get lumpsum compensation of
12 months and not for 36 months.
LPA No.1080/2007

page 3 of 23

NOTE: Salary for this purpose include Basic Pay +
D.A. Only.
VII SANCTIONING AUTHORITY:
1. ..............................
2.

Notwithstanding anything contained in these

rules,

the

Managing

Director

shall

be

fully

empowered either to accept or reject any request
by any employee in the overall interest of the
Federation, recording the reason in writing.
3.........
VIII. INTERPRETATION:
If any doubt or difficulty arises in interpreting
the provisions of this Scheme, or in giving effect to
them,

or

if

any,

lacunae,

inconsistency,

or

anomaly is discovered in their application, it shall
be open to the Managing Director to issue general
instructions or clarifications for the purpose of
removing

such

doubt,

difficulty,

lacunae,

inconsistency or anomaly.”
3.

The

aforesaid

Scheme,

as

stated

hereinabove,

circulated under Circular dated 24th July, 2000.

was

In the said

Circular it was mentioned that the Scheme would be in force for
three months ending on 31st December, 2000.
LPA No.1080/2007

Para 3 thereof
page 4 of 23

envisaged that the employee would be entitled for lumpsum
compensation equivalent to 3 months' salary for each completed
year of past service and part thereof or the monthly salary at the
time of Voluntary Retirement multiplied by the balance months of
service left before normal date of retirement, whichever was less,
and salary for this purpose would include basic pay plus D.A.
4.

On 30th January, 2001 another Circular being Circular

No.2/57/90[PERS]/3956 was issued by the appellant wherein it
was stated that the Scheme of Voluntary Retirement circulated
under Circular dated 24th July, 2000 was extended upto 31st
March, 2001. It was also stipulated therein that other terms and
conditions of VRS would remain the same as stipulated in Circular
No.1692 dated 24th July, 2000.

In view of the said letter, a

Scheme was also circulated along with a proforma for applying
for Voluntary Retirement. In the proforma of the application for
Voluntary Retirement, a paragraph was incorporated to the
following effect:
“The request for Voluntary Retirement has been
made by me after considering the pros and cons
of the Scheme and I undertake that I shall lose
(sic) my right to withdraw the same once it has

LPA No.1080/2007

page 5 of 23

been accepted by the Competent Authority.”
5.
March,

The aforesaid Scheme as extended was valid upto 31st
2001.

A

Circular

being

No.TFD/HO/P&A/2001-

02[VRS]/5818 came to be issued on 13th June, 2001 by the
appellant with the following contents:
“Sub:- Introduction of Voluntary Retirement
Scheme in TRIFED.
In continuation of Circular no.1692 dated 24th
July, 2000 and no.2/57/90-[PERS]/3956 dated 30th
January, 2001, the Voluntary Retirement Scheme
is hereby extended upto 31st August, 2001 with
the following condition:1)

Interested and eligible employees may send

their VRS application duly filled up latest by 31st
July, 2001. Applications received after 31.7.2001
will not be entertained.
2)

The condition no.12 under application form

stands withdrawn pertaining to option for date of
relieving under V.R.S.
3)

The date of relieving of interested and

eligible employee for V.R.S. will be on or before
31st August, 2001

and any option for relieving

after 31st August, 2001 will not be considered.
This

issues

with

the

approval

of

the

Managing Director.”
LPA No.1080/2007

page 6 of 23

6.

In the proforma also circulated with the said Circular, the

following para was incorporated:“The request for Voluntary Retirement has been
made by me after considering the pros and cons
of the Scheme and I undertake that I shall lose
(sic) my right to withdraw the same once it has
been accepted by the Competent Authority. I may
kindly be relieved along with all VRS benefits by
31.08.2001.”
7.
that

A bare perusal of the aforesaid paragraph would indicate
an

undertaking

was

sought

for

from

the

respondent/applicant that he would lose his right to withdraw the
offer for Voluntary Retirement once the same is accepted by the
Competent Authority and that he could be relieved along with all
VRS benefits by 31st August, 2001.
8.

After the aforesaid Voluntary Retirement Scheme

was

circulated on extension upto 31st August, 2001, the respondent
herein submitted his application on 28th June, 2001, wherein he
had also given an undertaking under his clear signature on the
proforma appended, seeking voluntary retirement from the
services of the appellant. He also undertook that he would lose
LPA No.1080/2007

page 7 of 23

the right to withdraw the same once it was accepted by the
Competent Authority and that he could be relieved along with all
VRS benefits by 31st August, 2001.
9.

The aforesaid request of the respondent was accepted by

the appellant and a letter was written to that effect to the
respondent by the appellant on 17th July, 2001.

The relevant

paragraph of the said communication is extracted hereinbelow:“This has reference to your VRS application dated
28.6.2001 forwarded by the Regional Manager
TRIFED Bhopal vide letter no.TFD/ROB/P&A/200102/442 dated 3.7.2001. The Competent Authority
has accepted your VRS request and you will be
relieved from the services of the Federation with
effect from 31.08.2001[afternoon].
This

issues

with

the

approval

of

the

Managing Director[I/c]”
10.

Thereafter on 27th July, 2001, the respondent made a

request to cancel his VRS application dated 28th June, 2001. On
4th December, 2001 the appellant passed an order rejecting the
request of the respondent for withdrawal of the VRS application

LPA No.1080/2007

page 8 of 23

on the ground that the same is contrary to the express provisions
of clause no.IV(2) of the Voluntary Retirement Scheme and also
in violation of his own undertaking submitted to the appellant.
On 15th December, 2001 the appellant relieved the respondent
from his service.

The respondent also received the benefits

under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme from the appellant but
on protest. The respondent thereafter filed a writ petition in this
Court, registered as C.W.P. No.7748/2001, which was considered
and disposed of by the learned Single Judge under the impugned
judgment and order dated 23rd March, 2007.
11.

Being aggrieved by the said order, the present appeal

was filed. Since the said appeal was filed belatedly, an application
for condonation of delay was also filed by the appellant. There
was a delay of 34 days in filing the present appeal.

Reasons

therefor were set out in the application. On going through the
same and upon hearing the learned counsel appearing for the
parties, we are of the considered opinion that the appellant has
been able to make out a case of sufficient cause on the reasons
given in the application. Therefore, we allow the application
bearing CM No.9587/2007 seeking for condonation of delay.

LPA No.1080/2007

page 9 of 23

12.

So far the appeal is concerned, the counsel appearing for

the parties have advanced indepth arguments and have drawn
our attention to the various documents on record to which we
shall refer to during the course of the discussion of this order. We
have already extracted the relevant clauses of the Scheme and
also the contents of the Circular and the aforesaid proforma as
annexed to the application for Voluntary Retirement. The learned
Single Judge has framed the relevant issue for decision in the
following manner:“This voluntary act of the employee can come into
force only when the same is accepted by the
employer and till the same is accepted the
employee seeking voluntary retirement can
always change his decision and withdraw his said
voluntary act of seeking retirement. Although in
the instant case the petitioner had withdrawn his
offer of seeking Voluntary Retirement Scheme
after the acceptance is communicated by the
respondent to the petitioner, yet the issue which
needs consideration is whether the respondent
could accept the offer even before the closure of
Scheme.”
13.

The learned Single Judge has held that the appellant itself

is responsible for creating confusion in the minds of its employees
desirous of seeking VRS, inasmuch as in the Circular dated 24th
July, 2000 in para 4 it was stated that, the application of

LPA No.1080/2007

page 10 of 23

voluntary retirement should be processed by the management
within one month from the closure of the Scheme, whereas, on
the other hand in the body of the Scheme in sub-para 4 of para IV
under the heading 'Procedure' it has been mentioned that the
competent authority within a period of 30 days from the date of
receipt of the said application, shall take a decision to accept or
reject the said application and also that under sub-para 2 of para
IV it is set out that an employee can be permitted to withdraw his
application for voluntary retirement, before the management
notifies in writing to him about the decision to accept his request
for voluntary retirement. It was held by the learned Single Judge
that

the

competent

authority

should

have

processed

the

application forms as received from the employee seeking
voluntary retirement only within 30 days after the closure of the
Scheme and not within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
application.

In terms of the aforesaid findings recorded it was

also held that the appellant cannot take advantage of the fact
that the

respondent was given the benefits under the Voluntary

Retirement Scheme,

as these benefits were given to the

respondent not only after he had withdrawn from the Voluntary

LPA No.1080/2007

page 11 of 23

Retirement Scheme

vide his communication dated 27th July,

2001, but also after he had sent the legal notice dated 7th
December,2001 and had filed a writ petition on 12th December,
2001. It was held that the relationship of employer and employee
continues till the employee is relieved

in response to his

application within 30 days after the closure of the Scheme and
since the offer of the respondent was accepted before the closure
of the Scheme, i.e., 31st July, 2001, therefore, declining to accept
the request of the respondent to withdraw from the benefit of
Voluntary Retirement Scheme was illegal and unjustified.
14.

The said findings and conclusions arrived at by the

learned Single Judge are assailed before us by the counsel
appearing for the appellant by making reference to various
clauses of the aforesaid Voluntary Retirement Scheme and also
by relying on the decisions of the Supreme Court in HEC
Voluntary Retd. Employees Welfare Society and another v. Heavy
Engineering Corpn. Ltd. and Ors. (2006) 3 SCC 708; Bank of India
& Ors. v. O.P. Swarnakar and Ors. (2003) 2 SCC 721 and the
decision of the Supreme Court in Punjab & Sind Bank & Anr. v. S.
Ranveer Singh Bawa & Another (2004) 4 SCC 484.

LPA No.1080/2007

page 12 of 23

15.

It was submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the

appellant that the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge
are contrary to the express terms of rule IV (2) of the Voluntary
Retirement Scheme

and also in violation of the undertaking

given by the respondent in his application seeking for voluntary
retirement.

It was further submitted by him that a concluded

contract has come into effect after the acceptance of the offer
contained in the Voluntary Retirement Scheme by the respondent
to go for voluntary retirement and, therefore, there could not
have been any withdrawal of such an offer of a stipulation and of
a concluded contract, which could have only been in accordance
with the provisions of the Indian Contract Act.
16.

Counsel

appearing

for

the

respondent,

however,

submitted before us that as per clause 4 of the Circular dated 24th
July, 2000, the application of the respondent seeking for
voluntary retirement was be processed by the Management
within one month from the closure of this Scheme and a decision
to accept or reject the said application was to be communicated
to the official concerned only thereafter. The said Scheme was
closed on 31st July, 2001 and since the application seeking for

LPA No.1080/2007

page 13 of 23

withdrawal of voluntary retirement was sent by the respondent
and received by the appellant prior to the said date, the stand
taken by the appellant declining to accept the said application
was illegal and unjustified and, therefore, the learned Single
Judge was justified in setting aside the said order passed by the
appellant.
17.

In the light of the aforesaid statements made, we now

proceed to deal with the issues raised before us and decide the
same.

The Voluntary Retirement Scheme

was introduced in

2000 whereby certain benefits were granted to persons who
opted for going on voluntary retirement by filing applications in
that regard. In sub-para 2 of clause IV of the Scheme under the
heading

“Procedure”

an

employee

could

be

permitted

to

withdraw his application for Voluntary Retirement, before the
Management notified in writing to him about the decision to
accept his request for Voluntary Retirement.

It was further

stipulated in sub-para 4 thereof that the Competent Authority,
within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of the said
application, would take a decision to accept or reject the said
application and would communicate the decision to the official

LPA No.1080/2007

page 14 of 23

concerned.
18.

Originally the aforesaid Scheme was circulated under

Circular dated 24th July, 2000, which was kept in force initially for
three months from 1st October, 2000 to 31st December, 2000,
and a stipulation was made therein that the application would be
processed by the Management within one month from the closure
of this Scheme and that a decision of the Competent Authority
about acceptance or rejection of request would be final and
binding on the applicant.

However, what is relevant for our

consideration is the provisions of the Scheme which was
circulated under Circular dated 13th June, 2001. It is, no doubt,
true that in the said Circular reference was also made to the
earlier Circular dated 24th July, 2000.

While doing so, it was

stated that the Scheme had been extended upto 31 st August,
2001 with the condition that interested and eligible employees
may send their VRS applications latest by 31st July, 2001.

The

date of relieving of interested and eligible employees for
Voluntary Retirement Scheme

would be on or before 31st

August, 2001. The aforesaid statement makes it clear that the
earlier clause, namely, clause 4 of the Circular dated 24th July,

LPA No.1080/2007

page 15 of 23

2000 was superseded by the aforesaid clause 3 stating that the
date of relieving of interested and eligible employees for V.R.S.
would be on or before 31st August, 2001 and, therefore, the
decision to accept or reject the request for voluntary retirement
was to be taken prior to the aforesaid date and not after one
month from the closure of the Scheme which was valid upto 31st
July, 2001. The said argument, therefore, of the learned counsel
appearing for the respondent appears to be fallacious.

The

learned Single Judge appears to have been influenced by the said
argument and, therefore, the decision rendered in our considered
view is also erroneous. The aforesaid view gets fortified when we
consider the very fact that the appellant had also given an
undertaking that he would lose his right to withdraw the offer for
Voluntary Retirement once the same was accepted by the
Competent Authority.

The request of the respondent to go on

voluntary retirement was accepted by the competent authority
under order dated 17th July, 2001, which was also communicated
to the respondent and was received by him before he sent the
letter dated 27th July, 2001 seeking for withdrawal of his
voluntary retirement application. Therefore, a concluded contract

LPA No.1080/2007

page 16 of 23

had come into effect and the same was acted upon by making
payment of the benefits also on his release from service.
19.

In this connection we may also refer to the decision of the

Supreme Court in

HEC Voluntary Retd. Employees Welfare

Society and another(supra) wherein in para 11 of the said
judgment the Supreme Court has held thus:“An offer for voluntary retirement in terms of a
Scheme, when accepted, leads to a concluded
contract between the employer and the employee.
In terms of such a Scheme, an employee has an
option either to accept or not to opt therefore. The
Scheme is purely voluntary, in terms whereof the
tenure of service is curtailed which is permissible
in law. Such a Scheme is ordinarily floated with a
purpose of downsizing the employees. It is
beneficial both to the employees as well as to the
employer. Such a Scheme is issued for effective
functioning of the industrial undertakings.
Although the Company is a "State" within the
meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India,
the terms and conditions of service would be
governed by the contract of employment. Thus,
unless the terms and conditions of such a contract
are governed by a statute or statutory rules, the
provisions of Contract Act would be applicable
both at the formulation of the contract as also the
determination thereof. By reason of such a
Scheme only is an invitation of offer floated. When
pursuant to or in furtherance of such a Voluntary
Retirement Scheme an employee opts therefor,
he makes an offer which upon acceptance by the
employer gives rise to a contract. Thus, as the
matter relating to voluntary retirement is not
governed by any statute, the provisions of
LPA No.1080/2007

page 17 of 23

Contract Act, 1872, therefore, would be applicable
too.{see: Bank of India v. O.P.Swarnakar(supra)}”
20.

In para 28 of the said judgment the Supreme Court has

held as follows:
“The expression "Special Scheme" used therein
must be understood in the context of a general
Scheme of employment governing the terms and
conditions of service or which is a part of the
statutory rules governing the service of the
employees. In this sense also the Voluntary
Retirement Scheme is a Special Scheme. The
Scheme was initially introduced for one year. It
might have been extended from time to time.
Extension of such Scheme indisputably must have
been on the basis of exercises resorted to by the
employer as regards the financial implications
thereof, availability of funds, average number of
employees opting therefor and other relevant
factors. Only because the said Scheme remained
in force for a total period of 10 years, the same
would not mean that it became a part of the
general terms and conditions of contract of
employment. Furthermore evidently as the
Scheme floated in 1987 did not work to the
satisfaction of the Company, it was replaced by
the year 1990 Scheme upon extending more
benefits to the employees.”
21.

In the case of

O.P. Swarnakar and Ors.(supra), the

Supreme Court in para 49, 50, 60,64, 65, 66 and 67 held as
under:“49. An offer indisputably can be made to a group
of persons collectively which is capable of being
LPA No.1080/2007

page 18 of 23

accepted individually but the question which has
to be posed and answered is as to whether having
regard to the service jurisprudence: the principles.
of Indian Contract Act would be applicable in the
instant case. It is the specific case of the 'Banks'
that the Schemes had been floated by way of
contract. It does not have any statutory flavour.
Reference to the pension Scheme framed under
the regulations was made for computation of the
pension.
50. It is difficult to accept the contention raised in
the Bar that a contract of employment would not
be governed by the Indian Contract Act. A contact
of employment is also a subject matter of
contract. Unless governed by a statute or
statutory rules the provisions of the Indian
Contract Act would be only applicable at the
formulation of the contract as also the
determination thereof. Subject to certain just
exceptions even specific performance of contract
by way of a direction for reinstatement of a
dismissed employee is also permissible in law.
.............
.............
60. Acceptance or otherwise of the request of an
employee seeking voluntary retirement is required
to be communicated to him in writing. This clause
is crucial in view of the fact that therein the
acceptance or rejection of such request has been
provided. The decision of the authority rejecting
the request is appealable to the Appellate
authority. The application made by an employee
as an offer as well as the decision of the bank
thereupon would be communicated to the
respective General Managers. The decision
making process shall take place at various levels
of the banks
...............

LPA No.1080/2007

page 19 of 23

...............
64. Once it is held that the provisions of the Indian
Contract Act, 1872 would be applicable, the
Scheme admittedly being contractual in nature,
the provisions of the Act shall apply. The Scheme
having regard to its provisions as noticed
hereinbefore would merely constitute invitation to
treat and not an offer.
65. A proposal is made when one person signifies
to another his willingness to do or abstain from
doing anything with a view to obtaining the assent
of the other to such act or abstinence (See Section
2(a)). Herein the banks by reason of the Scheme
or otherwise have not expressed their willingness
to do or abstain from doing anything with a view
to obtaining assent of the employees to such act.
It will bear repetition to state that not only the
power of the bank to accept or reject such
application is absolutely discretionary, it, as
noticed hereinbefore, could also amend or rescind
the Scheme. The Scheme, therefore, cannot be
said to be an offer which, on the acceptance by
the employee, would fructify in a concluded
contract.
66. The proposal of the employee when accepted
by the Bank would constitute a promise within the
meaning of Section 2(b) of the Act. Only then the
promise become an enforceable contract. In the
instant case the banks when floating the Scheme
did not signify that on the employees assenting
thereto a concluded contract would come into
being in terms whereof they would be permitted to
retire voluntarily and get the benefits thereunder.
67. Furthermore, in terms of the said Scheme no
consideration passed so as to constitute an
agreement. Once it is found that by giving their
option under the Scheme, the employees did not
derive an enforceable right, the same in absence
of any consideration would be void in terms of
LPA No.1080/2007

page 20 of 23

Section 2(g) of the Contract Act as opposed to
Section 2(h) thereof.”
22.

The aforesaid ratio of the decision of the O.P. Swarnakar

and Ors. case (supra) came to be referred to and relied upon by a
three Judges Bench in the decision of S. Ranveer Singh Bawa &
Another (supra), wherein the said ratio of the decision has been
approved.

The said decision, however, is not applicable to the

facts of the present case as the facts are somewhat different
from the facts of the present case.

The same is, however,

relevant to the facts of the present case only to the extent that
the decision in the case of O.P. Swarnakar and Ors.(supra) was
approved by the three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court.
23.

In terms of the aforesaid settled position of law,

therefore, it is established that the request of the respondent to
go on voluntary retirement in terms of the Scheme of the
appellant with a stipulation that once the said request is accepted
he will forgo his right to withdraw his request was in fact an offer
for voluntary retirement in terms of the Scheme. The aforesaid
request was accepted by the competent authority on 17th July,
2001, which was also notified and communicated to the
respondent. In terms thereof, therefore, there arose a concluded
LPA No.1080/2007

page 21 of 23

contract between the employer and the employee.

Once a

concluded contract has been arrived at, the determination of the
said concluded contract could only be done in accordance with
the provisions of the Contract Act.

It is established from the

facts of the present case that, the terms and conditions of the
Voluntary Retirement Scheme

herein are not governed by any

statutory rules but are a matter relating to contract and,
therefore, the provisions of the Contract Act would be applicable,
both on the formation of the contract and also the determination
thereof.
24.

Consequently, we hold that the appellant could have

taken a decision to decline the request of the respondent to
withdraw the offer as the same was accepted and a concluded
contract had arisen. The action of the appellant, therefore, cannot
be said to be illegal and unjustified. The decision rendered by the
learned Single, therefore, cannot be sustained and the same is
set aside and quashed. The respondent has already received the
benefit under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme,

which was

deposited in his bank account. If any other amount is found due
and payable to the respondent under the Scheme, the same shall

LPA No.1080/2007

page 22 of 23

be paid by the appellant within two months from the date of the
receipt of a copy of this order.
25.

The appeal stands disposed of in terms of the aforesaid

order. No costs.

CHIEF JUSTICE

FEBRUARY 15 , 2008
Rohtash
th

LPA No.1080/2007

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

page 23 of 23

