*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) No.348/2002

%

Date of Decision: 17th March, 2008
NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LTD ……. APPELLANT

Through: Mr.Prashant Bhushan with
Mr.Rohit Kumar, Advocates
Versus
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA & ORS ……
RESPONDENTS

Through Ms.Indu Malhotra, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.Kunal Tandon, Mr.Arjun
Suresh, Advocates for R-1
Mr.Tarun Johri, Advocate for R-2
Ms.Bina Gupta with Mr.Gaurav
Singh and Ms.Rashmi Rekha Devi,
Advocates for R-5
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ
1.What is under challenge in this appeal is the order dated 13th
September, 2002, passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the
application filed by the appellant-NTPC under Order VII Rule 11 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
2.The NTPC filed the said application praying for rejection of the plaint in

(LPA 348/2002)

Page 1 of 10

the suit, being Suit No.904/2002, instituted by the respondent No.1-IDBI
against Spectrum Power Generation Co. Limited (SPGL for short), Jaya
Food Industries Limited (JFIL for short), Mr.M.Krishna Rao(defendant
No.3), National Thermal Power Corporation (for short NTPC) and
Spectrum Technologies USA (STUSA for short).

The aforesaid suit was

filed by the IDBI in its capacity as lead institution representing a
consortium of financial institutions, namely, IFCI, LIC, UTI, IIBI, GIC, NIC,
NIA, OIC and UII, collectively called as ‘the Lenders’. In the said suit,
challenge was made to the legality and validity of the compromise
agreement dated 9th April, 2001 arrived at between SPGL and NTPC on
the ground that terms and conditions of the said agreement are
contrary to the conditions of the Loan Agreements amongst the financial
institutions and SPGL and that SPGL had no power to make such
payments through the compromise agreement or to enter into such a
settlement. NTPC filed the aforesaid application under Order VII Rule 11
CPC in the said suit praying for rejection of the plaint on the ground that
no cause of action was disclosed in the plaint and, therefore, the plaint
was required to be rejected.
3.In order to appreciate the contentions raised by the counsel appearing
for the parties before us, it would be necessary to deal with some
background facts leading to the filing of the aforesaid suit.
4.The IDBI and other financial institutions as stated hereinbefore

(LPA 348/2002)

Page 2 of 10

collectively sanctioned financial assistance to SPGL to the tune of
Rs.326.20 crores.

The said loans are governed by the terms and

conditions of the loan agreements dated 11th August, 1994 and 17th
May, 1995. During the course of arguments, reference was made to the
following provision of the aforesaid loan agreements entered into
between the SPGL and the lenders, which provides as follows:
“Section 7.3 GENERAL COVENANTS
The Borrower shall,
(i) .....
(ii) LOANS AND DEBENTURES
Not issue any debentures, raise any loans,
accept deposits from public, issue equity or
preference capital, change its capitalstructure or create any charge on its assets
or give any guarantees without the prior
approval of the Lead Institution.
This
provision shall not apply to normal trade
guarantees or temporary loans and
advances granted to staff or contractors or
suppliers in the ordinary course of business
or to raising of unsecured loans, overdrafts,
cash credit or other facilities from banks in
the ordinary course of business.
5.It is also necessary to mention at this stage that the promoters of the
SPGL, namely, STUSA, Jaya Food Industries and NTPC, entered into a
promoters agreement dated 29th June, 1993 to develop and set up a 208
MW combined cycle gas power project.

However, in respect of the

aforesaid agreement disputes arose amongst the parties and the said
disputes culminated in the institution of suits, being Suit No.1256/1996
and Suit No.1905/1996 before this High Court. It is also necessary to
(LPA 348/2002)

Page 3 of 10

mention at this stage that the Lenders/Financial Institutions were not
arrayed as parties in those proceedings.

During the course of the

aforesaid proceedings, Jaya Food Industries and Mr.M.Krishna Rao, who
was the Managing Director of SPGL, entered into a compromise
agreement dated 9th April, 2001 with NTPC, whereby SPGL was required
to pay Rs.41.57 crores to NTPC with 9% interest from 1st January, 1999
in 12 monthly instalments commencing from 25th April, 2001. The same
came to be noticed by the Asset Reconstruction Company

(India)

Limited (ARCIL), successor in interest of IDBI, so far rights of IDBI in the
proceeding have been assigned in favour of ARCIL. The Supreme Court
under order dated 9th April, 2001 recorded that taking of the
compromise agreement on record would not preclude any other party
affected by it from challenging the authority of SPGL to make such
payment to NTPC or to enter into any such settlement or to take any
objection available in law before an appropriate Court.
6.A bare perusal of the aforesaid order passed by the Supreme Court
also indicates that the Supreme Court in that case held that if a
challenge is raised before the competent court in respect of the power
of SPGL to make such payment to NTPC and the competence of the
NTPC to enter into such settlement without the consent of the
Lenders/Financial Institutions, the same shall be decided on its own
merits without being influenced by the fact that the terms of the

(LPA 348/2002)

Page 4 of 10

compromise agreement are taken on record and/or that undertakings
are given to and accepted by the Supreme Court.
7.There was another suit filed by STUSA which was registered as Suit
No.765/2001, for restraining SPGL from making any payment to NTPC
pursuant to the compromise agreement, wherein the learned Single
Judge passed an order dated 21st September, 2001 on the application
filed by IDBI seeking to intervene, holding that IDBI has no right to
intervene. The said order passed by the learned Single Judge was
challenged by filing FAO(OS) No.518/2001. The Division Bench passed
an order dated 22nd March, 2002 whereby the appeal filed by STUSA
was partly allowed, reiterating the order passed by the learned Single
judge holding that SPGL shall continue to make payment of instalments
to NTPC.

It was also held that the financial institutions can file a

separate suit.

Observations in that regard were also made in the

following terms:
“Learned counsel for IDBI was duly heard on this
application. Besides the maintainability of such an
application in the appeal, in the absence of IDBI as a
party to the suit, we find no merit in the application.
At the instance of IDBI, directions as prayed for
cannot be issued which are beyond the scope of the
suit itself. Allowing such prayers would amount to
even exceeding the prayers which STUSA has made
in its suit. In case IDBI has any grievance, it was
permissible for it to file a separate and independent
suit or seek its impleadment in the pending suit
rather than approaching the appellate court for such
a relief. .....”

(LPA 348/2002)

Page 5 of 10

8.Consequent thereto, the aforesaid suit was filed by the IDBI on behalf
of itself and the consortium of banks and financial institutions which is
registered as Suit No.904/2002.

In the said suit, a declaration was

sought to the effect that the compromise agreement dated 9th

April,

2001 was null and void and un-enforceable in law. A decree of perpetual
injunction was also sought for directing SPGL and the NTPC to restore
the amount paid by the SPGL to the tune of Rs.52 crores. In the said
suit the aforesaid application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC was filed
which was rejected by the learned Single Judge holding that there is
cause of action for filing the suit.
dismissed

Accordingly the said application was

as against which the present appeal is filed on which we

have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and also
looked into the records.
9.It was submitted by the counsel for the appellant that so far as the
compromise agreement is concerned the Lenders/Financial Institutions
have no connection and/or interest as that is a compromise agreement
arrived at in a pending suit wherein the Financial Institutions were not
even parties. It was also contended that the IDBI has no cause of action
against the NTPC, as there is no privity of contract with NTPC and
payment of money to NTPC by SPGL as loss of opportunity cost does not
change the capital structure or the debt equity ratio of the company.
Another contention that was raised was that the opting out of NTPC

(LPA 348/2002)

Page 6 of 10

from the project would not affect the paid up share capital of the
company. Contention was also raised that NTPC had entered into the
settlement at the insistence of IDBI and other parties.
10.On the other hand, counsel for the respondent No.1-IDBI, while
refuting the aforesaid contentions, submitted that IDBI has made out a
strong cause of action inasmuch as the Lenders/Financial Institutions
are vitally concerned by payment of substantial money by SPGL to
settle another promoter’s dispute.
11.We have considered the aforesaid submissions in light of the records.
On going through the records we find that whatever settlement was
made through compromise agreement was made by the SPGL for loss of
opportunity cost to NTPC. We also find from the records and as stated
before us during the course of arguments, that the IDBI has claimed a
substantial amount against SPGL and, therefore, any settlement arrived
at by SPGL with any other party would be of vital interest and of utmost
relevance to the Lenders/Financial Institutions.

It was urged by the

counsel for the IDBI that the aforesaid payment has seriously disturbed
the debt equity ratio of the SPGL, which according to the institutional
norms should be 70:30. It was sought to be shown in the pleadings of
the parties that as a consequence of the aforesaid payment made by
the SPGL to the NTPC, the debt equity ratio has reached 84:16 and,
therefore, respondent no.1-IDBI has become vitally interested in the

(LPA 348/2002)

Page 7 of 10

activities of the SPGL in carrying on their financial activities. It cannot
be denied that the respondent No.1-IDBI on behalf of the consortium of
Banks/Financial Institutions now has a vital stake in the SPGL as on the
date of the filing of the suit.

Investment of different stake holders was

in the vicinity of about 700 crores. The contention raised in the suit is
also that the payment of the said amount by SPGL to NTPC for nonissuance of 77.7 lac equity shares to NTPC is barred in law as the
payment of the said amount by SPGL would tantamount to purchase of
its own shares by SPGL itself. In view of the pleadings of the parties in
the suit, it cannot be said that there is no cause of action for the suit.
The disputes which are raised in the pleadings of the parties as
available on record would clearly indicate and also establish that the
said disputes are required to be proved by leading evidence and are
required to be adjudicated upon, for, it cannot be said that on the
pleadings of the parties no cause of action is made out.
12.It has been held in a catena of judgments by the Supreme Court and
also by this Court that whether or not the plaint discloses a cause of
action is a question of fact, which has to be gathered on the basis of the
averments made in the plaint in its entirety, taking those averments to
be correct. The test is as to whether if the averments made in the plaint
are taken to be correct in their entirety, a decree would be passed.
13.A cause of action

(LPA 348/2002)

is a bundle of facts which are required to be

Page 8 of 10

proved for obtaining relief and for the said purpose, the material facts
are required to be stated but not the evidence, except in certain cases
where the pleadings relied on are in regard to misrepresentation, fraud,
wilful default, undue influence or of the like nature.

So long as the

plaint discloses some cause of action which requires determination by
the Court, the mere fact that the plaintiff may not succeed cannot be a
ground for rejection of plaint. [See: Mayar (H.K.) Limited v. Owners and
Parties, Vessel M.V. Fortune Express reported in (2006) 3 SCC 100].
14.It was also held by the Supreme Court in the case of Liverpool and
London S.P. & I.ASSN. Ltd v. M.V. Sea Success I & Another reported in
(2004) 9 SCC 512, that it may be true that order VII Rule 11(a) although
authorises the court to reject a plaint on failure on the part of the
plaintiff to disclose a cause of action, but the same would not mean that
the averments made therein or a document upon which the reliance has
been placed although discloses a cause of action, the plaint would be
rejected on the ground that such averments are not sufficient to prove
the facts stated therein for the purpose of obtaining relief claimed in the
suit. By the statute the jurisdiction of the court is restricted to ascertain
whether on the allegations a cause of action is shown and as long as the
claim discloses some cause of action or raises some question fit to be
decided by a Judge, the mere fact that the case is weak or not likely to
succeed is no ground for rejecting it.

(LPA 348/2002)

Page 9 of 10

15.In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the learned
Single Judge, who has given cogent reasons for coming to the
conclusion that the application should be dismissed, was justified in
holding that the suit has cause of action and that the averments made
therein required trial.

We find no merit in this appeal which is

dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE
17th MARCH, 2008
“v”

(LPA 348/2002)

Page 10 of 10

