HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
LPA No.108/2008
Date of Decision: 17th March, 2008
M/S. B.S. CONSTRUCTIONS CO.
……. Appellant
Through: Mr.Nitendra Sharma with
Mr.J.P.Sengh, Advocates
VERSUS
THE COMMISSIONER OF MCD & OTHERS … Respondents
Through:Ms.Amita Gupta, Ms.Archana
Vashisht and Ms.Aparna Saxena,
Advocates for MCD
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON’BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ
CM No.3268/2008
By this application the appellant prays for condonation of
delay in filing the appeal. There is a delay of two days in the
filing the appeal. On going through the application we find that
the appellant has been able to make out a case of sufficient
cause for condonation of delay.
(LPA 108/2008)

Accordingly, we allow the
Page 1 of 10

application and the delay in filing the appeal is condoned. The
appeal is taken on record.
The application stands disposed of.
LPA No. 108/2008
1.This order shall dispose of the appeal which is filed by the

appellant challenging legality of the order dated 9th January,
2008 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ
petition filed by the appellant.
2.The writ petition was filed by the appellant being aggrieved by

the order of the respondents dated 13th August, 2007, whereby
the appellant was restrained/ debarred from participating in the
tender process of the MCD for a period of two years on account
of non-execution of the work of de-silting, which was allotted to
the appellant under work orders dated 13th June, 2007 and 14th
June, 2007. The learned Single Judge heard the counsel for the
parties and after going through the records found that the
appellant was called upon to start work and to complete the
same within 25 days, but that he did not do so on the pretext
that he would need at least two months’ time to complete the
work.

The learned Single Judge however did not accept the

aforesaid plea taken up by the appellant and on perusal of the
(LPA 108/2008)

Page 2 of 10

original records observed that the appellant was called upon to
start work and complete the same within 25 days. Even a show
cause notice dated 20th June, 2007 was issued and the
appellant-contractor was also called for personal hearing, which
was held on 29th June, 2007, at which stage the appellantcontractor was warned that the work in question is of urgent
nature and work should be immediately started to avoid
disciplinary action against the appellant-contractor. The learned
Single Judge held that the since the appellant-contractor did not
start work, there was no merit in the writ petition, which was
dismissed, giving an opportunity however to the appellant to
invoke the arbitration clause in accordance with law.
3.Being aggrieved by the aforesaid findings recorded by the
learned Single Judge, the present appeal is filed on which we
have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
have also gone through the records.
4.Our attention was drawn to the Short Tender Notice dated 30th

May, 2007 wherein it was mentioned that the time for
completion of the work was two months. The respondent has
taken up a stand that in the meantime a corrigendum was
issued on 1st June, 2007, wherein it was specifically stipulated
(LPA 108/2008)

Page 3 of 10

that time for completion of the work under the Short Tender
Notice dated 30th May, 2007 would be 25 days from the date of
issue of the work order. The said corrigendum is reproduced
below for reference:
“Due to time bound work the time of
completion of Short Notice NIT No.EEXXX/TC/2007-08/4 dated 30.5.07 due on
04.06.07 shall be 25 days from the date of
issue of work order.”
5.The appellant on the other hand has taken up a plea that he

was never intimated about the aforesaid corrigendum and was
not made aware of any change in the stipulation in the Short
Tender Notice before issuance of and receipt of separate work
orders dated 13th June, 2007 and 14th June, 2007. In the said
work orders which were issued to the appellant, it was
specifically mentioned that the appellant was to complete the
aforesaid work within 25 days. The plea which was taken up
before the learned Single Judge was that the said work orders
were contrary to the terms of the Short Tender Notice as the
time for completion of work was unilaterally reduced by the MCD
from two months to 25 days.
6.In the light of the aforesaid submissions of the learned counsel

for the parties, we have also perused the original records. In the
(LPA 108/2008)

Page 4 of 10

Short Tender Notice which was issued on 30th May, 2007 it was
mentioned that the last date for receipt of tender was 4th June,
2007.

However the stipulation of time for completion of the

work in the said Short Tender Notice was two months.

The

respondent had in fact also issued a corrigendum on 1 st June,
2007, i.e. before the tender closing date, with the stipulation
that the time for completion of the work under the Short Tender
Notice dated 30th May, 2007 would be 25 days from the date of
issue of the work order. The said corrigendum is a part of the
record and was issued pursuant to a decision recorded in the
note sheet. In the noting of the Executive Engineer-XXX dated
7th June, 2007 also the time for completion of the entire work is
mentioned as 25 days.

It is also recorded in the said noting

that negotiation was conducted with the appellant-contractor as
the rates quoted by him were high. The said file was processed
at different stages and by order dated 14th June, 2007 a decision
was taken to award

the contract in question in favour of the

appellant.
7.At the risk of repetition, it is necessary

to reiterate at this

stage that although as per approved/draft notice inviting tender,
the time for completion was two months, due to urgency of the
(LPA 108/2008)

Page 5 of 10

work, time for completion was re-stipulated as 25 days, for
which a necessary corrigendum was issued under letter dated
1st June, 2007. Thereafter, it was found that the appellant was
the only tenderer who had submitted tender. On opening of the
tender submitted by the appellant it was found that the rates
quoted were high and consequently, a letter was sent to the
appellant

requesting

him

to

attend

the

office

of

the

Superintending Engineer on 7th June, 2007 for negotiations for
reduction of the quoted rates. The appellant attended the said
meeting.

Thereafter, the work was awarded to the appellant

after taking a decision in that regard, under order dated 14 th
June, 2007, with the period of completion of the work as 25
days.
8.As the appellant-contractor did not start any work immediately

after the issuance of the work order, a show cause notice was
issued to the him under letter dated 20th June, 2007, directing
him to submit reply within three days from the date of the issue
of the said show cause notice. The appellant however did not
submit any reply to the said show cause notice. It was therefore
concluded by the respondent that the appellant-contractor was
not interested in the execution of the said contract and
(LPA 108/2008)

Page 6 of 10

therefore some action was required to be taken against the
appellant-contractor for the default. A proposal was given to the
concerned authority to forfeit the earnest money of the
appellant-contractor and also not to accept any business from
the appellant for a period of two years. Finally, order dated 13 th
August, 2007 was passed to the effect that the appellantcontractor is debarred from tendering in MCD for a period two
years.
9.The pleas taken before us are that the appellant was not

served with the corrigendum and that the order passed on 13 th
August, 2007 is not a speaking order. Both the aforesaid issues
were also urged before the learned Single Judge who, after
considering the same, passed a detailed speaking order and the
said contentions were rejected by giving reasons for the same.
Records placed before us indicate that before taking action to
debar the appellant from participating in the tender process for
a period of two years as stated above, a show cause notice was
issued to the appellant.

Even thereafter, by letter dated 22nd

June, 2007, an opportunity was granted to the appellant to start
the work so as to enable him to avoid disciplinary action, to
which no heed was paid by him and he expressed his inability to
(LPA 108/2008)

Page 7 of 10

start the work, stating that the time of 25 days to complete the
work is insufficient and that he should have been given two
months’ time as given in the notice inviting tender.

The

appellant was also given personal hearing on the aforesaid show
cause notice and thereafter he was also informed that the case
has been processed for disciplinary action against his firm for his
failure to execute the work. Before issuing the order debarring
the appellant from participating in the tender process,

the

respondent was satisfied from the records that the appellant has
deliberately avoided the execution of the work,
unwarranted plea for the same.

taking an

The competent authority

having found that the plea taken by the appellant was
unjustified, passed the aforesaid order after giving a reasonable
opportunity to the appellant to rebut the contentions raised in
the show cause notice issued to the appellant. Therefore, we
are of the considered opinion that there is no violation of the
principles of natural justice in the aforesaid action taken by the
respondent after giving due notice and after giving

full

opportunity to the appellant to rebut the allegations made
against him.

(LPA 108/2008)

Page 8 of 10

10.The

contention that the appellant was not aware of the

corrigendum stipulating that the work is to be completed within
25 days from the date of acceptance of the tender and issuance
of work order also cannot be accepted, for, the appellant was
the only tenderer and whatever correspondence was done was
only with him. His matter was processed and even on the first
date when his matter was processed, it was specifically
mentioned in the note sheet that the work is to be completed
within 25 days. Copies of the letters and the corrigendum were
also sent to the appellant at the address provided by the
appellant.

Even the letter requesting him to attend the

negotiations for reduction of the quoted rates was received by
him at the same address.

Subsequent work orders issued to

him, which admittedly were received by him, were also sent at
the same address and, therefore, the plea that he did not know
the revised stipulation that the completion time for the work was
25 days, cannot be accepted.
11.The appellant was given a detailed show cause notice and
was granted personal hearing and, thereafter the order was
passed for which reasons are also recorded in the records.
Therefore, the contention that no speaking order was passed by
(LPA 108/2008)

Page 9 of 10

the respondent to debar the appellant from participating in the
tender process for a period of

two years also cannot be

accepted.
12.In view of the above discussion, we find no infirmity in the
impugned judgment and order passed by the learned Single
Judge. The appeal has no merit and is dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE
March 17, 2008
“v”

(LPA 108/2008)

Page 10 of 10

