*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 223/2002

%

Date of Decision: 17th March, 2008
BRAHMA PRAKASH KALRA
…….Appellant
Through: Mr.K.P. Mavi, Advocate
Versus
NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION
& OTHERS
……Respondents
Through: Mr.S.K.Taneja, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Rajesh Gupta and Mr.T.K.Tiwari,
Advocates.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?
yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ

1.The issue that arises for consideration in this appeal is whether
the departmental proceeding which is initiated against the
appellant should continue to remain stayed pending final disposal
of the criminal trial, which is also pending against the appellant.
2.The

allegation

against

the

appellant

was

that

he

demanded/received bribe and was caught red-handed by the
(LPA 223/2002)

Page 1 of 9

raiding party of the CBI. Consequent thereupon a criminal case
was

registered

against

him

which

is

at

the

trial

stage.

Departmental proceeding has also been initiated against the
appellant pursuant to which a charge sheet has been issued
containing statement of articles of charge as annexed to the
memorandum of charges dated 6th August, 2001.
3.Contending, inter alia, that both the criminal case and the
departmental proceeding are based on identical and similar facts
and that witnesses for both the proceedings would also be the
same, the writ petition was filed by the appellant praying that the
departmental proceedings should be stayed pending finalisation of
the criminal case.
aforesaid

contention

The learned Single Judge considered the
raised

and

held

that

departmental

proceedings cannot be said to be of such a nature that the same
need to be stayed pending adjudication of the criminal case filed
against him.

The aforesaid conclusion was arrived at by the

learned Single Judge on the basis of his finding that a reference to
the statement of charge would show that so far as the
respondents are concerned, if in case it is shown that the
appellant had even demanded an illegal gratification, the same
would be sufficient to proceed against the appellant. It was held
(LPA 223/2002)

Page 2 of 9

that the very nature of the charge is such that the exigency of
good administration would require the disciplinary proceeding to
be concluded expeditiously. The writ petition was consequently
dismissed.
4.Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant preferred the present

appeal.

While issuing notice in the appeal, continuation of the

departmental proceedings was stayed by an interim order passed
by this Court. By order dated 5th February, 2003 the appeal was
admitted but subsequently an order came to be passed on 9th
February, 2005 by this Court wherein the following observations
were made by the earlier Division Bench:
“We
have
given
our
careful
consideration
to
the
arguments
advanced by the learned counsel for
both the parties.
Normally, the
departmental proceedings are initiated
to maintain probity in service and it is
for the department concerned to take
appropriate/suitable measures so as to
keep the administrative hierarchy in
order. Therefore, Court should normally
not interfere and stay departmental
proceedings.”
Having recorded the prima facie finding as aforesaid, the Division
Bench held that it would not be appropriate to stay the
departmental proceedings. Consequently, the interim order was
(LPA 223/2002)

Page 3 of 9

vacated, but to safeguard the interest of the appellant a direction
was issued to the effect that the respondents would continue the
departmental proceeding and would complete the same, but
would keep the final order in a sealed cover to be opened subject
to further orders by this Court.
5. Thereafter, the appeal was listed for hearing and the same was

placed before us

for hearing arguments of the counsel for the

parties. We have accordingly heard the counsel appearing for the
parties and also perused the records.
6.Consequent upon passing of the aforesaid order by the Division
Bench of this Court, the departmental proceedings initiated
against the petitioner have reached finality.

We are informed

during the course of hearing that the inquiry proceeding has been
concluded and findings have been submitted, but the final order is
not communicated in view of the order passed by the Division
Bench. The contention that was raised by the appellant all along
and even before us was that continuation of the departmental
proceeding against the appellant on the same facts as those of the
criminal case, which is pending for trial, would prejudicially affect
the defence of the appellant in the criminal trial, for once the
appellant discloses his defence in the departmental proceedings,
(LPA 223/2002)

Page 4 of 9

the same would prejudicially affect the criminal trial.

The

appellant also relied upon various judgments in support of this
contention.
7.It is well settled that departmental proceedings and criminal

case are separate and distinct and can go on simultaneously.
Departmental

proceeding

are

decided

on

the

basis

of

preponderance of probability and in such proceedings, the
standard of proof and the provisions of Evidence Act are not
applicable. On the other hand, the standard of proof in a criminal
trial is as per the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872,
which requires proof beyond all reasonable doubt. There is also
difference with regard to the object and purpose of the two
proceedings.

The

object

and

purpose

of

a

departmental

proceedings is to determine whether the delinquent officer is
guilty of misconduct. Disciplinary proceedings are initiated for the
purpose of maintaining discipline and efficiency in public service.
Criminal prosecution is launched for an offence of breach of law,
which implies infringement of public duty punishable under
criminal

law

as

distinguished

from mere

Hindustan

rights in

disciplinary

proceedings.

Corporation

Ltd v. Sarvesh Berry reported in (2005) 10 SCC

(LPA 223/2002)

(See:

private

Petroleum

Page 5 of 9

471)
8.What is required to be seen in such cases is whether the

departmental proceedings and criminal case are based on same
set of facts and whether the evidence may be common. The other
aspect to be considered is whether the departmental proceedings,
if allowed to continue, would seriously prejudice the delinquent
employee in his defence at the trial of the criminal case. No
straitjacket formula can be applied and each case has to be
considered on its own facts and on its own merit. This aspect has
been examined by the Supreme Court in Depot Manager, A.P.
SRTC v. Mohd. Yousuf

Miya (1997) 2 SCC 699; State of

Rajasthan v. B.K.Meena (1996) 6 SCC 417 and other cases. In
State of Rajasthan v. B.K.Meena (supra), after referring to
several judgments, the following conclusions were promulgated:
“22. The conclusions which are deducible from
various decisions of this Court referred to
above are:
(i)Departmental proceedings and proceedings
in a criminal case can proceed simultaneously
as there is no bar in their being conducted
simultaneously, though separately.
(ii)If the departmental proceedings and the
criminal case are based on identical and
similar set of facts and the charge in the
criminal case against the delinquent employee
(LPA 223/2002)

Page 6 of 9

is of a grave nature, which involves
complicated questions of law and fact, it would
be desirable to stay the departmental
proceedings till the conclusion of the criminal
case.
(iii)Whether the nature of a charge in a
criminal
case
is
grave
and
whether
complicated questions of fact and law are
involved in that case, will depend upon the
nature of offence, the nature of the case
launched against the employee on the basis of
evidence and material collected against him
during investigation or as reflected in the
charge-sheet.
(iv)The factors mentioned at (ii) and (iii) above
cannot be considered in isolation to stay the
departmental proceedings but due regard has
to be given to the fact that the departmental
proceedings cannot be unduly delayed.
(v)If the criminal case does not proceed or its
disposal is being unduly delayed, the
departmental proceedings, even if they were
stayed on account of the pendency of the
criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded
with so as to conclude them at an early date,
so that if the employee is found not guilty his
honour may be vindicated and in case he is
found guilty, the administration may get rid of
him at the earliest.”
9.In the case of Capt. M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines

Ltd. and another reported in (1999) 3 SCC 679, to which the
learned Single Judge has also referred to in the impugned
judgment, it was held that there is consensus of judicial opinion on
(LPA 223/2002)

Page 7 of 9

the basic principle that proceedings in a criminal case and
departmental proceedings can go on simultaneously, unless there
are certain special circumstances, which attract factors mentioned
in clauses (ii) and (iii) as propounded in B.K.Meena’s case
(supra). Even factors mentioned in clauses (ii) and (iii) cannot be
considered in isolation to stay the departmental proceedings, but
due regard has to be given to the fact that the departmental
proceedings cannot be unduly delayed and they should be
concluded within a reasonable time.

Ratio laid down in the

aforesaid decisions was reiterated by the Supreme Court in the
case of

Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghathan & Others v. T.

Srinivas reported (2004) 7 SCC 442.
10.Keeping in mind the aforesaid parameters which depict the
settled position of law, we have analysed the facts to determine
the case in hand.

The criminal case which is pending for

consideration is at the stage of recording of evidence whereas the
disciplinary proceedings stand concluded.

The defence of the

appellant is already disclosed and, therefore, there is no question
of the appellant being prejudicially affected in the trial of the
criminal case pending against him. The departmental proceeding
having been concluded, there is no bar now for communication of
(LPA 223/2002)

Page 8 of 9

the order of the disciplinary authority on the findings recorded by
the Inquiry Officer. Copy of the inquiry report was also served on
the appellant.

In the said inquiry report, the defence of the

appellant is fully disclosed. The defence having been revealed, we
find no justification for staying further action in the departmental
proceedings. This is not a case which can be regarded as one
where grave prejudice would be caused to the appellant. There is
already delay in finalising the departmental proceedings and any
further delay in communication of the order would, in our opinion,
jeopardise the interest of the department.
11.In this view of the mater, we find no reason to take a different
view than that taken by the learned Single Judge. The appeal has
no merit and is accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHERTAPAL)
JUDGE
17th MARCH, 2008
“v”

(LPA 223/2002)

Page 9 of 9

