*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 1178/2007

%

Date of decision: 19th February, 2008
VIJAY PAL SINGH

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Varun Parsad, Adv.

versus
N.D.M.C

..... Respondent
Through Ms.Jyoti Singh, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (Oral)
1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 27th February,

2007 passed by the learned Single Judge agreeing with award dated 7 th
April, 2004 passed by the Presiding Officer of the Industrial Tribunal
holding that the appellant is not entitled to any relief of reinstatement
and regularisation.
2.

The appellant was working as muster roll employee with the

NDMC and while working as such he was caught red handed stealing
sprinkler valves on 19th June, 1993.

A criminal case under Section

379/411 IPC was filed against him. The appellant did not report for duty
after that. The criminal case was brought to trial and on conclusion of
(LPA 1178/2007)

Page 1 of 6

the trial, he was convicted on 6th August, 1994.

However, by order

dated 8th August, 1994 he was released on probation.
3.

A representation was filed by the appellant in 1995 requesting

the respondent to re-engage him and take him back in service. The said
request was rejected by the respondent. A copy of the letter written by
the respondent on 30th August, 1996 is on record. In the said letter the
respondent informed the appellant while disposing of his representation
dated 17th July, 1995 that he cannot be reinstated in the post of
Chowkidar or Mali in the NDMC. The appellant did not raise any dispute
nor challenged the same in any court of law till 2001 when he moved
the appropriate government for making a reference upon which a
reference was made by the appropriate government

in the following

terms:
“1.Whether the services of Shri Vijay Pal Singh s/o
Shri Late Ram Swaroop have been terminated
illegally and/or unjustifiably by the management, and
if so, to what sum of money as monetary relief
alongwith consequential benefits in terms of existing
laws/Govt. Notifications and to what other relief is he
entitled and what directions are necessary in this
respect ?
2. Whether Shri Vijay Pal Singh s/o late Sh. Ram
Swaroop is entitled to be regularised on the post of
mali in proper pay scale, if so, from which date and
what directions are necessary in this respect? “
4.

The learned Industrial

Adjudicator allowed the parties to

filed their respective pleadings and also to lead their evidence and on
(LPA 1178/2007)

Page 2 of 6

conclusion of the proceeding passed the award dated 7th April, 2004
holding that the appellant was not a regular employee holding any post
and was only a daily wager. It was also held that the offence of theft for
which the workman was convicted cannot be said to be of technical
nature nor was too trivial and rather it was an act

involving moral

turpitude and the theft was also of the property of the management. It
was held that since the appellant was not a regular workman and was
only a daily wager therefore the reference has to be answered in favour
of the management and against the workman. It was also held that the
workman was not a fit person to be given fresh appointment.
5.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid award, the appellant filed the

writ petition which was considered by the learned Single Judge.
writ petition was dismissed on several grounds.

The

The first ground on

which the writ petition was dismissed was on the ground of inordinate
delay and laches.

The learned Single Judge held that not only the

reference was delayed, for, the termination was made in the year 1993
but the dispute was actually raised in October, 2001 and that also
without showing any reason for the delay in initiating the proceeding,
but even the writ petition was barred by principles of delay and laches
for the award was passed in April, 2004, whereas the writ petition was
filed only in January, 2007 i.e. after a lapse of about three years. The
second ground on which the writ petition was dismissed was that the

(LPA 1178/2007)

Page 3 of 6

appellant was a daily wager and did not have any permanent right
against the post on which he was working and since the termination of
the appellant workman was in the nature of a punishment inflicted on
him by way of a disciplinary action, therefore it cannot be said that it is
a case of retrenchment. The appellant did not come and join duties but
abandoned the service himself from June, 1993 when he stopped
coming to the office. The submission that the since the appellant was
released on probation, it should not be deemed to be conviction was
also rejected by making reference to the decision of the Supreme Court
in Union of India v. Bakshi Ram reported in AIR 1990 SC 987 wherein the
Supreme Court has held thus:
“In criminal trial the conviction is one thing and
sentence is another. The departmental punishment
for misconduct is yet a third one. The Court while
invoking the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the Act
does not deal with conviction; it only deals with the
sentence which the offender has to undergo. Instead
of sentencing the offender, the Court releases him on
probation of good conduct. The conviction however,
remains untouched and the stigma of conviction is
not obliterated. In the departmental proceedings the
delinquent could be dismissed or removed or
reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has
led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
Section 12 of the Act does preclude the department
from taking action for misconduct leading to the
offence or to his conviction thereon as per law. The
Section was not intended to exonerate the person
from departmental punishment. The question of
reinstatement into service from which he was
removed in view of his conviction does not therefore,
arise. That seems obvious from the terminology of
(LPA 1178/2007)

Page 4 of 6

Section 12".
6.

The learned Single judge agreed with the finding of the

learned Industrial Adjudicator that the offence for which the workman
was convicted was that of theft, and that too of the property belonging
to the respondent NDMC itself, and that the offence was neither trivial
nor of a technical nature and since the appellant did not report for duty
after 19th June, 1996 therefore it was held that it is not a case of
retrenchment and the respondent was justified in not giving fresh
appointment to the appellant as the appellant is a person with the
stigma of conviction.
7.

The aforesaid findings are concurrent findings of fact arrived at

by the Industrial Adjudicator and the learned Single Judge. The learned
Single Judge appreciated the findings and the submissions made before
him, and on re-appreciation of the said findings of facts came to the
conclusion that the same are not required to be interfered with.
8.

Sitting on the appellate side, we cannot re-appreciate the

concurrent findings to come to a different finding altogether.

The

appellant has abandoned his job and did not come to join office after
19th June, 1993 and started representing only from the year 1995 and
that also for seeking re-employment and/or for being taken back into
duty which he himself abandoned in 1993. There was inordinate delay in
preferring the reference and also in filing the writ petition. Therefore,

(LPA 1178/2007)

Page 5 of 6

taking all the facts into consideration we find no reason to interfere with
the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge. The appeal has no
merit and is accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 19, 2008
“v”

(LPA 1178/2007)

Page 6 of 6

