*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 547/2000
R.K.MINA

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Ashish Garg, Adv.
versus

MCD & Others

..... Respondents
Through Mr.Vibhu Shankar, Adv. for R1 & R-2

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
%

ORDER
19.02.2008
Counsel appearing for the respondents has drawn our

attention to the contents of the impugned order dated 21st August,
2000. By the said order the learned Single Judge allowed the writ
petition filed by the respondent No.3 relying on the decision of the
Supreme Court in Ajit Singh & Others v. State of Punjab reported in
JT 1999 (7) SC 153. Referring to the said judgment and observing
that the said judgment is binding on the Court, the learned Single
Judge passed the impugned order quashing the seniority list of the
Executive Engineers(Civil) dated 14th July, 1995 directing the
official respondents to fix the seniority of the Executive Engineers
(Civil) afresh in the light of the aforesaid judgment.
The said observations and directions made in the light of the
judgment in the case of Ajit Singh & others v.State of Punjab

(supra) are under challenge in this appeal. During the course of
hearing, learned counsel for the respondents has pointed out that
after rendering his service as Chief Engineer respondent No.3 has
retired from service whereas the appellant was promoted to the
post of Engineer-in-Chief and has since retired from the said post.
Counsel for the appellant has also drawn our attention to the
decision rendered by the Supreme Court in M.Nagaraj & Others v.
Union of India & Others reported in (2006) 8 SCC 212. Counsel for
the

respondent

states

that

by

the

aforesaid

judgment

a

Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has upheld the
constitutional

validity

of

the

Constitution

(Seventy-seventh

Amendment) Act, 1995, the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment)
Act, 2000, the Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000
and the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001. In the
said decision of the Supreme Court, the decisions rendered in Ajit
Singh Januja v. State of Punjab (Ajit Singh-I) reported in (1996) 2
SCC 715, Ajit Singh-II (supra) and Ajit Singh-III reported in (2000)
1 SCC 430 were also considered. The said position is accepted by
the counsel appearing for the parties.
Since the legal position has been made clear by the aforesaid
decision of the Supreme Court and since the appellant as also the
respondent no.3 in the present appeal have retired from service

after attaining their maximum position as there was no stay
granted, it appears to us that the respondent has given effect to
the directions. In our considered opinion, nothing survives in this
appeal and the same is rendered infructuous.

The appeal is

accordingly disposed of as infructuous.

CHIEF JUSTICE

FEBRUARY 19, 2008
“v’

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

