*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 50/2008 and CM Nos.1618-1619/2008
(stay) (delay)

%

Date of decision: 19.2.2008
SAVITA DEVI

..... Appellant
Through Mr.R.P. Bansal, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Rakesh Mahajan, Mr.Prabhat
Ranjan and Mr.Sheetesh Khanna,
Advocates

versus
D.S.I.D.C. & ANR.

..... Respondents
Through Ms.Monica Sharma, Adv. for R-1.
Mr.Amiet Andely, Adv. for R-2.

CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 6 th August, 2007

passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed by
the appellant and also the order dated 18th September, 2007 whereby
a review application filed by the appellant was dismissed.
2.

While dismissing the writ petition, it was held that there is no

cogent and sufficient evidence brought on record by the appellant to
LPA 50/2008

page 1 of 7

indicate that the unit of the appellant was functional in the true sense
of the term till the relevant cut off date i.e. 31st December, 1996 in
order to get the benefit of allotment of alternative land.
3.

The appellant herein alleged that she was having a unit

functioning at the premises and that she had to close the said unit
pursuant to the orders of the Supreme Court some time in April and
July, 1996. The orders of the Supreme Court passed in April and July,
1996 indicate that all the units / premises carrying on industrial and
impermissible activities in residential and non-conforming areas were
required to cease operations w.e.f. 31st December, 1996 and that they
were eligible to industrial plots / premises to be alloted by Government
agencies including the DSIDC.
4.

In order to implement the aforesaid orders of the Supreme

Court, a scheme was evolved by the DSIDC in terms of which the
existing units, which were not conforming with the Master Plan and
other controlling norms, but desired to have allotment, were required
to stop their activities while applying for an alternative plot.

The

appellant submitted an application and as it appears the said request
was also processed by the DSIDC. Our attention is also drawn to the
letter dated 23rd October, 2000, whereby the DSIDC had informed the
appellant about the allotment of a plot of land to her unit measuring
100 sq. mtrs. at Bawana. Pursuant to the aforesaid order of allotment,

LPA 50/2008

page 2 of 7

the amount required to be deposited was also deposited by the
appellant. Subsequently, however, the appellant was informed that the
allotment of land had been cancelled because the said unit was not
functional on the relevant date. The aforesaid order was challenged
before the Appellate Committee, who rejected the appeal of the
appellant, consequent to which the writ petition was filed, which was
heard and disposed of by the learned Single Judge under the impugned
order dismissing the writ petition. Being aggrieved by the said order, a
review application was filed, which also met the same fate, and
consequently, the present appeal is filed on which we have heard
learned counsel appearing for the parties and have also gone through
the records, which were placed before us.
5.

Our attention was drawn by the counsel appearing for the

appellant to the letter of allotment dated 23rd October, 2000. He has
also drawn our attention to the licence given to the unit of the
appellant and relying on the same it was submitted that the appellant's
unit was functional in 1996 and thereafter it closed its operations from
the said area in view of the orders passed by the Supreme Court. It is
also submitted that the inspections carried out in 1998 and 2005 were
only an eye wash and such reports of inspection carried out in 1998
and 2005 cannot determine as to whether or not the unit of the
appellant was functional upto 1996. Accordingly, it is submitted that

LPA 50/2008

page 3 of 7

the order of the learned Single Judge should be quashed and the
respondent should be directed to allot the aforesaid plot of land to the
appellant.
6.

Counsel appearing for the respondents, however, placed before

us the original records in support of their contention that even the
records show that the unit of the appellant was not functional and
operational during the year 1995-96.

The letter, which is strongly

relied upon by the counsel for the appellant, which is the allotment
letter issued on 23rd October, 2000, does show that the application of
the appellant for allotment of industrial plot was accepted and she was
informed that the said unit is successful for allotment of an alternative
industrial plot measuring 100 sq. mtrs. By the said letter the appellant
was also directed to deposit the amount. It was, however, made clear
in the said letter that the Delhi Financial Corporation had agreed in
principle to finance the cost of the plot and that the final decision of
financing the plot rests with Delhi Financial Corporation subject to
completion of formalities.

It was also indicated in the said letter

particularly in paragraph 11 to the following effect:
“11. In case if it is found at a later stage that you
have misrepresented the facts and/or the DSIDC
has

issued

an

allotment

letter

wrongly

inadvertently, this letter should be treated as void
ab-initio and your allotment will stand cancelled

LPA 50/2008

page 4 of 7

automatically.”
7.

It is also indicated from the records that pursuant to the

aforesaid allotment letter, the amount demanded was also deposited
by the appellant. Subsequently, however, the appellant was informed
that the allotment of the aforesaid plot in favour of the appellant was
cancelled by the respondent on the ground that the unit of the
appellant was not functional and non-operational on the relevant date.
The appellant was given opportunity to submit documentary evidence
in support of her contention that the said unit was functional around
the relevant date.

The respondents also on their own carried out

inspection at the site.

The reports of the inspection are placed on

record. One of the said inspection reports is dated 24 th July, 1998. In
the said reports it is stated that the premises where the aforesaid unit
is supposed to carry on its activities was then being occupied by one
Mr.Shyam Sunder, who stated that he was residing in the said plot for
the last one year. The said report also stated that no unit in the name
and style of M/s Jai Durga Industries existed at the aforesaid site. The
statement of the occupier, namely, Mr.Shyam Sunder is a part of the
said report. Mr.Shyam Sunder has stated that he is residing in the said
house for one year and that there is no firm by the name of M/s Jai
Durga Industries for the last 4-5 years. He also stated that according
to his knowledge there is no plot or shop in the name of M/s Jai Durga
LPA 50/2008

page 5 of 7

Industries at the aforesaid address. The said statement is also dated
24th July, 1998 and if the period of 4-5 years, as stated in the said
statement, is computed from the said date, it will be possible to
presume that the said firm did not exist at the site from 1993 onwards.
8.

Be that as it may, the appellant was also given an opportunity

to produce evidence including documentary evidence in support of her
claim that the said firm was functional somewhere around 1995-96.
What was produced in support of the said contention was the licence of
the firm.
9.

The learned Single Judge, on examination of the records, found

that the said licence was renewed only upto 1995. Now the original
licence is produced, which shows that it was renewed upto 31.3.1996.
However, renewal of the licence would not prove that the unit was
functional and operative from the said place even in 1996. There could
have been other relevant documents placed by the appellant to show
that the said unit was functional till 31.12.1996. The appellant has also
produced before us certain records before the Appellate Committee
showing profit and loss account even for the subsequent period, i.e.
the year 1999. Now, if according to them, they were not functional at
all after 1996, how are the said profit and loss accounts being
produced for the purpose of establishing that they were operational
even in 1999.

LPA 50/2008

page 6 of 7

10.

Therefore, in our considered opinion the records are being

created to establish that the appellant has all along been functioning
from the said premises even upto 2000. However, it is the stand of the
appellant herself that the said unit stopped its functioning and
operation from the said place some time in 1996 pursuant to the
orders of the Supreme Court.

These are disputed questions of fact,

and as rightly observed by the learned Single Judge, there is no
conclusive evidence placed on record either in the nature of
documentary evidence or otherwise to show and indicate that the said
unit was functional some time in 1995-96 in the aforesaid area so as to
entitle the appellant's firm to have allotment of an alternative plot of
land.
11.

We find no merit in this appeal, which is dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 19, 2008
nm

LPA 50/2008

page 7 of 7

