*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA NO.1159-61/2006 and CM No.769/2008

%

Date of Decision: 22nd February, 2008
Union of India & Ors.
Dr. Ramjee Singh

..… Appellants
Through: Ms.Monika Garg, Advocate
Versus
...... Respondent
Through:Mr.Arun Kathpalia with
Mr.Vivek Malik and Mr.Virender
Singh Thakur, Advocates

CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ :
1.

This appeal is filed by the Union of India on being aggrieved by

the judgment and order dated 24th May, 2006 passed by the learned
Single Judge allowing the writ petition of the respondent herein, being
WP (c) No. 2593/06 holding that there was no justification for deletion
of the name of the respondent from the electoral roll or voters list and
also giving an observation that the respondent would nevertheless be
entitled as on date to seek election to the post of President, as per the
Act and the Rules. The Act and the Rules, which are referred to, are
‘The Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973’ (hereinafter referred to
as the ‘Act’) and the Rules framed thereunder.

LPA No.1159/2006

page 1 of 12

2.

A writ petition was filed by the respondent, which was

registered as Civil Writ Petition No.1186/2006, wherein he challenged
the

appointment

Homoeopathy.

of

Administrator

to

the

Central

Council

of

The writ petition was disposed of with the following

order, which was passed on 7th February, 2006:
“There is no need to reflect upon the finding or
efficacy of the Report of the Enquiry Commission,
which admittedly has not been signed by all the
Members. After hearing arguments in some detail,
learned counsel for the Respondent on instructions
from Dr. Alok Kumar, Deputy Advisor, Department of
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoepathy(Ayush), states that elections shall be
conducted in accordance with Section 7(1) of the
Homeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 within a
period of four weeks from today. He further states
that the impugned Order dated 18-1-2006 shall not
be acted upon in these circumstances. Prima facie
there appears to be no provision in the statute for
the

appointment

of

an

Administrator.

This

is

manifestly clear from the Report of the Rajya Sabha
pertaining to the proposed Homeopathy Central
Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Respondents
had set up a case for the amendment to the Statute
empowering the appointment of an Administrator.
The Committee expressed the opinion that such a
provision would not be democratic and in the
interest
LPA No.1159/2006

of

the

Council.

Inasmuch

as

the
page 2 of 12

Administrator has been appointed, the impugned
Order does not have the sanction of law. It is
accordingly quashed.
The Writ Petition stands disposed of in these terms.”
3.

The appellant thereafter took steps for holding election to the

office bearers of the Central Council. At that stage the name of the
respondent was not reflected in the list prepared by the Returning
Officer.

Consequently, the petition out of which the present appeal

arises was filed. An interim order was passed in the said writ petition
on 2nd March, 2006 permitting holding of election to the post of
President and Vice President to be conducted under Section 7(1) of the
Act.
4.

In the said writ petition, the appellant herein took a definite

stand that the name of the respondent was rightly deleted from the list
prepared by the Returning Officer on the ground that he had ceased to
be a elected member of the Council effective from 4 th December, 1997
consequent upon his having been nominated under the provisions of
Section 3(1)(c) of the said Act.
5.

The respondent, however, also took up a very strong stand that

he never intended to be nominated as a nominated member nor his
name was nominated with his consent.

It is his contention that he

never resigned as an elected member and, therefore, the action of the

LPA No.1159/2006

page 3 of 12

appellant in nominating him without his consent and knowledge as a
nominated member was without jurisdiction and cannot be operational.
6.

The learned Single Judge considered the aforesaid stand taken

by the contesting parties. It was held that the elections have become
due so far State of Bihar is concerned in 1995 but no such election was
held. The other two representatives, who were elected along with the
respondent, continued as members of the Central Council.

In that

context, it was held that the respondent would, therefore, be deemed
to be continuing as an elected member since 1990 along with two
other members and, therefore, there appears to be no valid reason for
him to have been privy to his nomination to the Central Council instead
of continuing as an elected Member until fresh elections were
conducted.

The learned Single Judge also held that Rule 4 of the

Homoeopathy Central Council (Election) Rules, 1975 would clearly
show that until a fresh list is received from the State concerned, the
names of all the three representatives cannot be scored out and that if
the same applies to the two other representatives from the State of
Bihar, it would apply in identical manner to the respondent.

In that

context and after recording the aforesaid findings, it was held by the
learned Single Judge that there was no justification for removing the
name of the respondent from the electoral roll or voters list and if he
had not wished to accept nomination, he would nevertheless remain

LPA No.1159/2006

page 4 of 12

entitled as on date to seek elections to the post of President, as per the
Act and the Rules.
7.

The aforesaid findings and conclusions arrived at by the learned

Single Judge are under challenge in this appeal, on which we heard the
learned counsel appearing for the parties and have also gone through
the records as also the provisions of the Act and the Rules framed
thereunder. We may herein extract the relevant provisions:
“3 (1) The Central Government shall, by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes
of this Act a Central Council consisting of the
following members, namely:(a) Such number of members not exceeding five as
may be determined by the Central Government in
accordance

with

the

provisions

of

the

First

Schedule from each State in which a State Register
of Homeopathy is maintained, to be elected from
amongst themselves by persons enrolled on that
register as practitioners of Homeopathy;
(b)

One member from each University to be

elected from amongst themselves by the members
of the Faculty or Department (by whatever name
called) of Homeopathy of that University;
Provided that until any such Faculty or Department
of
LPA No.1159/2006

Homeopathy

is

started

in at

least

seven
page 5 of 12

Universities,

the

Central

Government

may

nominate such number of members not exceeding
seven as may be determined by the Central
Government from amongst the teaching staff of
medical institutions within India, so however, that
the total number of members so nominated and
elected under this clause shall in no case exceed
seven;
(c) such number of members, not exceeding forty
per cent of the total number of members elected
under clauses (a) and (b), as may be nominated by
the Central Government, from amongst persons
having

special

knowledge

or

practical

experience in respect of Homoeopathy or other
related disciplines :
Provided that until members are elected under
clause (a) or clause (b) in accordance with the
provisions
thereunder,

of

this
the

Act

and

Central

the

rules

made

Government

shall

nominate such number of members, being persons
qualified to be chosen as such under the said
clause (a) or clause (b), as the case may be, as that
Government thinks fit; and references to elected
members in this Act shall be construed as including
references to members so nominated.”
“5(1) No person shall be eligible for election to the
Central Council unless he possesses any of the
medical qualifications included in the Second or the

LPA No.1159/2006

page 6 of 12

Third Schedule, is enrolled on any State Register of
Homoeopathy and resides in the State concerned.”
“7(1) The President, Vice-President or a member of
the Central Council shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date of his election or
nomination, as the case may be, or until his
successor

shall

have

been

duly

elected

or

nominated, whichever is longer.”
8.

In the context of the aforesaid arguments and the records, the

issue that arises for our consideration is whether the respondent could
be said to be continuing as an elected member or he accepted his
nomination and acted as a nominated member of the Council. Section
3(1)(a) provides the manner and mode through an elected member is
elected and appointed whereas Section 3(1)(c) lays down the criteria
for appointment as a nominated member by the Central Government.
Sub-section (2) of Section 5, however, clearly provides that no person
may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity.
Therefore, the respondent could be either discharging his duties as
elected member or as a nominated member. Once he is elected as a
member, he serves for a tenure of five years or to the next election
held for the purpose whichever is longer. The respondent was elected
from the State of Bihar. After the respondent had continued for five
years as a member of Bihar, the Central Government issued a
notification on 4th December, 1997, nominating the respondent as a
LPA No.1159/2006

page 7 of 12

nominated member. A copy of the said notification dated 4th
December, 1997 is put on record and from the said document placed
on record it is established that the aforesaid notification was also
published in the Gazette of India dated 4th December, 1997. In the said
notification it was stated that pursuant to the provisions of clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act,
1973, the persons mentioned in the said notification had been
nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons having
special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Homoeopathy
or other related discipline to be members of the Central Council of
Homoeopathy.

The name of the respondent is mentioned against

serial number 12.
9.

Undisputedly, the respondent was elected as a member

effective from 29th October, 1990 for a tenure of five years, which
period had expired but the next election was not held and, therefore,
till the date of 4th December, 1997, he continued to be an elected
member by virtue of the provisions that the term of elected member
would be for a tenure of five years or to the date when next election is
held, whichever is longer. There is also no dispute to the fact that the
Central Government nominated him on 4th December, 1997.

The

appellant has placed on record certain documents to prove and
establish that the respondent accepted the aforesaid position of being

LPA No.1159/2006

page 8 of 12

a nominated member and he exercised his right as a nominated
member.

It was also stated that the respondent contested the

elections for Vice President in the capacity of a nominated member and
to that effect he signed in the attendance register of meeting of
Central Council of Homeopathy to elect Vice President/ President held
on 24th March, 1999. Copy of the aforesaid register was produced for
our perusal during the course of hearing.

The said register does

indicate that the respondent signed as a nominated member under
Section 3(1)(c) of the Act. Section 5(2) also postulates that no person
may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity
thereby making it clear that there is a statutory bar in continuing as a
member in more that one capacity at the same time. The fact of his
being appointed as a nominated member to the Council was made
known to each and everyone by issuing the aforesaid notification,
which was also published in the Official Gazette. The respondent never
protested as against the issuance of the aforesaid notification and the
publication of the aforesaid notification in the Official Gazette.

The

aforesaid notification having been published in the Gazette becomes
operational and functional.

The Annual Report of the Council also

indicates the respondent as a nominated member. There is a further
fact that he was elected as Vice President in his capacity of being
nominated member on 24th March, 1999. The respondent aspired to

LPA No.1159/2006

page 9 of 12

become the Vice President of the Council and for that reason he
accepted the aforesaid nomination as a nominated member of the
Council and took full advantage of that for contesting the election for
the post of Vice President of the Council.
10.

Our attention was drawn by the counsel for the respondent

that Regulation 36 of the Central Council of Homoeopathy postulates
that any member, who desires to resign his seat on the Council, has to
send his resignation in writing to the President and that his resignation
would become effective from the date specified by him in that behalf
or from the date of receipt of the letter by the President whichever is
later, after confirmation from the member concerned. Relying on the
said provision it was sought to be submitted by the counsel appearing
for the respondent that there was no such resignation letter on record,
which would show that the respondent at any point of time intended to
resign and in fact submitted his resignation from the elected
membership and gave his consent for being nominated as a nominated
member. Such letter of resignation is not on record but issuance of the
Gazette notification nominating the respondent as a nominated
member, his acceptance of the same by signing the register in the
aforesaid manner and also contesting election of the Vice President as
a nominated member proves and establishes that not only the
respondent did not object to for being appointed as a nominated

LPA No.1159/2006

page 10 of 12

member but he accepted the same and in such capacity attended
meetings and also contested election to be appointed as Vice President
of the Council. Apparently, the respondent is taking advantage of the
fact that he could continue as a member of the council as an elected
member from Bihar as no election has been held in Bihar and
Maharashtra since 1990. This indeed is a very sorry state of affairs and
is deplorable for a statutory authority constituted in accordance with
law and any delay in holding election only speaks of lackadaisical
attitude of the Council.
11.

We hope and trust that elections from the State of Bihar and

the State of Maharashtra, if not held already, should be held
immediately by the concerned authorities so as to have a complete
and effective Council. It appears that fresh nomination was made to
the Council on 18th January, 2006 when all the nominated members
were replaced.

Since the respondent is not re-nominated and has

since been replaced, therefore, it appears that the aforesaid writ
petition now filed by the respondent so as to enable him claim all
benefits as an elected member contending, inter alia, that he continues
to be an elected member from the State of Bihar.
12.

We cannot accept the aforesaid position, and in our opinion he

is not entitled to the said benefit after having enjoyed the benefit of
being a nominated member. He may not have resigned from his post

LPA No.1159/2006

page 11 of 12

by submitting an application but he accepted the status and position of
being appointed as a nominated member.

The Central Government

also helped him by appointing him as a nominated member so as to
enable him to contest the election for the post of Vice President of the
Council by issuing a notification and publishing the same in the Gazette
also. After his nomination in 1997, the respondent did not protest and
contest his appointment for 5 years. He has taken advantage of that
fact by attending meetings as nominated member and now when the
period of nominated member has come to an end by efflux of time, he
turns back and adopts a different stand altogether.

The aforesaid

notification was issued in the year 1997, and was also published in the
Gazette.

Having exercised powers as a nominated member for long

nine years, he has now turned back and says that he was never been
elected as a nominated member.

The respondent has changed his

stance because after 1997, no elections have taken place for
appointment of elected members under Section 3(1)(a) of the Act.
13.

We, therefore, allow the appeal and accordingly set aside the

order of the learned Single Judge.

With the aforesaid findings, we

dismiss the writ petition of the respondent.
CHIEF JUSTICE
22nd FEBRUARY, 2008
nm
LPA No.1159/2006

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
page 12 of 12

