*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 34/2008

%

Date of Decision : 22-01-2008
D.T.C.

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Vibbhu Shankar, Advocate
versus

ROSHAN LAL & ORS
Through Nemo

..... Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ? Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?
Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
CM No.1023/2008
For the reasons stated in the application, the application is
allowed and the delay in re-filing the appeal is condoned.
The application stands disposed of.
LPA No.34/2008, CM No.1022/08(Delay) and CM 1021/2008
1.

There is a delay of 187 days in filing the appeal.

An

application has also been filed along with the appeal, praying for
condonation of the said delay.

(LPA 34/2008)

Since the learned counsel for the

Page 1 of 5

appellant has put forth arguments on merits of the case, we propose
to dispose of the appeal on merits.
2.

Counsel appearing for the appellant has raised only one issue

that the learned Single Judge could not have passed an order for
payment of compound interest @ 12% per annum on the delayed
payment of pension.

We have considered the said submission in

the light of the records placed before us. The contention raised is
that the respondents have no right to claim interest on the arrears
of pension, due to the delay in disbursement, as they had
themselves submitted an affidavit stating that they would not claim
any interest on the arrears of pension. It is also submitted before us
that the aforesaid delay in making the payment was procedural as
the question with regard to respondents’ entitlement for pension
was a matter of inquiry by the appellant.
3.

On the face of it, the aforesaid contention cannot be accepted

in view of the fact that there was delay in release of arrears of
pension to the respondents.

The respondents also cannot be

blamed for non-inclusion of their names in the list of the employees
who opted for DTC Pension Scheme. What was required to be done
has been done by them and it was for the appellant to process their
case well in time for making payment of pension.
(LPA 34/2008)

Page 2 of 5

The appellant

also has a specific rule which provides for payment of interest @
12% per annum on non-payment or delayed payment of pension.
In view of the mandate of the said provision, it was obligatory for
the appellant to pay pension well in time. It was also obligatory for
the appellant to pay interest at the rate envisaged therein which is
12% compound interest for delayed payment. The contention that
the respondents would be dis-entitled to receive any such interest in
view of the affidavits submitted by them cannot be relied upon as
the same were obtained by the appellant from the respondents on
the ground that unless such an affidavit is filed, no pension would
be released in their favour. Therefore, having no other alternative,
the respondents had executed the aforesaid affidavits.

That

however would not in any manner dis-entitle the respondents from
getting their statutory dues i.e. payment of the entire arrears due
towards pension along with interest.
4.

In the above connection the learned Single judge has

appropriately referred to and relied upon the decision of the
Supreme Court in Civil appeal No.1598/2005, titled Alok Shankar
Pandey v. Union of India. The relevant portion of the said decision,
which in our considered opinion clinches the issue, is as under:
“It may be mentioned that there is misconception
(LPA 34/2008)

Page 3 of 5

about interest.
Interest is not a penalty or
punishment at all, but it is the normal accretion
on capital. For example, if A had to pay B a
certain amount, say 10 years ago, but he offers
that amount to him today, then he has pocketed
the interest on the principal amount. Had A paid
that amount to B 10 years ago, B would have
invested that amount somewhere and earned
interest on it for this period.
Hence equity
demands that A should not only pay back the
principal amount but also the interest thereon to
B.”
5.

The learned Single Judge on appreciation of the records has

held, with which we also agree, that the DTC withheld the pension of
the respondents illegally and without any just cause or sufficient
reason and therefore they would definitely be liable to pay
compound interest @ 12 % per annum to the respondents on the
arrears of pension from the date the said amount became due, till
the date of actual payment.
6.

In terms of the Pension Scheme floated by the DTC, the

employees have the responsibility to leave with the management
the contribution of the management towards their Provident Fund
on which interest is earned by the management. In other words, the
management earns interest not only on arrears of employees’
contribution towards Provident Fund but also on the arrears of
pension payable to the employees. This apart, payment of interest

(LPA 34/2008)

Page 4 of 5

is not a bounty nor is in the nature of penalty but a normal accretion
of the capital and, therefore, the respondents are entitled to the
same along with interest which has fallen due and payable.
7.

We find no ground to interfere with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the learned Single Judge. The appeal has no
merit and is dismissed. Consequently, the pending applications are
also dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

JANUARY 22, 2008
“v”

(LPA 34/2008)

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

Page 5 of 5

