*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA No.1166/2007

%

Date of Decision: 26th February, 2008
Nath Trader’s (India)
……. Appellant
Through: Mr.S. Balakrishnan,
Sr. Advocate with Mr.S.N. Jha,
Advocates.
Versus
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner
and others
.... Respondents
Through:Mr.R.C. Chawla, Advocate
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ
CM No.11535/2007, 11537/2007
Having perused the applications and having heard the counsel

appearing for the parties, we are satisfied that the appellant has been
able to make out sufficient cause for condonation of delay of 51 days in
filing the appeal and delay of 141 days in refiling the appeal.
Accordingly, delay in filing and refiling the appeal stands condoned.
The applications stand disposed of in terms of the aforesaid order.
LPA No.1166/2007 and CM No.11536/2007 (stay)
1.

We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties on

merits.
LPA No.1166/2007

page 1 of 10

2.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 29 th November,

2006 passed by the learned Single Judge allowing the writ petition filed
by the respondent herein, which was filed challenging the validity of
the order dated 3rd November, 2000 passed by the Employees
Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal allowing the appeal of the appellant
herein and setting aside the order dated 7th October, 1999 passed by
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner under Section 7-A of the
Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.
3.

The issue that arises for our consideration in this appeal is

whether ‘Nath Oil Company’ which is a sole proprietorship firm of
Mr.Surender Nath dealing in Kerosene Oil and ‘Nath Traders’, which is
stated to be partnership firm dealing in LPG have any unity of
ownership as also unity of management, supervision and control and
whether they could be clubbed for the purpose of applicability of the
provisions of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952.
4.

The respondent got an inspection carried out in the premises of

both Nath Traders and Nath Oil Company, in the year 1989.
squad,

who

conducted

the

inspection,

submitted

a

The
report

recommending the applicability of the Act to the aforesaid two entities
stating that the said two establishments were in fact one.

It was

further stated that Nath Traders and Nath Oil Company were operating

LPA No.1166/2007

page 2 of 10

from the same premises i.e. 14, Kailash Colony, New Delhi – 110 048
and that there was only one entrance to the said premises. It was also
revealed that both the establishments had common telephone number
being 6432474, as the said number was found on the letterheads of
both the firms.

In the year 1989, Mr.Surender Nath was the sole

proprietor of Nath Oil Company and that he was one of the partners in
Nath Traders, which is a partnership firm of Mr.Surender Nath and his
father-in-law Mr.O.P. Bhalla and subsequently, on death of Mr.O.P.
Bhalla, his wife was inducted as partner and thereafter Ms.Seema Nath,
wife of Mr.Surender Nath and daughter of Mr.O.P. Bhalla, became the
other partner.

Nath Oil Company was dealing in kerosene oil depot

whereas Nath Traders was dealing in LPG connection.

It was also

revealed that the accounts of the two entities were being looked after
by one common Accountant Shri R.C. Singh.
5.

The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner stated in his order

that the combined and cumulative strength of employees of both the
establishments was found to be 24 and that period of infancy stood
expired long before. He held that the combined employees strength of
the two establishments was more than the required strength for
applicability of the Act and since there was functional integrity
between the two firms, unity of ownership, inter-transfer of employees
and geographical proximity and also unity of management, supervision

LPA No.1166/2007

page 3 of 10

and control, both the aforesaid establishments should be treated as
one establishment for the purpose of applicability of the Act.
6.

An appeal was filed by the said two establishments and in the

said appeal, it was held by the Appellate Tribunal that the two
establishments were dealing in two different commodities, one in
kerosene oil and the other in LPG and that they were having separate
licenses from the respective authorities and therefore they are two
separate legal entities. It was held that M/s Nath Oil Company was the
sole proprietorship concern whereas Nath Traders was a partnership
firm, both having separate sales tax and income tax registration and
their assessments were also done separately.

The Tribunal further

held that since one is a partnership firm and the other is a
proprietorship firm, they cannot be clubbed together and considered as
one establishment.

It was held that one of the said establishments

could survive without the other being in existence and they were not
interdependent and, therefore, they cannot be clubbed together for the
purpose of applicability of the provisions of the Act.
7.

Being aggrieved by the said order passed by the Tribunal, the

respondent preferred a writ petition in this Court, which was
considered by the learned Single Judge and on going through the
records and upon hearing the counsel appearing for the parties, it was
held that Mr.Surender Nath was running business of distribution of LPG

LPA No.1166/2007

page 4 of 10

and kerosene oil, both of which are fuels although he opened two firms
for the two agencies and obtained separate licenses in the name of two
firms.

Findings were also recorded by the learned Single Judge on

appreciation of evidence on record that Mr.Surender Nath could have
obtained the licenses in the same name for both the establishments
but only in order to deprive the employees of the benefits of beneficial
legislations and labour laws, he fragmented his business into two firms.
As a matter of fact, it was held by the learned Single Judge by order
dated 29th November, 2006 that the management and control and
supervision of both the entities remained in the hands of Mr.Surender
Nath and also that there was a common Accountant operating from the
same premises at the time of inspection.

It was also held that the

employees of both the establishments were intermingled and that both
the establishments were using the same telephone number and had
given the same number on their letterheads and, therefore, it is
established that the two firms were, in fact, one establishment,
working under one management and control of Mr.Surender Nath. It
was also held that the other partner was his wife and, therefore, there
was a functional integrity. Merely because they have separate sales
tax and income tax registration, it was held, would not change the
unity of the establishment.

LPA No.1166/2007

page 5 of 10

8.

Having recorded those findings and after making the reference

to the decision of the Supreme Court in Management of Wenger
and Company v. Their Workmen reported as AIR 1964 SC 864 and
Rajasthan

Prem

Krishan

Goods

Transport

v.

R.P.F.

Commissioner, 1997 Labour (IC) 146, it was held that the employees
of the two firms were rightly clubbed together for the purpose of
applicability of the provisions of the Act.
9.

The facts, therefore, on the basis of which decision was

rendered by the various authorities, namely, the Regional Provident
Fund Commissioner, the Appellate Tribunal and the learned Single
Judge in the writ petition clearly pin point certain accepted positions of
fact that there were two entities, namely, Nath Oil Company and Nath
Traders dealing in two separate commodities, namely, kerosene oil and
LPG. They are also separately assessed both for the sales tax and the
income tax purposes.

But apart from the said distinctive features,

there are much commonality between the two establishments, which
are already stated hereinbefore.
10.

The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner recorded the

evidence

wherein

Mr.Surender

Nath,

proprietorship firm examined himself.

the

proprietor

of

the

The statement made by

Mr.Surender Nath also discloses that he was proprietor of M/s Nath Oil
Company and a partner in Nath Traders (India) and that M/s Nath

LPA No.1166/2007

page 6 of 10

Traders (India) deals in Indane Gas and M/s Nath Oil Company deals in
kerosene oil. The statement of Mr.Surender Nath further discloses that
M/s Nath Traders (India) was started on 1st November, 1965 with two
partners, Mr.O.P. Bhalla and Mr.Surender Nath and that on the death of
Mr.O.P. Bhalla, his daughter Mrs.Seema Nath, wife of Mr.Surender
Nath, became the partner.

Mr.Surender Nath admitted in his cross

examination that address of both the establishments was same and he
also admitted that Mr.R.C. Singh was the common Accountant of both
the establishments.

It is also established that there is geographical

proximity and both the establishments are operating from the same
premises i.e. 14, Kailash Colony, New Delhi and that there was
common entrance to the premises. The aforesaid position, therefore,
does indicate that there was no distinct or discerning demarcation
which could in any way distinguish that there were two different
establishments at the same address.

It was also established by

evidence that the employees in both the establishments were
intermingled and a common telephone number was mentioned on the
letterheads of both the companies. It is also brought in evidence that
Mr.Surender Nath is overall incharge for both the establishments.
11.

In Andhra

University

Vs.

Regional

Provident

Fund

Commissioner reported in 1985(4) SCC 509 it was held by the
Supreme Court that the Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous

LPA No.1166/2007

page 7 of 10

Provisions Act is a beneficent piece of social welfare legislation aimed
at promoting and securing the well being of the employees and the
Court will not adopt a narrow interpretation which will have the effect
of defeating the very object and purpose of the Act.

In the said

decision it was held that where the Department of Publications and
Press of the University was running a printing press, where the work of
printing of text books, journals and magazines for the various
constituent and affiliated colleges as well as of various items of
stationery such as admission form etc. was carried out and about 100
persons were employed in connection with the said activity in the said
Department,

the

establishment,

namely,

the

Department

of

Publications and Press could be said to be a factory, as such activities
clearly constitute manufacture within the meaning of the said
expression and it was held that since more than 20 persons were
employed in the concerned establishment, the establishment would be
liable to be covered under Act.
12.

In this connection the decisions of Supreme Court in Noor

Niwas Nursery Public School v. Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner reported in (2001) 1 SCC 1 and in Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner, Jaipur v. Naraini Udyog and
others reported in 1996 (5) SCC 522 are also to be taken notice of. In
the case of Noor Niwas Nursery Public School, (supra) in the

LPA No.1166/2007

page 8 of 10

context of the findings that two units are run by the same society and
they are located at one and the same address thereby establishing
geographical proximity, the Supreme Court came to the conclusion
that the two units would constitute one single unit. In the case of
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Jaipur vs. Naraini
Udyog and Others (supra) it was held by the Supreme Court that the
fact that the two units belonged to the members of the same family
and that some of the employees were working for both the units and
that the offices of both the units were situated at the same premises
and accounts were being maintained by the same set of clerks, were
relevant factors that were to be taken into consideration. These were
the factors which were taken notice of by the Supreme Court for
coming to the conclusion that the two units are one establishment for
the purpose of the Act. The sum and substance of the aforesaid
decisions, therefore, is that there is a burden on the court to find out
and ascertain whether there is any unity of management, supervision
and control and also unity of functional integrity and geographical
proximity between the two units for the purpose of the Act.
13.

In the backdrop of the aforesaid legal position, when we

consider the facts of the present case, it is clearly established that both
the units have common management. There is common Accountant
operating from the same premises.

LPA No.1166/2007

The employees of both the

page 9 of 10

establishments are intermingled and that both the establishments are
using the same telephone number and have given the same number
on their letterheads and, therefore, it is established that the two firms
are, in fact, one establishment, working under one management and
control of Mr.Surender Nath.

The other partner is his wife and,

therefore, there is a functional integrity.

Merely because they have

separate sales tax and income tax registration will not

change the

unity of the establishment.
14.

Therefore, we are of the considered opinion that there is unity

of management, supervision and control between the two units. It is
also proved on record and established that there is interlinking of and
functional integrity between the two units and, therefore, the findings
recorded by the learned Single Judge do not need any interference in
our hands. We find no merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed,
but without any costs.

CHIEF JUSTICE

26th FEBRUARY, 2008
nm

LPA No.1166/2007

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE

page 10 of 10

