*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CO.APP. 13/2006

%

Date of decision: 28.1.2008
M/S MEDISPHERE MARKETING P.LTD
..... Appellant
Through Mr.Arunabh Chaudhary with
Mr.Abhishek Ray, Advocates
versus
M/S MEDI TRADE MEDICAL TRADING
..... Respondent
Through Mr.Sanjiv Sachdeva, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ : (Oral)
1.

The present appeal is filed by the appellant challenging

the findings and the conclusions arrived at by the learned Single
Judge under the order dated 7th October, 2005.

The aforesaid

order came to be passed by the learned Company Judge in a
petition filed under Sections 433, 434 and 439 of the Companies
Act by the respondent contending, inter alia, that the appellant is
indebted to the respondent and that the appellant is unable to

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 1 of 12

pay its debt.
2.

When the said petition was filed, objections were raised

regarding the maintainability of the petition on the ground that
the affidavit annexed to the petition was not in the prescribed
form and, therefore, the said petition could not have been
entertained and was required to be dismissed on that ground
alone. The second objection was also regarding maintainability of
the petition on the ground that the power of attorney, on the
basis of which the affidavit was filed by one Shri Pankaj
Sachdeva, is not stamped and, therefore, no affidavit could have
been filed in support of the Company Petition by a person on the
basis of such unstamped document.
3.

Both the aforesaid contentions were argued at length

before the learned Company Judge.

By the impugned order,

however, the learned Company Judge held that so far as the issue
with regard to the affidavit not being in accordance with the
prescribed form is concerned, the same is only a curable defect
and, therefore, could be cured by directing for amendment of the
said affidavit.
4.

So far as the second contention is concerned, the learned

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 2 of 12

Company Judge held that the said power of attorney if not duly
and properly stamped, this could be subsequently rectified by
resorting to the provisions of impounding a document and
directing

the

concerned

authority

to

pay

the

penalty

in

accordance with the prescribed law. With regard to the allegation
of fraud on the part of Shri Pankaj Sachdeva in asserting in
rejoinder that the power of attorney was duly stamped the Court
held that there was no fraud but only a bona fide mistake and,
therefore, the same was not fatal.
5.

The said findings are under challenge in this appeal on

which we have heard the learned counsel appearing for the
parties.
6.

So far as the contention with regard to power of attorney

not being duly stamped and the affidavit being filed on the basis
of an unstamped document is concerned, there is a statement
made in rejoinder by Shri Pankaj Sachdeva that the power of
attorney is duly stamped and registered as per law.

The said

statement on the face of it is incorrect, for the power of attorney
admittedly was not stamped at all as on that date when the said
statement was made. The rejoinder was filed on 7th January, 2004

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 3 of 12

and the said document came to be impounded and subsequently
stamped on 19th/22nd April, 2004.

Therefore, there is no doubt

that the said document on the date of swearing of the affidavit by
the deponent was not a stamped document and in fact was an
unstamped one. However, we cannot lose sight of the fact that
as and when such unstamped document is relied upon and
referred

to

in any

proceedings,

impounding the same.

there

is

a provision

for

In the present case also when an

objection was raised about the said document on the basis of
which affidavit was filed, relying upon the fact that there was
valid authority given under the power of attorney executed in
favour of Shri Pankaj Sachdeva, it was also the Court's obligation
to see that the said document was properly stamped when the
same is acted upon and referred to. Subsequently, by an order
passed by the Court the said power of attorney was ordered to be
properly stamped and the same was accordingly stamped on
19th/22nd April, 2004.

Therefore, the decision rendered by the

learned Company Judge that the aforesaid power of attorney
being now stamped could be relied upon cannot be faulted.
7.

So

far

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

as

the

issue

with

regard

to

fraud

and

page 4 of 12

misrepresentation

played

by

Shri

Pankaj

Sachdeva

and,

therefore, the petition being not maintainable is concerned, in our
considered opinion, it cannot be said that it was a fraud or
misrepresentation only on the basis of a statement made by Shri
Pankaj Sachdeva to the said effect.

There was no attempt or

effort on the part of Shri Pankaj Sachdeva to derive any undue
benefit by making the aforesaid statement, which was otherwise
not available to the appellant. In our considered opinion also no
prejudice was caused to the appellant by such an incorrect
statement made by the power of attorney holder and, therefore,
we find no error in the order passed by the learned Company
Judge in respect of the aforesaid findings.
8.

So far as the issue with regard to the affidavit not being in

the prescribed form and the rule is concerned, the learned
Company Judge has held that the same at the most is a curable
defect and, therefore, could be ordered to be cured.

We now

proceed to consider the said finding and conclusion arrived at by
the learned Company Judge.
9.

In exercise of the powers vested under Section 643 of the

Companies Act, the Companies (Court) Rules, 1959 have been

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 5 of 12

framed by the Supreme Court.

The said Rules deal with the

procedure as to how a company petition should and could be filed
in the Court.

Rule 21 thereof mandates that when a company

petition is presented, such petition shall be verified by an
affidavit made by the petitioner or by one of the petitioners,
where there are more than one, and in

case the petition is

presented by a body corporate, by a director, secretary or other
principal officer thereof and that such affidavit shall be filed along
with the petition and shall be in Form No.3. The expression used
in the said Rule is “shall” and, therefore, it is contended that the
said provisions of the said Rules are mandatory.
10.

In this connection we may refer to a decision of the

Supreme Court in the case of Associated Journals Ltd. v.
Mysore Paper Mills Ltd. reported in (2006) 6 SCC 197, wherein
the Supreme Court had occasion to deal with the provisions of
Rule 21 and Form No.3, which pertain to defect and irregularity in
filing an affidavit. In the said decision, the Supreme Court has
held that substantial compliance should be enough.

Rules are

undoubtedly statutory and the forms are to be adopted wherever
they are applicable. The Supreme Court, however, held that the

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 6 of 12

rules relating to the affidavit and the verification cannot be
ordinarily brushed aside, but then what is required to be seen is
whether the petition substantially complies with the requirements
and, secondly, even when there is some breach or omission,
whether it can be fatal to the petition.
11.

Reference

may

be

also

made

to

the

decision

in

Mrs.Roma Deb & Ors. v. M/s R.C. Sood & Co. Pvt. Ltd.
reported in (1986) I ILR (Delhi) 498, wherein a learned Single
Judge of this Court dealt with the provisions of Rule 21 and Form
No.3 while dealing with a petition filed under Section 433 read
with Section 439 of the Companies Act, 1956 which was not
supported by an affidavit duly verified as per Form No.3
stipulated under the Companies (Court) Rules and held that the
defect in the petition could be rectified by filing an amended
petition in terms of Rule 21 of the Rules.
12.

Another decision, which may have some relevance to the

contentions raised, is the decision of the Supreme Court in F.A.
Sapa etc. etc. v. Singore and others etc. reported in AIR
1991 SC 1557.

The said case, of course, deals with a petition

filed under the Representation of the People Act, whereunder it is

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 7 of 12

mandatory that an election petition, if any, should be presented
within 45 days of the date of the commencement of the election.
There is also no power for condonation of delay applicable to the
provisions of the said Act, as it is a special Act. In the context of
the aforesaid facts, the Supreme Court in paragraph 28 held that
while the result of a defective verification or a defective affidavit
must be fatal, the High Court should ensure its compliance before
the parties go to trial, so that the party required to meet the
charge is not taken by surprise at the actual trial. Paragraph 27
of the said decision, which may have some relevance to the legal
position, which arises for our consideration in the present case as
well, reads as follows:
“27............ It clearly emerges (i) a defect in the
verification, if any, can be cured (ii) it is not
essential that the verification clause at the foot of
the petition or the affidavit accompanying the
same should disclose the grounds or sources of
information
allegations

in

regard

which

are

to

the

based

averments
on

or

information

believed to be true, (iii) if the respondent desires
better particulars in regard to such averments or
allegations, he may call for the same in which
case the petitioner may be required to supply the
Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 8 of 12

same and (iv) the defect in the affidavit in the
prescribed Form 25 can be cured unless the
affidavit forms an integral part of the petition, in
which case the defect concerning material facts
will have to be dealt with, subject to limitation,
under Section 81(3) as indicated earlier......”
13.

Reference may also be made to the decision of a learned

Single Judge of this Court in Greaves Fesesco Ltd. v. Ratlam
Ispat Ltd. reported in (1997) 88 Company Cases 155 (Delhi),
wherein the effect of the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section
441 of the Companies Act was considered in juxtaposition with
the provisions of Sections 446, 447 and 537 of the Companies
Act. In terms of the provisions of the Companies Act, a winding
up petition is required to be filed within the period of limitation,
as prescribed. Section 441 of the Companies Act deals with the
provisions

with

proceedings.

regard

to

commencement

of

winding

up

Sub-section (2) of Section 441 states that the

winding up of a company will be deemed to commence at the
time of the presentation of the winding up petition.

The said

provision reads as follows:
“441. Commencement of winding up by

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 9 of 12

Tribunal.– (1) Where, before the presentation of
a petition for the winding up of a company by the
Tribunal, a resolution has been passed by the
company for voluntary winding up, the winding
up of the company shall be deemed to have
commenced at the time of the passing of the
resolution, and unless the Tribunal, on proof of
fraud or mistake, thinks fit to direct otherwise, all
proceedings taken in the voluntary winding up
shall be deemed to have been validly taken.
(2) In any other case, the winding up of a
company by the Tribunal shall be deemed to
commence at the time of the presentation of the
petition for the winding up.”
14.

A company petition for an order of winding up thus

relates back to the date of presentation of the petition and if the
period of limitation is in any manner affected, Rule 21 and Form
No.3 may have some relevance in the context of the provisions of
sub-section (2) of Section 441.

In the event of dealings by the

Company with its assets between the date of presentation of the
winding up petition and the date when a valid petition comes into
existence after re-verification of the same, third parties may have

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 10 of 12

acquired valuable rights in the company’s assets, which, it may
be difficult to assail or set aside.

The winding up order would

come into existence on the date of such re-verification and this
would create a good deal of confusion regarding the assets of the
company and rights of third parties. In each case it would be a
question of fact. These aspects, in our view, are required to be
considered by the learned Company Judge on the basis of the
facts and the pleadings before the learned Company Judge and,
therefore, to the aforesaid extent we set aside the order passed
by the learned Company Judge in respect of the affidavit and
remand back the matter to the learned Company Judge to
consider the same in accordance with law. Since the aforesaid
aspect was not noticed by the learned Company Judge including
the issue with regard to limitation, the same may be considered
in accordance with law by the learned Company Judge.
15.

We would also mention here that while coming to the

aforesaid conclusions we have recorded our views and opinions
which are tentative in nature. So far as the merit of the case is
concerned, it shall be open to the learned Company Judge to
consider the issue with regard to limitation and other issues in

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

page 11 of 12

the light of the facts as available on the basis of the pleadings of
the parties and nothing said herein shall be construed as final and
binding.
16.

The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.

CHIEF JUSTICE

JANUARY 28, 2008
nm

Co. Appeal No.13/2006

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

page 12 of 12

