*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) 1677/1996

%

Date of Decision: 28th March, 2008
NAVIN BHATIA & OTHERS
…….PETITIONERS
Through: Mr.Arun Jaitley, Sr.Advocate/Amicus
Curiae
Mr.Rajiv K.Garg and Mr.Ashish, Advocates.
Versus
LT.GOVERNOR OF DELHI & OTHERS
……RESPONDENTS
Through: Ms.Iram Majid for Ms.Zubeda Begum
counsel for GNCTD
Mr.O.P.Saxena, Advocate for MCD
Mr.J.M.Sabharwal, Sr.Advocate with Mr.Rakesh
Mahajan and Mr.S.K.Sabharwal,
Advocates for DDA
Mr.H.L.Raina, Advocate for R-7
Mr.Sandeep Sethi, Sr.Advocate with Mr.Vikram
Nandrajog, Advocate for R-8
Mr.Rakesh Munjal, Sr.Advocate with Mr.Rakesh
Kumar, Advocate for R-9
Mr.A.S. Chandhiok, Sr.Advocate with Mr.Anil
Grover, Mr.Ritesh Singh and Mr.Navpreet
Singh, Advocates for R-10
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ

1.

The present public interest petition was filed by the occupants

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 1 of 17

of the area in the Yusuf Sarai/ Gulmohar Enclave Commercial
Complex and the Community Centre Occupants Association alleging
illegal construction on plot No.16,

which was named as N-161, N-

161/A, M-161 and B-161/4. The writ petition was filed praying for a
direction to the respondents to stop the unauthorised and illegal
constructions and seal the building which, as per the petitioners, has
come up on acquired public land at Gulmohar Enclave Commercial
Complex.
2.

The grievance of the petitioners is that at plot No.16 of the

Commercial Complex, unauthorised constructions have come up
without any sanctioned plan. It was alleged that the parking area in
front of the said plot has also been encroached and a building has
been constructed thereupon. As per the petitioners, on inquiry they
found that the said plot is yet to be auctioned by the DDA, and the
construction thereon is not only without any approval and therefore
unauthorised, but also with the connivance of the concerned
authorities, including the Police. The petitioners further allege that
their representations/complaints in this regard to the concerned
authorities have met with no result as the authorities have paid no
heed to their complaints, and that they are also hand in glove with
the encroachers. It is also alleged that an iron barrier erected by the

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 2 of 17

petitioner association in order to stop the unauthorised construction
and encroachments has also been removed by the encroachers with
the help of the Police. Under these circumstances, the petitioners
have approached this Court by filing this writ petition, praying for
the aforesaid reliefs.
3.

By order dated 18th September, 1996 this Court noted that the

main issues which arise for consideration in the present petition are:(i) Whether the four buildings defined in the
amended memo of parties (respondent 7,8,9 and
10) are on public land or private land; and
(ii)Whether the said four buildings have been
constructed after sanction of plan from local
authorities.
4.

In reply to the contention of the petitioners that the said

construction has been carried out on the public land, respondent
No.7, who is the builder, in its counter affidavit stated that the land
in dispute is a private land and the said respondent had purchased
the said land from one Smt.Herjinder Kaur vide agreement to sell
dated 26th May, 1990. Counter affidavits have also been filed by the
other private respondents taking the same ground. It was also stated
that though acquisition proceedings were initiated and the award
was passed, but the same was quashed by judgment dated 25th
March, 1965 and by efflux of time, the entire acquisition proceedings

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 3 of 17

have lapsed,

in view of Section 11A of the Land Acquisition

(Amendment) Act, 1984.
5.

In reply, it was also stated by the DDA that the land in

question was sought to be acquired by issuance of a notification
under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act on 24th May, 1961 and,
accordingly, the declaration under Section 6 of the Act was issued on
27th July, 1961. Subsequently the land was acquired by award
No.1259 dated 3rd February, 1962. The total land acquired under the
said award was 49 Bighas and 9 Biswas,

including an area of 42

Bighas 11 Biswas of Khasra No.116/93. It was further stated that by
Notification dated 2nd November, 1963 under Section 22(1) of the
DDA Act, the land was placed at the disposal of the DDA. The DDA
in their affidavit dated 5th October, 1996 stated that though the
acquisition proceedings and the award were quashed vide order
dated 25th March, 1965, but possession of the land had been taken
by the Collector, and none of the parties has approached the DDA for
release of the possession of the land, which was placed at the
disposal of DDA.
6.

It is the legal position that after amendment of the Land

Acquisition Act in 1984, under Section 11 the award has to be passed
within a period two years from the date of publication of the

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 4 of 17

declaration, and if no award is made within the said period the entire
proceeding for acquisition of the land shall lapse and where the
declaration was published before the commencement of the Land
Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984, the award shall be passed within
a period of two years from such commencement.

It is an admitted

position that no award has been made after 1984. As a result of the
amendment, the proceedings with respect to this land have
automatically lapsed, resulting in the ownership of the land vesting in
the owners from whom the land was sought to be acquired. The DDA
has, nowhere throughout the pendency of the present case, claimed
the ownership of the said land and no records have been produced to
show that any proceedings are pending before any Court for claiming
possession of the said land. What has been stated by the DDA is only
that during the period when the land was development land,
permission for any construction on the said land was required to be
taken from the DDA.

Thus, the question which remains to be

considered by us in the present petition is whether the construction
of the building was in accordance with the building bye-laws
prevalent at the time of such construction.
7.

As per

Section 313 of the Delhi Municipal Act, 1957

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’), permission is required before

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 5 of 17

utilising, selling or otherwise dealing in any land. The said provision
envisages as under:
“313. Lay-out Plans: (1) Before utilising, selling
or otherwise dealing with any land under Section
312, the owner thereof shall send to the
Commissioner a written application with a lay-out
plan of the land showing the following particulars,
namely:(a) the plots into which the land is proposed to be
divided for the erection of buildings thereon and
the purpose or purposes for which such buildings
are to be used;
(b) the reservation or allotment of any site for any
street, open space, park, recreation ground,
school, market or any other public purpose;
(c) the intended level, direction and width of street
or streets;
(d) the regular line of street or streets;
(e) the arrangements to be made for levelling,
paving, metalling, flagging, channelling, sewering,
draining, conserving and lighting street or streets;
(2) The provisions of this Act and the bye-laws
made thereunder as to width of the public streets
and the height of buildings abutting thereon, shall
apply in the case of streets referred to in subsection(1) and all the particulars referred to in that
sub-section shall be subject to the sanction of the
Standing Committee;
(3) Within sixty days after the receipt of any
application under sub-section (1) the Standing
Committee shall either accord sanction to the lay
out plan on such conditions as it may think fit or
disallow it or ask for further information with
(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 6 of 17

respect to it.
(4) Such sanction shall be refused(a) if the particulars shown in the lay-out plan
would conflict with any arrangements which have
been made or which are in the opinion of the
Standing Committee likely to be made for carrying
out any general scheme of development of Delhi
whether contained in the master plan or a zonal
development plan prepared for Delhi or not; or
(b) if the said lay-out plan does not conform to the
provisions of this Act and bye-laws made
thereunder;or
(c) if any street proposed in the plan is not
designed so as to connect at one end with a street
which is already open.
(5) No person shall utilise, sell or otherwise deal
with any land or lay-out or make any new street
without or otherwise than inconformity with the
orders of the Standing Committee and if further
information is asked for, no steps shall be taken to
utilise, sell or otherwise deal with the land or to
lay-out or make the street until orders have been
passed upon receipt of such information;
Provided that the passing of such orders shall not
be in any case delayed for more than sixty days
after the Standing Committee has received the
information which it considers necessary to enable
it to deal with the said application.
(6) The lay-out plan referred to earlier in this
section shall, if so required by the Standing
Committee, be prepared by a licensed town
planner.”
8.

Further Section 332 and Section 333 of the Act provide for

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 7 of 17

prohibition of erection of building without the previous sanction of
the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi. The said Sections
are reproduced below for reference:
“332.
Prohibition
of
building
without
sanction:- No person shall erect or commence to
erect any building or execute any of the works
specified in Section 334 except with the previous
sanction of the Commissioner, not otherwise than
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
and of the bye-laws made under this Act in relation
to the erection of building or execution of works.
333. Erection of building:- (1) Every person who
intends to erect a building shall apply for sanction
by giving notice in writing of his intention to the
Commissioner in such form and containing such
information as may be prescribed by bye-laws
made in this behalf.
(2) Every such notice shall be accompanied by
such documents and plans as may be so
prescribed.”
9.

With reference to the aforesaid provisions, it was stated by

some of the private respondents that the land in question falls under
the ‘Lal Dora’ and thus the provisions of neither the MCD Act nor the
Delhi Development Act, 1957 are applicable and no permission has to
be taken from the said authorities. It was further stated that the
Gujjar Dairy area, where the disputed property is situate, is
unapproved and does not fall within the jurisdiction of either the MCD
or the DDA and, accordingly, not only the present construction, but

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 8 of 17

all constructions in the said area are without any sanctioned plan.
Thus, the contention appears to be that as neither the DDA nor the
MCD has jurisdiction over the said land, the concerned building byelaws also do not apply.
10.

To the aforesaid, the MCD, by filing an affidavit dated 26th

September, 1997, has stated that the land in question does not fall
under the ‘Lal Dora’ of the Village Yusuf Sarai as, by virtue of the
Notification dated 28th May, 1966,

the entire revenue estate of

Village Yusuf Sarai was urbanised.

Thus, the contention of the

private respondents that the land falls under the ‘Lal Dora’ area and
the requisite permission from the respective authorities would not be
required for construction on the land in question has no merit.

We

accordingly hold that the land in question comes within the purview
of the building bye-laws and any construction raised on such land has
to be in accordance with such building bye-laws.
11.

In order to determine the nature of the land use of the plot in

question and the regulatory authority under which the said land
vests, notices were issued to the DDA as well as to the MCD. Both
the said authorities by filing affidavits stated that the land is not
under the area governed by them.

It was stated by the DDA by

filling an affidavit that the said area comes within the purview of the

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 9 of 17

MCD after 1987 and the MCD, on the other hand, by filing an affidavit
stated that the said property does not fall under the MCD and is still
under the DDA, as the same has not been denotified. Interestingly,
both the authorities have in one voice stated that the said
construction is without any sanction from either of them. Having
regard to the issues involved, by order dated 19th March, 1997 the
Court appointed Mr.Arun Jaitley, Senior Advocate, as amicus curiae in
this matter.
12.

As the case was taken up and orders were passed by this

Court, the DDA finally by way of an affidavit in September, 1998
submitted that the area in question had been denotified from the
purview of development area vide notification No.F.12(138)/88LAB/PLG./II/18887-93 dated 26th November, 1997, the result of which
is that in the said denotified area, the building activities that are to
take place are no longer under the monitoring and control of the
DDA. Thus, no requisite permission would be required from the DDA
before undertaking any development in the said area.
13.

Accordingly, after consideration of the aforesaid affidavit

filed by the DDA and recording the statement of the counsel for the
DDA, and also considering the fact that no approved plan has been
produced before the court by the private respondents,

(LPA 1677/1996)

by order

Page 10 of 17

dated 14th July, 2005 this Court directed the private respondents to
supply drawings of the buildings to the MCD, who was required to
verify the same and submit a report, specifically demarcating the
area constructed in accordance with building by-laws. The MCD was
also required to indicate compoundable and non-compoundable
portions, if any. The said order is reproduced below for reference:
“It is brought to the notice of the Court that private
respondents have constructed the properties
without obtaining permission from the authorities.
We direct the private respondents to supply
drawings of the buildings to the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi within a period of two days.
The Municipal Corporation of Delhi to verify the
same and to make report within a period of 10
days thereafter specifically demarcating the area
constructed in accordance with building bye-laws
and shall also indicate the compoundable and noncompoundable portions.
Renotify on 18th August, 2005.”
14.

In compliance with

the said directions,

the

Deputy

Commissioner (South Zone) MCD passed the order dated 12th
September, 2005. Relevant portion of the same is reproduced below
for reference:
“Before taking a decision on the plans submitted
by applicants for regularisation of building in
Gulmohar Enclave (Community Centre developed
by DDA), the matter was referred to Chief Town
Planner, MCD, for their comments in the said
matter. The Chief Town Planner, MCD vide letter
(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 11 of 17

dated 7-9-2005 commented as under:
“In the instant case, approval of the
layout plan for the area under reference
under Section 312/313 is the prerequisite for the approval of building
plan. As such, the applicants may be
advised to submit the layout plan with
necessary documents to the Town
Planning Department, for processing
the case of layout plan to be approved
by the competent authority i.e.
Standing Committee.
Sanction of
building
plan/regularisation/compounding, etc.
shall be subsequent to the approval of
the layout plan.”
In view of the above comments of Chief Town
Planner, MCD your applications submitted for
regularisation/sanction of building plans in respect
of the existing constructions in the abovementioned premises has been rejected with the
advise to submit the layout plan with necessary
documents to the Town Planning Department, MCD
for processing the case of layout plan for approval
by the competent authority i.e. Standing
Committee.”
15.

The said order was filed before this Court along with an

affidavit dated 15th September, 2005, stating that the plot on which
these buildings are raised does not form part of any approved lay out
plan and the surroundings of this plot are of Community Centre land
use.

In the said affidavit, it was also stated that these private

respondents are first required to get the lay out plan of this plot

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 12 of 17

approved by the Standing Committee, MCD and then to seek
sanction of the building plan in accordance with the lay out plan.
16.

After perusal of the aforesaid order and affidavit filed by the

MCD, this Court observed that no formal order had been passed by
Deputy Commissioner, MCD sanctioning or refusing to sanction the
building plans/drawings submitted by these private respondents. The
order passed by the MCD was neither here nor there, but was selfcontradictory. On 29th September, 2005, the learned amicus curiae
submitted to the Court that no lay out plans were submitted before
the Commissioner, and that the private respondents have wrongly
raised multi-storey buildings

without any proper sanction and

without there being any lay out plan for the plot on which these
buildings were raised.
17.

Subsequently, however, by Resolution No.729 dated 29th

March, 2006 the layout plan of the land in question was approved by
the Standing Committee, MCD. The said approval was filed in this
Court along with the status report dated 17th May, 2006 wherein it
was stated that in pursuance of the order dated 14th July, 2005
passed by this Court to give approval, the matter was considered
and the approval was given by the Standing Committee subject to
certain conditions.

(LPA 1677/1996)

These conditions are reproduced below for

Page 13 of 17

reference:
“1. Applicant shall get the building plan
approved/regularised as per prevailing regulations
of Master/Zonal Plans and Building Bye-laws and
policy being followed for regularisation.
2. The ownership, shape, size/extent and site shall
be verified at the time of approval of building
plan/regularisation of existing structures by the
Building Deptt. of South Zone.
3. The applicant shall indemnify the MCD in case
of any dispute if arises at any stage with respect of
shape, size, extent, ownership of the site, MCD
shall not be the party to it and an Indemnity Bond
to this effect shall be submitted by the applicants.
4. Conversion charges or any other charges which
are applicable shall be paid by the applicant. Rate
of conversion charges shall be either as per orders
of the Court/as per advice of DDA.”
18.

At this point, an issue was raised as to whether the layout

plan approved by the MCD can be given retrospective effect. During
the course of arguments,

it was stated by the MCD that the said

question will not arise as this approval was given in accordance with
the order dated 14th July, 2005 passed by this Court.

We have

perused the said order and find that the MCD was only directed to
consider the layout plans in the light of the existing building bye-laws
and submit a report thereon, stating whether the layout plans can be
approved or not, and no direction was given by this Court to the MCD
to give approval, to the said lay out plans. There was no order of this
(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 14 of 17

Court to give approval but the direction was to proceed in the matter
in accordance with law. The Corporation has to independently take a
decision in accordance with the statutory provisions and the law. It
cannot take up a stand that it has given approval in terms of and
following the orders of the High Court. The Corporation has misread
and misinterpreted the order of the High Court and also the intent
thereof.

As per Section 313 of the MCD Act, which is reproduced

herein-above,

lay

out

plan

has

to

be

approved

before

any

construction is raised. Also, it is the general proposition of law that
the layout plan cannot be given retrospective effect as the same will
destroy the very purpose of getting the layout plan approved before
starting any construction.
19.

The picture is also made clear by Item No.41 of the agenda

of the Standing Committee meeting, in which a reference was made
to the letter of the Commissioner, MCD dated 17th March, 2006,
wherein it is stated by the Commissioner that the said four plots fall
in the part of the approved lay out plan of the Community Centre of
Yusuf Sarai and the plan for the Community Centre has been
prepared by the DDA.

The relevant part is reproduced below for

ready reference:
“The site on which the four plots fall is a part of the
approved layout plan of Community Centre of
(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 15 of 17

Yusuf Sarai with a total area of 8601.24 sq.ft
(955.70 sq.yds). The plan for the Community
Centre has been prepared by DDA. However, the
present site of four plots including the other
adjoining area is un-acquired by DDA and is not
developed as per the approved lay out plan. The
designated use of the present four sites as per the
approved layout plan of Community Centre as
received from DDA is partly for shop-cum-office,
partly for parking and partly for open (paving).
Land use as per the Zonal Development Plan of
Zone ‘F’, is commercial i.e. for Community
Centre”.
20.

It has been repeatedly stated by the DDA, by filing affidavits,

that no sanction of plan has ever been given by the DDA.

The MCD

during the course of arguments has also never rebutted the
statements of the DDA that they have never approved any layout
plan. The incongruity lies in the fact that the MCD now states that it
has given the approval as the land falls within the Community Center
of which lay out plan has been approved by the DDA.
21.

Thus, as the approval to the layout plan has been given by

the MCD after giving consideration to irrelevant and non-existent
factors, we think it appropriate to remit the matter back to the MCD
for re-consideration of the said plans, which were filed by the private
respondents, in the light of the present building bye laws. While
considering the same, the MCD will also consider the land use and
ascertain and decide whether any part of the land on which the

(LPA 1677/1996)

Page 16 of 17

structure has been built up was meant for public road and, if so,
necessary action in accordance with law shall be taken by the MCD
with immediate effect.
22.

Before parting with the case, we wish to comment that the

emergence of the current incongruous and irreconciliable situation in
this case clearly shows the lethargic and lackadaisical attitude on the
part of the civic authorities in performing their obligations and in
passing on the buck to each other instead of working in tandem.
23.

We also place on record our appreciation of the valuable

assistance rendered by Mr.Arun Jaitley, Senior Advocate, who had
been appointed as amicus curiae in this matter and who has
rendered considerable assistance to us.

CHIEF JUSTICE

28th March, 2008
“sjs”

(LPA 1677/1996)

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE

Page 17 of 17

