*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA No.393/2000

%

Date of Decision: 28th March, 2008
A.K.GAJWANI

…….APPELLANT
Through: Ms.Maninder Acharya, Advocate.
Versus

AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
……RESPONDENT
Through: Mr.Rajan Sabharwal with Ms.Seema
Bhaduriya, Advocates
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ
1.

The present appeal is filed by the appellant, being aggrieved by

order dated 27th January, 2000 passed by the learned Single Judge,
whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant was dismissed.
2.

The appellant joined the respondent Authority on 19th October,

1977 as Assistant Engineer and was posted in Delhi. By order dated 20th
December, 1982 the appellant was promoted to the post of Executive
Engineer (Civil) but on ad hoc basis, in the pay scale of Rs.1250-1700.
On 4th March, 1987 while the appellant was working as Executive
Engineer he was transferred to Madras by the respondent Authority. On

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 1 of 11

20th July, 1987 the appellant was directed to appear before the selection
committee for interview for the purpose of regularising his service in the
cadre of Executive Engineer (Civil) and, thereafter, on 4th November,
1987 the appellant was promoted as Executive Engineer on regular
basis and placed on probation for a period of one year.
3.

While the appellant was posted at Madras, in May, 1988 the

appellant took 15 days leave commencing from 7th May, 1988 to 21st
May, 1988 for the purpose of visiting his mother who was staying in
Delhi. After coming to Delhi, the appellant applied for extension of the
leave which request was rejected, but as the request was again made
on the ground that the leave be granted and extended due to death of
the appellant’s mother, leave was granted upto 18th June, 1988.

Even

after the expiry of the said extended leave period, the appellant did not
report for duty and instead requested for another extension upto 4th
July, 1988 on the ground that his son was sick. The said request was
rejected and he was asked to join his duty immediately. The appellant
instead of complying with the said direction, made another request for
extension of leave upto 16th July, 1988, which was denied.

Without

paying any heed to the said rejection of leave, the appellant informed
the respondent authority through telegram that due to unavoidable
reasons he would be joining only on 1st August, 1988, which the
appellant unilaterally further extended to 16th August, 1988 without any

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 2 of 11

approval. In the meantime, a memo dated 2nd August, 1988 was issued
to the appellant directing him to join duties by 5th August, 1988 as he
had unauthorisedly remained absent since 19th June, 1988.

It was

clearly stated in the said memo that if the appellant did not join his duty
by 5th

August, 1988 an action would be contemplated against him

according to the rules for such unauthorised absence.
4.

As the appellant did not join by 5th August, 1988, a memo dated

14th September, 1988 was issued informing the appellant that the
respondent Authority proposes to take action against him under
Regulation 30 of IAAI Employees (Conduct, Discipline and Appeal)
Regulations, 1987 and he was directed to submit his representation
within 15 days of the receipt of the said memo.
memo was filed on 28th September, 1988.

A response to the said

By office order dated 21st

November, 1988 the appellant was reverted to his substantiative post of
Assistant Engineer on the ground of unsatisfactory performance during
the probation period and also on the ground of unauthorised absence
from his place of posting. The competent authority, on consideration of
the reply filed by the appellant to the memo dated 14 th September,
1988, found the same unsatisfactory and by order dated 21st March,
1989 imposed the penalty of censure on the appellant stating that
though the misconduct committed by the appellant was of a serious
nature, but keeping in view the fact that the appellant had already been

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 3 of 11

reverted to the post of Assistant Engineer due to his unsatisfactory
performance during the period of probation, the competent authority
had taken a lenient view and had ordered imposition of penalty of
censure only.
5.

Aggrieved by the aforesaid, the appellant challenged the orders

dated 21st November, 1988 and 21st March, 1989 before the learned
Single Judge by filing the writ petition in the year 1991.

The said writ

petition was filed near about two and half years from the date of the
order of reversion and near about three years from the date of the order
imposing the penalty of censure.
6.

On perusal of the records and after hearing the learned counsel

appearing for the parties, the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ
petition by order dated 27th January, 2000, holding that the contention
of the appellant that the order dated 21st November, 1988 was punitive
in nature cannot be accepted and the respondent Authority was
perfectly justified in declining to grant leave to the appellant and
subsequently passing the aforesaid orders.
7.

Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the learned Single Judge, the

appellant preferred

the present appeal on which we have heard the

learned counsel appearing for the parties and have also perused the
records.
8.

It was contended by the learned counsel appearing for the

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 4 of 11

appellant that the respondent Authority has imposed two penalties,
namely, the minor penalty of censure and the major penalty of
reversion, for the alleged single charge of unauthorised absence from
duty. The appellant has stated that he had already worked as Executive
Engineer for six years from the date of his initial appointment and due
to continued officiation, he should be deemed to have been confirmed in
the said post and therefore he could not have been reverted. It was also
contended by the appellant that no opportunity was granted to him to
meet the charges levelled against him, on the basis of which he had
been reverted.
9.

On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent

submitted that the appellant along with four others was promoted to
the temporary post of Executive Engineer and placed on probation for a
period of one year as per the IAAI (General Conditions of Service)
Regulations. Relying on Clause 12(3) of the said Regulations it was
submitted that an employee promoted from a lower post to a higher
post was liable to be reverted to the lower post, if his performance
during the period of probation was not found to be satisfactory or upto
the standard.

It was denied that the appellant had been given two

punishments for the same offence as no major penalty was imposed on
the appellant, and also the appellant was not reverted or lowered in
rank on account of disciplinary proceedings and rather, he was reverted

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 5 of 11

due to unsatisfactory performance during the probation period which
was in consonance with the IAAI Rules. It was also submitted that as
per Clause 31 of the Regulations, unauthorised absence of this kind
apart from resulting in loss of pay and allowances would also constitute
a break in service entailing forfeiture of past service, but in the case of
the appellant the respondent Authority had taken a lenient view in
imposing only a penalty of censure.

Next, it was submitted that the

appellant had wrongly alleged that the extension of leave was taken on
account of his son’s illness, as the medical certificate submitted by the
appellant clearly shows that the ailment was of a minor nature and not
such that he could not move to Madras.
10.

The appellant herein was appointed to the post of Executive

Engineer on a temporary basis and placed on probation for a period of
one year. There are ample number of decisions, both by this Court and
also by the Supreme Court, laying down and reiterating again and again
that the performance of a person who is appointed on probation could
be assessed and reviewed during the period of probation, so as to take
a decision as to whether he should be continued on probation or
confirmed in the post or should be reverted back to his substantive post
due to his unsatisfactory performance.

[See: Municipal Committee,

Sirsa v. Munshi Ram, reported in (2005) 2 SCC

382

and

Krishnadevaraya Education Trust and Another v. L.A. Balakrishna

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 6 of 11

reported in (2001)9 SCC 319]
11.

In order to appreciate the contentions raised by the learned

counsel for the parties, we have also perused the original records placed
before us. A reference to the records indicates that the performance of
the appellant in the promoted post of Executive

Engineer during the

period of his probation was found to be unsatisfactory and the said fact
was brought to his notice.

Despite such warning there was no

improvement in the performance of the appellant, which fact is also
disclosed from the original records placed before us. We find from the
original records that by letter dated 12th July, 1988 of the Executive
Director (Personnel) IAAI, the contents of the PAR for the year 1987
were communicated to the appellant, wherein after pointing out the
weak points which were adverse in nature, the appellant was advised to
improve upon his work performance in the areas where he had been
found weak. We also find various other communications in the records
addressed to the appellant requiring him to improve his performance,
and also stating that it would not be possible for the authority to
continue his probation unless a very remarkable improvement is shown
in his work.

As there was no improvement in the

appellant’s

performance during the said period of probation, therefore, the right of
the respondent to revert back the appellant to the post of Assistant
Engineer cannot be questioned and the action taken therefor by the

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 7 of 11

respondent cannot be held to be in any manner either punitive or illegal
or without jurisdiction.
12.

Thus, the contentions of the appellant that the respondent

Authority had imposed two penalties and also that no inquiry was
conducted before his reversion, have no merit.

The reversion of the

appellant during the period of probation cannot be said to be a
punishment of any kind. Reference in this regard can also be made to
the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. P.S.
Bhatt reported in (1981) 2 SCC 761, wherein referring to an earlier
decision in the case of Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. Dr. Md. S.
Iskender Ali reported in (1980) 3 SCC 428, it was held that even if
misconduct, negligence, inefficiency may be the motive or the inducing
factor which influences the authority to terminate the service of the
employee on probation, even then such termination cannot be termed
as penalty or punishment.

So far as the question of inquiry is

concerned, Clause 12(3) of the IAAI (General Conditions of Service)
Regulations empowers the respondent to revert an employee if his work
is found to be unsatisfactory during the period of probation. In the case
of Kunwar Arun Kumar v. U.P. Hill Electronics Corporation Ltd & Others
reported in (1997) 2 SCC 191 it was held by the Supreme Court that
during the period of probation, the authorities are entitled to assess the
suitability of the candidate and if it is found that the candidate is not

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 8 of 11

suitable to remain in service, they are entitled to record a finding of
unsatisfactory performance of the work and duties during the period of
probation.

For this, the appointing authority has to look into the

performance of the work and duties during the period of probation, and
if they record a finding that during that probation period the work and
performance of the duties were unsatisfactory, they are entitled to
terminate the service in terms of the letter of appointment without
conducting any inquiry.
13.

So far as the issue with regard to imposition of the penalty of

censure is concerned, the said action has no relational relevance with
the aforesaid order of reversion. The said order of imposition of penalty
of censure was passed in the light of completely independent facts and
for alleged misconduct of the appellant in unauthorisedly absenting
himself from duty. In our considered opinion, the respondent could have
imposed a harsher punishment for the aforesaid offence, which was
proved from the documents on record. But they choose to impose only
the minimum possible penalty on him and, therefore, there cannot be
any cause for grievance to the appellant in that regard.
14.

An argument was also sought to be made on behalf of the

appellant that subsequent to filing of the writ petition, the appellant was
denied promotion. It was submitted before us that even before filing of
the writ petition on 17th July, 1991, a Departmental Promotion

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 9 of 11

Committee was constituted for considering cases for appointment to the
post of Executive Engineer wherein the appellant’s junior was asked to
appear

for

interview,

whereas

the

appellant’s

request

and

representation for consideration of his case for promotion was rejected.
It was also stated by the appellant that as per the orders dated 24 th July,
1991 and 25th September, 1991 issued by this Court though the
appellant’s name was considered for promotion but the same was kept
in a sealed cover, which was not opened even till the date of filing of the
present appeal. We find that after passing of the order dated 5 th April,
1991 a new cadre of Assistant Executive Engineers, which was created
in between the posts of Assistant Engineer and Executive Engineer. The
appellant was working against the substantive post of Assistant
Engineer.

With the creation of the aforesaid cadre of Assistant

Executive Engineers, which was created in the month of January, 1993,
the appellant was required to be first considered for promotion to the
said post. In the year 1994 a meeting of the Departmental Promotion
Committee (DPC) was held for selection to the aforesaid cadre of
Assistant Executive Engineers, wherein the case of the appellant was
considered, but since his case was found to be ‘average’ he was not
promoted to the said post. The next DPC for considering promotion to
the cadre of Assistant Executive Engineers was held sometime in the
year 1999.

In the said selection also the name of the appellant was

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 10 of 11

considered, and this time he was found to be fit for promotion and,
accordingly, he was promoted to the said post effective from 28th June,
1999. After his promotion to the said post of Assistant Executive
Engineer, he was finally retired as Assistant Executive Engineer in the
year 2002. Considering the entire facts and circumstances of the case,
it cannot be said that any step-motherly treatment was shown to the
appellant at any stage by the respondent. At least the records which
are placed before us do not make out any such case.
15.

In this view of the matter, we find no infirmity in the impugned

judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge. There is no
merit in this appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed. No costs.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE
28th MARCH, 2008
“v”

(LPA 393/2000)

Page 11 of 11

