*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) No.25/2007 and FAO(OS) No.26/2007

%
1.

Date of decision : 28th March, 2008
FAO(OS) No.25/2007
Shri P. Subba Rao and others
..... Appellants
Through Mr.B.B.Sawhney, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.M.J. Nasir, Advocate
versus
Andhra Association, Delhi (Regd.) & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through Mr.Jayant Bhushan, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Vivek Narayan Sharma and
Mr.Manish Vishnoi, Advocates for
respondents No.1 and 2.

2.

AND
FAO(OS) No.26/2007
Shri R. Damodar and others
..... Appellants
Through Mr.B.K. Sood with
Mr.Yogesh Kumar Bhatt, Advocates
versus
Andhra Association, Delhi (Regd.) & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through Mr.Jayant Bhushan, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Vivek Narayan Sharma and
Mr.Manish Vishnoi, Advocates for
respondents No.1 and 2.
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

Yes
page 1 of 20

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ:
1.

These appeals have been filed by the appellants being

aggrieved by the order dated 20th December, 2006 passed by the
learned Single Judge, whereby two applications filed by the appellants
herein under Order XXXIX Rules 1 & 2 CPC, registered as IA
No.5642/2004 in CS(OS) No.945/2004 titled R. Damodar and others
v. Andhra Association, Delhi (Regd.) and others and IA Nos.784849/2004 in CS(OS) No.1328/2004 titled P. Subba Rao and others v.
Andhra Association, Delhi (Regd.) and others were dismissed. As
in both these appeals the appellants are challenging the common order
dated 20th December, 2006 and the reliefs sought for are also similar,
we dispose of these two appeals by this common judgment and order.
2.

The aforesaid applications under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of

the Code of Civil Procedure for grant of interim injunction were filed in
the aforesaid two suits, challenging the election process of the Andhra
Association (respondent No.1 herein).

The records placed before us

clearly disclose and establish that the suit of Shri R. Damodar and
others was filed earlier than the suit filed by Shri P. Subba Rao and
others with an identical subject-matter. In Suit No.945/2004 filed by
Shri R. Damodar and others, the following reliefs were sought for in the

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 2 of 20

injunction application being IA No.5642/2004:
“a) this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to restrain
defendants from carrying on and holding elections
of Defendant No.1 Association on 5.9.2004.
b)
direct the defendants to hand over the
records of the Association regarding the existing
and enrolled members, either by the Association
itself or through Branch Secretaries/Chairman/Vice
Chairman/Joint Secretaries of the various Branches
to an administrator/Officer appointed by this
Hon'ble Court for the purpose of scrutiny and to
hold the elections, after including all the legitimate
members of the Association.”
3.

The said application was filed on 31st August, 2004 and by filing

the aforesaid application, the appellants prayed for an interim order
restraining the respondents / defendants herein from carrying on and
holding elections of the Andhra Association on 5th September, 2004.
When the said suit was listed before the learned Single Judge, while
issuing summons in the suit, notice was issued on the injunction
application and the statement of the counsel appearing for the
plaintiffs was also recorded to the following effect:
“...... Shri S.Madhusudan Babu is directed not to
declare the results till further Orders of this Court.
Mr.Sood further submits that the Plaintiff believes
that the election will not be conducted in a fair
manner. He presses for the appointment of an
Observer who would independently report the
proceedings to this Court.”
4.

However, so far as the prayer restraining the holding of the

election was concerned, the learned Single Judge passed a specific

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 3 of 20

order holding that as the election process had already commenced, it
would not be appropriate or in fact necessary to interdict the holding of
the elections.

The learned Single Judge also observed that serious

disputes had been raised and, therefore, the Returning Officer was
directed not to disclose the results till further orders of the Court. The
learned Single Judge, as it appears, accepted the prayer of the counsel
appearing for the appellants / plaintiffs for appointment of an Observer
and appointed a Court Observer with a direction that he should be
present during the course of election. The said order was passed by
the learned Single Judge on 2nd September, 2004. Consequent to the
said order, election for electing the office bearers to the aforesaid
Association was held as per schedule on 5th September, 2004 but the
election results were not declared.
5.

Thereafter, the other suit, namely, CS(OS) No.1328/2004 was

filed by Shri P. Subba Rao and others in which also an application
under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure was
filed. In the said application, the appellants as plaintiffs sought for the
following reliefs as an interim measure:
“It is therefore respectfully prayed that this
Hon'ble Court may be pleased to withhold the
results of the elections conducted on 05/09/2004
pending disposal of the suit and maintain status
quo during the pendency of the suit.”
6.

While issuing summons in the said suit, notice was also issued

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 4 of 20

on the application seeking for injunction. Since, there was already a
restraint order to the effect as stated hereinbefore, although elections
were held as per schedule, results were not declared.

The said

applications thereafter were taken up for consideration by the learned
Single Judge before whom several issues appear to have been raised.
The learned Single Judge took notice of all the pleas raised before her.
On 7th November, 2006, after some arguments on the application IA
No.5642/2004, the learned Single Judge observed that the prayer to
restrain the defendants from carrying on and holding election of the
defendant No.1 Association on 5th September, 2004 would not survive
as the elections had already been held under the supervision of the
Observer and the results were kept in a sealed cover and were not
declared, pursuant to the interim orders passed by the Court. It was
also observed by the learned Single Judge that the second prayer in
the application filed under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of
Civil Procedure is for appointment of an Administrator. After referring
to the aforesaid prayer, the submission of the counsel for the
appellants in the said suit was recorded that since fresh elections are
due in the year 2007, an Administrator had to be appointed and to that
extent the application would survive for consideration.

The learned

Single Judge observed in the order passed that the prayer for
appointment of an Administrator in the application only related to the

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 5 of 20

election already held.
appointment

of

an

It was also observed that the prayer for
Administrator

would

amount

to

seeking

a

mandatory injunction, which, under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, can be granted only in a very rare situation
and that if mandatory injunction was granted, the same would amount
to disposing of the whole suit. The learned Single Judge also referred
to the prayer for injunction in CS(OS) No.1328/2004 and in respect of
the same, it was observed that the same relates to the declaration of
the result of the election already held. As it appears from the tenor of
the impugned order passed, the only limited question on which the
arguments were addressed before the learned Single Judge was
whether the result of the election should be declared or not. The pleas
raised by the counsel appearing for the parties were recorded, and
thereafter the same were considered, and finally by order passed on
20th December, 2006 both the applications were dismissed and it was
observed by the learned Single Judge that the result of the election
should now be declared and, therefore, it was held that the sealed
cover be opened and the result be declared. Immediately thereafter,
results were declared and the new office bearers of the Association
took charge of their office and are continuing in office till date.
7.

The appeals were filed as against the aforesaid impugned order,

which were considered by us and on which we have heard the learned

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 6 of 20

counsel appearing for the parties.

It may be stated herein that the

appeal filed by Shri R. Damodar and others was filed on 23rd January,
2007 i.e. after the declaration of the election results and after
assumption of office by the new office bearers. The issue, which arises
for our consideration in these appeals pertains to interim orders to be
passed in respect of holding of election. It is established and there is
no dispute with regard to the fact that elections have been held,
results have been declared and the new office bearers have assumed
charge.

The injunction applications on the basis of which we are

hearing these appeals have thus been rendered infructuous by the
subsequent developments that have taken place, as noticed in the
various orders passed by the learned Single Judge, at different stages.
Elections having been held, results having been declared, the new
office bearers having assumed charge and having begun to discharge
their duties as office bearers, there is no question of passing any
interim temporary injunction, either restraining the holding of elections
or restraining the declaration of the results.
8.

Accordingly, on a conspectus of the facts of the present

appeals, we are of the opinion that the reliefs sought for in the interim
applications, which are the subject matter of the present appeals, have
been rendered infructuous and, therefore, nothing survives in these
appeals for consideration.

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 7 of 20

9.
case of

Even otherwise it has been held by the Supreme Court in the
Shri Sant Sadguru Janardan Swami (Moingirid Maharaj)

Sahakari Dugdha Utpadak Sanstha and anr. v. State of
Maharashtra and ors. reported in (2001)8SCC509 and the Division
Bench of this Court in the case of Javed Rahat and Ors. v. Bar
Council of India and Ors. reported in 129(2006)DLT104 that when

the election process commences, there should not be any
interference by the Courts. It is only after the election results are
declared and the persons elected assume the charge of the
office, that an election petition, if permitted under the rules, can
be filed. If there is no provision for an election petition, then a
civil suit should be filed. However, the Court should not interfere
once the election process has started.
10.

So

far

the

issue

with

regard

to

appointment

of

an

Administrator is concerned, the prayer in the application was that an
Administrator be appointed for the purpose of holding the elections.
There is no prayer that an Administrator should now be appointed for
the management and functioning of the Association.

Even if such a

prayer is made, it would not be possible to pass such an order at this
stage by way of an interim order, for even if such an order is passed,
the same would be amount to the passing of a final order in the suit,

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 8 of 20

which cannot be done. Not only this, the new office bearers, who have
been elected, are not parties either before us or in the suits and in
case such an order is passed, vested rights accruing to them would be
taken away without there being any effective contest in the suit.

It

cannot also be said to be a case for issuance of mandatory injunction
at this stage, for, the pre-condition for grant of such an injunction is not
made out in this case. All the pleas that are raised in the applications
filed under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure
and

also

in

the

suits

are

seriously

disputed

by

the

respondents/defendants, who have filed their reply to the injunction
applications and also their written statements in the main suits and,
therefore, the said pleas are required to be proved and established in
accordance with law.

These disputed questions of fact cannot be

finally decided at this stage, without there being proof of the pleadings
in accordance with law.
11.

In this connection, we may appropriately refer to the decision

of the Supreme Court in Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. and others v.
Prem Chand Premi and another, reported in (2005) 13 SCC 505. In
the said decision it was held by the Supreme Court that the High Court
should not have granted the ultimate relief at the interim stage as the
issue seems to be a highly debatable one.

In State of U.P. and

others v. Ram Sukhi Devi reported as (2005) 9 SCC 733, the

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 9 of 20

Supreme Court again had an occasion to deal with a similar issue as to
whether the Court should grant almost the final relief by way of interim
measure. In that connection, in paragraph 8 of the said judgment, the
Supreme Court held as follows:
“...... Time and again this Court has deprecated the
practice of granting interim orders which
practically give the principal relief sought in the
petition for no better reason than that of a prima
facie case having been made out, without being
concerned about the balance of convenience, the
public interest and a host of other considerations.
[See CCE v. Dunlop India Ltd. (1985) 1 SCC 260,
State of Rajasthan v. Swaika Properties (1985) 3
SCC 217, State of U.P. v. Visheshwar (1995 Supp
(3) SCC 590), Bharatbhushan Sonaji Kshirsagar
(Dr.) v. Abdul Khalik Mohd. Musa (1995 Supp (2)
SCC 593), Shiv Shankar v. Board of Directors,
U.P.SRTC (1995 Supp (2) SCC 726) and
Commr/Secy to Govt. Health and Medical
Education Deptt. Civil Sectt. v. Dr. Ashok Kumar
Kohli (1995 Supp (4) SCC 214)]. No basis has been
indicated as to why learned Single Judge thought
the course as directed was necessary to be
adopted. Even it was not indicated that a prima
facie case was made out though as noted above,
that itself is not sufficient. We, therefore, set aside
the order passed by learned Single Judge as
affirmed by the Division Bench and without
expressing any opinion on the merits of the case
we have interfered primarily on the ground that
the final relief has been granted at an interim
stage without justifiable reasons.......”
12.

Having considered the ratio of the aforesaid decisions of the

Supreme Court, we hold that the reliefs that are sought for by the
appellants in these appeals cannot be granted, inasmuch as if such
prayer is granted, the same would amount to grant of final relief in the
FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 10 of 20

form of an interim injunction, which cannot be granted as settled by
the Supreme Court.

Besides, any order passed in the injunction

application amounting to unsettling a settled matter and throwing out
the elected members as office bearers without giving them an
opportunity of hearing would not be permissible as the same would
amount to affecting valuable vested rights and infringing the same
without giving the said parties an opportunity of hearing.

Even

otherwise, there is no prayer in the appeals for appointing an
Administrator to run and administer the activities and functioning and
administration of the association and, therefore, the question of
appointment of such an Administrator would not arise at this stage.
We may also refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Avtar
Singh Hit v. Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee and
others reported in (2006) 8 SCC 487. In paragraphs 31, 32 and 33 of
the said judgment the Supreme Court held thus:
“31. In our view no relief could have been granted
to the writ petitioners on account of the fact that
the newly elected office bearers of the Executive
Board, who would have been affected by the
decision of the writ petitions, were not impleaded
as party to the writ petitions. In Udit Narain Singh
Malpaharia v. Additional Member, Board of
Revenue 1963 Supp (1) SCR 676 : AIR 1963 SC
786, it was observed that where in a petition for a
writ of certiorari made to the High Court, only the
tribunal whose order was sought to be quashed
was made a party but the persons who were
parties before the lower tribunal and in whose
favour the impugned order was passed were not
FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 11 of 20

joined as parties; the writ petition was incompetent
and had been rightly rejected by the High Court. In
Prabodh Verma v. State of U.P. (1984) 4 SCC 251 :
AIR 1985 SC 167, it was held: (SCC p. 256)
“A High Court ought not to hear and
dispose of a writ petition under Article
226 without the persons who would be
vitally affected by its judgment being
before it as respondents or at least
some of them being before it as
respondents
in
a
representative
capacity if their number is too large to
join them as respondents individually,
and, if the petitioners refuse to so join
them, the High Court ought to dismiss
the petition for non-joinder of necessary
parties.”
32. In Ishwar Singh v. Kuldip Singh (1995) Supp.
(1) SCC 179, it was held that a writ petition
challenging selection and appointment to some
posts without impleading the selected candidates
was not maintainable. This view has been
reiterated in Arun Tewari v. Zila Mansavi Shikshak
Sangh AIR 1998 SC 331.
33. This being the settled legal position, the nonimpleadment of the newly elected office bearers of
the Executive Board was fatal and no relief could
have been granted to the writ petitioners. The
result of granting any relief in the writ petitions, as
was done by the learned single Judge, was that the
members of the newly elected Executive Board lost
the office which they were holding without
affording them an opportunity to present their case
which is clearly impermissible in law. The writ
petitions were liable to be dismissed on this count
as well.”
13.

The counsel appearing for the appellants relied upon and

referred to the decision of the Single Judge Bench of this Court in Shri
FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 12 of 20

Sarbjit Singh & Others v. All India Fine Arts & Crafts Society &
others reported in 1989 (2) Delhi Lawyer 360 in support of his
contention that in an appropriate case an Administrator can also be
appointed by way of interim injunction order on the basis of an
application filed under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of the
Civil Procedure.
14.

The facts of the said case cannot be equated with the facts of

the present case in view of the different nature of the applications filed
and different subject matter altogether. The aforesaid decisions of the
Supreme Court which are relied upon by us are clear and unambiguous
and, therefore, the said ratio of the decisions of the Supreme Court
would squarely apply and govern the matter in hand.
15.

We may also refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in

Deoraj v. State of Maharashtra and others reported in (2004) 4
SCC 697. In paragraph 12 of the said judgment, the Supreme Court
stated as follows:
“Situations emerge where the granting of an
interim relief would tantamount to granting the
final relief itself. And then there may be converse
cases where withholding of an interim relief would
tantamount to dismissal of main petition itself; for,
by the time the main matter comes up for hearing
there would be nothing left to be allowed as relief
to the petitioner though all the findings may be in
his favour. In such cases the availability of a very
strong prima facie case -- of a standard much
higher
than
just
prima
facie
case,
the
considerations of balance of convenience and
FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 13 of 20

irreparable injury forcefully tilting the balance of
the case totally in favour of the applicant may
persuade the Court to grant an interim relief
though it amounts to granting the final relief itself.
Of course, such would be rare and exceptional
cases. The Court would grant such an interim relief
only if satisfied that withholding of it would prick
the conscience of the Court and do violence to the
sense of justice, resulting in injustice being
perpetuated throughout the hearing, and at the
end the Court would not be able to vindicate the
cause of justice. Obviously such would be rare
cases accompanied by compelling circumstances,
where the injury complained of is immediate and
pressing and would cause extreme hardship. The
conduct of the parties shall also have to be seen
and the Court may put the parties on such terms
as may be prudent.”
16.

In the said judgment, the Supreme Court has cautioned that

the power to grant any interim injunction by way of granting a final
relief should be rarely exercised in rare and exceptional cases, and the
Court should grant such an interim relief only if satisfied that
withholding of it would prick the conscience of the Court and do
violence to the sense of justice, resulting in injustice being perpetuated
throughout the hearing.
17.

In the present case although debatable issues have been

raised. It cannot be said that the balance of convenience is in favour of
the appellants and that they would suffer irreparable injury if the
prayer made in the appeals is not granted. In fact, due to the changed
circumstances and subsequent events, reliefs as sought for cannot be
granted as all the interim reliefs sought for and extracted above have
FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 14 of 20

been rendered infructuous. The suits will now have to be contested,
the evidence will have to be led to prove and establish the pleadings of
the parties, and only thereafter the issues raised could be decided.
The said issues are being fully contested by filing replies and also
written statements.
18.

Several issues have also been raised and argued before us by

the counsel appearing for the appellants in order to show that the
preparation of the electoral rolls, the rejection of the nomination
papers and, in fact, the entire process of election was vitiated. It was
contended on behalf of the appellants that the respondents did not
make available the complete voters list for rectification on the 12th, 13th
and 14th of August, 2004.

It was further submitted that complete

voters list was not made available for sale on 21st August, 2004, and
thereby the entire election process is vitiated. The entire electoral roll,
which was prepared, was also vitiated as the names of 500 life
members were left out and many ghost members were included in the
voters list. It was also submitted that altogether about 6000 members,
who were required to be included in the voters list, were not included.
19.

Mr.B.B. Sawhney, Sr. Advocate, appearing on behalf of the

appellants – Shri P. Subba Rao and others, also took up three issues
contending, inter alia, that there was wrongful exclusion of as many as
6140 members from the voters list, as the applications were received

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 15 of 20

by the Branch Secretaries, who after completion of all formalities,
wrongly did not include the names of the applicants in the voters list.
He has also submitted that there was a denial of right of scrutiny and
rectification of the voters list, which had adversely affected the result
of the elections. His submission was that the opportunity for scrutiny
and rectification of the voters list was negated and that the names of
530 pre-existing life members did not appear in the voters list. It was
also submitted that the entire election proceeded on the basis of
plurality of lists. First the “latest voters list” of 5773 new members,
then incomplete consolidated voters list, followed by supplementary
list.

It was also submitted that there was no finding given by the

learned Single Judge on the several issues raised by the appellants in
this regard.
20.

All the aforesaid submissions have been countered by the

respondents in their replies and the written statements filed since they
relate to the issues raised in the suits. Since these are disputed facts,
specific issues shall have to be framed and evidence led to establish
the allegations. Only thereafter the same could be adjudicated upon
and decided in accordance with law, effectively.

It would not be

possible to express any opinion at this stage in respect of the issues,
for no evidence is led on the aforesaid issues and the applications filed
under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure have

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 16 of 20

been decided only on the basis of the affidavits filed by the parties.
The respondents have effectively contested all the aforesaid pleas in
their counter affidavits and also before us by making reference to the
various statements made therein in respect of the issue regarding
names of 6140 persons, who had applied for new membership, but
were not included in the final voters list. In respect of the same it was
stated that the aforesaid statement is based on the belief that the
Branch Secretaries had power to enroll members under Article 13(b) of
the Constitution of the Association.

This was refuted on the ground

that a bare perusal of Articles 4 and 13(b) would reveal that only the
General Secretary of the Association has been conferred the power to
admit members in the Association. It is also pointed out that the said
issue was also raised in Civil Suit No.339/2004 filed before the Civil
Judge, Tis Hazari by some of the Branch Secretaries of the Association,
alleging that the names of 6140 persons newly enrolled by them were
not included in the voters list by the respondent No.2, on the ground
that their completed application forms were not received in the Head
Office of the Association by the cut off date i.e. 24th July, 2004. In the
said case, the case of the plaintiffs was that they had received the
application forms and the membership subscription forms of the 6140
interested persons on or before 24th July, 2004 and that, therefore, the
enrolment of these 6140 persons was in fact complete as soon as the

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 17 of 20

Branch Secretaries received the forms. It is thus established therefrom
that the said plea is again being raised in these suits and before us in
these appeals.

In this connection, we may also state that the Civil

Judge, while disposing of the applications under Order XXXIX Rules 1
and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure recorded that the application
forms were forwarded by the plaintiffs to the Association after a delay
of a couple of days and in that view of the matter, the trial Judge
issued a direction that the names of these persons be incorporated in
the voters list. An appeal was filed as against the said order of the
learned Civil Judge, who had virtually granted the final relief to the
plaintiffs, and the same was set aside by the appellate court, upholding
the non-inclusion of 6140 persons' names in the voters list. It is also
brought to our notice that CM(M) No.1278/2004 arising out of the
above mentioned appeal was dismissed by the High Court.

The

aforesaid suit No.339/2004 is still pending consideration. Another plea
that is taken while refuting the aforesaid submission on behalf of the
respondents is that no vested right accrues in favour of a person to be
enrolled as a voter in the voters list by mere issuance of receipt of
subscription by the Branch secretary. An applicant is required to
deposit the subscription amount along with the application for
enrolment and, if on scrutiny of the application, it is found that the
person fulfils all the criteria laid down under Article 4 of the

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 18 of 20

Constitution of the Association, it is then that he can be enrolled as a
member by the General Secretary.
21.

Therefore, whatever is stated hereinbefore would clearly

establish that all the issues, which are raised, have been refuted, and
there is answer given to each of the aforesaid allegations. All these
issues would be required to be considered only when the pleadings in
the suit are proved by leading cogent and reliable evidence, and an
opportunity is granted to all the interested parties to lead their
evidence in rebuttal. This is not the stage when we can answer any of
the aforesaid issues, which, according to us, are debatable and
arguable issues. We do not intend to pronounce on these issues at this
stage, for we would like to give parties an opportunity of proving /
disproving the said allegations in accordance with law, and clearly this
is not the stage when we can effectively decide the said issues. At this
stage, there is also no question of destabilising the status of the
elected members, who are functioning as of today, merely because
such allegations have been made.
22.

Considering the entire facts and circumstances of the case, we

are of the considered opinion that these appeals are required to be
dismissed in view of the observations made hereinbefore.
appeals are accordingly dismissed.

Both the

In the light of the facts and

circumstances of the case and the allegations made, however, we feel

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

page 19 of 20

that the hearing of the suits should be expedited.

The counsel

appearing for the respondents also accepted the aforesaid position and
themselves stated that the hearing of the suits was required to be
expedited and that they had no objection to the same. In this view of
the matter, we direct that if possible, the evidence be recorded on a
day-to-day basis, as far as practicable, and thereafter arguments be
heard as expeditiously as possible.
23.

It is made clear that the observations made hereinabove on

the merits are only for the purpose of deciding the present appeals and
will have no impact on the final decision of the suits.
24.

The parties shall now appear before the learned Single Judge

on 7th April, 2008 for obtaining further dates in the two suits.

CHIEF JUSTICE

March 28, 2008
nm

FAO(OS) 25/07 & FAO(OS) 26/07

REVA KHETRAPAL
(JUDGE)

page 20 of 20

