*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+
%

LPA 75//2002
Date of decision : 29.2.2008
Dayawati

..... Appellant
Through nemo

versus
Union of India and others
..... Respondents
Through Ms.Jyoti Singh with
Mr.Ankur Chibber, Advocates
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
1.

We have gone through the case records of this case.

The

learned Single Judge, whose order is under challenge in this appeal,
decided the writ petition in the light of the decision of the Supreme
Court in Union of India and others v.Rakesh Kumar reported as
(2001) 4 SCC 309.

In the said judgment, the Supreme Court, after

noticing the provisions of Rules 48, 48A and 49 of the Central Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, in paragraph 16 has observed as
follows:
“On the basis of Rule 49, it has been contended that
qualifying service for getting pension would be ten
years. In our view, this submission is without any
basis. Qualifying service is defined under Rule 3(q)
to mean service rendered while on duty or
otherwise which shall be taken into account for the
purpose of pensions and gratuities admissible under
these rules. Rule 13 provides that qualifying service
LPA No.75/2002

page 1 of 4

by a government servant commences from the date
from which he takes charge of the post to which he
is first appointed either substantively or in an
officiating or temporary capacity. This rule nowhere
provides that qualifying service for getting pension
is 10 years. On the contrary, there is specific
provision that if a government servant retires before
completing qualifying service of 10 years because
of his attaining the age of compulsory retirement,
he would not get pension but would get the amount
of service gratuity calculated at the rate of half
months emoluments for every completed six
monthly period of qualifying service. In these
appeals, we are not required to consider other
conditions prescribed for qualifying service as it is
admitted that respondent-members of the BSF have
completed more than 10 years of qualifying service.
Further clause 2(a) of Rule 49 specifically provides
for grant of pension if a government servant retires
after completing qualifying service of not less than
33 years. The amount of pension is to be calculated
fifty per cent of average emoluments subject to
maximum provided therein. Clause 2(b) upon which
much reliance is placed indicates that in case of a
government servant retiring in accordance with the
provisions of the Rules before completing qualifying
service of 33 years, but after completing qualifying
service of ten years, the pension shall be
proportionate to the amount of pension admissible
under clause (a) and in no case, the amount of
pension shall be less than Rs.375/- per month. This
would only mean that in case where government
servant retires on superannuation i.e. the age of
compulsory
retirement
as
per
service
conditions or in accordance with the CCS
(Pension) Rules, after completing 10 years of
qualifying service, he would get pension which is to
be calculated and quantified as provided under
clause (2) of Rule 49. This clause would cover cases
of retirement under Rules 35 and 36 that is,
voluntary retirement after 20 years of qualifying
service, compulsory retirement after prescribed age
and such other cases as provided under the Rules.
However, this has nothing to do with the quitting of
LPA No.75/2002

page 2 of 4

service after tendering resignation. It is also to be
stated that Rule 26 of CCS (Pension) Rules
specifically provides that resignation from a service
or post entails forfeiture of past service unless
resignation is submitted to take up, with proper
permission, another appointment under the
government where service qualifies. Hence, on the
basis of Rule 49 member of BSF who has resigned
from his post after completing more than 10 years
of qualifying service but less than 20 years would
not be eligible to get pensionary benefit. There is no
other provision in the CCS (Pension) Rules giving
such benefit to such government servants.”
(Emphasis supplied)
2.

In the light of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court,

the learned Single Judge held that the case in hand is fully covered by
the aforesaid decision of the Supreme court.
3.

On going through the records we also find that the Supreme

Court in the aforesaid case of Rakesh Kumar (supra) has held that on
the basis of Rule 49 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, a member of the
BSF, who has resigned from his post after completing more than 10
years of qualifying service but less than 20 years would not be eligible
to get pensionary benefit. The husband of the appellant had about 13
years of service to his credit.

A similar case of a Commandant of

Indian Coast Guard having 13 years of service to his credit was subject
matter of a writ petition being WP(C) No.5651/2000 titled Comdt.
Rajeev Ranjan (Retd.) v. Union of India and others (disposed of
on 12th October, 2004), before one of the Division Benches of this Court
consisting of Dr.Mukundakam Sharma and Gita Mittal, JJ. By judgment
LPA No.75/2002

page 3 of 4

dated 12th October, 2004, the said writ petition filed by the Coast
Guard employee was dismissed relying on the aforesaid decision of the
Supreme Court.
4.

The appellant herein is the widow of the deceased Shri Ram

Avtar Singh, who had only 13 years of service to his credit.

Her

husband was not entitled to pensionary benefit on completion of 13
years of service.

Resignation of the husband of the appellant was

accepted by the respondent – BSF effective from 1st September, 1996
by which date he did not complete 20 years of service.

However,

under a misconception of law, the respondent – BSF gave pension to
the husband of the appellant and after his death to his wife, who is the
present appellant. In view of the aforesaid law now laid down by the
Supreme court, they have stopped making payment of further pension,
but it is categorically stated before us by the counsel for the
respondents that whatever amount has since been paid to the widow
or to her husband by way of pension under misconception of law,
would not be recovered by the respondents.

Therefore, in our

considered opinion, this appeal has no merit and is dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

FEBRUARY 29, 2008
nm
LPA No.75/2002

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

page 4 of 4

