*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA No.245/2007

%

Date of Decision:29th February, 2008
CANARA BANK

…….APPELLANT
Through: Mr.V.K.Rao with Mr. Ayushya
Kumar and Mr.Saket Sikri,
Advocates
Versus

V.K.GROVER

……RESPONDENT
Through:Mr.Inder Jit Singh, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ
1.

The issue that is involved in the present appeal is whether or not

the respondent is entitled to stagnation increment as envisaged in the
Fifth Bipartite Settlement dated 10th April, 1989.
2.

The

respondent

was

appointed

in

the

erstwhile

Commercial Bank Limited as Clerk on 4th September, 1972.

Laxmi
He was

promoted as Head Clerk on 11th November, 1980 and then as Special
Assistant on 11th November, 1981.

Thereafter, the respondent

was

promoted to the Officer cadre on 7th January, 1983. Subsequent thereto,
the erstwhile Laxmi Commercial Bank Limited was merged with the
(LPA 245/2007)

Page 1 of 8

appellant-Canara Bank with effect from 24th August, 1985 in terms of an
amalgamation

scheme

framed

by

the

consultation with the Reserve Bank of India.

Central

Government

in

Consequently, effective

from 24th August, 1985 the respondent became an officer employee of
the appellant-bank. The respondent after the aforesaid amalgamation
was transferred to Sikanderabad Branch of the appellant-bank on 10th
September, 1986 not only in terms of the transfer policy of the Bank but
also in tune with the RBI Guidelines for giving rotation in posting from
time to time and also on the ground of administrative exigencies. The
respondent, however, did not join Sikanderabad Branch and made all
efforts to get the transfer order cancelled or modified for being posted
to Delhi.

Even after a long lapse of time when he did not join

Sikanderabad Branch, some other officer was posted to that Branch.
Respondent was thereafter transferred to Vishakhapatnam Branch in
1988 when he again made a representation dated 30th May, 1988 for his
retention at Delhi due to his family circumstances. The appellant-bank
expressed their inability to accept the aforesaid request under letter
dated 14th June, 1988 stating that the respondent has been working in
the cadre of employment which extends to all over the country and,
therefore, has all-India transfer liability due to which the appellant-bank
was unable to consider his

retention at Delhi.

Thereafter the

respondent made another representation on 30th November, 1988

(LPA 245/2007)

Page 2 of 8

requesting to revert him back to the workman cadre and for his
retention at Delhi due to his family circumstances. The appellant-bank,
as per the guidelines formulated and as a matter of policy decision,
offered him the terms and conditions on which his request for retention
could be considered.

Respondent agreed to the aforesaid terms and

conditions under letter dated 3rd January, 1989 voluntarily and without
raising any protest.

The competent authority of the appellant-bank

therefore permitted him to get himself reverted back to the clerical
cadre under proceeding dated 3rd February, 1989 and a communication
to that effect was issued by the appellant-bank.

On 25th November,

1992 the respondent submitted a letter to the appellant-bank praying
for release of stagnation increment in terms of the policy decision of
the appellant, particularly by making reference to the following
conditions:
“4.B STAGNATION INCREMENTS:
Both the clerical and subordinate staff shall
be eligible for three stagnation increments
at the rates and frequencies and subject to
the terms and conditions as enumerated
below:
The Clerical and the Subordinate staff on
reaching the maximum in their respective
scales of pay, shall draw stagnation
increments at the rate of Rs.120/- and
Rs.50/- each and at the frequencies of
three years and two years respectively
from the dates of reaching the maximum of
their scales of pay as aforesaid.
(LPA 245/2007)

Page 3 of 8

Provided however:(1).......
(2)......
(3)....
NOTE:- Stagnation increments would not be
given to an employee who at any time
after the commencement of the 8th
September, 1983 settlement and after
being offered or selected for promotion
refuses to accept such promotion.”
3.

In the meantime however by letter issued on 21st January, 1993

the appellant-bank rejected the claim of the respondent stating that
since the respondent on his own will got himself reverted to clerical
cadre with effect from 10th February, 1989,

as per Head Office

guidelines, he would not be eligible to get any stagnation increment.
4.

On 19th February, 1994 the respondent made an application

under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 before the
Central Government Labour Court wherein he claimed payment of
stagnation increment on the ground that he fulfilled all the prescribed
requirements to get such increment from 1st September, 1992 to 31st
January, 1994 in terms of the Bipartite Settlement.

The matter was

contested before the Tribunal. The Tribunal however on going through
the record passed an order dated 28th February, 2004 for payment of
Rs.3,737.52 with 6% interest. The bank was directed to pay the
aforesaid amount along with upto date interest to the respondent.
5.

The appellant bank aggrieved by the aforesaid order passed by

(LPA 245/2007)

Page 4 of 8

the Tribunal, filed a writ petition in this Court which was heard by the
learned Single Judge. By order dated 20th February, 2007, the said writ
petition was dismissed upon interpretation of clause 4(B) of the Fifth
Bipartite Settlement and the Note appended thereto, which have been
extracted hereinbefore.
6.

Being aggrieved by the order passed by the learned Single

Judge, the present appeal is filed on which we have heard the learned
counsel appearing for the parties and also perused the record.
7.

The issue that arises for our consideration is as to whether after

reversion to the clerical cadre at his own request, the respondent could
be said to be stagnated in the clerical cadre, for which he may be
entitled to stagnation increment as contemplated in clause 4(B) and the
Note appended thereto.

The learned Single Judge held that the

respondent did not fulfill any of the conditions in the aforesaid Note so
as to make the said Note applicable to him and, therefore, he is entitled
to stagnation increment. The learned Single Judge however stated that
the respondent was offered promotion before 8th September, 1983,
which he accepted and, therefore, the aforesaid clause 4(B) of the 5th
Bipartite Settlement which came into effect from 8th September, 1983
would not be applicable to the case of the respondent, as he was not
offered/selected for promotion after 8th September, 1983. Having held
thus,

it was held by the learned Single Judge that the benefit of

(LPA 245/2007)

Page 5 of 8

stagnation increment cannot and should not be denied to the
respondent.
8.

While issuing notice on this appeal we directed the appellant to

deposit an amount of Rs.3737.52 in this Court which has been deposited
along with 6% interest. Counsel appearing for the appellant has fairly
submitted that the amount is not very huge and, therefore, even if the
said amount is paid to the respondent the appellant would not have any
objection, but the legal issue which has been considered and decided by
the learned Single Judge is erroneous and, therefore, those findings
should not be allowed to stand, as it may affect the appellant adversely
at a future date.
9.

We have gone through the records and examined the aforesaid

legal issue which arose for our consideration as to whether or not the
respondent is entitled to stagnation increment in terms of clause 4(B) of
the 5th Bipartite Settlement and the Note appended thereto. The very
purpose and object of such a beneficial provision is to give benefit to a
person who is not given promotion or cannot get promotion to the next
cadre and is stagnating in the post for want of due promotion for long
time. Eligibility for receiving the stagnation increments at the rates and
frequencies and the terms and conditions are enumerated in the said
clause. In the note appended thereto it was made clear that stagnation
increment would not be given to an employee who at any time after the

(LPA 245/2007)

Page 6 of 8

commencement of the settlement dated 8th September, 1983 and after
being offered and/or selected for promotion, refused to accept such
promotion.

The aforesaid policy admittedly came into effect on 8th

September, 1983 when the respondent was working in the officer cadre.
He himself has sought his reversion and, therefore, it was a unilateral
action on the part of the respondent asking for his reversion to the
clerical cadre. The aforesaid Note, which is appended to Clause 4(B) of
the Bipartite Settlement, was applicable immediately on the voluntary
action on the part of the respondent, as on the date 8th September 1983
he was working on the promoted post and after the commencement of
the said Settlement dated 8th September, 1983 he had refused to
continue with the promotion and wanted reversion back to the clerical
cadre.

The appellant did not mind giving the respondent promotion

and, therefore, there was no cause for stagnation due to action on the
part of the appellant, but it was the voluntary act of the respondent
which

caused

the

said

stagnation.

A

three

year

period

was

contemplated for making one entitled to and eligible for stagnation
increment and if for any reason a person was not promoted for three
years, he could become eligible to claim such benefit.
beneficial provision.

It was a

Here, however, is a case where although the

appellant desired that the respondent should serve on the promoted
post, but due to his own personal difficulty the respondent refused to

(LPA 245/2007)

Page 7 of 8

continue with the said promotion and wanted reversion back to his old
cadre. Therefore, it cannot be said that the aforesaid clause 4(B) along
with the Note appended thereto is not applicable to the case of the
respondent. The findings arrived at by the learned Single Judge
therefore appear to be fallacious. We accordingly set aside the same.
10.

In view of the above discussion, we allow the appeal.

We

however make it clear that we have only considered and decided the
legal issue which arose for our consideration. But so far as the amount
which is deposited in this Court is concerned, it being a very meager
amount and as the appellant has no objection if the said amount is paid
to the respondent with interest accrued thereon, we direct that the said
amount be paid to the respondent along with accrued interest without
prejudice to the legal principles as laid down herein. The appeal stands
disposed of in terms of the aforesaid order.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE
29th February, 2007
“v”

(LPA 245/2007)

Page 8 of 8

