*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 835/2004

%

Date of Decision: 29th February, 2008
SANDEEP ARVIND

..... Appellant
Through Mr.Mohan Kumar, Advocate

versus
D.D.A.

..... Respondent
Through Mr.Ajay Verma, Advocate

CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?no
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? no
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? no
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ:
1.

This appeal is preferred by the appellant on being aggrieved by

the judgment and order dated 23rd August, 2004 passed by the learned
Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant herein.
2.

The appellant through his father was able to put pressure on

the then Lt. Governor so as to get allotment of an agency of retail sale
of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) in an area of South Delhi not only out
of turn but also in derogation of the Rules and Regulations prevalent
during that period. This was probably possible because the father of
the appellant was a Correspondent with the All India Radio. After the
LPA No.835/2004

page 1 of 14

allotment of said agency, pressure was also put on DDA from the office
of the Lt. Governor to allot a shop to the appellant in South Delhi and
give immediate possession thereof for the purpose of running the said
gas agency.
3.

Pursuant to the directions of the Lt. Governor, the DDA by letter

dated 17th July, 1986 informed the appellant that he has been allotted
a shop for gas agency. On 19th December, 1986, another letter was
written by the DDA to the appellant informing him in the following
manner:
“Shri Sandeep Arvind
E-1158, Netaji Nagar,
New Delhi - 23
Subject: Allotment of shop No.8 in Block
AB/B-6, Safdarjung Enclave.
In continuation of this office letter of even
number, dated 17.7.86, on the subject indicated
above, I am directed to write that a sum of Rs.2/lacs (Rupees two lacs only) may please be
deposited “on account” basis along with an
undertaking to the effect that you would pay the
difference, if any, on demand from DDA
immediately within 15 days of receipt of this
office letter, so as to enable us to hand over the
possession of the shop pending finalisation of its
cost to be charged.
Yours faithfully,
sd/( SOM PARKASH )
Deputy Director (CE)”

LPA No.835/2004

page 2 of 14

4.

The

aforesaid

communication

prima

facie

indicates

that

pressure was put on DDA not only for giving out of turn allotment of a
shop at South Delhi to the appellant but also for immediate handing
over of its possession, even before the price for the said shop could be
determined by the competent authority. However, DDA directed the
appellant to deposit “on account” an amount of Rs.2,00,000/- in order
to take possession of the shop pending finalisation of the cost to be
charged from the appellant. Instead of depositing the said amount, the
father of the appellant again approached the Lt. Governor. The same
can be inferred from the file noting dated 19th February, 1987, the
contents of which are reproduced below for reference:
“Under the policy approved by the DDA,
allotment to war widows is made at reserve rates
while allotment to other categories is made at
average auction rate. This shop was withdrawn
from auction on the request of Sh.Arvind Jaiswal
and allotted to his son Shri Sandeep Arvind. His
request for charging reserve rate is not covered
by the policy approved by the DDA. We may,
keeping in view the special circumstances of the
case, allow Shri Sandeep Arvind to make
payment in easy instalments. If approved we
may handover possession to Sh.Sandeep Arvind
on payment of 50% of the reserve price and
obtain an undertaking from him that he would
pay the balance amount based on average
auction rate within a period of 4 years together
with usual interest. This is the maximum period
which is permitted for making payment in
instalments in exceptional cases. Although it is a
hard case, the rules do not permit allotment at
reserve rate, we have to charge auction rate in
the present case.”
LPA No.835/2004

page 3 of 14

5.

Appellant mounted pressure on DDA, which is apparent from

the following note dated 6th November, 1987 put up on the file:
“Shri Arvind Jaiswal, a Correspondent, All India
Radio met the V.C. on 4.11.87 after the Press
Conference. He represented that in spite of the
orders of the L.G. to allot a showroom for running
a gas agency to his son in Safdarjung Enclave
the same has not been handed over so far. He
informed the V.C. that while he was willing to
pay the entire amount due at current auction
rate, possession of the shop should be handed
over to him on payment of 50% of the reserved
price and the balance recovered in easy
instalments within a period of 4 years together
with the interest. The file had been submitted to
Finance to calculate the current auction rate. As
per the orders of the L.G. at page 5/N, the
possession should be handed over to Shri
Sandeep Arvind on payment of 50% of the
reserved price which works out to Rs.38,500/-.
Shri Arvind should be handed over the property
on payment of 50% of the reserved price and
demand letter issued. He should, however, be
asked to execute an undertaking that the entire
amount due against him at current auction rate
plus interest thereon will be paid by him in
instalments fixed by DDA within a period of 4
years. The file may thereafter be sent to Finance
for ascertaining the current auction rate and
total demand.
sd/( P.K. Tripathi )
Commissioner (Lands)
6.11.87”
6.

On perusal of the aforesaid note, it appears that the said note

was the result of an endorsement made by the then Lt. Governor of

LPA No.835/2004

page 4 of 14

Delhi on a letter dated 31st October, 1987. The said endorsement note
reads as under:“I had approved sale of shop on reserve price.
Please process accordingly – immediately.
sd/R. Bhandari”
7.

In consonance with the note dated 6th November, 1987, a

revised demand notice dated 12th November, 1987 was issued in the
name of the appellant, wherein, Shop No.8, Block AB/B-6, Local
Shopping Centre, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi was allotted to the
appellant on payment of Rs.38,500/- being 50% of the premium of
Rs.77,000/-, to be deposited by the appellant within 30 days from the
date of issue of the said letter. The said letter was followed by letter
dated 23rd November, 1987, whereby the appellant was informed that
he was being handed over the possession of the shop on payment of
50% of the reserved price and on submitting an undertaking on a nonjudicial stamp paper of Rs.2/- indicating that he would pay the balance
amount of the shop price on an average auction rate in four equal
instalments.
8.

In accordance with the aforesaid, on 4th December, 1987, the

appellant furnished the following undertaking to DDA on a non judicial
stamp paper. The said undertaking is reproduced below for reference:
“I have been allotted shop No.8, in AB/B-6,
Safdarjung Development Area Market, New
LPA No.835/2004

page 5 of 14

Delhi, by the Delhi Development Authority on
average auction rate to be fixed by the DDA.
And whereas possession of the said shop is being
handed over to me on payment of 50% of the
reserved price of the shop and the balance
amount of average auction rate to be fixed by
the DDA is to be paid by me in four equal annual
instalments of the balance amount.
I, Sandeep Arvind son of Shri A.C. Jaiswal,
resident of E-1158, Netaji Nagar, New Delhi,
hereby undertake to pay the balance cost of the
shop to be fixed by the DDA on an average
auction rate in four equal annual instalments and
when demanded.
Sd/(SANDEEP ARVIND)
S/o Sh. A.C. Jaiswal
R/o E-1158, Netaji Nagar,
New Delhi.”
9.

On receiving the undertaking and 50% of the reserved price,

DDA issued letter dated 11th December, 1987 intimating the appellant
that he could take possession of the shop on 14th December, 1987.
10.

Once possession was taken, the appellant started showing his

true colours, which is manifest from the letter dated 27th December,
1987, written by the appellant to the Lt. Governor. The said letter is as
under:
“The Hon’ble Lt. Governor,
Delhi.
Sir,
As per your kind orders the DDA has
handed over the possession of Shop No.8, in
LPA No.835/2004

page 6 of 14

AB/B-6, Safdarjung Enclave Market for my
Cooking Gas Distributorship against payment of
50% of the Reserved Price i.e. Rs.77,000/-.
Sir, in this connection I wish to bring it to
your kind notice that I have been allotted this
LPG Distributorship on compassionate grounds
as an unemployed graduate under the
Government’s Social Commitments Scheme. In
accordance with Reserve Bank of India Circular
for this Scheme, I have been sanctioned a loan of
Rs.2.22 Lacs only for the entire project by a
Nationalised Bank. I, therefore, request your
kind honour that this shop may be allotted to me
on Reserved Price only as a special case under
your kind discretion and I may not be asked to
pay the Average Auction Rate which will be too
much for me. My father is a Government servant
- a Correspondent in All India Radio and is a very
serious Cardiac patient. As per your orders in
this connection, I shall be paying the balance
50% i.e. Rs.38,500/- in four equal annual
instalments as the project will start generating
income.
Before handing over the possession of this
Shop on 15.12.87 (although this was sanctioned
by you in February, 1987), the DDA has taken an
Undertaking that I should pay the balance of cost
to be calculated on Average Auction Rate.
Sir, I once again request you to kindly
allow me the allotment on Reserve Price only, as
a special case on Compassionate Grounds as I
have no other source of Income and my father is
suffering from a terminal disease.
Thanking you,
Yours faithfully,
Sd/(SANDEEP ARVIND)
S/O ARVIND JAISWAL
A1/257, SAFDARJANG ENCLAVE,
NEW DELHI – 110 029”
LPA No.835/2004

page 7 of 14

11.

In the meantime, DDA by letter dated 5th April, 1998 raised a

demand on the appellant, demanding a premium of Rs.3,44,400/calculated on the basis of average auction rate.

50% of the said

amount was required to be paid within 10 days from the date of issue
of said letter after adjusting the amount already deposited and the
balance 50% in eight equal bi-annual instalments.
12.

It appears that instead of depositing the amount of

instalments, the appellant had meetings with the various higher
officers. Two reminders were also issued to the appellant, one on 7th
June, 1988 and the other on 11th January, 1989 asking the appellant to
clear the arrears of instalments.

It was mentioned in the said two

letters and also in the letter dated 25th January, 1990 that if the
appellant fails to deposit the arrears of the instalments, action to
cancel the allotment would be taken besides recovery of the dues. As
the appellant did not pay any heed to the said letters and in spite of
sufficient opportunity did not deposit the said amount, by letter dated
5th April, 1990 the allotment in favour of appellant was cancelled and
the appellant was requested to hand over vacant possession of the
said shop.
13.

Thereafter, appellant again used his clout and through his

father approached the Ministry of Urban Development. In March, 1999,
under pressure, DDA finally agreed to restore the cancelled allotment,

LPA No.835/2004

page 8 of 14

subject to the appellant depositing an amount of Rs. 10,69,959/- which
was calculated after adding interest and restoration charges. Even at
this stage, the appellant did not deposit the amount. It appears that
the appellant had exhausted his avenues of clout,

as now he

approached the learned Single Judge by filing the aforesaid writ
petition, which came up for consideration and hearing before the
learned Single Judge.

The matter was heard in depth and the writ

petition was consequently dismissed with a detailed reasoned order,
which is under challenge in this appeal, on which we have heard
learned counsel appearing for the parties, who have drawn our
attention to the various records and the documents available.
14.

The learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted

that the respondent could not have changed the stance by demanding
average auction price instead of fixing the price of the allotment at a
compassionate rate as available to war widows etc., having agreed to
do so. Counsel appearing for the appellant also submitted that a fraud
was played by the respondent by making a misrepresentation in the
records and, therefore, due to such misrepresentation, the writ petition
should have been allowed.
15.

In order to appreciate the aforesaid contentions, we have very

minutely perused all the records including the note sheets and other
correspondence available in the original records of the respondent.

LPA No.835/2004

page 9 of 14

There cannot be any denial of the fact that the appellant was given a
concession and, in fact, Rules and Regulations were bent by the
authorities for giving allotment of shop to the appellant for the purpose
of running an agency of retail sale of LPG on an out of turn basis, by
taking out the same from the process of auction. Although the price on
which the said allotment was to be made was not determined and
finalised, pressure was put from the office of the Lt. Governor to put
the appellant into possession of the shop.

It appears that the Delhi

Development Authority under the the said pressure put the appellant
into possession without actually determining the price, which later on
came to be determined with a decision taken for charging average
auction rate for the shop. The aforesaid decision of charging average
auction rate from the appellant was also approved by the Lt. Governor.
The same is evident from the fact that on 28th February, 1987 the Lt.
Governor by putting his signatures gave approval to the note dated
19th February, 1987 whereby the Deputy Director has clearly pointed
out that the Rules do not permit allotment at reserve rate and,
therefore, DDA has to charge average auction rate in the aforesaid
case.
16.

Even thereafter also there is a note appearing in the record

which is dated 15th March, 1989 of the Deputy Director (CE), wherein
he has pointed out that the allotment was made on the current auction

LPA No.835/2004

page 10 of 14

price to the appellant, as approved by the LG on 28 th February, 1987.
It was also mentioned therein that Shri Arvind Jaiswal even informed
the Vice Chairman, when he met him on 4th November, 1987, as would
be clear from the note of Commissioner (Lands) dated 6th November,
1987 that he is willing to pay the entire dues on current rate and
possession of the shop may be handed over to him on payment of 50%
of the reserve price and that the balance amount be recovered in easy
instalments together with interest.

It is also pointed out in the said

note that in terms of the aforesaid demand and assurance given, the
appellant was allowed to take over possession after he had deposited
50% of the reserve price.

It is also indicated therein that after the

market price was got fixed, the appellant was intimated under office
letter dated 5th April, 1988 asking him to deposit the amount in eight
equal half yearly instalments. Approval was also given to the said note
by the Lt. Governor on 29th November, 1989 with a specific direction
that the appellant should be informed and told to make his payments.
In this connection we may refer to the aforesaid noting as appearing in
the file.
“He should be informed and told to make his
payments.
Sd/L.G. 29.11.1989”

LPA No.835/2004

page 11 of 14

17.

Although

the

Lt.

Governor

in

his

note

has

given

an

endorsement, yet such endorsement which is in violation of the Rules
and Regulations was not rightly accepted by the Delhi Development
Authority and instead the appellant was directed to pay average
auction rate.

He was allotted the shop out of turn and he took

possession of the shop on 14th December, 1987 after giving an
undertaking to the effect that he would pay the average auction rate,
which is clear on a bare perusal of the undertaking, which is available
on record. Even otherwise, the directive of the Lt. Governor dated 29th
November, 1989, directing the appellant to make payment of
demanded amount which is at the rate of average auction rate, would
supersede any prior direction for charging reserve price. In any case,
reference of the Lt. Governor to charge only reserve price was also
contrary to the Rules and Regulations and the same could not have
acted by the Delhi Development Authority, which rightly refused to
accept the same.
18.

On going through the records, we are satisfied that the Lt.

Governor sought to bend the Rules and Regulations by asking the
appellant to pay only the reserve price instead of paying the auction
price, which was required to be paid for allotment of the aforesaid
shop. Whatever action has been taken by the DDA, appears to have
been taken in order to safeguard the interest of the public exchequer.

LPA No.835/2004

page 12 of 14

It is true that in the counter affidavit filed, there was a wrong
statement made by the deponent contending that there was no
endorsement of the Lt. Governor. The said endorsement and the letter
is not contained in the main file but is a part of the part file of original
record.

It may so happen that the person, who had filed the said

affidavit, might have come to the conclusion that there is no such
letter and endorsement of the Lt. Governor on the representation of
the appellant, as no such document was filed in the main file and it was
only a part of the part file of the original file. Be that as it may,
subsequently a proper affidavit was filed in the nature of an additional
affidavit in which it was disclosed that such endorsement was received.
In that view of the matter, we are not persuaded to accept the
contention of the counsel appearing for the appellant that any fraud
was played.
19.

Even the contention of the appellant that the allotment of the

shop in question had been made to the appellant on compassionate
ground has no merit and it seems that the same is an afterthought and
creation of the appellant’s mind to serve his purpose, as there is no
material to suggest the same.

Even otherwise, the allotment on

compassionate ground, if any, is given where there is extreme
hardship, which in the opinion of the authority deserves sympathetic
consideration in view of the special circumstances of a case at a given

LPA No.835/2004

page 13 of 14

time. Also, the discretionary power, if any, vested with the authority
has to be exercised to advance and subserve the purpose for which the
power exist. (See: Shiv Sagar Tiwari v. Union of India & Others reported
(1997) 1 SCC 444).

In the present case, as is clear from the above

discussion, the clout of the appellant’s father was capitalised in order
to get the out of turn allotment of the said shop.
20.

We are of the considered opinion that the appellant has

enjoyed the property without making payment of the dues which was
required to be paid. There could not have been allotment of the shop
in question at a reserved price, as the appellant was not entitled to get
allotment of a shop like that at a reserved price particularly when the
same is a part of the auction sale and the price required to be paid for
allotment of such shop is auction sale price. The appellant is bound to
make payment in the aforesaid manner along with all arrears within
eight weeks from today,

failing which appropriate action could be

taken by the respondent in accordance with law.
21.

The appeal is dismissed with costs, which is quantified at

Rs.20,000/-.

CHIEF JUSTICE
REVA KHETRAPAL, J

29 FEBRUARY, 2008
nm
th

LPA No.835/2004

page 14 of 14

