*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) 406/2007

%

Date of Decision: 29th February, 2008
RAM NIWAS

…….APPELLANT
Through: Mr.Subhash Markandeya,
Sr.Advocate with Mr.Ritam
Aggarwal , Advocates.
Versus

PITAMBER SINGH & OTHERS
……RESPONDENTS
Through:Mr.Manmohan Gupta,
Advocate for R-1 & 4 and LRs
of R-5&6
Mr.Ravi Gupta with Mr.Ankit Jain,
Advocates for R-2&3
CORAM:
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ? yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?
yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ
1.

By this judgment we propose to dispose of this appeal filed

by the appellant being aggrieved by the impugned judgment and
order, dated 19th September, 2007, passed by the learned Single
Judge in the suit filed by the appellant.

In the said suit, the

following issues were framed:
(FAO(OS) 406/2007)

Page 1 of 7

“1. Whether late Smt.Mishri Devi
executed a valid and legal Will dated
18.11.1971 ? (OPD1)
2. Whether the order dated 23.7.1996 in
Case No.704/1988 passed by Shri
K.K.Dahiya,
SDM/R.A
is
void,
inoperative, ab initio and non est ?
(OPP)
3. Whether the sale deeds executed by
defendant No.1 in favour of defendants
No.2 to 6 on 25.7.1996 are null and void
and illegal ? (OPP)
4. Whether the mutations made by the
Revenue
Authority
in
favour
of
defendant No.2, defendant No.4(i) and
(ii), defendant No.5 and defendant No.6
are liable to be declared illegal and null
and void ? (OPP)
5. Whether this Court has the
jurisdiction
to
determine
the
controversy raised in issues No.2 to 4 ?
(OPP)
6. Relief
2.

In the suit, the defendants took up the plea that except for

issue No.1, the rest of the issues namely, issue Nos.2, 3 & 4,
cannot be tried by a Civil Court. Issue No.5 was framed in the light
of the said objection taken up by the defendants. Issue No.5 came
to be decided in the impugned judgment and order in favour of the
defendants. The findings recorded therein are under challenge in
(FAO(OS) 406/2007)

Page 2 of 7

this appeal on which we have heard the learned counsel appearing
for the parties.
3.

During the course of arguments, counsel for the appellant

had to concede that so far as issue Nos. 2&4 are concerned, they
are probably issues which cannot be decided by a Civil Court and
may have to be referred to a Revenue Court for decision, as the
said issues relate to title. In this connection, reference was made
to the provisions of Section 186 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act,
1954. In sub-section (1) of Section 186 it is provided that if there
is any dispute with regard to title of any party to the land which is
the subject matter of revenue proceedings, in that event the Court
may frame an issue on the said question of title and submit the
record for decision of the civil court. The issues, namely, issue
Nos.2&4, therefore, are required to be considered by the Revenue
Court and if the Revenue Court is of the opinion that the said
issues relate to the question of title then the same are required to
be referred to the competent Civil Court for its decision as laid
down under Section 186(1) of the Delhi Land Reforms Act.

To the

aforesaid extent there is also admission on the part of the
appellant which is disclosed from the impugned order, where the
learned Single Judge referred to the said admission thus:
(FAO(OS) 406/2007)

Page 3 of 7

“Learned senior counsel appearing for the
plaintiff submits that the Order dated 12.03.2007
needs to be modified to the extent that it is only
issues no.2 & 4 which cannot be tried by the Civil
Court (Collateral proceedings being pending
before the Revenue Court) and not issue no.3.”
4.

The aforesaid admission and concession made before the

Learned Single Judge on behalf of the appellant clinches the issue
that the aforesaid issues namely, issue Nos. 2 & 4 cannot be
decided by the Civil Court and are required to be considered by
the Revenue Court in an appropriate proceeding. We are informed
that the said proceeding is pending as of date and, therefore, it
would be proper for the appellant to take recourse to the
provisions of Section 186(1) of the Act and in case the appellant is
able to satisfy the Revenue Court that the provisions of Section
186(1) are applicable, in that event, the appropriate Revenue
Court would pass an order in accordance with law.
5.

We are, therefore, now left with question as to whether or

not issue No.3 is also required to be decided by the competent
Revenue Court as contended by the respondent or whether the
Civil Court may be required to decide the same only when there is

a reference to that effect by the competent Revenue Court.
6.

Issue No.3 is extracted hereinbefore and pertains to

(FAO(OS) 406/2007)

Page 4 of 7

illegality and invalidity of the sale deed which is executed by
defendant No.1 in favour of defendant Nos. 2 to 6. The aforesaid
issue is also inextricably connected with issue Nos. 2&4 and,
therefore, without deciding the aforesaid issues, issue No.3 cannot
be decided by the Civil Court. In our considered opinion therefore
since all the issues namely, issue Nos. 2, 3 & 4 are intrinsically
connected with each other, all the aforesaid issues were rightly
held to be triable by the Revenue Court.
7.

In this connection we may refer to the decision of the

Supreme Court in Hatti v. Sunder Singh reported in 1970 (2) SCC
841. In paragraph 7 of the said judgment, it was held as under:
“7. The High Court, in this connection, referred to
Section 186 of the Act under which any question
raised regarding the title of any party to the land
which is the subject-matter of a suit or proceeding
under the First Schedule has to be referred by the
Revenue Court to the competent Civil Court for
decision after framing an issue on that question.
Inference was sought to be drawn from this provision
that questions of title could be competently agitated
by a suit in the Civil Court, as the jurisdiction of the
Civil Court was not barred. It appears to us that
there is no justification for drawing such an
inference. On the contrary, Section 186 envisages
that questions of title will arise before the Revenue
Courts in suits or proceedings under the First
Schedule and, only if such a question arises in a
competent proceeding pending in a Revenue
Court,an issue will be framed and referred to the Civil
Court. Such a provision does not give jurisdiction to
the Civil Court to entertain the suit itself on a
(FAO(OS) 406/2007)

Page 5 of 7

question of title. The jurisdiction of the Civil court is
limited to deciding the issue of title referred to it by
the Revenue Court. This clearly implies that, if a
question of title is raised in an application for
declaration of Bhumidari rights under Item 4 of
Schedule-I of the Act, that question will then be
referred by the Revenue Assistant to the Civil Court;
but a party wanting to raise such a question of title in
order to claim Bhumidari right cannot directly
approach the Civil Court. The Act is a complete Code
under which it is clear that any one, wanting a
declaration of his right as Bhumidar, or aggrieved by
a declaration issued without notice to him in favour
of another, can approach the Revenue Assistant
under Item 4 of the First Schedule and this he is
allowed to do without any period of limitation,
because he may not be aware of the fact that a
declaration has been issued in respect of his holding
in favour of another. A declaration by a Gaon Sabha
of the right of any person can also be sought without
any period of limitation. If there is dispute as to
possession of agricultural land, the remedy has to be
sought under Section 84, read with item 19 of the
First Schedule.
All the reliefs claimed by the
respondent in the present suit were, thus, within the
competent jurisdiction of the Revenue Assistant, and
the Civil court had no jurisdiction to entertain the
suit.”

8.

When the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court are

read in conjunction with the provisions of Section 186 of the Act,
which was interpreted in the said decision, it is established that
the Civil Court would have no jurisdiction to try and decide directly
in respect of matters of title. In such cases, proceeding has to he
initiated before the Revenue Court and in such a proceeding, if a
question arises with regard to title, the said issue would be framed
(FAO(OS) 406/2007)

Page 6 of 7

and referred to the Civil Court.
9.

In our considered opinion, the aforesaid situation would

arise in the present case also. If in case the appellant is able to
prove before the learned Revenue Court that the aforesaid three
issues refer to matters of title directly, in that event the Revenue
Court would have jurisdiction to frame issue with regard to title
and refer the same to the decision of the Civil Court. The decision
rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Dulabhai & Others
v. State of M.P. & Anr reported in (1968) 3 SCR 682 and relied
upon by the appellant, in our considered opinion, is not applicable
to the facts of the present case. Whether or not there would be
devolution of Bhumidari interest on defendant No.1 would be a
matter to be considered by the Revenue Court initially and
therefore, the contention raised by the appellant is without merit.
There is no merit in this appeal which is dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

(REVA KHETRAPAL)
JUDGE
29th FEBRUARY, 2008
“v’
(FAO(OS) 406/2007)

Page 7 of 7

