*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 42/2008

%

Date of decision: 31.1.2008

NATWAR DALMIA EX-DIRECTOR APOLLO
..... Appellants
STONES LTD & ANR
Through:Mr. Kirti Uppal and Mr.Ranjeet Singh,
Advocates.
versus
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA & ORS
..... Respondents
Through:Mr. H.S. Parihar and Mr. K.S. Parihar,
Advocates for respondent No.1/RBI.
Mr. Rajiv Kapur, Advocate for respondent
No.2/SBI.
Mr. Subhash Bansal, Senior Central
Government Standing Counsel with Mr. Raghav
Bansal, Advocate for respondent No.3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
to see the judgment ?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?No

LPA No.42/2008

page No.1

of

5

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (oral)
1.

We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant

as also the counsel appearing for the Reserve Bank of India and the
counsel appearing for the respondent No.3. The learned Single Judge
has passed an order on 22.11.2007 modifying and issuing certain
directions in respect of pre-deposit to be made by the appellant and
also directing the Appellate Tribunal to consider the appeal of the
appellant and decide according to law with a further direction to the
Reserve Bank of India to consider the request of the appellant in terms
of the existing policies. The aforesaid directions and observations of
the learned Single Judge are contained in para 16 of the order which is
extracted hereinbelow:“16. In view of the above, I am of the opinion that this
petition can be disposed of with appropriate direction.
It is accordingly directed as follows :1.
The RBI shall consider the petitioner's request in
terms of its existing policies and pass an order as early
as
possible
and
in
any
case
within
two
months from today, from the date of the petitioner
making a comprehensive representation to it in terms
of Section 18 read with Rule 8 of the FERA.
2.
The petitioner shall make his representation to
the RBI within four weeks from today. A copy of the
same shall be furnished to the SBI as well as the other
respondents.

LPA No.42/2008

page No.2

of

5

3.
The impugned order of the Tribunal requiring the
pre-deposit of 40% is hereby modified having regard
to the facts. Instead of the direction to pay 40%, the
petitioner shall ensure deposit of 20% of the amount.
This shall be done within 12 weeks from today.
4.
The RBI shall communicate its decision to the
petitioner, SBI as well as the Appellate Tribunal, within
12 weeks from today.
5.
The Appellate Tribunal shall consider the appeal
of the petitioner,and decide according to law, after 14
weeks from today.”
2.

On hearing the counsel appearing for the appellant and the

counsel for the respondent, we find no reason to take a different view
than what is taken by the learned Single Judge for the simple reason
that on interpretation of the provisions of Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1973, particularly the provisions of Section 18 thereof and also
the provisions of Section 49(3) & (4) as also Section 49(6) of the FEMA,
it was held that the obligations, rights and liabilities arising under FERA
would be continued so far the appellant is concerned. We find that the
learned Single Judge has given an opportunity to the appellant to file a
representation to the RBI, which when filed was directed to be
considered by the RBI in terms of the existing policies of the RBI and
also to pass an order as early as possible, preferably within two months
from the date of making the comprehensive application to the RBI. In
the meantime, a direction was also issued that since the appellant has
LPA No.42/2008

page No.3

of

5

also filed an appeal, the said appeal should be considered by the
Appellate Tribunal when the appellant deposits 20% of the amount as
pre-deposit. On consideration of the records we find that the Appellate
Tribunal had issued a direction to the appellant to deposit 40% of the
amount as a pre-deposit with a direction that on deposit of the said
40% of the amount the appeal shall be heard. The aforesaid order of
the Appellate Tribunal was modified to the extent that only 20% of the
amount was directed to be deposited by the appellant which will
enable the appellant to get a hearing of the appeal.
3.

We find no reason to interfere with the aforesaid order.

However, we now permit the appellant to file a comprehensive
representation in terms of the order of the learned Single Judge within
two weeks from today. On receipt of the said representation from the
appellant, the RBI shall consider his request in terms of the existing
policies and pass an order within a period of six weeks from the date of
appellant making the representation to the RBI in terms of Section 18
read with Rule 8 of the FERA. Copies of the said representation may
also be furnished to the counsel for the other respondents including
the respondent No.3, who may take appropriate steps at their end to
pursue the matter so that the orders passed by this Court are duly
complied with.

The appellant is permitted to deposit 20% of the

amount within two months and on deposit of the aforesaid amount, the

LPA No.42/2008

page No.4

of

5

Appellate Tribunal shall proceed to hear the appeal filed by the
appellant and decide the issue arising therefrom according to law as
expeditiously as possible.
4.

In terms of the aforesaid order, the appeal stands disposed of.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
JANUARY
Rohtash

LPA No.42/2008

31, 2008

page No.5

of

5

