*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

LPA No. 189/ 2009 & C.M. No. 6153/2009

M/S FIVE DIMENSIONS COMPUTERS (P) LTD. ..... Appellant
Through:
Mr. G. C.Sharma, Advocate.
versus
GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through:
Mr. Rajeshwar Kumar Gupta,
Advocate No. 2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE NEERAJ KISHAN KAUL
ORDER
%
01.05.2009
1.

The present appeal arises out of the impugned order dated 8th

April, 2009 passed by the learned Single Judge.

2.

The respondent No. 2/Workman (original respondent No. 2 in

the Writ Petition) was employed with the appellant-Management
(original petitioner in the Writ Petition). As per the respondent No. 2,
the Management illegally terminated his services.

Since the

Management did not make any payment pursuant to the demand
notice sent by respondent No. 2, therefore, the application under
Section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 was filed before
the Labour Court. The notice of the application was served by way of
affixation

but

nobody

appeared

on

Management before the Labour Court.

behalf

of

the

appellant-

The appellant-Management

was proceeded ex parte and the Award was passed against the
appellant-Management.

LPA No.189/2009

Page 1 of 3

3.

Learned counsel for the appellant submitted before the learned

Single Judge that no notice was ever served upon the appellant and
the Labour Court wrongly passed the ex parte order.

As per the

appellant-Management, it is nowhere recorded in the statement of the
Process Server that he had affixed the summons after the same was
refused by any representative of the appellant-Management and thus,
the affixation was not as per the provisions of Order V Rule 20 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

4.

The respondent, on the other hand, pointed out before the

learned Single Judge that the appellant-Management was throughout
aware of the proceedings before the Labour Court and deliberately
chose not to appear. As per respondent No. 2, the Labour Court also
recorded the statement of Process Server to satisfy itself whether the
Process Server had visited the premises of the appellant-Management
or not so as to affect the service. The counsel for the respondent No.
2 further submitted before the learned Single Judge that as per the
appellant it had come to know about the Award through notice dated
6th February, 2008 then how could the appellant have obtained a
certified copy of the Award earlier from the Copying Agency on 31st
October, 2007. The respondent No. 2 pointed out the said date from
the certified copy placed on record by the appellant where the seal of
the Copying Agency was affixed.

It was then contended by

respondent No. 2 that the appellant had deliberately tried to mislead
the Court that it came to know about the ex parte Award only
through the office of Labour Commissioner or through the office of

LPA No.189/2009

Page 2 of 3

Assistant Collector.
5.

The learned Single Judge has rightly held that the appellant

was well aware of the ex parte Award at least when it had applied for
certified copy and since the appellant had suppressed these facts by
not mentioning the same in the petition, the Court would not exercise
its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India in favour of the appellant who had not approached the Court
with clean hands. It is a fundamental principle of law that a person
invoking the jurisdiction of the Court must come with clean hands
and must make a full and complete disclosure of the facts to the
Court.

6.

The learned Single Judge has rightly dismissed the writ

petition and directed the amount deposited by the appellant
pursuant to the direction given by the Court to be released in favour
of respondent No. 2 along with interest, if any accrued thereupon.

7.

In view of what has been stated hereinabove, we see no

infirmity in the order passed by the learned Single Judge. The appeal
is accordingly dismissed. The pending application also stands
disposed of.

CHIEF JUSTICE

NEERAJ KISHAN KAUL, J
May 01, 2009
sb

LPA No.189/2009

Page 3 of 3

