*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 397/2007 & CM No. 7910/2007
N.D.M.C.

..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Rajesh Mahajan, Advocate.
versus

%

AVAT RAM MAMTANI
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Anil Mittal, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE NEERAJ KISHAN KAUL
ORDER
11.05.2009

1.

The appellant (original respondent in the writ petition) is

aggrieved by the decision of the learned Single Judge dated 30th April,
2007. Briefly stated the facts of the present case are as follows:-

2.

A shop was allotted to the respondent (original petitioner in

the writ petition) in 1950. In 1992, the respondent requested that
the shop be transferred in the name of his son. Two years later, the
respondent was asked to confirm that he had given his „No Objection‟
for transfer of allotment in favour of his son. The respondent gave his
confirmation by letter dated 22nd March, 1994. By a letter dated 4th
May, 1994, the son of the respondent was informed that he should
visit the office of the New Delhi Municipal Corporation (in short
„NDMC‟) within 7 days for executing fresh licence deed, affidavit to
the effect that he did not own any shop in Delhi, to make a fresh
security deposit and pay municipal charges from 30th March, 1993

LPA No.397/2007

Page 1 of 6

onwards. The respondent‟s son made security deposit and signed the
licence deed. He also deposited the amount as demanded towards
monthly charges and interest. Despite all this, no fresh licence deed
was issued in favour of the respondent‟s son. Reminders were sent
by the respondent but to no avail. In 2001, the respondent received
a demand notice for payment of certain amounts. The respondent
protested against this demand.

However, the demand was not

withdrawn and the respondent accordingly wrote on 14th February,
2002 stating that he was no longer interested in getting the allotment
transferred exclusively in favour of the son and that the name of the
son be added along with his name. Thereafter demands were raised
on

the

respondent

outstanding.

towards

licence

fee/damages

which

were

The respondent again wrote on 22nd April, 2003

withdrawing his request for transfer of shop exclusively in the name
of his son and requested that his son's name be added with his name
without enhancing the licence fee. Nothing happened thereafter.
Correspondence was exchanged between the parties and certain
challans issued to the respondent by the NDMC towards arrears and
damages including interest. By a letter dated 20th July, 2004, the
respondent was informed that the NDMC had turned down his
request for renewal of licence fee in his name along with the name of
the son without enhancement of the fee. The reason for this was
stated to be the failure of the respondent and his son to complete
formalities for execution of licence deed and making payment
pursuant to the earlier demand letters of NDMC.

The respondent

clarified vide his letter dated 22nd July, 2004, that he had made all

LPA No.397/2007

Page 2 of 6

payments and had handed over the signed licence deed to the NDMC.
The matter was also referred to the Lok Adalat. However, ultimately
when the respondent received the impugned demand notice dated
18th January, 2005, the appellant filed the writ petition out of which
the present appeal arises.

3.

Essentially, the case of the NDMC in the writ petition was that

the respondent having conveyed his „No Objection‟ and having
handed over possession could not withdraw his request for transfer of
the licence to his son. In the reply filed by the NDMC in the writ
petition, it nowhere denied that the respondent had made an
application for transfer of the allotment in the name of his son, the
fact that the son of the respondent made the security deposit, signed
the licence deed and paid the municipal charges.

It was simply

stated that these were “matter of record”. It was not even denied that
although the son of the respondent had handed over the licence deed
to the NDMC for their counter signatures and execution, the NDMC
did not do anything about the same.

There was no justifiable

explanation forthcoming for the unconscionable delay on the part of
the NDMC in considering the request of the respondent. Since the
respondent did not hear anything from the NDMC even after NDMC
framed its policy for transfer of stalls on 18th March, 1999, he wrote a
letter on 14th February, 2002 stating that he was not interested in
getting the allotment transferred in favour of his son.

4.

The learned Single Judge has correctly, in our view, held that

LPA No.397/2007

Page 3 of 6

the NDMC was not justified in its stand that the respondent could
not withdraw his request particularly when it failed to complete its
part of the transaction and communicate to the respondent its
decision one way or the other for over 11 years. The learned Single
Judge also took note of the fact that as per 18th March, 1999 policy, if
the said policy were to be applied to the respondent, then the request
of the respondent for transfer of allotment in the name of his son
ought to have been permitted in the category of „non-dependent
family members‟ with 30% enhancement.

It appears that even prior

to this date, transfers were being permitted. There seems to be no
reason why NDMC kept sitting on the respondent‟s application
without doing anything till 2002.

Nowhere does the NDMC, in its

affidavit in the writ petition, states that it has, in fact, recorded the
change of such allotment in favour of the respondent‟s son. In those
circumstances, the learned Single Judge rightly held that for the
NDMC to insist on enhanced fee as if the respondent had parted with
possession and allotment stood transferred to his son, was entirely
without basis and unreasonable. The learned Single Judge correctly
observed that the respondent having withdrawn his request for
transfer in favour of his son, the NDMC was no longer justified in
persisting with raising bills for the enhanced licence fee. There was,
admittedly, no formal transfer of the allotment in favour of
respondent‟s son and viewed from any angle, the respondent was
justified in withdrawing his request for transfer in favour of his son.

5.

We see no infirmity in the finding of the learned Single Judge

LPA No.397/2007

Page 4 of 6

that the demand of enhanced fee on the footing that the licence stood
transferred to the respondent‟s son was, in the circumstances,
unjustified. The respondent was entitled to seek refund of the
amount of enhanced licence fee paid by him. The learned Single
Judge was absolutely right in holding that since no transfer took
place, no enhanced fee was payable and the NDMC was bound to
calculate all the amounts paid by the respondent towards enhanced
licence fees and refund it to him. The allotment of shop/stall No. 46,
Janpath, was correctly held by the learned Single Judge to be treated
as standing in the exclusive name of the respondent.

6.

During the course of arguments, the counsel for the appellant

sought to place reliance on the relinquishment deed executed by the
respondent on 4th April, 1996 in favour of his son.

As per the

respondent the relinquishment deed was executed by the respondent
in aid of his application for transfer of allotment which never
fructified. Nowhere did the NDMC, in its affidavit in the writ petition,
ever say that it had, in fact, recorded the change of such allotment in
favour of the respondent‟s son. It did not indicate any fresh licence
deed that had been executed in favour of the respondent‟s son. For
the NDMC, to now insist, relying on the relinquishment deed and
reading it completely out of context, to suggest that the respondent
had parted with possession and thus the allotment stood transferred
to his son was entirely without basis and unreasonable. The action
of every instrumentality of the State has to be informed by reason.
There has to be fair play in action. Arbitrariness is the anti-thesis of

LPA No.397/2007

Page 5 of 6

equality as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The
actions of the NDMC and the stand taken by them clearly reflect nonapplication of mind and a completely unreasonable and arbitrary
approach.

It was, in fact, the NDMC which failed to discharge its

duties and failed to complete its part of the transaction and
communicate to the respondent its decision one way or the other for
over 11 years.

The stand of the NDMC and their reliance on the

relinquishment deed is completely misplaced and of no relevance
whatsoever.

7.

In the light of what is stated hereinabove, we find no infirmity

in the findings of the learned Single Judge and the appeal is
accordingly dismissed. The pending application also stands disposed
of.

CHIEF JUSTICE

MAY 11, 2009
sb

LPA No.397/2007

NEERAJ KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page 6 of 6

