*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: 7th November, 2007
Crl.M.C.No.3592/2006

#

DR. V. NATRAJAN

!

.....Petitioner

Through Mr. Maninder Singh with Mr. Ajay Kumar, Advocates
versus

$

STATE & ANR.

^

..... Respondents
Through Mr.O.P.Saxena, APP for State.

Mr. Prashant Mendiratta, Advocate for R-2.
CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The present petition is filed under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
for quashing of complaint case titled as ‘Nairsons I.T. Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Sai Priya
Consultants (P) Ltd. & Ors.’ under Sections 138/142 of the Negotiable Instruments
Act pending in the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkardooma Courts as also
the order dated 03-01-2003 of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate whereby the
present petitioner was summoned as an accused.

2.

The Respondent no. 2 complainant, filed a complaint case against M/s. Sai

Priya Consultants Pvt. Ltd. and its Directors under Section 138 read with 141 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act and in that case petitioner herein was summoned as
an accused who appeared in Court and moved an application under Section 245
Cr.P.C. for discharge on the ground that since he was only a sleeping director of the
Company and was not involved in the day to day functioning as well as conduct of
the business of the Company and also that at the time of alleged offence in the
year 2002 he was gainfully employed elsewhere he was not responsible for any
act of M/s. Sai Priya Consultants Pvt. Ltd. It is alleged in the petition that the
application of the petitioner-accused for his discharge was rejected by the
Metropolitan Magistrate referring to the judgment passed by Hon’b le Supreme
Court in case “Adalat Prasad Vs. Rooplal Jindal”, 2004 (3) JCC 1347. Feeling
aggrieved, the petitioner filed this petition before this Court for quashing of the
complaint and the summoning order.
3.

I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and learned counsel for

the respondent no.2, complainant.
4.

The only submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner in

support of his prayer for quashing of the complaint qua the petitioner was that the
complaint does not contain any averment from which it could be inferred that the
petitioner was in any way in-charge of and managing day to day affairs of the
Company, namely, M/s. Sai Priya Consultants Pvt. Ltd. and therefore, he could not

have been summoned as an accused in respect of the offence allegedly committed
by the said Company. Learned counsel placed reliance upon two judgments of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court reported as “S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs. Neeta Bhalla
& Anr.”, 2005 (8) SCC 89 and 2007 (1) JCC 112, “N.K.Wahi Vs. Shekhar Singh &
Ors.”. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent no. 2 contended that
there was no deficiency in the complaint regarding the liability of the present
petitioner inasmuch as in para no. 1 itself of the complaint it had been
categorically pleaded by the complainant that the Directors, respondents no. 2 to 4
in the complaint, including the present petitioner were in-charge and responsible
for the affairs and business of the said Company.
5.

The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the S.M.S. Pharmaceutical’s and N.K.Wahi’s

case(supra) has held that in a complaint under Section 138 Negotiable
Instruments Act filed against a Company any of its Directors are also impleaded as
accused persons then the complaint must contain an averment that these
Directors were in-charge and responsible for the conduct of the business of the
Company at the time of commission of the offence. However, in the present case
the complainant had not averred in its complaint that the present petitioner was incharge and responsible for the management of the affairs of the accused
Company at the time of the commission of the offence alleged to have been
committed by the accused Company and a simple averment to the effect that the
petitioner was in-charge and responsible for the affairs of the accused Company

will not satisfy the requirement of law, as laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in the above referred two cases.

Therefore, the learned Magistrate was not

justified in entertaining the complaint against the present petitioner and
summoning him as an accused.
6.

In the result, this petition is allowed and the complaint filed against the

petitioner by M/s. Nairsons IT Pvt. Ltd., respondent no. 2 herein, under Sections
138/142 of the Negotiable Instruments Act as well as the order of the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate dated 3rd January, 2003 summoning him as an accused
are hereby quashed.

November 7, 2007
sh

P.K.BHASIN,J

