*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No. 6638/2006
Date of Decision: 5th December, 2007

%
#

Rajni Bhargava

!

.....Petitioner
Through Mr. Vijay Aggarwal, Advocate
versus

$

The State of NCT of Delhi & Anr.

^

...Respondents

Through Mr. M.N. Dudeja, APP for State.
Mr. Gagan Minocha with Mr. Abhineet Gulati, Advocates
for the complainant

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT
P.K. BHASIN, J:
This petition is filed by the petitioner under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 for setting aside of the order dated 04.06.2004 passed by the
Metropolitan Magistrate during the pendency of a criminal case arising out of FIR

no. 263/2003 registered at police station Alipur on 02.08.2003 under Sections
381/420/408/120-B I.P.C. against the petitioner and her husband at the instance
of respondent no. 2 whereby application of the State for attaching some
immovable properties of the petitioner was allowed.
2.

Briefly stated, facts of the case leading to the filing of the present petition are

that complainant Company (M/s Sun Star Overseas Ltd.) had employed the
husband of the petitioner for obtaining the DEPB(duty entitled pass book) licenses
in the name of Company and selling them in open market on behalf of the
Company (M/s Sunstar Overseas Ltd.) at the prevailing market price. Husband of
the petitioner had allegedly stolen some licenses and sold them in open market at
an inflated price to the firms owned by himself and the petitioner herein and had
misappropriated the amount of the Company to the tune of Rs. 32 Lacs. On a
criminal complaint being filed in Court the Metropolitan Magistrate passed an
order under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. The police investigated the matter and upon
investigation filed a charge-sheet in the concerned court against one Adesh Mohan.
The petitioner and her husband were kept in column no. 2 of the charge-sheet.
Thereafter on 22.05.2004 the Investigating Officer moved an application in Court
for attachment of one residential house and one plot of the petitioner alleging that
her husband in his disclosure statement had disclosed that he had purchased the
house and the plot in the name of his wife out of the misappropriated money of the
complainant. The learned Metropolitan Magistrate on 03.06.2004 ordered placing

of the case file with that application on 4-6-2004 and on 04.06.2004 on the
application itself passed an order like this:
“Heard, application allowed in the interest of justice.”

Thereafter the investigating officer sealed the two properties and as a result of
sealing of the residential house the petitioner and her family got dispossessed
from that house on 07.06.2004.
4.

Aggrieved by the said order dated 04.06.2004 the petitioner has filed this

petition. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that after filing of the challan
in the Court the police has no power to seal any property and that in any case no
notice of the attachment application was given to the petitioner-accused by the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate and he passed the impugned order ex-parte. It
was also contended that even otherwise simply because the petitioner’s husband
had in his alleged confessional statement claimed that he had purchased the two
properties in her name out of the misappropriated amount the Magistrate was not
justified in ordering attachment when the State was not claiming that in fact those
properties were purchased from misappropriated amount. Finally, it was submitted
that the properties in any case could not be sealed and the petitioner could not be
dispossessed from her house like that and so she should be restored back the
possession. Learned counsel further submitted that if the petitioner is given back
the possession of the two properties which have been sealed by the police she
would neither part with the possession of those properties nor would she create

any third party interest in those properties.
5.

Learned counsel for the respondent no. 2, however, supported the impugned

order of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate and submitted that the Magistrate
had the power under Section 105 (c) (1) of Cr.P.C. to attach the properties which
are suspected to have been obtained by the accused through ‘proceeds of crime’.
Learned APP for the State also supported the impugned order, but half heartedly.
6.

I have given my due consideration to the rival submissions of the parties and

have come to the conclusion that this petition deserves to be allowed on the short
ground that the application moved by the State for attachment of properties was
allowed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate without giving its notice to the
accused (petitioner herein) which the Magistrate should not have done. The order
which he passed had serious consequences and so the least which should have
been done by the Magistrate was to give a chance to the accused to file reply and
to argue the matter before the disposal of that application. Even the haste shown
by the learned Magistrate in passing the impugned order immediately on filing of
the attachment application appears to be unjustified in view of the fact that in the
attachment application itself it was not even averred that the petitioner was
intending to dispose of the two properties and to avoid that some urgent order
needed to be passed. In this view of the matter, other points viz. whether
Magistrate has powers to attach any property during the trial when the police itself
had not seized any property during investigation and whether after attachment

order passed by the Court the police can dispossess the occupant and seal the
property need not be gone into by me.
7.

In view of the above, this petition is allowed and the matter is remanded back

to the trial Court with directions to take up the attachment application afresh after
issuing notice to the accused (petitioner herein). The SHO concerned is directed to
restore back to the petitioner-accused possession of property bearing no. A-3/65,
Sector-15, Rohini, Delhi-85 and plot no. 37, Khasra No. 103/7, Rajiv Nagar, PhaseII, Begam Pur, Delhi within four days. It is, however, also directed that the
petitioner shall not transfer or create any third party interest in the two properties
without the prior permission of the trial Court.

December 5, 2007
sh

P.K.BHASIN, J

