* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ Crl. M.C. No. 2639/2006
% Date of Decision: 2nd January, 2008
#

Rajiv Khurana.....Petitioner

!

Through Ms. Rebecca M. John with Mr. Vishal Gosain

versus

$

The State of NCT of Delhi & Anr.

^

....Respondents

Through Mr.Pawan Behl, APP for the State.

CORAM:
*
1.

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?(No)

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:

The petitioner by way of this petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 seeks quashing of the criminal complaint no. 83/2002 for the
offence under Section 29(1)(a) of the Insecticides Act, 1968 filed by the
Insecticides Inspector and pending in the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate,
Rohini Courts as also the order dated 10.04.2002 passed therein summoning
him as an accused.
2.

Relevant facts necessary for the disposal of the present petition are that a

criminal complaint was filed by the Insecticides Inspector against M/s Reckitt &
Colman of India Ltd. and the petitioner on the allegations that on 05.03.1999
Insecticides Inspector visited the premises of the said Company in Okhla
Industrial Area and purchased three containers of Allethrin 0.2 % mosquito coil
(insecticide) for the purpose of inspection and then the said samples were sealed
in the presence of the petitioner. One sample was sent to the Pesticides Testing
Laboratory at Chandigarh for testing. As per the report of the analyst, the sample
did not conform to the prescribed IS specifications in its a.i. content
requirements and so it was opined to be ‘misbranded’. The aforesaid Company
challenged the said report and requested for retesting. The second sample was
then sent to a Laboratory in Faridabad where also the analyst declared the
sample as ‘misbranded’. Then respondent no. 2-complainant sent a notice to the
Company to explain as to why the Company was manufacturing and selling
‘misbranded’ insecticide. Since the Company did not respond criminal complaint

was filed in Court. The learned Magistrate took cognizance and summoned the
Company and the petitioner herein as an accused. Aggrieved by the said
summoning order dated 10.04.2002, the petitioner has preferred this petition.
3.

The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the complaint against

the petitioner is not maintainable because the complainant has failed to aver in
the compliant as to in what capacity the petitioner was being prosecuted for the
offence committed by the abovesaid Company. The counsel for the petitioner
also cited two judgments of the Apex Court in “S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v.
Neeta Bhalla” 2005 (3)JCC (NI) 203 and “M/s Gupta Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.
State of Punjab” 2006(1) Crimes 576 in support of this petition.
4.

Learned APP for the state opposed the quashing of the criminal complaint

stating that the averments made in the complaint are sufficient to launch a
prosecution against the petitioner herein. Learned APP further submitted that
the Consent Order dated 20.03.2002 vide which the permission was granted by
the competent authority to the Insecticides Inspector to initiate the prosecution
of the above named Company as well the petitioner herein clearly mentions the
designation of the petitioner as Regional Technical Director of the accused
Company and so the complaint against the petitioner also was maintainable.
5.

I have considered the rival submissions. A perusal of the criminal complaint

filed in the trial Court shows that it does not contain any averment from which it
could be inferred that the petitioner was in any way in-charge of or managing the

day-to-day affairs of the accused Company, namely, M/s. Reckitt and Colman of
India Ltd. In fact, it has also not been pleaded in the complaint that the petitioner
was either a Director of the accused Company or its employee. All that has been
averred in the complaint is that the ‘misbranded’ samples were sealed by the
Insecticides Inspector in the presence of the petitioner. This averment is
definitely not sufficient to prosecute the petitioner for an offence which as per
the complaint was committed by the manufacturer of the ‘misbranded’ product.
Under Section 33 of the Insecticides Act, 1968 it is provided that if an offence
under this Act is committed by a Company then every person who was in-charge
of the affairs of the Company at the time of commission of the offence would also
be liable for the offence in addition to the Company. Since in the present case it
has not been averred in the complaint that the petitioner was at the relevant
time in-charge of or responsible to the accused Company for the conduct of its
business he cannot be prosecuted and held vicariously liable for an offence
allegedly committed by the accused Company. The criminal complaint against
the petitioner was, therefore, not maintainable and the learned Magistrate
should also have not taken cognizance against him and summoned him as an
accused in respect of the offence allegedly committed by the aforesaid
Company. As far as the Consent Order dated 20.03.2002 for the prosecution of
the Company and the petitioner, relied upon by the learned APP, is concerned
even that document does not disclose that the petitioner was in any way in

charge of the affairs of the accused company at the relevant time. Just because
in that order the petitioner has been described as a Technical Director of the
accused Company no criminal liability can be fastened upon him for the act of
the Company. In any case, as noticed already, in the complaint the petitioner has
not been shown to be even a Director of the accused Company. Therefore, the
learned Magistrate was not justified in entertaining the complaint against the
present petitioner and summoning him as an accused.
6.

In view of the foregoing, this petition is allowed and the complaint case no.

83/2002 titled as “D.R. Pal v. Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd. & Anr.” pending in
the Court of Sh. Prashant Kumar, Metropolitan Magistrate, Rohini Courts, as well
as the order dated 10.04.2002 whereby the petitioner was summoned as
accused are hereby quashed.

January 2,2008
sh

P.K.BHASIN,J

