*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL. APPEAL NO. 176 OF 1997

%
#
!

Date of Decision: 4th March, 2008
C.P. VASHIST

....Appellant
Through: None
versus

$
^

*

ASHFAQ

....Respondent
Through : None

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The present appeal has arisen from the judgment dated
22.03.1997 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, New
Delhi in Sessions Case no. 36/1997 whereby the respondent, who
was charged for the offences under Sections 132 and 135(1)(a) of
The Customs Act, 1962 and Sections 18 and 28 read with Sections

8 and 23 of the Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act,
1985 („NDPS Act‟ in short), was acquitted of all these offences.

2.

Brief facts necessary for the disposal of this appeal are that

on 28.01.1988 respondent Ashfaq was booked with Thai Airways
Flight No.TG-935 for going to Bangkok. At the Customs Counter at
I.G.I. Airport, New Delhi he declared that he was carrying US Dollars
500 only as FTS. While he was proceeding towards the Security
Check he was intercepted by the Customs Officer(PW-1) and on
being asked as to whether he was carrying any Indian or foreign
currency or any narcotic drug the respondent replied that he was
carrying US dollars 500 only. Thereafter, the respondent was asked
if he had any baggage on which he informed that his checked-in
suitcase was lying in the Departure Hall. He was then asked to
bring his checked-in baggage at the Customs Counter which he did.
PW-1 called two officials of Thai Airways(PW-3 and PW-4) on duty
at the Airport so that the suit-case of the respondent could be
searched in their presence. On PW-1 entertaining some suspicion,
base of the suitcase was pierced with the help of a sharp edged

Crl. App. No. 176/97

2

knife and some oily substance suspected to be Narcotic Drug
weighing 3.750 kgs. was recovered. The respondent could not
produce any documentary or other evidence for its lawful export.
The said black coloured oily substance was then seized under
Section 110 of the Customs Act, 1962 and the NDPS Act and three
representative samples of the substance were taken in separate
packets and were sealed with the seal of Customs Department and
rest of that substance was kept in a separate cardboard box and
the same was also sealed with the Customs seal.These
proceedings were recorded in a panchnama (Ex. PW-1/C) by the
Customs Officer(PW-1). On being questioned by the Customs
Officer(PW-1) about the substance recovered the respondent
showed his ignorance and claimed that the said suit case did not
belong to him and that the same had been booked in his name and
on his ticket by one Avinash Chander Dhawan who was still at the
Airlines Counter for getting his clearance done. It is the further case
of the prosecution that thereafter the respondent was taken to the
Airline Counter and he was asked to identify the person named by
him and then on the pointing out of the respondent that Avinash

Crl. App. No. 176/97

3

Chander was also apprehended.

3.

The respondent as well as Avinash Chander were then

produced before Sh. R.D. Gupta, (PW-2), who on that night was the
Air Customs Superintendent and was also on duty at the Airport
when these two persons were apprehended, and he recorded their
separate statements under Section 108 of the Customs Act, 1962
(Ex. PW-2/A and Ex. PW-2/B). In his statement made under Section
108 of the Customs Act the respondent claimed that the foreign
currency in his possession was provided to him by Avinash Chander
after purchasing it from Connaught Place in his (Ashfaq‟s) name
and further that when Avinash Chander booked the suit case in his
name he had become suspicious but had kept quiet since Avinash
had paid for his Bangkok trip. Avinash Chander in his statement
under Section 108 admitted that he had come to the Airport for
going to Bangkok along with Ashfaq and one Nanak Ram. He
disclosed that he had prepared a plan with Nanak Ram that he
(Nanak Ram) would procure opium from Bareilly and get it packed
in a suitcase in such a way that no one would come to know about

Crl. App. No. 176/97

4

it and he (Avinash Chander) would arrange three tickets from Delhi
to Bangkok. The opium was to be taken to Bangkok for a person
named Devi who had promised to pay twice the price that was paid
for its purchase and the money was to be shared by him (Avinash
Chander) and Nanak Ram. Accordingly he arranged three tickets
for Bangkok and Nanak Ram brought opium to Delhi concealed in
a suitcase and left the same at his house for being taken to the
airport in the evening. It was further stated that Ashfaq was chosen
to carry the opium to Bangkok as he was going abroad for the first
time and the Custom Officers would not suspect him and in case
he would get caught he (Ashfaq) alone would be held responsible
as goods would stand booked in his name. Avinash Chander in his
statement made to the Customs Officer also stated that Ashfaq
was not aware that they had hidden opium in the suit case and
that he was under the impression that he was being taken for a
leisure trip by them. Avinash Chander further disclosed that he and
Ashfaq reached the Airport in a taxi and deliberately sent Ashfaq
late for customs clearance thinking that his baggage would not be
searched properly in case he goes late for clearance.

Crl. App. No. 176/97

5

4.

The prosecution case is that when all these proceedings were

being conducted on the Airport the third associate of Avinash
Chander and Ashfaq, namely, Nanak Ram, who had been named
by Avinash Chander, had boarded the plane to Bangkok and the
flight had taken off and so he could not be apprehended.

5.

Out of three samples sealed at the spot, two of them were

later on forwarded to the Central Revenue Control Laboratory for
chemical analysis of the black oily substance suspected to be
narcotics drug recovered from the suit-case of the respondent and
the chemical analyst‟s report (Ex. PW-1/N) confirmed the sealed
substance to be „opium‟.

6.

A criminal complaint was then filed in Court by the Customs

Department against Ashfaq, respondent herein, and Avinash
Chander for the offences under Sections 132 and 135 of The
Customs Act, 1962 and Sections 18, 28 read with Sections 8 and
23 of the NDPS Act. Avinash Chander expired during the pendency

Crl. App. No. 176/97

6

of the trial proceedings and so the proceedings against him stood
abated. The prosecution had examined only four witnesses to prove
its case. Two witnesses(PWs 1 & 2) were the Customs Officials and
both of them had supported fully the case set up in the
complaint.The other two witnesses were panch witnesses(PWs 3 &
4) but both of whom had turned hostile. In his statement recorded
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the respondent denied the allegations
levelled against him by the prosecution and pleaded innocence and
claimed that he had been falsely implicated in the case and
nothing was recovered from him. The learned trial Court vide its
judgment dated 22.03.1997 acquitted the respondent. Feeling
aggrieved by the acquittal of the respondent the present appeal
was filed by the complainant.

7.

At the time of hearing of this appeal there was no

appearance from both the sides which showed that counsel for the
parties were not really interested in advancing any arguments.
Since the trial Court record was available with this Court I decided
to dispose of the appeal on merits instead of dismissing it for non-

Crl. App. No. 176/97

7

prosecution.

8.

In an appeal against acquittal the appellate Court has to

keep in mind certain guidelines which have been laid down by the
Apex Court in its decisions which had arisen out of judgments of
acquittal. In “State of Punjab Vs. Ajaib Singh and Ors.” (2005) 9
SCC 94, it was observed by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court that:
“11. This being an appeal against acquittal we have with
the assistance of counsel for the parties gone through
the evidence on record with a view to find whether the
view favourable to the accused taken by the High Court
is based on the evidence on record and is reasonable. It
is well settled that in an appeal against acquittal, the
appellate court is entitled to re-appreciate the evidence
on record, but having done so it will not interfere with the
order of acquittal unless it finds the view of the court
acquitting the accused to be unreasonable or perverse. If
the view recorded by the court acquitting the accused is
a possible, reasonable view of the evidence on record,
the order of acquittal ought not to be reversed.”

In an earlier decision also reported as AIR 2000 SC 2212,
“Narinder Singh & anr. V. State of Punjab”, Hon‟ble Supreme Court
had observed as under:
“12. The High Court while considering the appeal against
acquittal is not exercising any extra ordinary jurisdiction.
Its power to consider and decide the appeal against the
judgment of acquittal is same as against the judgment
of conviction. However, there are certain guidelines. One
is that if there are two views on evidence which are
Crl. App. No. 176/97

8

reasonably possible one supporting acquittal and the
other indicating conviction. High Court in an appeal
against judgment of acquittal should not interfere
merely because it feels that it would as a trial Court have
taken a different view. High Court will certainly interfere
if it finds that the judgment of acquittal is manifestly
erroneous and that the trial Court has acted with
material irregularity or its appreciation of evidence lacks
coherence or it has made assumptions which are
unwarranted or its evaluation of evidence is such as to
shock the sense of justice and which has led to
miscarriage of justice or its reasoning is unintelligible or
defies logic or its conclusions are against the weight of
the evidence.”

9.

Now, keeping in mind these views of the Supreme Court it is

to be seen if the impugned judgment in the present case can be
said to be unreasonable or perverse. The trial Court has acquitted
the respondent for the charges under the NDPS Act on the ground
that requirement of law as contemplated under Section 57 of the
NDPS Act had not been followed and further that even the public
prosecutor had conceded during the course of arguments that after
the apprehension of the accused provisions of the NDPS Act had
not been followed.

As

has been noticed earlier, the customs

department was unrepresented in this matter when it was taken up
for hearing. I have gone through the grounds of challenge taken up
in this appeal and I find that even in the memorandum of appeal

Crl. App. No. 176/97

9

the appellant has not claimed that there was compliance of
Section 57. All that has been stated is that the learned trial Court
has failed to take notice of the legal position that the requirement
of making of a report, as provided under Section 57 of the NDPS
Act, is only directory and not mandatory. This, in fact, shows that
the learned prosecutor representing the customs department
before the trial Court had rightly conceded non-compliance of the
provisions of the NDPS Act.
10.

Section 57 reads as under:“57.
Report of arrest and seizure- Whenever any
person makes any arrest or seizure under this Act, he
shall, within forty eight hours next after such arrest or
seizure, make a full report of all the particulars of such
arrest or seizure to his immediate official superior.”

In the present case there is no evidence whatsoever to the
effect that the Customs Officer(PW-1) who had apprehended the
respondent and searched his checked-in baggage had thereafter
complied with the aforesaid requirement of Section 57. All that he
deposed was about his intercepting the respondent at the airport
while he was going for security check and asking him as to whether
he was carrying with him any prohibited substance and then about
Crl. App. No. 176/97

10

his having asked the respondent to bring in his checked in baggage
and recovery of opium from the suit case which the respondent
brought. He did not claim that he had made any report about the
apprehension of the respondent and the seizure of opium from his
baggage to his immediate superior. In a recent judgment reported
as 2007(1) SCC 450, “Dilip & anr. v. State of M.P.”, the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court while reiterating its view expressed in its earlier
decisions that the provisions of Section 57 are not mandatory
observed about the effect of non-compliance thereof as under:
“15.
Indisputably, however, effect of a search carried
out in violation of the provisions of law would have a
bearing on the credibility of the evidence of the official
witnesses, which would of course be considered on the
facts and circumstances of each case.”

11.

In an earlier judgment also which is reported as 2001 (1) JCC

144, “Gur Baksh Singh Vs. State of Haryana” Hon’ble Supreme
Court had observed as under(in para no. 9)
“…It is true that provisions of Sections 52 and 57 are
directory. Violation of these provisions would not ipso
facto violate the trial or conviction.
However, I.O.
cannot totally ignore these provisions and such failure
will have a bearing on appreciation of evidence
regarding arrest of the accused or seizure of the
article.”(emphasis laid)

Crl. App. No. 176/97

11

12.

Similarly in “State of Punjab v. Balbir Singh”,(1994) 3 SCC

299 Hon‟ble Supreme Court while dealing with the provisions of
Sections 52(which has also not been complied with in the present
case) and 57 of the NDPS Act had held as under(in para no. 24):“24. Sections 52 and 57 come into operation after
the arrest and seizure under the Act.
Somewhat
similar provisions are also there in the CrPC. If there
is any violation of these provisions, then the Court has
to examine the effect of the same. In that context
while determining whether the provisions of the Act to
be followed after the arrest or search are directory or
mandatory, it will have to be kept in mind that the
provisions of a statute creating public duties are
generally speaking directory. The provisions of these
two sections contain certain procedural instructions for
strict compliance by the officers. But if there is no
strict compliance of any of these instructions that by
itself cannot render the acts done by these officers
null and void and at the most it may affect the
probative value of the evidence regarding arrest or
search and in some cases it may invalidate such arrest
or search.
But such violation by itself does not
invalidate the trial or the conviction if otherwise there
is sufficient material. Therefore it has to be shown
that such non-compliance has caused prejudice and
resulted in failure of justice.
The officers, however,
cannot totally ignore these provisions and if there is no
proper explanation for non-compliance or where the
officers totally ignore the provisions then that will
definitely have an adverse effect on the prosecution
case and the courts have to appreciate the evidence
and the merits of the case bearing these aspects in
view. However, a mere non-compliance or failure to
strictly comply by itself will not vitiate the
prosecution.”(emphasis laid)

13.

Since, in the present case, PW-1 had not said in his evidence

Crl. App. No. 176/97

12

for his having not made any report about the arrest of the
respondent and seizure of opium from his baggage, as required
under Section 57, his evidence cannot be accepted and recovery of
opium from the baggage of the respondent becomes doubtful.
There is no doubt that evidence of the official witnesses of recovery
can be made the basis of conviction but in the present case taking
into consideration the fact that recovery officer(PW-1) did not
comply with the provisions of Section 57 and both the independent
witnesses of recovery, namely, PW-3 N.C.Sharma and PW-4 Ripu
Anand, both of whom were associated by PW-1 at the time of
recovery of the baggage of the respondent, have not supported the
case of the complainant the evidence of PW-1 becomes unreliable
and has been rightly not relied upon by the learned trial Court.

14.

There is another reason also for not accepting the evidence

of the recovery officer, PW-1 C.P.Vashisht. Under Section 52(3) of
the NDPS Act it is provided that a person arrested and any article
seized under Sections 41(2), 42, 43 or 44 of the NDPS Act has to
be forwarded without unnecessarily delay to the officer-in-charge of

Crl. App. No. 176/97

13

the nearest police station or an officer empowered under Section
53 and it is further provided under sub-section 4 that the authority
or officer before whom the arrested person or the seized article is
produced shall with all convenient dispatch take such measures as
may be necessary for the disposal according to law of the arrested
person or the seized article. In the present case, PW-1 has not
stated anything in his evidence as to what he had done with the
narcotic substance which he claimed to have recovered from the
baggage of the respondent after taking the same into possession.
There is also no evidence to the effect as to when the
representative samples of the recovered substance suspected to
be opium was sent for chemical analysis to the CRCL(Central
Revenues Control Laboratory) and where the samples were kept
before being sent to CRCL. In the absence of any link evidence in
this regard also the evidence of the recovery officer(PW-1)
becomes unreliable.

15.

Before the trial Court the complainant had also sought

conviction of the respondent on the basis of a statement allegedly

Crl. App. No. 176/97

14

made by him before PW-2 Shri R.D.Gupta who was posted as Air
Customs Superintendent at the IGI Airport on the night of 21-081988. That statement is Ex. PW-2/A and according to PW-2 it was
a statement recorded by him under Section 108 of the Customs
Act. In his evidence PW-2 claimed that since Ashfaq had claimed
that since he was illiterate he had asked one cleaner on duty at the
airport to write the statement of Ashfaq and then that cleaner Shri
Ram Kishore wrote that statement Ex. PW-2/A.

The witness

claimed that Ashfaq signed that statement voluntarily after it had
been read over and explained to him and it had been admitted that
the same was correctly recorded. The learned trial Court had not
placed any reliance on this statement of the respondent on the
ground that there was no evidence adduced by the complainant to
show that PW-2 to show that PW-2 was competent to record the
statement under Section 108. I have also perused the record of
the trial Court and I have also find that there is nothing on record to
show that PW-2 was competent to record a statement under
Section 108 of the Customs Act. The scribed of the statement,
namely, Ram Kishore had also not been examined and his non-

Crl. App. No. 176/97

15

examination also renders this statement to be doubtful.

In any

case, as has been noticed already, the respondent had not
admitted in this statement, although he has denied having made
any such statement, that he knew that there was opium in his
checked in baggage. On the contrary, he had exculpated himself
by claiming that he did not know as to what had been kept in the
suit case by Avinash Chander(the deceased co-accused of the
respondent) while booking that suit case in his(respondent‟s)
name. There was, thus, no confession of an offence made by the
respondent. Therefore, the learned trial Court had rightly ignored
the afore-said statement Ex. PW-2/A.

16.

Since, apart from the recovery of opium from the suit case of

the respondent, which recovery has not been found to have been
established by reliable evidence, there was no other recovery
claimed by the complainant from the possession of the respondent
he was rightly not convicted even for the offences under the
Customs Act by the learned trial Judge.

Crl. App. No. 176/97

16

17.

On an overall appreciation of evidence, I am satisfied that

there is no infirmity in the reasons assigned by the learned trial
Court for acquitting the respondent and there being no perversity in
the findings of the trial Judge this appeal against acquittal of the
respondent deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly hereby
dismissed.

( P.K.BHASIN)
JUDGE
March 4, 2008
sh

Crl. App. No. 176/97

17

