*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No. 7032/2006
Date of Decision: 7th January, 2008

%
#

Rinku @ Kishore Aggarwal

!

.....Petitioner

Through Mr. R.K. Saini, Advocate

versus
$

State of NCT of Delhi

^

..... Respondent

Through Mr. M.N. Dudeja, APP for the State.
Complainant in person with Mr. Puneet Verma, Advocate

CORAM:
*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

ORDER
P.K.BHASIN, J:

The present petition is filed by the petitioner under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 for quashing of the order dated 25.03.2004 passed by

the learned Metropolitan Magistrate whereby the Final Report dated 03.01.2004
filed by the police for cancellation of the case against the petitioner-accused
arising out of FIR No. 392/2001 u/s 376 IPC registered at Sangam Vihar police
station on 19-7-2001 was rejected and police was directed to file a fresh report
under Section 173 Cr.P.C.

2.

Relevant facts of the case are that FIR no. 392/2001 was registered at

Sangam Vihar Police Station against the petitioner for the offence under Section
376 of IPC on the allegations that on 18.07.2001 at about 7.45 p.m. the
prosecutrix had gone to collect her suit from her tailor and on her way back home
petitioner-accused, who was running a shop of building material, stopped her and
offered her cup of tea and thereafter took her to the first floor of his shop and
raped her. After the incident the petitioner-accused went to the police station and
on her signed complaint a case u/s 376 IPC was registered. However, the
prosecutrix later on backed out from her statement made to the police when her
statement was got recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. on 7-08-2001 wherein she
claimed that her family was also having a building material shop and about 2-3
months back some dispute arose with the petitioner and on 18-7-2001 there was
a fight also with him and in a bid to teach him a lesson she had got the case of
rape registered against him and that her complaint lodged with the police was out
of anger and not correct.

3.

The police then filed a report on 20-8-2001 before the concerned

Metropolitan Magistrate requesting for closure of the case in view of the
prosecutrix claiming in her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C that she was not
raped by the petitioner-accused. The Metropolitan Magistrate, however, declined to
accept the cancellation report and vide impugned order directed the police to file a
report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. after observing that the case was registered on
the complaint of the prosecutrix herself and not her parents and her MLC showed
that she was raped under threat.

4.

Aggrieved by the said order passed by the Metropolitan Magistrate the

petitioner has filed this petition for setting aside of the order dated 25.03.2004
and for accepting the Final Report of the police for closure of the case against him.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that since the prosecutrix had
claimed in her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and also before the Magistrate
when the Cancellation Report was filed that she had lodged a false complaint no
useful purpose would be served in unnecessarily putting the petitioner to trial and
that in any case the Magistrate could not have directed filing of a challan against
the petitioner when the police did not consider that a case of rape was made out.
In support of his contention the learned counsel for the petitioner also cited
judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court reported as “M.C. Abraham & Anr. v.

State of Maharashtra & Ors.” 2003 (1) Crimes 302 (SC), “Kanwar Pal Singh v. State
of Haryana” AIR 1994 SC 1045 and “Sampat Singh & Ors. v. State of Haryana”
(1993) 1 SCC 561.

5.

Learned APP for the State opposed this petition on the ground that there was

no error in the impugned direction of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
warranting interference by this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section
482 Cr.P.C.

6.

I have considered the rival submissions and have also gone through the

material on record. In my view the learned Metropolitan Magistrate on receipt of
the report from the investigating agency to the effect that no case was made out
against the petitioner-accused for the offence of rape could have after disagreeing
with that conclusion of the investigating agency either taken cognizance on the
basis of whatever material the investigating agency had collected during the
investigation or ordered further investigation into the matter but he could not have
directed the police to challan the accused for the offence of rape and this is what
the Magistrate conveyed to the police when he directed filing of a report under
Section 173 Cr.P.C. Learned Counsel for the petitioner was right in contending that
no such direction could be given to the police. I, however, do not find any force in

the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the FIR of the present
case should be quashed because of the prosecutrix having stated in her statement
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. that she had lodged a false complaint in a fit of anger
because of some prior incident in which there was some altercation between the
petitioner and the family of the prosecutrix as that would be a matter to be taken
into consideration by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate. So, in my view this
matter needs to be disposed of with a direction to the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate concerned to re-consider the matter on the basis of the complaint of
the prosecutrix based on which FIR under Section 376 IPC was registered as also
any other material which the investigating agency had collected upto the date of
filing of its report requesting for closure of the case including the statement of the
prosecutrix recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and then to take an appropriate
decision whether cognizance could be taken on the basis of that material or not or
whether the matter requires further investigation.

7.

In view of the fore-going, this petition is disposed of with a direction to the

learned Metropolitan Magistrate to re-consider the matter, as aforesaid, on the
basis of the material collected by the police upto the date of filing of its closure
report and take appropriate decision then. It is however clarified that this Court has
not considered the material collected during investigation by the investigating
agency and nothing observed in this order would be taken by the Magistrate as any

opinion of this Court on the merits of the case. The matter be taken up by the
learned Magistrate for consideration on 18th January, 2008.

P.K.BHASIN,J
January 7, 2008
sh

