*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: 7th November, 2007
Crl.M.C.No.6853/2006

#

P. SHRIRAM

!

.....Petitioner
Through Mr. A. Ramesh with Mr. R.Anand Padmanabh,
Advocates
versus

$

IMATION INDIA PVT. LTD. & ORS.

^

..... Respondents

Through Ms. Priya Puri, Advocate

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The present petition is filed under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
for quashing of complaint case No. 4/1/2006 titled as ‘M/s. Imation India Pvt. Ltd.
Vs. MBO Computers (I) Ltd. & Ors.’ under Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act pending in the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi as also
the order dated 24-01-2006 of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate whereby the
present petitioner was summoned as an accused.
2.

It is alleged in the petition that the petitioner joined the respondent no. 2 as a

Director on 05-08-1998 and resigned from that post in the end of 1998 and
thereafter he is continuously residing in USA. It is further alleged that since the
cause of action arose in the year 2005 he has nothing to do with the complaint
case pending the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi as he was not
connected with the activities of the accused Company, respect no. 2 herein and so
he should not have been summoned as an accused.
3.

I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and learned counsel for

the respondent no.1, complainant.
4.

The only submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner in

support of his prayer for quashing of the complaint qua the petitioner was that the
complaint does not contain any averment from which it could be inferred that the
petitioner was in any way in-charge of and managing day to day affairs of the
Company, namely, M/s. MBO Computers (I) Pvt. Ltd. and therefore, he could not
have been summoned as an accused in respect of the offence allegedly committed
by the said Company. Learned counsel placed reliance upon two judgments of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court reported as “S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs. Neeta Bhalla
& Anr.”, 2005 (8) SCC 89 and 2007 (1) JCC 112, “N.K.Wahi Vs. Shekhar Singh &
Ors.”. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent no. 1, complainant,
contended that there was no deficiency in the averments in the complaint
regarding the liability of the present petitioner inasmuch as it had been
categorically pleaded by the complainant that the present petitioner was also

personally and jointly responsible for the payment to be made by the accused
Company of which he was a Director.
5.

The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals and N.K.Wahi’s

cases(supra) has held that if in a complaint under Section 138 Negotiable
Instruments Act filed against a Company any of its Directors are also impleaded as
accused persons then the complaint must contain an averment that those
Directors were in-charge and responsible for the conduct of the business of the
Company at the time of commission of the offence. However, in the present case
the complainant had not averred in its complaint that the present petitioner was incharge and responsible for the management of the affairs of the accused
Company at the time of the commission of the offence alleged to have been
committed by the accused Company and a simple averment to the effect that the
petitioner was personally and jointly responsible for the payment will not satisfy
the requirement of law, as laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the above
referred two cases.

Therefore, the learned Magistrate was not justified in

entertaining the complaint against the present petitioner and summoning him as
an accused along with the Managing Director(respondent no. 3 herein) of the
Company(respondent no.2 herein).
6.

This petition is, therefore, allowed and the complaint filed against the

petitioner by M/s. Imation India Pvt. Ltd., respondent no. 1 herein, under Sections
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act as well as the order of the learned

Metropolitan Magistrate dated 24th January, 2006 summoning him as an accused
are hereby quashed.

November 7, 2007
sh

P.K.BHASIN,J

