*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 121 OF 1997

+
#

Date of Decision: Ist April, 2008
M.C.D.

...Appellant

!

Through: None
versus

$

Shri Ashok Kumar

...Respondent
Through : None

*
1.
2.
3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?(No)
To be referred to the Reporter or not? (No)
Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT

P.K.BHASIN, J:

Appellant has preferred this appeal challenging the order
dated 09.5.1996 passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate,

Delhi in Complaint Case No.111/92 whereby the respondent
herein was acquitted of charge under Section 332 of the Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the
„Act‟).

2.

Facts relevant for disposal of this appeal are that the

appellant M.C.D. filed a complaint under Section 332/461 of the
Act against the respondent alleging that on 23.6.92 during
inspection by PW-3 he was found carrying out unauthorised
construction in premises No.3790, Tel Mandi Pahar Ganj, Delhi. It
was alleged in the complaint that the respondent being the owner
and builder of the unauthorised construction was given a show
cause notice dated 24.06.92 (Ex.PW-1/B) under Sections 344(1)
and 343 of the Act and the said notice was received by the
respondent on 25.06.92. As per the case of the complainant the
respondent gave a reply but it was not found to be satisfactory
and so a complaint case was then filed in the trial Court. The trial

Crl. App. No. 121/97

2

Court gave a notice under Section 251 Cr.P.C. to the respondentaccused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

3.

Prosecution in order to prove its charges against the

respondent examined four witnesses in all. The respondent in his
statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. stated that he had no
concern with the property in dispute and that he had not raised
any unauthorised construction.

4.

The learned trial Court after appreciating the evidence

brought on record by the prosecution came to the conclusion that
the prosecution had failed to establish that the respondent was
responsible for the alleged unauthorised construction in any
manner and so acquitted the respondent. Aggrieved thereby the
appellant M.C.D. sought leave of this Court to challenge the
impugned judgment of the trial Court which was granted. The

Crl. App. No. 121/97

3

respondent was thereafter informed of the admission of this
appeal but he did not enter appearance.

5.

There was no appearance in the matter from both the sides

when the appeal was taken up for hearing which showed that the
parties were not really interested in advancing any arguments and
since the trial Court record was available with this Court I decided
to dispose of the appeal on merits instead of dismissing it for nonprosecution.

6.

While dealing with an appeal against acquittal the appellate

Court has to keep in mind certain guidelines which have been laid
down by the Apex Court in its decisions which had arisen out of
judgments of acquittal. In “State of Punjab Vs. Ajaib Singh and
Ors.” (2005) 9 SCC 94, it was observed by the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court that:

Crl. App. No. 121/97

4

“11. ………….It is well settled that in an appeal against
acquittal, the appellate court is entitled to re-appreciate
the evidence on record, but having done so it will not
interfere with the order of acquittal unless it finds the
view of the court acquitting the accused to be
unreasonable or perverse. If the view recorded by the
court acquitting the accused is a possible, reasonable
view of the evidence on record, the order of acquittal
ought not to be reversed.”

In an earlier decision also which is reported as AIR 2000 SC
2212, “Narinder Singh & Anr. V. State of Punjab”, Hon‟ble
Supreme Court had observed as under:
“12. The High Court while considering the appeal
against acquittal is not exercising any extra ordinary
jurisdiction. Its power to consider and decide the
appeal against the judgment of acquittal is same as
against the judgment of conviction. However, there are
certain guidelines. One is that if there are two views on
evidence which are reasonably possible one supporting
acquittal and the other indicating conviction. High Court
in an appeal against judgment of acquittal should not
interfere merely because it feels that it would as a trial
Court have taken a different view. High Court will
certainly interfere if it finds that the judgment of
acquittal is manifestly erroneous and that the trial
Court has acted with material irregularity or its
appreciation of evidence lacks coherence or it has
made assumptions which are unwarranted or its
evaluation of evidence is such as to shock the sense of
justice and which has led to miscarriage of justice or its
reasoning is unintelligible or defies logic or its
conclusions are against the weight of the evidence.”

Crl. App. No. 121/97

5

7.

Now, keeping in mind these views of the Supreme Court it is

to be seen if the impugned judgment in the present case can be
said to be unreasonable or perverse. The trial Court has acquitted
the respondent for the charge under the Section 332 read with
Section 461 of the Act on the ground that the complainant had
failed to establish that the respondent was the owner of the
unauthorised construction and that the House Tax record in
respect of the property in question brought on record by the
complainant itself showed that one Sadhu Narain was the owner.
Another reason given by the learned trial Court for acquitting the
respondent was that just because it had been stated by PW-3 in
his evidence that at the time of his visit to the property in question
he had found respondent present there he could not be convicted
as his mere presence at the disputed site could at the most give
rise to a suspicion against him but mere suspicion was not
sufficient for his conviction. I have myself also gone through the
evidence of the prosecution witnesses and have come to the
conclusion that there is no perversity in the said reasoning of the

Crl. App. No. 121/97

6

learned trial Judge for acquitting the respondent-accused. The
complainant itself had placed on record of the House Tax record
of the property in question which shows that some Sadhu Narain
was its owner. PW-4 Sh. Suresh Kumar who had proved the House
Tax record categorically admitted in his cross-examination that
Ashok Kumar, the respondent herein, was not the owner of the
property in question. PW-3 S.C. Goel is the Junior Engineer of
M.C.D. who had visited the property in question on 23.6.92. He
has simply claimed that he had noticed some unauthorised
construction going on and at that time the respondent had met
him there and he demanded sanction for the construction going
on from the respondent. He further deposed that a show cause
notice was given to the respondent to which he had submitted his
reply but the same was found to be unsatisfactory being not
supported by any proof. In cross-examination this witness stated
that he did not know if the respondent–accused was the owner of
the property in question but he had come to know from the reply
of the respondent-accused to the show cause notice that he was

Crl. App. No. 121/97

7

the owner. The prosecution has not placed on record the reply to
the show cause notice allegedly given by the respondent
admitting himself therein to be the owner of the property in
question. No explanation has been offered for non production of
that reply which allegedly contained an admission of respondentaccused to the effect that he was the owner of the property in
question and so for its non production it has to be inferred against
the appellant that if that document had been produced it would
have gone against the appellant‟s case that the respondent was
the owner of the property in question. The respondent in his
statement under Section 281 Cr.P.C. had categorically claimed
that he had no concern with the property in dispute. In these
circumstances, appellant-complainant could not be said to have
established that it was the respondent who was the owner and/or
builder of the unauthorised construction for which he was
prosecuted. The learned trial Court has rightly acquitted him and
there is no reason for interfering with the impugned judgment of
acquittal.

Crl. App. No. 121/97

8

8.

In the result, this appeal is dismissed.

P.K.BHASIN,J

April 1, 2008
sh

Crl. App. No. 121/97

9

