*
%

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 367 OF 1997

+

Date of Decision: 2nd April, 2008

#
!

M/s Vishnu Trading Company

...Appellant
Through: None

versus
$
^

*

Sada Ram

...Respondent
Through : None

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? (No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
This appeal is preferred by the appellant-complainant
impugning the order dated 24.07.1997 passed by the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi in Complaint Case No. 5/1

whereby its complaint under Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter referred to as the „Act‟) filed
against the respondent herein was dismissed.

2.

Relevant facts leading to the acquittal of the respondent are

that a complaint was filed by the appellant under Section 138 of
the Act against the respondent alleging that respondent Sada
Ram represented himself to be proprietor of M/s Shiv Trading
Company and issued a cheque bearing No.783652 (Ex. CW-1/C)
dated 15.11.90 for a sum of Rs.2,75,000/- drawn on Punjab
National Bank, Naya Bazar in favour of complainant. The
complainant firm deposited the said cheque with State Bank of
Bikaner and Jaipur, Khari Bowoli, Delhi but the same was
dishonored vide memorandum by the respondent‟s bank and
returned back dated 1.12.90 with the remarks „Account closed‟.
Thereafter the complainant issued a legal notice of demand dated
10/11-12-90 (Ex. CW-1/E) to the respondent-accused by
registered post as well as under certificate of posting (UPC). The
notice sent by registered post came back undelivered and one

Crl.A. No. 367/97

2

copy of the notice was affixed at residence of the respondent on
15.12.90 by complainant‟s manager CW-2, Ashok Kumar Bansal.
On failure of the respondent-accused to pay the amount of the
dishonored cheque within the prescribed time of fifteen days the
complainant filed the criminal complaint against the respondent,
which however came to be rejected by the trial Court.

3.

The complainant firm in order to prove the accusations of

the respondent-accused had examined five witnesses. The
respondent, on the other hand, in his defence denied being the
proprietor of M/s Shiv Trading Company and having issued the
cheque in question. He further denied having received any notice
of demand or any affixation of the said notice on the property
bearing no. 2632 2nd Floor, Gali Laltain Wali. He also denied
having any connection with the addresses mentioned at S.Nos. 2
and 3 in the legal notice (Ex. CW-1/E). In his defence the
respondent examined himself as his own witness wherein he
maintained on oath that neither he had signed the cheque (Ex.
CW-1/C) nor he had any concern with the proprietorship of M/s

Crl.A. No. 367/97

3

Shiv Trading Company.

4.

The learned Metropolitan Magistrate vide his order dated

24.07.1997 concluded that the complainant had not been able to
prove its case against the respondent beyond reasonable doubt
and acquitted the respondent-accused. Feeling aggrieved the
appellant came up in appeal.

5.

There was no appearance in the matter from both the sides

when the appeal was taken up for hearing which showed that the
parties were not really interested in advancing any arguments and
since the trial Court record was available with this Court I decided
to dispose of the appeal on merits instead of dismissing it for nonprosecution.

6.

While dealing with an appeal against acquittal the appellate

Court has to keep in mind certain guidelines which have been laid
down by the Apex Court. In “State of Punjab Vs. Ajaib Singh and
Ors.” (2005) 9 SCC 94, it was observed by the Hon‟ble Supreme

Crl.A. No. 367/97

4

Court that:
“11. This being an appeal against acquittal we have
with the assistance of counsel for the parties gone
through the evidence on record with a view to find
whether the view favourable to the accused taken by
the High Court is based on the evidence on record and
is reasonable. It is well settled that in an appeal against
acquittal, the appellate court is entitled to re-appreciate
the evidence on record, but having done so it will not
interfere with the order of acquittal unless it finds the
view of the court acquitting the accused to be
unreasonable or perverse. If the view recorded by the
court acquitting the accused is a possible, reasonable
view of the evidence on record, the order of acquittal
ought not to be reversed.”

In an earlier decision also reported as AIR 2000 SC 2212,
“Narinder Singh & anr. V. State of Punjab”, Hon‟ble Supreme Court
had observed as under:
“12. The High Court while considering the appeal
against acquittal is not exercising any extra ordinary
jurisdiction. Its power to consider and decide the
appeal against the judgment of acquittal is same as
against the judgment of conviction. However, there are
certain guidelines. One is that if there are two views on
evidence which are reasonably possible one supporting
acquittal and the other indicating conviction. High Court
in an appeal against judgment of acquittal should not
interfere merely because it feels that it would as a trial
Court have taken a different view. High Court will
certainly interfere if it finds that the judgment of
acquittal is manifestly erroneous and that the trial
Court has acted with material irregularity or its
appreciation of evidence lacks coherence or it has
made assumptions which are unwarranted or its
Crl.A. No. 367/97

5

evaluation of evidence is such as to shock the sense of
justice and which has led to miscarriage of justice or its
reasoning is unintelligible or defies logic or its
conclusions are against the weight of the evidence.”

7.

Now, keeping in mind these views of the Supreme Court it is

to be seen if the impugned judgment in the present case can be
said to be unreasonable or perverse. The trial Court has acquitted
the respondent for the charge under Section 138 of the Act on the
grounds that the complainant firm had failed to establish that the
cheque in question was signed by the respondent which he could
have proved by sending the cheque to CFSL for comparing the
admitted signatures of the respondent with that of the signature
on the cheque and also because the complainant had failed to
show that the cheque was issued for consideration. Trial Court
also came to the conclusion that the demand notice was not
served on the respondent.

8.

I have gone through the grounds of challenge taken up in

this appeal and I find that in the memorandum of appeal one of
the grounds sought to challenge the acquittal order is total

Crl.A. No. 367/97

6

disregard by the trial Court of the evidence of the appellantcomplainant

represented

by

Meghraj

(CW-1)

who

has

categorically stated that the cheque in question was signed by the
respondent in his presence at his(accused‟s) shop. Another
ground taken by the appellant was that the cheque was issued by
the respondent for the supply of rice to the respondent which fact
was proved by the statements of CW-1, Megh Raj and CW-2,
Ashok Bansal, manager of the appellant firm. Another ground
taken up by the appellant was in respect of service of notice to
the respondent. The appellant in its memorandum of appeal has
also stated that the notice of demand was duly served under UPC
and also by way of affixation by its manager, CW-2, Ashok Bansal.

9.

After perusal of the trial Court record, I am of the view that

the acquittal of the respondent was fully justified and there is no
perversity in the decision of the learned trial Court. The
respondent had denied having issued the cheque in question and
his being the proprietor of M/s Shiv Trading Company which firm
had allegedly issued the cheque. This defence was put to the CW-

Crl.A. No. 367/97

7

1 who was a partner of the complainant firm, in his crossexamination as well as to the complainant‟s manager CW-2
Ashok Kumar. Thereafter he maintained the same stand when his
statement was recorded after the conclusion of complainant‟s
evidence under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and further by examining
himself as his own witness. He denied during his crossexamination that he had any bank account with Punjab National
Bank, Naya Bazar Branch or that he had purchased any material
from the complainant. In these circumstances the view taken by
the learned trial Judge that the complainant had failed to
establish that the dishonored cheque based on which the
complaint was filed had been signed by the respondent which it
could have done by getting an expert opinion in respect of the
signature on the disputed cheque cannot be said to be a perverse
finding justifying any interference by this Court in appeal. The
complainant‟s partner CW-1 Meghraj had although claimed that
the disputed cheque was signed by the respondent in his
presence at his (complainant‟s shop) but this statement of CW-1
stood contradicted by the statement of complainant‟s manager

Crl.A. No. 367/97

8

CW-2 Ashok Kumar Bansal in his cross-examination to the effect
that the cheque in question was given by the respondent to their
employee who used to collect payment on their behalf. In my
view, the complaint could have been dismissed on this ground
alone.

10.

Similarly, the finding of the learned trial Court that the

complainant had also failed to establish the service of demand
notice on the respondent cannot be said to be in any way perverse
or unreasonable since even according to the complainant itself
the demand notice which had been sent by registered post had
been received back unserved. Regarding the stand of the
complainant that there was service of notice by affixation also at
the residence of the respondent the learned trial Court had relying
upon a judgment of Madras High Court in “R.M. Sunderam v. C.M.
Ramraj”, 1993 (3) Crimes 175 had come to the conclusion that
there has to be actual service of notice and constructive service of
demand notice is not contemplated under Section 138 of the Act
and further that service of notice by affixation is also not provided

Crl.A. No. 367/97

9

for under the provisions of the Act. I do not find any fault with this
finding also of the learned trial Court.

11.

There being, thus, no perversity in the findings of the

learned trial Court this appeal is dismissed.

P.K.BHASIN,J

April 2, 2008
sh

Crl.A. No. 367/97

10

