*
%

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 19 OF 1996

+

#
!

Date of Decision: 2nd April, 2008

STATE

...Appellant
Through: Mr. M. N. Dudeja, APP
versus

$
^

*

ANIL BATRA & ORS.

...Respondents
Through : None

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? (No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
This appeal has been filed by the State against the
judgment dated 24.07.1995 passed by the learned Metropolitan

Magistrate, New Delhi in Case No. 437/1989 whereby the
respondents were acquitted of the charge under Section 7 read
with Section 16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act(for
short „the Act‟).

2.

The relevant facts leading to the prosecution of the

respondents herein as have been noticed by the learned trial
Court in para no. 1 of the impugned judgment are as under:“(1)
……..On 31st July, 1989, a team of Food
Inspectors comprising F.I. R.K. Ahuja, Rajesh
Kumar, under the supervision of Dr. P.K. Jaiswal,
LHA visited the premises of M/s Regency Mid town,
B-29, Connaught Place, New Delhi where accused
no.1 Anil Batra was found conducting the business
of the said hotel and food article including Paneer
was found stored in the freezer in the polythene bag
having no label declaration. It has been further
alleged that about 3.30 p.m. accused Anil Batra
sold a sample of 750 grams of paneer to F.I. R.K.
Ahuja for analysis and payment of Rs.30/- was
offered to the vendor as price of the sample but was
refused to be accepted. It has been further alleged
that the sample was taken as per the PFA Act and
Rules, and FI divided the aforesaid sample then and
there into three parts, and each part was placed in
separate clean and dry bottles, and 20 drops of
formaline were added in each bottle and each bottle
was separately packed, fastened, marked and
sealed as per the PFA Act and rules. Notice inform
VI was given to the accused. Punchnama was also
prepared at the spot. It has been further alleged
that all the documents were prepared and signed all
at the spot by the FI R. K. Ahuja, as well as accused

Crl.A.No. 19/1996

2

Anil Batra and by attesting witness Rajesh kr. F.I. as
before starting the sample proceedings efforts were
made by the concerned F.I. to join the public
witnesses but none agreed, and thereupon another
F.I. Rajesh Kumar was joined as a witness to the
sample proceedings. It has been further alleged that
one counter part of the sample in intact condition
was sent to the P.A. Delhi for analysis, who analysed
the sample of paneer and same was found
adulterated vide report bearing no. PFA/Enf/(89)/L128/940 dt. 4.8.1989, on the ground that the
sample does not conform to the standard because
mild fat on dry weight basis was found 48.05%
which is less then prescribed minimum limit of
50.0% During investigation, accused no.1 was found
as vendor-cum-Manager of Regency Mid town and
that M/s Regency Mid town is run by accused No.2
i.e. M/s Supriya Food P. Ltd. and that accused no.3
and 4 were the Director and were persons Incharge
of and responsible for day to day business of the
said firm, and had no licence to deal in the food
article. It is pertinent to mention here that accused
no.4 died and proceedings against accused no.4
stands abated. Thereafter, the consent as provided
u/s 20 of the PFA Act for prosecution of accused
persons was granted by Sh. P. N. Gupta, the then
Director, PFA Delhi Admn. Delhi for violating the
provisions of sec.2(ia)(a)(m) Rule 50 (1) punishable
under sec.16(1) read with sec. 7 of the PFA Act.”

3.

After institution of the complaint accused exercised the

right before the Trial Court, as provided u/s 13(2) of the Act and
then the second counter part of the sample of paneer was sent to
the Director, CFL, Mysore, for analysis who vide his certificate No.
459/PFA/89 dated 1.12.89 opined that the sample bottles had
leaked out, thereby rendering the sample unfit for carrying out the
Crl.A.No. 19/1996

3

test/analysis. Thereafter the third counter part of the sample of
paneer was sent to the Director, CFL, for analysis who vide his
certificate bearing No. 459-A/PFA/89 dated 9.2.1990 opined that
sample did not conform to the prescribed standard.

4.

To prove the accusation levelled against the respondents

the prosecution had examined five witnesses in all. In his
statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the respondent had denied
the prosecution allegations.

5.

After considering the evidence adduced by the prosecution

and taking into consideration other relevant circumstances, the
learned trial Court acquitted the respondents herein and
observed in para nos. 11 and 12 of the impugned judgment as
under:“11.
It is admitted case of the prosecution that
the sample was not kept in refrigerator, but was
kept at room temperature.
The sample was
allegedly taken from the accused No.1 on 31.7.89.
Consent as provided under Section 20 of the PFA
Act by Sh.P.N.Gupta, the then Director, PFA Delhi
Admn., Delhi Ex.PW1/C was granted on 11th
October, 1989 and the present case was filed in the
court on 25th October, 1989 and from the 2nd
Crl.A.No. 19/1996

4

counter part of the sample, the liquid portion had
leaked leaving behind a solid mass thereby
rendering the sample unfit for carrying out
test/analysis; and thereupon the 3rd counter part of
the sample was analysed by the Director, CFL
Mysore vide his certificate dated 9th February, 1990
meaning thereby the Director, CFL Mysore could
analyse the sample after the expiry of period of
more than six months. When the 2nd counter part of
the sample was produced in the court, it was not
found leaking. It may be that the leakage started
during transit of the sample to the CFL Mysore for
which the accused cannot be blamed and the
accused is entitled to benefit of the delay.
12.
In the present case, there has been a
marginal deficiency as already discussed above in
the milk fat contents on dry matter basis which can
be attributed to delay in analyzing the 3rd counter
part of the same, as the Director CFL Mysore could
analyse the sample only after expiry of more than
six months of the taking of the sample. For the
foregoing discussion the prosecution case is not free
from doubt. Accordingly, the accused are given the
benefit of doubt and they are accordingly acquitted
of the charge ……”

6.

Feeling aggrieved the State sought leave to appeal which

was granted. I have heard Mr. M.N.Dudeja, APP for the State,
None had appeared for the respondents.

I have also gone

through evidence adduced during the trial by the prosecution.

7.

Hon‟ble Supreme Court has laid down the guidelines which

an appellate court should keep in mind while dealing with the

Crl.A.No. 19/1996

5

judgment of acquittal and I may notice those guidelines at the
outset. In “State of Punjab Vs. Ajaib Singh And Others”, 2005
SCC (Cri) 43, while dealing with a case of acquittal it was
observed as under in para no. 10 of the judgment:
“10.
…… It is well settled that in an appeal
against acquittal, the appellate court is entitled to
reappreciate the evidence on record, but having
done so it will not interfere with the order of
acquittal unless it finds the view of the court
acquitting the accused to be unreasonable or
perverse.
If the view recorded by the court
acquitting the accused is a possible, reasonable
view of the evidence on record, the order of acquittal
ought not to be reversed.”

8.

In an earlier judgment reported as 1980 CAR 359 (SC),

“Sirajuddin alias Siraj Vs. State of Karnataka” also Hon‟ble
Supreme Court had observed while dealing with the scope of an
appeal against a judgment of acquittal as under:
“……. It is well settled that if the view of the evidence
taken by the trial Court is reasonably possible, the
High Court should not, as a rule of prudence, disturb
the acquittal.”

9.

I would now examine if the findings of the learned trial

judge can be said to be perverse, as is being claimed on behalf of
Crl.A.No. 19/1996

6

the State in this appeal. The findings in the impugned judgment
of the learned trial Court whereby the accused were acquitted
have already been reproduced above. Learned Trial Court has
relied upon one judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in
“Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ghisa Ram” 1975 PFA cases
186. In that case the complaint was filed in Court after about
seven months from the date of raid and taking of sample of milk
product (curd) from the shop of the accused which was on
20/09/1961. The complaint was filed on 23/05/1962. Hon‟ble
Supreme Court held that in these circumstances, the valuable
right available to the accused under section 13(2) of the Act of
having the sample tested at Central Food Laboratory had stood
denied to him. It was also observed that ordinarily it was possible
for the prosecution to obtain the report of the Public Analyst and
institute the prosecution within 17 days of the taking of the
sample. Mr. Dudeja, learned APP had submitted that this
judgment was not applicable to the facts of the present case
since in that case the Director of Central Food Laboratory had
found the sample sent to him to be unfit for analysis because of

Crl.A.No. 19/1996

7

decomposition and because of that reason the accused could not
have the benefit of the report of the Director which, if had been
given, would have superceded the report of the Public Analyst
and so the Hon‟ble Supreme Court had held that the delay in
launching the prosecution against the accused had resulted in
denial of the benefit of Section 13(2) of the Act to him while in
the present case despite the delay in the filing of the complaint in
court the third counter part of the sample which was sent for
analysis, as per the CFL report, did not conform to the prescribed
standard. So, learned APP contended, the acquittal of the
accused of the present case by the trial Court relying upon the
said judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court was totally
unjustified and not sustainable at all. However, in my view the
acquittal of the respondents in the present case in view of the
decision of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Ghisa Ram’s case
(supra) cannot be said to be unjustified because the crux of the
judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court is that prosecution in
these kinds of cases should be launched promptly. In that case
reference was also made to the opinion of an expert that if a food

Crl.A.No. 19/1996

8

article, like curd, is kept in a refrigerator and a preservative is
added to the sample the total period which may be available for
making analysis of that sample without decomposition will be six
months. In the present case, the third sample of the paneer was
sent to the Central Food Laboratory after the expiry of more than
six months from the date when it was taken from the shop of the
respondent no. 1 and there is no explanation forthcoming from
the side of the prosecution for that delay. It is admitted by the
prosecution that the sample was not kept in refrigerator but was
kept in at room temperature till the time from taking of the
samples to sending it to CFL. PW-5 FI, Rajesh Kumar in his crossexamination has categorically stated that their department had
no refrigerator in the office and the sample bottles were kept by
them at ordinary room temperature in steel Almirah. In these
circumstances, if the learned Trial Court has come to the
conclusion that the accused‟s right under section 13(2) of the Act
had got frustrated it cannot be said that this conclusion of the
trial Court is unreasonable.

Crl.A.No. 19/1996

9

10.

This appeal, thus, being devoid of any merit is dismissed.

P.K.BHASIN,J
April 2, 2008
sh

Crl.A.No. 19/1996

10

