*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No. 1487-92 /2006
Date of Decision: 7th December, 2007

%
#

Mahinder Pal Singh & Ors.

!

.....Petitioners

Through Mr. C.L. Dhawan, Advocate
versus

$

State & Anr.

^

....Respondents
Through Mr. M.N. Dudeja, APP for the State.
Mr. Amit Gupta, Advocate for respondent no. 2.

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The present petition is filed by the petitioners under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 praying for quashing of FIR no. 13/1998 for the
offences under Sections 147/149/452/323/506/34 I.P.C. registered at Police
Station Pratap Nagar on 20.01.1998 and the criminal proceedings emanating
therefrom pending in the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi.

2.

Facts leading to the controversy are that some dispute relating to one

property arose between respondent no. 2-complainant and Sardar Gurcharan
Singh, father of petitioner no. 1 in which the decree for possession was passed in
favour of the complainant by the civil court. Chagrined by this, Sardar Gurcharan
Singh and petitioner no. 1 started threatening respondent no. 2 and on the alleged
day of incident i.e. 28.08.1996 at about 9.30 p.m. when the complainant and his
family members were sleeping, the accused persons pounced upon them and
started beating them. Somehow the complainant got rid of petitioner no.1 and his
father, who were allegedly trying to strangulate the complainant and he rushed to
the police station after which the accused persons were taken to the police station.
The police investigated the matter and filed the challan in the concerned court and
after taking cognizance of the matter the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
summoned the petitioners as accused persons.
3.

During the pendency of the above said criminal proceedings respondent no.

2-complainant and the petitioners with the intervention of their well wishers sorted
out their disputes and arrived at an amicable settlement. In view of that
compromise this petition has been filed for quashing of the FIR in question.
Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that since compromise has been arrived
at between the parties no useful purpose would be served if the trial of the
petitioners goes on. The learned counsel for the petitioners in support of his

submissions has cited some judgments of this Court reported as “Basara & Ors. v.
State & Anr.” Crl. M.C. No. 6621-24/2006 decided on 03.09.2007, “Jaibir & Ors. v.
State & Anr.” 142(2007) DLT 141 and in an earlier judgment also of this Court in
“Gurcharan Singh v. The State & Anr.” 1998 Cri.l.J. 3780 wherein the proceedings
pending in the Court for the offences punishable under Section 307 I.P.C. were
quashed in view of the compromise between the parties.

4.

Notice of the petition was sent to the State and respondent no.2-complainant.

Respondent no. 2 appeared in person along with his counsel on 12-9-2007 before
this Court and affirmed that the matter has been amicably resolved and so he was
no more interested in pursuing his case against any of the petitioners thereby
supporting the prayer of the petitioners for quashing of the FIR and the criminal
proceedings resulting therefrom. Affidavit of respondent no. 2 is also placed on
record stating that he has settled all his disputes and claims with the petitioners
and nothing now remains to be resolved.

5.

Learned APP for the State, however, opposed quashing of the FIR on the

ground that allegations against the petitioner are grave in nature.

6.

I have considered the rival submissions made by the parties. It is now well

settled that cases even in respect of those offences which are not compoundable
under section 320 Cr.P.C. can be quashed if it is felt by the Court while dealing with
a quashing petition under section 482 Cr.P.C. that it would secure the ends of
justice if the FIR and criminal proceedings arising therefrom are quashed and
continuation of the investigation/criminal proceedings would amount to abuse of
the process of law. Since both the parties in this petition have settled the dispute
amongst themselves for bringing about peace and harmony and are living as law
abiding citizens and civil litigation between them also stands compromised, no
fruitful purpose would now be served if the trial of the accused persons goes on.

7.

In view of the foregoing and considering the fact that this Court itself in its

earlier decisions, relied upon by the counsel for the petitioners, has been allowing
petitions for quashing of the FIRs on the basis of the settlement between the
parties even in cases where allegations of serious nature inviting punishment upto
imprisonment for life were levelled against the accused, I am inclined to allow this
petition as it would amount to abuse of the process of law if the criminal case
against the petitioners-accused is allowed to continue. Consequently FIR no.
13/1998 for the offences under Sections 147/149/452/323/506/34 I.P.C.
registered at Police Station Pratap Nagar on 20.01.1998 and the criminal
proceedings emanating therefrom pending in the Court of learned Metropolitan
Magistrate, Delhi are hereby quashed.

P.K. BHASIN,J
December 7, 2007
sh

