*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL. APPEAL NO. 267 OF 1999

%

#
!

Date of Decision: 4th April, 2008

SHIV PRASAD

....Appellant
Through: Mr. Rajender Kumar,
Advocate(amicus curiae)
versus

$
^

*

STATE

....Respondent
Through : Mr. M. N. Dudeja, APP

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The appellant Shiv Prasad has challenged the judgment
and order dated 22.3.1999 passed by the learned Additional

Sessions Judge, Delhi in Sessions Case No.205/97 whereby he
was convicted under Section 392 read with Section 397 of Indian
Penal Code and was sentenced to undergo seven years rigorous
imprisonment and also to pay a fine of Rs.100/- with a default
stipulation of further one month’s rigorous imprisonment in case
of non-payment of fine.

2.

The relevant facts may first be stated. On 1.10.1991 at

about 11.30 p.m. four persons came to the factory of PW-3 Prem
Parkash Bansal at Prahladpur and at that time his two
employees Suresh(PW-1) and one Tajan were present in the
factory. One of the intruders was having a „katta‟ and he put the
same on the temple of Tajan and the other intruder who was
holding a knife put it on the back of PW-1 and took them in the
office and two other intruders tied them with a rope and covered
their eyes with a piece of cloth. In the factory some bags of
plastic granules were lying and those intruders were loaded in a
truck and taken away by the intruders.

As per the further

prosecution case, Mangal Bahadur, who was a chowkidar in the
factory and one Krishan, who was also the employee in that
Crl.A.No. 267/1999

2

factory, were also involved in that incident and they had also fled
away from the factory along with other four persons. Thereafter,
Suresh and Tajan informed the owner of the factory(PW-3) about
the incident who then informed the police. PW-6 ASI Raghubir
Singh reached the factory and recorded the statement (Ex. PW3/A) of PW-3 Parkash Bansal and a rukka(Ex.PW-2/B) was then
sent to the police station for the registration of an FIR under
Section 380 IPC.

Accordingly a case was registered under

Section 380 IPC vide FIR No. 209/91(Ex.PW-2/C). On receiving
some secret information on 9.10.91 about the culprits involved in
this incident the police apprehended eight persons, including the
present appellant and the above named two employees of the
complainant, from a godown in village Khera Khurd which
belonged to Ram Lal (PW-5). All the eight persons were found
sitting on the stolen bags of plastic granules which were 64 in
number. Those bags were then sealed and taken into police
possession vide memo Ex. PW-5/C. Later on the complainant
(PW-3) identified the bags at the police station when he had gone
there to find out the progress in his case.

Crl.A.No. 267/1999

3

3.

After investigating the matter the police filed charge-sheet

under Sections 395/397/342/412/34 IPC in the Court against
all the eight persons apprehended on 09-10-91. They were then
charged and tried for the commission of offences under Sections
395/398/34 IPC. During the pendency of trial four accused
persons, namely, Tej Bahadur, Man Singh, Bhim Singh and
Mangal Bahadur absconded and they were declared proclaimed
offenders.

4.

The learned trial Court finally convicted only the appellant

under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC relying upon the
testimony of PW-1 Suresh and acquitted other three accused
Krishan Prasad, Dharampal and Ram Hari.

Aggrieved by his

conviction the sole convicted accused, the appellant herein,
challenged the impugned judgment and order by filing this
appeal.

5.

Since none had appeared on behalf of the appellant to

advance arguments when it was taken up for hearing, Mr.
Rajender Kumar, Advocate was appointed as amicus curiae to
Crl.A.No. 267/1999

4

assist the Court.

6.

Sh. Rajender Kumar contended that the conviction of the

appellant was based on the testimony of the PW-1 and since his
evidence was not relied upon by the trial Court against other
accused persons the appellant could not be convicted on the
same evidence. In support of this contention the learned counsel
had relied upon a decision of Apex Court reported as 1992 SCC
(Crl.) 833, “Puttan @ Kamal Prasad v. State of U.P.” wherein the
conviction of the convicted accused under Section 394 read with
Section 397 IPC was set aside on the ground that when on the
same evidence two accused were acquitted there was no
justification in sustaining the conviction of the third one. In
another judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court cited by the amicus
curiae which is reported as AIR 1989 SC 772, “Sukhram v. State
of Madhya Pradesh” also it was held that if one accused is
acquitted then other one would on same evidence cannot be
convicted. It was also contended that in any event the evidence of
PW-1 in the absence of a prior test identification parade could not
be relied upon by the trial Court for convicting the appellant. In
Crl.A.No. 267/1999

5

support of this contention the learned Amicus cited two decisions
of the Apex Court reported as “Devinder Singh & Anr. v. State of
Himachal Pradesh”, 2004 SCC (Crl.) 93 and “Kanan & Ors. v.
State of Kerala”, 1979 (3) SCC 319 wherein it was held that when
identification of the accused person not known to the witness is
done for the first time in Court, his evidence becomes absolutely
valueless unless there has been a previous test identification
parade in respect of the accused.

7.

On the other hand Shri M.N.Dudeja, learned Additional

Public Prosecutor, supported the judgment of the trial Court and
submitted that there was no infirmity in the impugned judgment.

8.

After having gone through the testimony of Suresh (PW-1),

who is the only eye-witness of the incident produced before the
trial Court and whose evidence has not been accepted in respect
of other accused persons, I have unhesitatingly come to the
conclusion that the learned trial Court has wrongly convicted the
appellant while acquitting his co-accused persons.

As per the

prosecution case when the appellant was apprehended on 09-10Crl.A.No. 267/1999

6

91 along with his co-accused persons 64 bags of plastic
granules(dana) stolen by them from the factory of the
complainant(PW-3) were recovered from their possession.
However, the learned trial Judge has disbelieved the prosecution
case regarding that recovery.

The appellant was convicted on

the basis of evidence of PW-1 Suresh who identified him in Court
for the first time after the incident.

The other two accused,

namely, Dharampal and Ram Hari were acquitted since PW-1 had
not deposed anything against them in his chief-examination and
he stated that he could not identify these persons as his eyes had
been covered at the time of the incident with a cloth.

Accused

Krishan, who was the employee of the complainant, was
acquitted by the learned trial Judge on the ground that all that
PW-1 had stated about him in his evidence was that he had also
left the factory along with the other culprits and further that in the
first information about the incident recorded at the police station
vide DD No. 37-A(Ex.PW-2/A) there was no mention of accused
Krishan Prasad and the information received was that the
robbers had taken away the chowkidar with them.

In these

circumstances, accused Krishan Prasad was given the benefit of
Crl.A.No. 267/1999

7

doubt.

While dealing with the prosecution case against the

present appellant the learned trial Judge has noticed in his
judgment that appellant Shiv Prasad was a stranger to PW-1
Suresh and in the ordinary course his dock identification could
not be taken very seriously. By this, the learned Judge appears
to have intended to convey that since accused Shiv Prasad was a
stranger to the sole eye witness of the incident there should have
been a prior test identification parade, which admittedly was not
got conducted by the police.

It, thus, appears that the learned

trial Judge was not convinced about the involvement of the
appellant also merely on the basis of identification evidence of
PW-1 Suresh. It, therefore, became a matter of anxiety to find
out as to how the appellant was held guilty by the learned trial
Judge after having observed that in the ordinary course his dock
identification could not be taken very seriously. This is how the
learned trial Judge while considering the prosecution case against
the appellant in para no. 8 of the impugned judgment.
“8.
I am now left with the solitary statement
of PW-1 Suresh…………. He has identified Shiv
Prasad as the person who was armed with Katta.
Shiv Prasad was admittedly a stranger to him and in
Crl.A.No. 267/1999

8

the ordinary course dock identification would not be
taken very seriously. In the case of Shiv Prasad,
however, there were distinct identity marks and PW1 Suresh mentioned the same in the statement
which he made to the IO on the night of occurrence.
Accused Shiv Prasad has a mole on his nose and his
nose is pierced also. PW-1 Suresh mentioned both
these features to the IO. This satisfies me that
Suresh was actually present at the time of
occurrence and he had seen accused Shiv Prasad
with a katta……….”

9.

In my view, the learned trial Court has erroneously sought

corroboration of the testimony of PW-1 from the statement given
to the investigating officer during investigation ignoring the
settled legal position that any statement made to an
investigating officer in the course of investigation is hit by the
provisions of Section 162 Cr.P.C. and the same cannot be relied
upon except for the limited purpose of contradicting its maker
either by the accused or even by the prosecution if the witness
turns hostile. Since, appellant was admittedly not known to PW-1
the prosecution should have arranged a test identification parade
for getting the appellant identified from PW-1 and the other eyewitness Tajan. That was, however, not done and there is no
explanation forthcoming from the side of the prosecution for the
absence of prior test identification parade and consequently the
Crl.A.No. 267/1999

9

identification of the appellant for the first time in Court as the
culprit by PW-1 could not have been relied upon by the learned
trial Court since it itself had observed that in the ordinary course
dock identification of the appellant by PW-1 could not be taken
seriously which shows that the learned trial Judge himself was
not considering this witness to be belonging to that category of
witnesses whose evidence could be relied upon without any
corroboration. In the present case, the corroboration of the
testimony of PW-1 could be from the evidence of recovery of
stolen property from the appellant which, as noticed already, was
though adduced but was not found to be reliable by the learned
trial Court itself or from identification of the appellant by PW-1 at
a test identification parade which was not got conducted by the
investigating agency. As per the prosecution case the appellant
and his co-accused persons were apprehended on some secret
information and since the recovery of stolen property from the
appellant and his co-accused persons at the time of their
apprehension has been disbelieved by the trial Court the manner
of their arrest also becomes doubtful and consequently the
identification of the appellant by PW-1 in Court for the first time
Crl.A.No. 267/1999

10

more than two years after the incident without a property test
identification parade. In this regard a useful reference can be
made to the views of the Hon’ble Supreme Court also expressed
in (1979) 3 SCC 319, “Kanan And Others Vs. State of Kerala”.
Dealing with the effect of absence of a prior test identification in
a case where the apprehended person on the suspicion of being
involved in some crime by the victim who did not know that
person before the incident the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed
as under:
“Both the trial Court and the High Court have
found that the mere fact that no T.I. parade
was held would not destroy the evidence of PW
25. With due respect, we feel that the High
Court erred in law in taking this view. It is well
settled that where a witness identifies an
accused who is not known to him in the Court
for the first time, his evidence is absolutely
valueless unless there has been a previous T.I.
parade to test his powers of observation. The
idea of holding T.I. parade under Section 9 of
theEvidence Act is to test the veracity of the
witness on the question of his capability to
identify an unknown person whom the witness
may have seen only once. If no T.I. parade is
held then it will be wholly unsafe to rely on his
bare testimony regarding the identification of
an accused for the first time in Court. In these
circumstances, therefore, we feel that it was
incumbent on the prosecution in this case to
Crl.A.No. 267/1999

11

have arranged T.I. parade and got the
identification made before the witness who
called upon to identify the appellant in the
Court. On this ground alone, the testimony of
PW 25 becomes unworthy of credence and
must be excluded from consideration.”

10.

I also find force in the submission of the learned amicus

curiae that since the evidence of PW-1 who had implicated
appellant as well as the complainant’s employee Krishan Prasad
during his evidence in Court was not accepted by the learned trial
Court in respect of the acquitted accused Krishan Prasad the
same evidence could not have been relied upon for convicting the
appellant and the benefit of doubt should have been given to him
also and this view is fortified by the two decisions of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court on this aspect cited by the learned amicus curiae.

11.

I am, therefore, of the view that this appeal deserves to be

allowed and is hereby allowed. The judgment and order dated
22.03.1999 are set aside and the appellant is acquitted of the
offence for which he was convicted by the trial Court. The
sentence of imprisonment awarded to the appellant was

Crl.A.No. 267/1999

12

suspended during the pendency of this appeal and now as a
result of his acquittal bail bond executed by him stands cancelled
and his surety also stands discharged.

12.

For the valuable assistance rendered by the amicus curiae

the Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee shall pay his fees
which is fixed at Rs. 5500/- and it be informed accordingly by the
Registry.

P.K.BHASIN,J

April 4, 2008
sh

Crl.A.No. 267/1999

13

