*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: 15th November, 2007

+

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 264 OF 1996
STATE

....Appellant
Through: Mr. O.P.Saxena, APP
versus

MADHUSUDAN AGGARWAL & ANR.

....Respondents

Through : Mr. M.C.Sanghi, Advocate

CORAM:
*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT

P.K.BHASIN, J:
1.

This appeal has been filed by the State against the judgment dated

29.3.1996 passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi in complaint case
No.35/94 whereby the respondents herein were acquitted of the charge under

Sections 7/16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
2.

The relevant facts leading to the prosecution of the respondents herein as

noticed by the learned trial court in the impugned judgment are as under:“……………….on 8.11.93, a team of Food Inspectors

comprising of FI N.N.Sharma and FI P.N.Khatri and other
members of PFA Department under the supervision of
Dr.G.C.Raha visited the hotel the workshop of M/s Anand
Kumar Deepak Kumar, 2034, Katra Lachu Singh, Chandni
Chowk, Delhi, and found accused Madhu Sudan Aggarwal,
(accused No.1)conducting the business of the workshop fo the
firm and storing khoa, a food article, for use in preparation of
sweets for sale for human consumption of approximately 750
grams of khoa from an open tray bearing no label declaration
to FI N.N.Sharma for analysis and price of Rs.37.50 p was
offered but was refused to be accepted. It has been further
alleged that sample of was taken as per provisions of PFA Act
& Rules. The sample was taken after cutting into smallest
possible pieces with the help of clean and dry knife in a clean
and dry steel tray and properly mixing with the help of same
knife. It has been further alleged that the sample was divided
by the FI into three equal parts then and there and each part
was put in separate clean and dry bottles and 20 drops of
formalin was added to each bottle. Each bottle containing the
sample was separately packed, fastened, marked and sealed
according to PFA Act and Rules. Vendor's receipt, notice in
form VI were prepared at the spot by FI N.N.Sharma and copy
of notice was given to accused. Panchnama was also
prepared at the spot by FI NN Sharma and signed by him as
well as by accused and attesting witness FI PN Khatri. It has
been further alleged that before start of sample proceedings,
efforts were made to join public witnesses but none came
forward and thereupon, FI PN Khatri was requested to join who
agreed. Thereafter, one counter part of the sample in the intact
condition was sent to P.A. for analysis who vide report
No.PFA/Enf/(DW-10)/2029/93 dated 16.11.93 opined that
the sample does not conform to the standard as milk fat
contents of finished product were found at 17.06% which falls
below the minimum prescribed limit of 20%. It has been

3.

further alleged that two counter parts of sample in intact
condition were deposited with LHA. After receipt of report of
PA, investigation was conducted by FI NN Sharma, who found
that accused No.2 M/s Anand Kumar Deepak Kumar is a firm
having two partners namely Madhu Sudan Aggarwal (accused
No.1) and Smt. Sumitra Devi Aggarwal. Further, accused No.1
has been found as the person incharge and responsible for the
conduct of the business of the said firm. Thereafter, consent
for the prosecution of accused as provided U/s 20 of PFA Act
was granted by Sh.M.P.Tyagi, the then Director, PFA.
Accordingly, it has been alleged that both the accused have
violated the provisions of Section 2(ia)(a)(m) punishable u/s
16(1) and Section 7 of the PFA Act. Hence, the present
complaint.”
After institution of the complaint, accused were served with intimation letter

along with copy of PA report. Thereupon, accused No.1 exercised his right as
provided u/s 13(2) of PFA Act and second counter part of sample was sent to
Director, CFL, Mysore for analysis, who vide his certificate No.142/PFA/94 dated
13.4.94 opined that the sample does not conform to the standard laid down for
Khoa as per provisions of PFA Act and rules as milk fat contents on finished
product basis were found at 15.5% which falls below the minimum specified limit
of 20.0% on finished product basis. Thus, keeping in view the nature of
adulteration found in the sample, the case has been tried as summons trial case.
Accordingly, notice u/s 251 Cr.P.C. for the above-mentioned offence was given to
the accused to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
4.

After considering the facts and circumstances of the case as well as the

contentions raised by learned defence counsel and the testimony of PW-1 FI NN
Sharma and PW-2 Dr.G.C.Raha, LHA, I am satisfied that there has been an

inordinate delay in completion of investigation and launching prosecution against
the accused. In the present case, as per admission of PW-2 Dr.G.C.Raha, LHA, the
report of PA Delhi is dated 16.11.93 and thereafter, investigation was marked to
FI NN Sharma. PW-2 Dr.G.C.Raha further admitted in his cross-examination that FI
NN Sharma completed his investigation on 13.1.94, but the Director, PFA, has
granted consent for the prosecution of accused on 14.2.94. It is nowhere explained
as to what was going on during this period of time. In this regard, I find the answer
given by PW-2 Dr.G.C.Raha in his cross-examination as ever since. In his crossexamination, Dr.G.C.Raha has not given any specific or any reason, as to why a
period of one month was consumed in obtaining consent for the prosecution of
accused. Further, the complaint has been filed only on 28.2.94. Further, referring
to the prosecution case, two letters written by FI NN Sharma one to accused No.1
Madhu Sudan Aggarwal and another to Sales Tax Officer, Ward No.1, IP Estate,
Delhi and another letter written to Zonal Health Officer, MCD, City Zone, are placed
on record which are dated 24.12.93. These letters clearly show that no efforts
were made by any FI from the date, the report of PA Ex. PW1/F was received and
till these three letters written by FI NN Sharma. This fact clearly shows that period
of more than one month was wasted without any explanation or justified reason in
writing these three letters only which are Ex.PW1/H PW-1 and respectively.
Moreover, as per statement of PW-1 NN Sharma, FI and PW-2 Dr.G.C.Raha, it is the
case of prosecution that after completion of sample proceedings, one counter part

of sample was deposited, in intact condition, with Incharge Sample Collection, PFA
Department for onward transmission to PA for analysis and remaining two counter
parts of sample in intact condition, were deposited by FI NN Sharma with Dr.
R.C.Raha vide receipt Ex.PW-1/E. Under provisions of PFA Rules, LHA is required to
keep in safe custody the so deposited two counter parts of sample. Whereas
Dr.G.C.Raha, in his cross-examination stated that he cannot say anything whether
the second counter part of sample was kept in refrigerator or not till the time the
same was sent to Director, CFL, Mysore, without seeing his official while which he
was already carrying.
5.

Referring to the facts of the present case, the second counter part of sample

was not kept in a refrigerator till the time same was sent to Director, CFL, Mysore,
for analysis. Moreover, as already discussed above, there has been a delay of
more than two months in filing the complaint against the accused without any just
cause or any other reason. The food article in the present case is Khoa, which is
also a milk product like that of curd and the sample in the present case was found
not conforming to the standard on account of deficiency in milk fat per centage on
finished product basis. Various experts have appeared in the court and it has been
reported that the food articles like milk and milk product starts undergoing
chemical changes and milk fat content is bound to decrease with the passage of
time.
6.

Feeling aggrieved, the state sought leave to appeal which was granted. I have

heard Mr. M.N.Dudeja, APP for the State,

Mr. M.C. Sanghi, Advocate

for respondent. I have also gone through evidence adduced during the trial by the
prosecution.
7.

Hon’ble Supreme Court in a number of cases has laid down the guidelines

which an appellate court should keep in mind while dealing with the judgment of
acquittal. I may notice the views expressed in two judgments of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court. In “State of Punjab Vs. Ajaib Singh And Others”, 2005 SCC (Cri)
43, while dealing with a case of acquittal it was observed as under in para no. 10
of the judgment:
“10.

…… It is well settled that in an appeal against
acquittal, the appellate court is entitled to reappreciate the
evidence on record, but having done so it will not interfere
with the order of acquittal unless it finds the view of the court
acquitting the accused to be unreasonable or perverse. If the
view recorded by the court acquitting the accused is a
possible, reasonable view of the evidence on record, the order
of acquittal ought not to be reversed.”

8.

In an earlier judgment reported as 1980 CAR 359 (SC), “Sirajuddin alias Siraj

Vs. State of Karnataka” also Hon’ble Supreme Court had observed while dealing
with the scope of an appeal against a judgment of acquittal as under:
“……. It is well settled that if the view of the evidence taken by

the trial Court is reasonably possible, the High Court should
not, as a rule of prudence, disturb the acquittal.”
9.

Keeping in view these observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, I would

now examine if the findings of the learned trial judge can be said to be perverse,
as is being claimed on behalf of the State in this appeal. The findings in the
impugned judgment of the learned trial Court whereby the accused were acquitted
have already been reproduced above. Learned Trial Court has relied upon one
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in “Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ghisa
Ram” 1975 PFA cases 186. In that case complaint was filed in the court after
about seven months from the date of raid and taking of sample of milk product
(curd) from the shop of the accused which was on 20/09/1961. The complaint
was filed on 23/05/1962. Hon’ble Supreme Court held that in these
circumstances, the valuable right available to the accused under section 13(2) of
the Act of having the sample tested at Central Food Laboratory had stood denied
to him. It was also observed that ordinarily it was possible for the prosecution to
obtain the report of the Public Analyst and institute the prosecution within 17 days
of the taking of the sample. Learned APP had submitted that this judgment was
not applicable to the facts of the present case inasmuch as in that case the
Director of Central Food Laboratory had found the sample sent to him to be unfit
for analysis because of decomposition and because of that reason the accused
could not have the benefit of the report of the Director which, if had been given,
would have superceded the report of the Public Analyst so the Hon’ble Supreme
Court had held that the delay in launching the prosecution against the accused had
resulted in denial of the benefit of Section 13(2) of the Act to him while in the

present case despite the delay in the filing of the complaint in court the sample
which was sent to the Director of Central Food Laboratory was found to be fit for
analysis. So, learned APP contended, the acquittal of the accused of the present
case by the trial Court relying upon the said judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court was totally unjustified and not sustainable at all. However, in my view the
acquittal of the respondents in the present case in view of the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Ghisa Ram’s case (supra) cannot be said to be
unjustified because the crux of the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court is that
prosecution in these kind of cases should be launched promptly. In that case
reference was also made to the opinion of an expert that if a food article, like curd,
is kept in a refrigerator and a preservative is added to the sample the total period
which may be available for making analysis of that sample without decomposition
will be six months. In the present case, the sample of the khoa was sent to the
Central Food Laboratory after more than seven months from the date when it was
taken from the shop of the respondent no. 1 and there is no explanation
forthcoming from the side of the prosecution for that delay. In these
circumstances, if the learned Trial Court has come to the conclusion that the
accused’s right under section 13(2) of the Act had got frustrated it cannot be said
that this conclusion of the trial Court is unreasonable, wholly unjustified or
perverse.
9.

No other point was urged by the learned APP for the state.

10.

This appeal being devoid of any merit is, accordingly, hereby dismissed.

November
da

, 2007

P.K.BHASIN,J

