*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

CRL. APPEAL NO. 231 OF 1999

+
#

Date of Decision: 12th May, 2008
SATVIR SHARMA

!

...Appellant
Through: Mr. K.B. Andley, Senior Advocate
with Mr. M.L. Yadav, Advocate.
versus

$

C.B.I.

^

...Respondent
Through : Mr. R. M. Tewari, Advocate

CORAM:
*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(Yes)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:

The appellant has been convicted by the learned Special
Judge, Delhi under Sections 7 and 13 (1)(d) read with Section

13(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988(for short „the Act‟) and
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of two
years under Section 7 and forty months rigorous imprisonment
under Section 13(1)(d). Separate fines with default stipulations
were also imposed upon the appellant.

2.

The relevant facts leading to the trial and conviction of the

appellant have been narrated by the learned trial court in the
impugned judgment and the same are reproduced hereunder:-

“1.

Present case was registered on 22.6.89 on

the written complaint of Shri Sri Ram alleging that
he was getting his house No. A-46, Shastri Nagar,
repaired. Shri Satvir Sharma, accused visited house
No. A-46, Shastri Nagar on 19.6.89 and demanded
a sum of Rs. 5000/- as illegal gratification for
allowing him to continue the repair/renovation of
his house. Complainant alongwith his neighbor R.K.
Verma visited the office of accused at Karol Bagh on
21.6.89 where accused told the complainant to pay
him Rs. 1500/- on 22.6.89 at his office and to pay
the balance amount later on. The complainant was
not willing to pay the illegal gratification to the
accused and hence he lodged a written complaint

Crl.A. No. 231/99

2

with CBI on 22.6.89. A case was registered and the
investigation of the case was entrusted to Sh. Vijay
Rawal, Inspector CBI.
2.

Shri Vijay Rawal arranged two independent

witnesses S/Shri Sardari Lal and S.S. Kataria, both
from the department of Industrial Development
Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi on 22.6.89. The numbers
of the GC notes of Rs.1500/- produced by the
complainant were recorded in the handing over
memo and these GC notes were treated with
phenolphthalein powder. Thereafter these GC notes
were given to the complainant with the direction to
give the same to the accused on his demand. After
completion of all the legal formalities, Shri Vijay
Rawal laid a trap on 22.6.89. The party reached in
the office of the accused at Karol Bagh, Delhi at
3.20 PM on 22.6.89. All members of the trap party
took suitable potitions near the office of the
accused and complainant alongwith independent
witnesses entered the office of the accused at 3.35
PM. There accused repeated his demand for illegal
gratification and accepted the tainted money of
Rs.1500/-

from

the

gratification in the

complainant
presence of

as

illegal

independent

witnesses. After receiving appointed signal, Shri
Vijay Rawal, other members of the trap party
apprehended the accused. The tainted money of Rs.
1500/- was recovered from the right side pocket of

Crl.A. No. 231/99

3

pant of the accused by Sardari Lal, independent
witness and numbers of GC notes so recovered were
compared with the numbers of GC notes recorded in
the handing over memo which tallied. The hand
washes of the accused were taken. The wash of the
right side pocket of pant of accused was taken. All
other formalities were completed on the spot and
accordingly accused has been chargesheeted for
the offence punishable U/s 7 & 13(2) and 13(1)(d)
of P.C. Act, 1988. Further, sanction for prosecution
U/s 19(1)(c) of P.C. Act, 1988 has also been taken.”

3.

To prove the accusations against the appellant the

prosecution had relied upon the evidence of the complainant(PW2 Sri Ram), his neighbour to whom he had narrated about the
demand of bribe by the appellant(PW-5 Ram Kishan Verma), the
two independent panch witnesses(PW-3 S.S.Kataria & PW-4
Sardari Lal) and the trap laying officer(PW-7 Inspector Vijay
Rawal). The appellant-accused in his statement under Section
313 Cr.P.C. had pleaded innocence and claimed that a false case
had been foisted upon him as he had booked unauthorized
construction being carried out by the complainant because of

Crl.A. No. 231/99

4

which he had got annoyed and had threatened him(the appellant)
to get him removed from service. As regards the solutions of
sodium carbonate turning pink when his hands were dipped in
separate solutions after his apprehension the appellant‟s stand
was that the CBI officials had caught hold of him and had rubbed
their hands with his right hand and then forced him to dip his
hands in a colourless solution and they had dipped their own
fingers also in that solution and that solution had turned pink.

4.

During the course of arguments Mr. K.B.Andley, learned

senior counsel for the appellant, read out the relevant portions of
the statements of main prosecution witnesses and then urged for
rejecting their evidence. Before I consider the criticism of Mr.
Andley I would like to notice the relevant portions of the evidence
of material witnesses. PW-2 Sri Ram is the complainant. The
relevant portions of his testimony are as under:
“ I was employed with the D.C.M., Delhi, which was
closed about 6 - 7 years back. My services were
terminated. At that time I was residing in a house
allotted to me by DCM. I vacated the said DCM and I had

Crl.A. No. 231/99

5

a plot on which I had constructed my own house at
Shastri Nagar, Delhi and after leaving the DCM I shifted
to my own house after about one and a quarter year.
Where I am presently reside with my family. About 5-6
years back(this witness was examined on10/01/95) I
was carrying on repairs of the said house. It was a
summer season while the repairs was going on two
persons came to the site and one of them is the accused
Satbir Sharma accused present in the court and other
may be chaprasi. The other man came inside the house
and met him and told him that repairs was necessary
because of bad condition of the house that man told me
that Sahab was standing outside and he has called me. I
told him that I was an uneducated person therefore he
himself should talk to the Sahab. I did not see the said
date Saheb. That person came there and told me that
Rs.5000/- should be paid. Otherwise I would not be
allowed to undertake the repairs. That person gave me a
paper chit and told me to come to the office at Tibia
College and meet Satbir Sharma in his office. Next day I
went to his office at Tibia College alongwith my neighbor
Shri Ramkishan Verma. In the office Shri Ram Kishan
Verma went to inside the room and I remained outside.
They talk something in English which I could not
understand and Sri Ram Kishan Verma also coming of
that office room told me that the matter is settled about
1500/- which I was required to pay in connection with
the repairs of the house. This money was to be paid to
the accused. I did not remember the date thereafter I

Crl.A. No. 231/99

6

and Ram Kishan Verma discussed and decided that a
step should be taken so that the money of 1500/- could
be saved. I told him to take up this step. Thereafter Shri
R.K. verma took me to the CBI office next day……………..
Thereafter, I myself wrote an application to the CBI……….
The said report (complaint) is Ex. PW2/A ……….. I went to
the CBI office alongwith Shri Ram Kishan Verma and
handed over Rs.1500/- of Rs.50 denomination each.
This was about 2/3 days after the complaint was giving.
The number of the currency notes were noted down a
paper. Number of the GC notes were noted down a
piece of paper……………… I was directed to hand over the
printed currency notes to accused Satbir Sharma on his
demand…..……. After completing the proceedings in the
CBI office, we left CBI office about 2 or 2.30 p.m. At Tibia
College I alongwith Ram Kishan Verma and one more
person whose name I do not remember went the office
room of the accused which was on the first floor. On
reaching the office room the chaprasi met me and asked
him if Saheb was there he told me Sahab was sitting in
the room. I entered the room leaving behind Ram Kishan
Verma and the other person entered the room. Sahab
told me if I had brought the money ……….. and thereafter
I gave the money to accused Satbir who accepted the
same with his hands and kept it in the pant pocket.
………………I came out and those Ram Kishan Verma and
the other person also came alongwith me on the ground
floor and gave the signal to the CBI officers………. The
raiding party members went up and entered the office

Crl.A. No. 231/99

7

room of the accused and caught the accused……… He
was confronted that he had taken money from me which
he denied then the personal search was taken and the
money was recovered from his pant pocket……… The
numbers of the currency notes were tallied with the
numbers

already

recorded

in

the

handing

over

memo……. Thereafter the hands of the accused was
washed in a solution which turned into pink……………”

5.

PW-3 is the panch witness who was associated by CBI for

the trap. He deposed about the pre-raid formalities conducted at
the office of CBI and then he went on to depose about the actual
trap proceedings at the office of the appellant. The relevant
portions from his evidence are as under:

“………We had left the CBI office at about 3.25 p.m. we
reached at M.C.D. office Tibia College, New Delhi. At that
place complainant/myself and Shri S.K. Verma or R.K.
Verma were directed to go inside the office while other
members of the trap party took up their respective
position. We all three went to the office of accused
Satbir Sharma who is present in the court. (Witness has
rightly identify the accused)…….. Thereafter Sri Ram
went inside the room and called the accused and Sri

Crl.A. No. 231/99

8

Ram and accused came out of the room. Thereafter
accused said „HAA BOLO KYA BAAT HAI‟. Thereafter
complainant said „SAHAB JAISA AAPNE KAHA THA MEIN
RUPEES 1500/- LE AYA HOO‟ Thereafter accused
accepted Rs.1500/-. Accused kept that money in his
pant pocket. After keeping Rs. 1500/- with him accused
said „BAAKI PAISO KA INTJAAM JALDI KAR DENA DO
TEEN DIN ME AAB TUM JAAO”. Complainant asked from
the accused that now can he construct his house. The
accused replied “MAKAAN KA KYA BANWANA MAKAAN
BANA TO HUA”…….Thereafter complainant given the preappointed signal. …….Inspector Vijay Rawal enquired
from me as to whether the money has been taken which
I had replied yes and then we all three alongwith went
upstairs. Thereafter we all went the office of the accused
and accused was present in his seat. Inspector vijay
Rawal inquired from the accused as to where is the
money. I told him that the money is in the pocket of the
accused. Thereafter Vijay Rawal asked the accused to
take out the money. The accused replied „KOON SE
PAISE, PAISE MERE PASS NAHI HAA‟. At that time Sri
Ram was also present there……. As far as I remember
Inspector Vijay Rawal had asked me to take out tainted
currency note from the pocket of the accused and as
such I took out the same. PW Sardari lal was also
present there at that time. In the presence of members
of the trap party, inspector Vijay Rawal compared the
numbers of those tainted GC notes with handing over
memo and their number tallied.”

Crl.A. No. 231/99

9

6.

PW-4 Sardari Lal is another panch witness associated for the

trap. He also deposed about the pre-raid proceedings at the office
of CBI and the relevant portions of his statement regarding the
actual trap are as under:
“…….After the pre-raid proceedings, we left the CBI office
for MCD office, Karol Bagh, CBI vehicles were stopped at
main road at a distance of one furlong from MCD office.
Thereafter, we proceeded towards MCD office on foot.
Complainant Siri Ram, PW Kataria and PW Verma went
into the office of the accused and we the remaining
members of raiding party took position outside the office
at some distance. We had reached at MCD office at
about 3-20 PM. I did not see anyone giving the signal,
but at about 3-45 PM CBI Inspector rushed towards the
office of the accused alongwith the members of the
raiding party. As soon as we entered the office of the
accused, complainant and witnesses said that bribe has
been paid and CBI officials caught hold of the accused
from his wrist. They disclosed their identity and showed
the identity card. Inspector of CBI confronted the
accused that he has taken the bribe. The accused got
nervous. I was directed to search the accused and
Rs.1500/- were recovered from the right side pocket of
the pant of the accused, present in the court…….After the
recovery of currency notes, myself and PW Shri Kataria

Crl.A. No. 231/99

10

compared the numbers of currency notes with the
numbers already noted down in the handing over memo
Ex. PW2/B and currency notes were found to be the
same.
Thereafter water was fetched in a glass tumbler and
sodium carbonate was dissolved in it. Accused was
made to dip one hand in the aforesaid solution and on
this said solution turned pink. ………..Accused was made
to take off his pant. Another sodium carbonate solution
was prepared afresh in a glass tumbler and inner lining
of the right side pocket of the pant of the accused was
dipped in sodium carbonate solution and the said
solution turned pink. ……..”

7.

PW-5 Ram Kishan Verma is the complainant‟s neighbour to

whom he had told about the demand of bribe. The relevant
portions of his evidence are as under:
“I know Siri Ram complainant. It is the incident of June,
1989. On the fateful day Siri Ram came to see me at my
bank situated at Arya Samaj Road, Karol Bagh, New
Delhi. He requested me to accompany his to MCD office,
Karol Bagh Zone and he told me that Zonal Engineer.
Again said, that Engineer was demanding a bribe of
Rs.5000/- from him for permitting him to repair his
house. I took short leave permission from my officer and
went alongwith Siri Ram to MCD office, Karol Bagh, New

Crl.A. No. 231/99

11

Delhi. We reached at MCD office at 3-30 PM and there
we met accused Satbir Sharma who is today present in
the court. Siri Ram told accd. Satbir Sharma that he
being a poor person was unable to pay Rs.5000/- as
bribe and accd. Satbir Sharma reduced his demand to
Rs.1500/- and told the complainant to bring the amount
of Rs.1500/- on the next day. He also told that in the
event of non-payment of Rs.1500/-, house of Siri Ram
would be demolished. Actually, Satbir Sharma had told
the complainant to bring the instalment of Rs.1500/- on
the next day and to arrange for the rest of the amount of
demand within 2 or 3 days. Thereafter, Siri Ram told me
that he was not in a position to arrange for the
demanded amount and I suggested to him to lodge a
complaint with the CBI office. We planned to visit CBI
office on the next day. On the next day, I alongwith Siri
Ram

reached

at

CBI

office

at

about

11AM.

………..Complainant was directed to pay the tainted
amount to the accused only in the event of specific
demand. One of the public witnesses was directed to
accompany the complainant and watch the proceedings
and hear the conversation. He was also directed that in
the event of passing of money, he should given signal by
placing his hand over his head. I was also directed to
accompany the complainant and watch the proceedings
and see the passing over of the money. All the pre-raid
proceedings were reduced into writing in the form of
handing over memo Ex. PW2/B and bears my signatures
at encircled portions D on both the pages.

Crl.A. No. 231/99

12

We left the CBI office at about 3PM and reached at MCD
office, Karol Bagh at about 4PM. CBI vehicle was parked
at

some

distance

near

Tibia

College.

Myself,

complainant and one public witness went to the MCD
office to meet the accused and other members of
raiding party took position outside. Accused was sitting
on his official seat and on seeing us he said „AA GAYE‟
and Siri replied in affirmative. Thereafter, accused Satbir
Sharma asked, PAISE LAAE HO and Siri Ram replied,
HAAN JI. He also said that with great difficulty he has
arranged

for

Rs.1500/-

which

he

has

brought.

Thereafter, Satbir Sharma accused said „PAISE TO DAINE
HIN PAREN GEY KAHIN SE BHI LAAO MAKAAN BANWA
RAHE HO‟. Accused PAISE LAHE HO DEY DO AND Siri
complaint took out tainted Rs.1500/- and gave the
same to the accused. Accused after accepting the
tainted money in his hand kept it in his pocket
immediately. Accused kept the money in the pocket of
his pant. After giving the money, Siri Ram asked, “SAHIB
AB TO MEN APNA KAAM KARWA SAKTA HOON”. On this
accused said, “ AGAR BAKI KA PAISA DO TEEN DIN MAIN
NAHIN DIYA MEN TOOMARA MAKAN GIRA DOON GAA”.
The aforesaid public witness who had accompanied us
gave pre-arranged signal by putting his hand over his
head and CBI officials came inside the office. I also gave
the similar signal. Accused was apprehended from both
his wrists. Thereafter, they disclosed their identify and
confronted the accused with the fact that he had

Crl.A. No. 231/99

13

accepted bribe, however, the accused denied having
taken any bribe. Siri ram told CBI officials that he has
given the tainted money to the accused which he has
kept in his pant pocket……. The second public witness
took search of the accused and recovered aforesaid
Rs.1500/- from the pant pocket of the accused. CBI
officials were not wearing any identification pant.
Thereafter aforesaid public witness compared the
recovered currency notes which were already noted
down with the handing over memo and confirmed that
the currency notes were the same. Thereafter, a glass of
water was brought and the chemical powder was
dissolved in the same. Said chemical powder was in the
IO bag. It was the same chemical powder which was
used for making solution in the pre-raid proceedings.
Other chemical powder was not taken along to the site
of raid. Accused was made to dip his right hand fingers
in the aforesaid solution which turned from colourless to
pink………….. Thereafter fresh solution of the said
chemical in a clean glass of water was prepared and
inner lining of the pocket of the pant of the accused from
which the tainted notes were recovered was dipped in
the same. Aforesaid pocket wash turned milky white, but
not pink…….. Similarly, accused was also made to dip his
left hand finger in a solution of aforesaid chemical
prepared in a clean glass and the said solution turned
light pink……… I have seen the currency notes which are
Ex.P1 to P-30. These are the same tainted notes which
were accepted by the accused………….”

Crl.A. No. 231/99

14

8.

PW-7 is the trap officer from CBI. He deposed as under:
“In June, 1989 I was posted as Inspector. On 22.6.89
one of my informer brought Shiri Ram and Shri R.K.
Verma to my office at CGO Complex Lodhi Road. When I
enquired about their visit, Shri Ram told me that one
Junior Engineer Satyavir Sharma of Karol Bagh Zone,
M.C.D. was demanding Rs.5000/- as bribe for permitting
him to renovate his house at Shastri Nagar. He also told
me that said J.E. had met him on 21-6-89 evening and
directed him to bring Rs.1500/- on 22.6.89. This fact
was also confirmed by Shri R. K. verma. Thereafter Shri
Ram wrote down his complaint Ex. P.W.2/A in Hindi.
…………….
I organized a trap party, which included Inspector S.C.
Yadav, Inspector RK Chadha, Inspector Mehar Singh, ASI
Om Parkash of CBI and two independent witnesses Mr.
Sardari Lal and Shri S. S. Kataria both from Udyog
Bhawan. I told the facts to all the members of trap party
in the presence of complainant. Complainant showed his
complaint to the independent witnesses, who asked him
certain

questions

to

satisfy

themselves……….

Complainant produced 30 G.C. notes of Rs.50/denomination each. I noted down the numbers of those
G.C. notes in the handing over memo P.W.2/B. those GC
notes were treated with phelphthlene powder by ASI Om
Parkash. Sodium carbonate solution was prepared in a

Crl.A. No. 231/99

15

glass of water. ASI Om Parkash who treated the GC
notes dipped his fingers in the said colourless solution,
which turned pink. After this demonstration, I explained
the reaction of phelolphthlene powder with sodium
carbonate solution to all the members of raiding party.
Demonstration solution was thrown away. I handed over
treated GC notes to the complainant Shri Ram and he
kept them in the left pocket of his payjama. Before that
personal search of complainant was conducted to
ensure that he was not carrying anything. Complainant
was directed to hand over said treated notes to the
accused only in the event of demand and before that he
was not supposed to touch the GC notes. Shri S.S.
Kataria was directed to act as shadow witness and
remained

with

the

complainant

to

watch

the

proceedings and hear the conversation. I also directed
Shri R. K. Verma to accompany the complainant for the
purpose of raid. I directed the complainant to given
signal by scratching his head in the event of acceptance
of bribe by the accused. Similar instructions were given
to witness S.S. Kataria and Shri R. K. Verma. ……..I
prepared handing over memo Ex. P.W. 2/B and obtained
the signatures of all the members of raiding party.
On 22.6.89 at about 3.00 PM after pre-raid proceedings,
we all left for CBI office for the raid. We reached near the
office of Karol Bagh Zone, M.C.D. Complainant Shri Ram
with his associate R. K. Verma and shadow witness S.S.
Kataria went into the office. We the other members of
the raiding party took positions near MCD office. At

Crl.A. No. 231/99

16

about 3.50 PM complainant RK Verma and SS Kataria
came downstairs and the complainant gave appointed
signal by scratching his head. Similar signals were given
by RK Verma and Shadow witness. Thereafter, at the
instance of complainant we all rushed to the office of JE
Satyavir Sharma and he was found sitting on his seat. I
caught hold of left wrist of the accused and Shri S. C.
Yadav caught hold of his right wrist. I disclosed my
identity and challenged Satyavir Sharma that he has
accepted the bribe from the complainant. Complainant
confirmed and stated that accused had kept the bribe
money in the right pocket of his pant. (objected to) I
directed PW Sardari Lal to check the right pocket of the
pant of the accused and thereafter he recovered
Rs.1500/- comprising of 30GC notes of Rs.50/denomination each from the right pocket of the pant of
the accused. I myself tallied the numbers of those
recovered notes with the numbers noted down in
handing over memo and GC notes were found to be the
same. Independent witnesses as well as complainant
also tallied the recovered GC notes.
Sodium carbonade solution was prepared in a glass of
water and accused Satyavir Sharma was made to dip his
right hand fingers in the said solution. On this aforesaid
colourless turned pink. ……….Fresh solution of sodium
carbonate was prepared in a clean glass of water and
accused was made to dip his left hand fingers into the
same, on this solution turned whitish pink. …………….
Fresh solution sodium carbonade was prepared in a

Crl.A. No. 231/99

17

clean glass of water. Accused was made to remove his
pant and inner lining of right side pocket of his pant was
dipped in the said solution and on this solution turned
pink. …….I prepared recovery memo PW2/C……..”

9.

This is the evidence which was read out before me by the

counsel for the respondent. Mr. Andley had submitted that even
though these witnesses had deposed about the recovery of tainted
money from the appellant-accused at the time of trap but the
evidence of none of them inspires confidence. It was also
submitted that the prosecution case as reflected in the complaint
(FIR) of the complainant to CBI was that the initial demand of
bribe of Rs.5,000/- was made by the appellant-accused himself at
the house of the complainant three-four days prior to 22/06/89
when the complainant had lodged his complaint(Ex.PW-2/A) with
CBI but while giving evidence in Court the complainant gave a
different version and claimed that two persons had come to his
house but one of them only had met him and had demanded
Rs.5,000/- saying that otherwise he would not be allowed to carry
out the repair work in his house and had also told him to meet

Crl.A. No. 231/99

18

Satbir Sharma(the appellant) next day in his office. The witness
had also stated that that day he had not met the other person who
had come there and in cross-examination also he had admitted
that on that day he had not met the accused. Mr. Andley
submitted that the consequence of this deviation from the original
version given to CBI by the complainant and the one given by him
in Court and the CBI not prosecuting the chaprasi who had made
the initial demand of bribe is that the entire case against the
appellant regarding demand of bribe by him becomes doubtful. It
was also contended that the complainant had to be crossexamined by the prosecutor because of his having introduced one
„chaprasi‟ during his evidence but during that cross-examination
also he denied that initial demand of bribe was made by the
accused alone and not by any chaprasi and that fact also makes
the complainant wholly unreliable. It was also submitted that even
on the second occasion the accused, as per the complainant, had
not demanded bribe from him directly and the deal was settled
with his neighbour PW-5 Ram Kishan Verma. Mr. Andley also
submitted that the panch witness PW-3 S.S. Kataria was also

Crl.A. No. 231/99

19

cross-examined by the public prosecutor which shows that he was
also not a reliable witness. Learned counsel further submitted that
all the trap witnesses had given discrepant statements in Court
regarding the actual trap proceedings and particularly the
conversation between the complainant and the appellant-accused
and that fact also renders the evidence of each one of them
unreliable and not worthy of any credence and should not have
been relied upon by the trial Court.

Learned senior

counsel

concluded by saying that the appellant deserves to be acquitted
and if at all this Court is not inclined to accept that prayer then at
least the sentences of imprisonment awarded to the appellant by
the trial Court should be reduced taking into consideration the
small amount of bribe demanded by the appellant, his present
age and the fact that the incident is of the year 1989 and during
all these years the appellant has undergone lot of mental torture
which by itself is sufficient punishment for him.
10.

On the other hand Shri R.M. Tiwari, learned counsel for the

respondent-CBI supported the trial Court‟s judgment and

Crl.A. No. 231/99

20

submitted that there were definitely certain inconsistencies in the
evidence of the prosecution witnesses but those were not on any
material aspect of the prosecution case and in fact they were
bound to be there since the witnesses were examined after more
than five or six years of the trap. It was also contended that in a
case of corruption like the present one if the prosecution is able to
establish that some money which was not the legal remuneration
of the accused was recovered from his possession at the time of
trap then the Court is bound to presume that that money was
obtained by him as illegal gratification. In the present case since
the CBI had been able to prove the recovery of tainted money from
the possession of the appellant by reliable evidence there remains
no scope for the acquittal of the appellant as he had not been able
to offer any explanation for that recovery and so the statutory
presumption under Section 20 of the Act has remained
unrebutted.

11.

From a reading of the evidence of the complainant it is no

doubt clear that regarding the initial demand he had introduced

Crl.A. No. 231/99

21

one chaprasi in the story and had also claimed that initial demand
was made by that chaprasi but that will not render the
prosecution case doubtful. The appellant-accused was charged
and tried for his having obtained bribe from the complainant on
the day of the trap i.e. 22/06/89 and on that aspect the
complainant has deposed that the appellant had asked for money
when he had gone to his office for getting him apprehended red
handed while accepting the money from him and on his demand
only he had given to the appellant the phenolphathalein treated
currency notes. He has also deposed that those very notes were
later on recovered from the possession of the appellant when
other members of the trap team entered his office room on
getting pre-arranged signal. The two panch witnesses as well as
the trap officer(PW-7) have also supported the prosecution case
regarding the recovery of tainted money from the appellantaccused. Of course, to all the witnesses of recovery it was
suggested in cross-examination on behalf of the accused that no
money was recovered from the accused as claimed by them but in
my view there is no reason to disbelieve the witnesses and

Crl.A. No. 231/99

22

particularly the trap officer regarding the recovery of tainted
money from the appellant-accused. Although the appellantaccused has taken a plea that he had been falsely implicated in
this case but I am of the view that it is difficult to accept that the
two panch-witnesses, both of whom were government officials and
totally independent witnesses, and the trap officer would have
conspired with the complainant who was a retired government
servant, to falsely implicate the accused.

12.

No doubt, there are some discrepancies in the statements of

the complainant, his neighbour PW-5 and the panch witnesses but
those discrepancies are not to be given any weightage since it is
to be borne in mind that witnesses were examined in Court after
more than six years of the trap and some discrepancies were
bound to occur in their statements due to the passage of time.
However, on the material aspect of the prosecution case i.e.
recovery of tainted money from the pocket of the appellantaccused all the trap witnesses had claimed in one voice that
money was recovered from the pocket of the appellant-accused

Crl.A. No. 231/99

23

after his apprehension by the CBI officials. Similarly, the evidence
of the complainant and panch witness PW-3 S.S. Kataria cannot
be rejected just because they were cross-examined by the public
prosecutor on some aspects. It is now well settled that entire
evidence of a witness in a criminal trial does not get washed off if
the witness is cross-examined by the prosecutor and whatever he
deposes in favour of the prosecution can be relied upon if that
version is duly corroborated by other reliable evidence. Here, on
the point of recovery of tainted money from the appellant-accused
the evidence of the complainant is fully corroborated by the
second panch witness PW-4 Sardari Lal as well as the trap officer
PW-7 Inspector Vijay Rawal. So, just because the complainant and
PW-3 S.S.Kataria were cross-examined on behalf of the
prosecution it cannot be said that their evidence has to be
ignored.

13.

In fact, even if evidence of the complainant and panch

witness S.S. Kataria were to be excluded totally from
consideration because of their having been cross-examined by the

Crl.A. No. 231/99

24

prosecutor the prosecution would have still succeeded based on
the evidence of the other panch witness PW-4 Sardari Lal and the
trap officer PW-7 Inspector Vijay Rawal. In this regard it may be
mentioned here that there have been cases in which convictions
of the public servants for the offence of bribery were maintained
even upto the Supreme Court despite the fact that complainant as
well as the panch witness had not supported the prosecution at all
and the conviction was maintained by the Supreme Court
primarily on the evidence of the trap officer regarding the recovery
of tainted money from the possession of the accused at the time
of the trap. In this regard, I may make a useful reference to only
one such decision of the Apex Court which is reported as 2001 (1)
SCC 691,“M. Narsinga Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh”.

In this

case the Supreme Court upheld the decisions of the trial Court as
well as the High Court convicting the accused disregarding the fact
of the complainant and the panch witness turning hostile totally.
Full reliance was placed on the evidence of the trap officer and
accepting his evidence regarding the recovery of tainted money
from the possession of the convicted accused it was held that that

Crl.A. No. 231/99

25

evidence of recovery was sufficient to raise a presumption against
the accused that the money recovered from his possession was
illegal gratification. In the present case, thus, even on the basis of
evidence of the trap officer alone the conviction of the appellant
could be sustained.

14.

I am also of the view that even if it could be said, as was

contended by Mr. Andley, that the complainant had a reason to
lodge a false complaint against the appellant-accused because of
his objecting to the repair work being done by the complainant in
his house, at least, other witnesses of recovery could not be
attributed any motive for falsely claiming that tainted money was
recovered from the pocket of the appellant-accused at the time of
raid. At least no motive was suggested to any one of them in
cross-examination on behalf of the accused.

In my view, the

evidence of recovery of tainted money from the appellant-accused
is unimpeachable. And, once recovery of money from a public
servant is established and no explanation for the same is offered
by the public servant then it has to be held that he had obtained
Crl.A. No. 231/99

26

that money himself and in that event even if there is no direct
evidence of prior demand of

bribe that would not be of any

consequence since prior demand of bribe by the public servant
would be implicit in its acceptance because unless there was
some kind of prior deal between the public servant and the person
giving the money to him the money, which is shown to have been
recovered from the public servant at the time of trap and which
the public servant does not claim to be his own money, would not
have been accepted. Of course, the public servant can claim that
the money recovered was due to him on some account and if he is
able to probabalise this plea then the

statutory presumption

under Section 20 of the Act, which is a rebuttable presumption, of
recovered money being illegal gratification can be said to have
been rebutted. In the present case, however, the appellant has
denied the very recovery of tainted money from his possession.
However, the evidence adduced in that regard by CBI having been
found to be acceptable by the trial Court as well as by this Court
the bare denial of the appellant-accused is valueless.

Crl.A. No. 231/99

27

15.

I am, therefore, of the view that there is no merit in the

appellant‟s challenge to his conviction.

16.

Coming now to the question of sentence, I am of the view

that considering the fact that the incident of demand and
acceptance of bribe by the appellant is of the year 1989 and
during all these years he must have suffered lot of mental agony
because of the pendency of the criminal proceedings against him
he deserves some leniency. I am of the view that since minimum
sentence of imprisonment is provided under Sections 7 as well as
13 of the Act this Court can in the facts and circumstances of the
case reduce the sentence of imprisonment under both these
Sections to the minimum sentence provided.

17.

In the result, while maintaining the conviction of the

appellant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 I reduce the sentence of imprisonment to six

Crl.A. No. 231/99

28

months for the conviction of the appellant under Section 7 and to
one year for his conviction under Section 13(1)(d).

With this

modification only on the point of sentence the appeal against the
judgement of conviction stands dismissed. The appellant was
released on bail during the pendency of the appeal and now that
his conviction has been sustained he shall be taken into custody
and sent to jail to serve out the sentences of imprisonment
awarded to him.

P.K.BHASIN,J
May 12, 2008
sh

Crl.A. No. 231/99

29

