*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No. 6029-30/2006
Date of Decision:16thNovember, 2007

%
#

Dheeraj Kochhar & Anr.

!

.....Petitioners

Through Mr. Rajiv Thukral
versus

$

The State of NCT of Delhi.

^

..... Respondent

Through Mr. M.N. Dudeja, APP

CORAM:
*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? (No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest? (No)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The present petition is filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 assailing the order dated 24.01.2006 passed by the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate in a case arising out of FIR No. 8/2003, Police Station Hauz Khas
whereby charges for the offences under Sections 323/341/506/34 of Indian
Penal Code (‘IPC’ in brief) were ordered to be framed against the petitioners and
two others.

2.

The case set out by the prosecution is that one Ms. Rajni Sharma resident of

40/1-3, Yusuf Sarai, New Delhi lodged a complaint with the Haus Khas Police
station that everyday car stereos were being played on high volume outside her
house as these were shops of car accessories and she had been making
complaints about it to the police but of no avail. On 05.01.2003 also when a car
stereo was being played at the shop by the name of Arun Car Décor on full volume
she went down to ask him to reduce the volume he (name not mentioned in the
FIR) started fighting with her and abused her. Thereafter, it has been alleged by the
complainant in her complaint dated 05.01.2003, when she saw the owner of Batra
Car Décor, Deepak, she asked him also to reduce the volume of the music on
which his brother also started fighting and abusing her and also started beating her
husband. She further alleged that Shamsher Singh of Kaveri Car Touch, petitioner
no. 2, and his wife (who has not been charge-sheeted in view of the supplementary
statement of the complainant that she had in fact not beaten her) also started
beating her and that their fighting with her had become a daily affair and these
people were threatening her with her life everyday.
3.

On the basis of the said complaint FIR no. 8/2003 was registered at Hauz

Khas police station on 6-1-03. On the same day four persons were arrested
including the present two petitioners. After completion of the investigation the
police filed a charge sheet in court against the two petitioners and two others,
namely, Gagan Batra and Devender Singh. After hearing arguments from both

sides the learned Metropolitan Magistrate ordered framing of charges under
sections 341/323/506/34 IPC against the petitioners as well as their other two
co-accused persons vide impugned order dated 24.01.2006.
4.

The petitioners thereafter challenged the impugned order in revision before

the learned Additional Sessions Judge who by his order dated 04.08.2006
dismissed the said revision petition.
5.

Aggrieved by the said order on charge the petitioners have now come to this

court for the redressal of their grievance by invoking Section 482 Cr.P.C. The
learned counsel for the petitioners contended that a bare reading of the complaint
dated 05.01.2003 as well as the supplementary statement dated 06.01.2003 of
the complainant shows that no role has been assigned to petitioner Dheeraj
Kochar and even against petitioner Shamsher Singh no case is made out and
particularly for the offence under Section 341.
6.

On the other hand, learned APP submitted that the petitioners’ revision

petition having been rejected by the Sessions Court the present petition would not
be maintainable and is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone. This was the
only submission made by him.
7.

As far as petitioner no. 1 Dheeraj Kochar is concerned, as has been noticed

already, he was not named in the FIR. It appears that his name figured in the
supplementary statement of the complainant recorded on 6-1-03. However, on
going through that supplementary statement I find that all that was stated by the

complainant in that statement was that the police had rightly arrested the four
persons that day on her pointing out including these two petitioners. However, in
that statement nothing was said as to what had been done by the petitioner
Dheeraj Kochar at the time of the incident. A perusal of the order of the Sessions
Court whereby the revision petition of the petitioners was rejected shows that even
the learned Additional Sessions Judge was in some doubt regarding the
involvement of accused Dheeraj Kochar and to clarify that doubt he had called the
investigating officer and then the investigating officer had informed the Court that
Dheeraj Kochar was arrested because of the afore said subsequent statement of
the complainant Rajani Sharma. The leaned Additional Sessions Judge on the
basis of that statement of the investigating officer that he had arrested Dheeraj
Kochar on the pointing out of the complainant came to the conclusion that the
complainant must have told the investigating officer that Dheeraj Kochar was also
involved. However, in my view, this finding was conjectural and there was no basis
for arriving at that conclusion since the complainant herself had not made any
statement to that effect in her supplementary statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
also.

I had asked learned APP if there was any other material against the

petitioner Dheeraj Kochar except the aforesaid supplementary statement of the
complainant and in reply learned APP submitted that there was no other material
against Dheeraj Kochar. In my view, simply on the basis of the supplementary
statement of the complainant to the effect that the police had rightly arrested him

on her pointing out he could not be charged for any offence because the
complainant had not said anything against him as to what role was played by him
at the time of the incident. Therefore, as far as petitioner no. 1 Dheeraj Kochar is
concerned, he is entitled to be discharged despite the fact that his revision petition
had been dismissed by the Sessions Court. In this regard learned counsel for the
petitioners had cited two judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court which are
reported as 1997 (1) Recent Criminal Reports 724 and 1995 (IV) SCC 41 wherein
it had been held that even after dismissal of a revision petition filed by an accused
in the Sessions Court against an order of framing of charge against him is
dismissed the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
can quash the charges against that accused if it comes to the conclusion that it
was necessary to interfere to prevent abuse of process of Court or to secure ends
of justice. In the present case, there being no material whatsoever having been
brought on record by the prosecution against petitioner Dheeraj Kochar it would
definitely be an abuse of process of Court if he is made to face the trial. So, to
secure the ends of justice, this petition in respect of petitioner no. 1 Dheeraj
Kochar deserves to be allowed.
8.

However, as far as petitioner no. 2 Shamsher Singh is concerned, the petition

deserves to be allowed only partly in respect of the charge framed against him
under Section 341 IPC. Learned APP, in this regard, very fairly had stated that
there was no material for framing of charge against the accused under Section

341 IPC. As far as charges for other two offences are concerned, the trial Court
was justified in framing those charges against petitioner no. 2 Shamsher Singh in
view of the clear allegations in that regard made by the complainant in the FIR.
9.

In the result, this petition is allowed in respect of the petitioner no. 1 Dheeraj

Kochar and resultantly he stands discharged of all the charges framed against him
by the trial Court vide order dated 24-01-2006 and the petition in respect of
petitioner no. 2 Shamsher Singh is allowed partly discharging him for the offence
under Section 341 IPC only.

November 16, 2007
sh

P.K.BHASIN,J

