*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No. 3325-26/2006
Date of Decision: 14th January, 2008

%
#

Amarjit Singh & Anr.

!

.....Petitioners

Through Mr. K.T.S. Tulsi, Sr. Advocate with Mr. R.K. Handoo,
Advocate
versus

$

Sh. Vinod Kumar Sharma & Anr.

^

....Respondents

Through Mr. Satish Aggarwal, Advocate for respondent no. 1.

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
By way of this petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
the two petitioners seek quashing of a criminal complaint under Sections 132 and
135(1)(a) of the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’) pending
against them in the Court of Addl. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi.
2.

Relevant facts necessary for the disposal of the case are that on receiving

information that the petitioners were importing electronic goods from Hong Kong

at grossly undervalued prices and had been submitting invoices showing lower
price to Indian Customs authorities at the time of import the Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence(‘DRI’ in short) investigated the matter. After investigation
notices were given by the Additional Director General, DRI, New Delhi to the
petitioners demanding customs duty amounting to Rs.25,69,151/- from petitioner
no. 1 Amar Jit Singh, who was carrying on the business of electronic goods in the
name of M/s Singh Electronics in Old Lajpat Rai Market, Delhi and Rs.
12,20,010/- from petitioner no. 2 Inder Pal Singh, who was also doing the same
business in the name of M/s Samrat Enterprises in Old Lajpat Rai Market, Delhi, in
view of their having grossly undervalued the electronics goods imported by them.
On their failure to pay the said customs duty, which the petitioners had allegedly
evaded, a criminal complaint for the offences under Sections 132 and 135(1)(a) of
the Act, (being Crl. Complaint No.27/1) was instituted by the DRI on 02.04.2003
against the two petitioners herein and the Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate, New Delhi on the same day took cognizance and summoned the
petitioners. On 07/04/2003 the petitioners moved separate applications for
settlement before the Customs & Central Excise Settlement Commission,
Additional Bench at Mumbai(to be referred as ‘the Settlement Commission’
hereinafter) as provided under Section 127 of the Act. During the proceedings
before the Settlement Commission the petitioners agreed to pay the entire
demanded amount of Customs Duty and paid it also. The Settlement Commission

vide its final order dated 19.07.2004 then granted immunity to the petitioners
from the penalty and fine which could also be imposed upon them under the Act
but did not give the benefit of immunity from their prosecution since the criminal
complaint for their prosecution had already been filed in Court by the DRI before
their approaching the Settlement Commission.
3.

The petitioners have now invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Section

482 Cr.P.C. for quashing the criminal complaint pending against them in the Court
of Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi. Mr. K.T.S.Tulsi, learned
senior counsel for the petitioners while arguing in support of this petition did not
dispute that as far as the Settlement Commission’s order in not giving the benefit
of immunity from prosecution to the petitioners is concerned there was nothing
wrong in that order in view of the provisions of Section 127-H of the Act
whereunder it is clearly provided that no immunity from prosecution shall be
granted by the Settlement Commission where the proceedings for the prosecution
of the applicant approaching the Settlement Commission for settlement had
already been initiated before filing of the application for settlement.

Mr. Tulsi,

however, placing strong reliance upon a judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court in
“Hira Lal Hari Lal Bhagwati v. CBI, New Delhi”, 2003 (5) SCC 257, submitted that
the petitioners are still entitled to get the complaint against them quashed
because of their having paid the entire amount of Customs Duty claimed by the
Customs Department. The submission was that since Legislature itself has made a

provision in the Act that on payment of the duty as per the decision of the
Settlement commission the offender can be granted immunity from criminal
prosecution it becomes clear that recovery of the Government’s dues is the main
concern of the Department and not the prosecution of the offender and if such be
the position then the continuation of the complaint case against the petitioners in
the present case despite their having met the entire demand of the Customs
Department would really amount to abuse of judicial process and further that the
relief of immunity from their prosecution should not be denied to them which in
fact they would have got in routine from the Settlement Commission but for the
technical obstacle which came in their way in getting that relief also besides
immunity from penalty and fine, namely, their approaching the Settlement
Commission five days after the filing of the criminal complaint in Court by the DRI
about which they actually had no knowledge on 07/04/2003 when they had filed
the applications for settlement before the Settlement Commission. Mr. Tulsi
contended that that technical obstacle which was before the Settlement
Commission should not deter this Court in exercising the powers it has under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. for doing justice to the petitioners and denial of that relief to
the petitioners would be against the spirit and the legislative intent behind the
provision of settlement of disputes regarding customs duty by approaching the
Settlement Commission. Learned counsel drew my attention to that part of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Hira Lal’s case(supra) where it was observed

that “It is a well established principle of law that the matter which has been
adjudicated and settled need not be dragged into the criminal courts unless and
until the act of the appellants could have been described as culpable.” That was a
case where criminal case for some offences under the Indian Penal Code was
instituted even after the matter regarding evasion of customs duty had been
settled under the Kar Vivad Samadhan Scheme and the offender had been
granted immunity from prosecution under the Act. In that fact situation the
Supreme Court had made the afore-quoted observations and quashed the FIR in
respect of the offences under IPC because of the settlement of the matter between
the Department and the duty evader despite the fact that under the aforesaid
Scheme availed of by the duty evader immunity from prosecution under the Act
only could be granted and which only had been given by the competent authority.
Mr. Tulsi had also argued, though half heartedly, that the complaint against the
petitioners was in any case not maintainable before a Delhi Court since the
offences complained of were committed within the jurisdiction of Mumbai Courts.
4.

Mr. Satish Aggarwala, learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand,

submitted that since as per the provisions of the Act the Settlement Commission
could not grant immunity from prosecution where the proceedings for prosecution
for any such offence had been instituted before the date of receipt of the
application under section 127-B this petition deserves to be dismissed and
complaint against the petitioners should not be quashed by this Court just because

the petitioners had paid the customs duty as per the decision of the Settlement
Commission. The submission was that the petitioners could always withdraw their
applications for settlement after they had come to know that their prosecution had
already been launched before their filing applications for settlement before the
Settlement Commission instead of paying the demanded amount of customs duty
and having not done that they cannot be permitted now to say that they have been
a victim of a technical bar under Section 127-H of the Act whereunder it is provided
that no immunity from prosecution can be given by the Commission if prosecution
of the duty evader had already been launched before the filing of the application
for settlement before the Settlement Commission.
5.

I have thoughtfully considered the submissions made by learned counsel for

the parties.
6.

There is no doubt that the provision for settlements introduced in statutes like

the one in Customs Act regarding filing of applications by evaders of customs duty
etc. before the Settlement Commission for settlement of the disputes regarding
the amount of evaded duty are meant for ensuring that proceedings before the
criminal courts are avoided and the Government is also not put to financial loss.
This was so observed by the Supreme Court in “Commissioner of Income Tax,
Jalpaiguri vs Om Parkash Mittal”, 2005 (II) SCC 51. However, as noticed already
and which position was not disputed even by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioners, the remedy of seeking immunity from prosecution from the Settlement

Commission is available only before the initiation of prosecution proceedings by
the Customs Department. So, in the present case the petitioners having not
availed of the remedy of seeking immunity from prosecution from the Settlement
Commission before the initiation of criminal proceedings against them they have
rightly not felt aggrieved by the decision of the Settlement Commission in not
giving them the immunity from prosecution since it had no such power and, in fact,
there is a specific bar against the grant of this benefit by the Settlement
Commission after the initiation of prosecution of the duty evader. However, the
legislature has also made a provision for the offenders to seek relief of immunity
from

prosecution

even

after

initiation

of

the

prosecution

by

framing

Customs(Compounding of Offences) Rules, 2005. These Rules were framed by the
Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred upon it under Section
156(2)(h) and Section 137(3) of the Act. Rule 3 of these Rules provides that an
application for compounding of the offences under the Act can be made either
before or after institution of prosecution to the compounding authority which is the
Chief Commissioner of Customs having jurisdiction over the place where the
offence under the Act was allegedly committed. The compounding authority under
these Rules has been given the powers to allow compounding of the offences
under the Act as specified under Rule 5 which include even the offences under
Sections 132 and 135(1)(a) of the Act for which offences the present petitioners
are being prosecuted. The compounding can, however, be allowed by the

compounding authority on payment of compounding fee which has also been
prescribed under Rule 5 of the aforesaid Rules of 2005.

The compounding

amount varies in respect of different offences.
7.

The petitioners, thus, could have approached the compounding authority also

for compounding of the offences for which they were being prosecuted even after
they had approached the Settlement Commission from which they had got the
relief of immunity from penalty and fine. The petitioners, however, did not avail of
this remedy available to them under the aforesaid Rules of 2005 and, therefore, in
my view, the present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. will have to be dismissed
because of the failure of the petitioners to avail of the statutory remedy available
to them under the Act for seeking compounding of the offences for which they are
being prosecuted.
8.

As far as the plea of the petitioners that the Court at Delhi had no territorial

jurisdiction to entertain the complaint against the petitioners is concerned the
same, in my view, can be very well urged before the trial Court where the complaint
is pending trial since the plea of the Department is that final destination of the
goods imported by the petitioners at undervalued prices was Delhi. In view of
these rival factual stands from both the sides this question cannot be determined
in the present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. So, on this ground also the
petitioners cannot succeed in this petition.
9.

No other point was urged.

10.

This petition is accordingly dismissed. It would, however, still be open to the

petitioners to approach the Compounding Authority under the Compounding Rules
of 2005 for compounding of the offences for which they are being prosecuted.

January 14, 2008
sh

P.K.BHASIN,J

