*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

CRL. APPEAL NO. 243 OF 1999

+
#

Date of Decision: 19th May, 2008
SHASHI BHUSHAN

!

...Appellant
Through:

Mr. G.P.Thareja and Mr. Subhash
Sharma, Advocates

versus
$

STATE

...Respondent

^

Through :

Mr. M. N.Dudeja, APP

WITH
%
#

CRL. APPEAL NO. 383 OF 1999
SANJAY SHARMA

!

...Appellant

Through:

Mr. Deepak Bhardwaj, Advocate

versus
$

STATE

^

...Respondent
Through :

Mr. M. N.Dudeja, APP

CORAM:
*
1.

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:

These appeals have been filed by the two convicted accused
assailing the judgment dated 7th April, 1999 and order dated 8th April,
1999 passed by an Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi whereby both of
them alongwith one Rajinder were held guilty of the commission of
the offence punishable under Section 366 read with Section 34 IPC
and have been awarded two years rigorous imprisonment and a fine
also of Rs. 3000/- each with a default stipulation.

2.

The relevant facts leading to the trial and conviction of the

appellants have been noted by the learned trial court in para nos. 4-6
of the impugned judgment and the same are reproduced hereunder:-

Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

2

“……….On 19.10.89 at about 7.30 p.m. PW-2
Sunita went to have a stroll in the park opposite to
her house in P & T Colony, Janak Puri. She was
accompanied by her aunt Renuka(PW-3) and brother
Rakesh. While she was standing at the gate of the
park, a maruti van suddenly came and whisked her
away. Since the incident had occurred suddenly, the
digits of the registration number of the maruti van
could not be noted. The letters “DAE” were, however,
observed by Renuka and she mentioned the same in
her report.
The information of abduction of the prosecutrix
was communicated to P.S. Janak Puri vide DD No.
17/A. On receipt of DD No. 17-A SI Sultan Singh
rushed to the spot. He recorded the statement of
Renuka and sent rukka through HC Kishan Lal (PW10).
In the meantime a wireless message was
received that the girl had been recovered in the area
of PP Tilak Vihar…..On 22.10.89 at about 6.00 p.m.
accused Sanjay was arrested at C-2-B bus stop in
pursuance of a secret information in the presence of
the prosecutrix and her brother Raju. It is alleged
that Sanjay led the police to Sagarpur bus stand and
there accused Shashi Bhushan and Raj Pal were
nabbed at about 8.00 p.m. The interrogation of the
accused gave further clues to the police and they
went to New Priya Travel Agency, Hari Nagar, Ghanta
Ghar. A maruti van bearing No. DAE-6632 was found
parked near the office of the travel agency and it was
seized. Accused Rajinder was also there and he was
arrested. …………..”

3.

Initially FIR was registered under Section 363 IPC on the

complaint of aunt of the kidnapped girl (PW-3 Renuka) who alongwith
kidnapped girl’s brother Rakesh was allegedly with the minor girl

Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

3

Sunita at the time of the incident. Later on the statement of the
kidnapped girl was also got recorded by the police under Section 164
Cr.P.C. in which she had named one Ramesh, whom she knew, as
one of her kidnappers but he was not be arrested by the police. The
police, however, arrested six other persons, including the two
appellants. Appellant Sanjay @ Laddu was the first one to be arrested
by the police on 22/10/89 on the pointing out of PW-12 Raj Kumar,
another brother of the kidnapped girl, who as per the prosecution
case knew Sanjay and had seen him sitting in a van on the day of the
incident and he had also claimed to have chased that van on hearing
the noise that his sister had been kidnapped. At the instance of
Sanjay other accused persons were arrested.

Test identification

parade was held in respect of three persons, namely,

Manoj Dang,

Rajinder Singh and appellant Shashi Bhushan. Only Manoj
participated in the test identification parade but the complainant did
not identify him as one of the culprits. So, he was got discharged by
the police. Accused Rajinder Singh and appellant Shashi Bhushan had
refused to participate in the test identification. For accused Sanjay no
TIP was held because he was arrested on the pointing out of the
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

4

kidnapped girl and her brother Raj Kumar(PW-12). After investigation
was over four accused were charge-sheeted in the Court of
Magistrate while the case against the fifth accused, namely, Raj Pal @
Rana was filed in Juvenile Court. All the four accused were charged
under Section 366/34 IPC. During the trial one of the accused,
namely, Paramjit @ Padam @ Kalia absconded and so was declared a
proclaimed offender. In order to establish the allegations against the
accused persons the prosecution had relied upon the evidence of the
complainant(PW-2) who had identified in Court all the three accused
to be the persons who had alongwith their other associates kidnapped
her. Corroboration of her testimony was sought from the refusal of
two accused persons to participate in the test identification parade
as also from the statement of accused Rajinder Singh under Section
313 Cr.P.C. to the effect that he was the driver of the van in which the
complainant was kidnapped and that his co-accused Sanjay

and

Shashi Bhushan(the two appellants) were also in that van at that
time.

The learned trial Judge accepted the evidence of the

complainant and the refusal of the two accused persons to participate
in the test identification parade as well as the aforesaid admission of
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

5

the accused Rajinder Singh, which was considered as his confession
of the crime although he had also claimed that he was forced to drive
the van to Tilak Vihar at the point of knife and accordingly the trial
Court held the two appellants and Rajinder Singh guilty of the
charge under Section 366 read with Section 34 IPC. Feeling
aggrieved, these two appeals were filed. Third convicted accused
Rajinder Singh does not appear to have challenged his conviction and
the reason for that appears to be his own above-referred admission of
certain facts during his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.

4.

I have heard the counsel for the two appellants and the

Additional Public Prosecutor for the State and during the course of
hearing of the appeals relevant portions of prosecution evidence were
also read out from both sides. Since these appeals arose out of the
same judgment of the trial Court and were heard also analogously the
same are being disposed of by this common judgment.

5.

As noticed already, the prosecution case is that one of the

kidnappers Ramesh was known to the kidnapped girl Sunita and one
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

6

was known to her brother Raj Kumar(PW-12). Ramesh was not
arrested by the police and the learned trial Judge has observed in his
judgment that the prosecution has not explained as to why he was not
arrested.

In my view, this fact of the police not prosecuting the

person who was named by the kidnapped girl herself as one of the
culprits should have been considered by the trial Court to be a
circumstance making the case against the appellants doubtful.

6.

As far as appellant Sanjay is concerned, no doubt that as per

the prosecution case he was known to PW-12 Raj Kumar and he has
deposed that this accused was arrested in his presence and also in
the presence of his sister Sunita(PW-2) but, in my view, on the basis of
this statement alone of PW-12 involvement of Sanjay in the
kidnapping of Sunita cannot be said to have been established beyond
reasonable doubt because PW-12 did not claim that he had seen
Sunita being taken in the van in which he had seen Sanjay sitting
some time before the incident going towards the P & T Colony where
they were living. His statement was only to the effect that when he
was going to the market he had seen Sanjay going towards P &T
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

7

Colony in a van and when he returned back from the market he had
heard that his sister had been kidnapped and also that before his
return his sister had been taken away. This witness was crossexamined by the prosecutor on the ground that he had resiled from
his police statement. During the cross-examination he stated that
when he had come back from the market he had seen the same
van(in which he had seen Sanjay sitting) at the gate of their colony
and also that he had tried to intercept that van on hearing noise. From
this statement of PW-12 learned prosecutor wanted me to infer that
at least Sanjay’s involvement is definitely made out. I am afraid I am
unable to come to any such conclusion. If actually this witness had
seen accused Sanjay sitting in the van in which his sister Sunita was
kidnapped he would have immediately given the name of Sanjay to
the police since he knew Sanjay, as claimed by him in his chiefexamination itself. However, he did not do that. He stated in his crossexamination on behalf of the accused that on the day of the incident
he had not made any statement to the police. He stated in his chiefexamination that next of the incident at about 11 a.m. his statement
was recorded by the police at his house but in cross-examination he
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

8

stated that his statement was recorded by the police on 22/10/89.
There was thus unduly long delay in giving the name of accused
Sanjay to the police by PW-12 Raj Kumar and the delay has remained
unexplained and that fact certainly makes his version doubtful.

7.

In fact even the arrest of appellant-accused Sanjay Sharma on

the pointing out of PW-12, as claimed by him as well as by the
investigating officer PW-13 Head Constable Ghanshyam, becomes
doubtful since PW-2 Sunita, who was also as per the prosecution case
present with the police team at the time of his arrest has not claimed
in her evidence that he was arrested in her presence. In any case
these two witnesses have not claimed that at that time Sunita had
identified Sanjay to be one of the culprits. In fact, in her statement in
Court PW-2 Sunita had categorically claimed that when she had gone
to the police station on the next day of the incident accused Sanjay
was sitting there. She was not cross-examined by the prosecutor on
this part of her statement which is quite significant because the
kidnapped girl herself having not claimed that Sanjay Sharma was
arrested on her pointing out the identification of this accused in
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

9

Court by PW-2 Sunita as one of her kidnappers became meaningless
in the absence of a prior test identification parade after his arrest. So,
the submission of the learned prosecutor that test identification
parade in respect of accused Sanjay Sharma was not got arranged
because he was arrested on the pointing out of the kidnapped herself
cannot be accepted. Identity of an accused in these types of cases
where the accused was not known to the victims of crime is of utmost
importance and there has to be reliable evidence about the identity of
the accused being tried. Prior test identification parade has always
been considered to be quite essential in respect of an accused who is
stranger to the victim and in the absence of that corroborative piece
of evidence dock identification of the accused is normally not
attached any value. In the present case there is no circumstance
which could make up the deficiency in the prosecution which is there
because of the absence of test identification in respect of accused
Sanjay Sharma. In fact, the statement of the kidnapped girl that she
had seen accused Sanjay at the police station next day of the incident
makes the entire prosecution case highly doubtful because the
prosecution case as projected during the trial through the evidence of
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

10

PW-12 Raj Kumar and PW-13 Head Constable Ghanshyam was that
Sanjay was arrested on 22/10/89. Despite all these serious
infirmities in the prosecution case staring in the eyes of the Court the
learned trial Judge did not deal with them in right perspective and
simply observed that folly of the investigating officer in calling the
prosecutrix to the police station when suspects were present and
which he did to give an opportunity to the accused to claim during the
trial that they had been shown to the prosecutrix could not affect the
credibility of the kidnapped girl. There is no doubt that follies
committed by the investigating agency during investigation stage
should not be allowed to benefit the accused if there is reliable
evidence against the accused. However, this was not a case of folly of
the investigating officer. It is the kidnapped girl herself who had
claimed and which statement of hers was not challenged by the
prosecution as not correct that on 20/10/89 accused Sanjay Sharma
had been seen by her at the police station when it was the
prosecution case that Sanjay was arrested on 22/10/89. If she was to
be considered to be a reliable witness then this statement of hers also
had to be considered as true by the trial Court. In my view, the
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

11

appreciation of the evidence led by the prosecution by the learned
trial Judge was not proper. The prosecution is supposed to establish
its case beyond reasonable doubt and in my considered view the
aforesaid infirmities in the prosecution case certainly entitled
appellant-accused Sanjay Sharma to the benefit of doubt.

8.

Coming now to the case against appellant-accused Shashi

Bhushan, I find that he has also been convicted on the basis of
evidence of the kidnapped girl who had identified him also in Court as
one of the kidnappers. And corroboration of her evidence had been
sought from his refusal to participate in the test identification parade
held after his arrest. This accused did admit that he had refused to
participate in the test identification parade but he had also sought to
justify that by claiming that he had been shown before that to the
witnesses at the police station. This accused was admittedly not
known to the kidnapped girl and that is why after his arrest test
identification parade was got arranged by the police. The trial Court
has also observed that such an identification parade is mandatory. If
a suspect is identified during such a parade and later on also during
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

12

the evidence in Court then his prior identification certainly becomes of
great corroborative value and if the suspect refuses to participate in
the identification parade without any just cause then that refusal also
becomes a circumstance of great corroborative value for the
prosecution. However, in case of refusal of an accused to join the
identification parade he is only to show from the circumstances
surfacing during prosecution evidence or otherwise by adducing some
evidence that there could be a possibility of his being shown to the
identifying witnesses before holding of the identification parade. In
the present case, he has claimed that he was shown to the
prosecutrix by the police before the identification parade and so he
had refused to participate in that parade. As per PW-14 Sub-Inspector
Sultan Singh PW-2 Sunita had come to the police station alongwith
her father on 23/10/89 at about 10.15 a.m. and at that time accused
Rajinder Singh and Sanjay Sharma were present there and she had
identified Rajinder Singh. Although he also claimed that Shashi
Bhushan at that time was not there as he had been sent for his
medical examination but there is no proof in that regard. In any case,
as observed already, what has to be seen by the Court is whether
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

13

there was a possibility of an accused being shown to the witnesses
before the test identification parade. In the present case the
prosecution has not been able to rule out the possibility of the
prosecutrix seeing the accused at the police station during her visit
there. That possibility is very much there and so refusal of this
accused to participate in the TIP cannot be said to be unjustified.

9.

Learned prosecutor had also submitted that the testimony of

the kidnapped girl gets corroborated even from the statement of the
third convicted accused Rajinder Singh recorded under Section 313
Cr.P.C. and the same had been rightly relied upon by the trial Court
not only against Rajinder Singh but also against the present two
appellants. In my view, the learned trial Judge totally went wrong on
this aspect. Accused Rajinder Singh had not made any confession of
the crime during his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. On the
contrary, he specifically claimed that he was not involved in the
kidnapping of Sunita. His plea was that he was forced by one of the
persons in the van at the point of knife to drive away his van. From
this statement of Rajinder Singh it cannot be said that he had
Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

14

inculpated himself in the crime for which he was tried along with his
co –accused persons.

His statement was totally exculpatory and

consequently could not be treated as a confession.

Consequently,

the two appellants could not be made liable for the crime of
kidnapping on the basis of the said statement made by their coaccused Rajinder Singh under Section 313 Cr.P.C.

In view of this

conclusion, I need not go into the question as to whether the
statement of Rajinder Singh even if it had amounted to his confession
could be used against co-accused persons by invoking Section 30 of
the Indian Evidence Act in the absence of any charge having been
framed against the accused persons under Section 120-B IPC and
also because of that statement of his having not been put to the
appellants in their statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., as was also
the submission of the counsel for the appellants.

10.

For the fore-going reasons, I am of the view that both these

appeals deserve to be allowed since the guilt of both the appellants
cannot be said to have been established beyond reasonable doubt.

Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

15

11.

In the result, both these appeals are allowed and the impugned

judgment dated 7.4.1999 as also the order on sentence dated
8.4.1999 are set-aside and the appellants-accused stand acquitted.
Their bail bonds stand cancelled and sureties discharged.

May 19, 2008
sh

Crl.A. nos. 243/99 & 383/99

P.K.BHASIN,J

16

