*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL. APPEAL NO. 153 OF 1999

%

#
!

Date of Decision: 12th March, 2008

SRI SHARMA
Through:
Advocate.

Mr.

....Appellant
Manoj
Mishra,

versus
$
^

*

STATE

....Respondent
Through : Mr. Pawan Bahl, APP

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?(Yes)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(Yes)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(Yes)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
This appeal has been preferred against the judgment dated
26.02.1999 and order dated 27.02.1999 passed by the learned
Special Judge, Delhi in Sessions Case No.40/1993 whereby the

appellant was convicted under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) read with
Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(hereinafter referred to as „the Act‟) and was sentenced under
Section 7 to undergo six months rigorous imprisonment and also
to pay a fine of Rs.1000/- with

a default stipulation of two

months rigorous imprisonment in case of default of payment of
fine and under Section 13(1)(d) to undergo rigorous imprisonment
for a period of one year and six months and also to pay a fine of
Rs.4000/-, in default of payment of which to further undergo six
months rigorous imprisonment. Both the substantive sentences
were ordered to run concurrently.

2.

The relevant facts leading to the prosecution of the

appellant herein have been noticed by the trial court in paras 1-3
of the impugned judgment and are as under:-

“ Accused Sri Sharma had been working as a
Chaudhari in the Horticulture Department,
N.D.M.C. in Chanakyapuri area. Complainant
Sikandar (P.W.1) was a gardener working under
the accused. On 9-9-1989, Sikandar came to
the Anti-Corruption Branch and lodged his
complaint Ex.PW1/A, alleging that the accused

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

2

used to harass him. The accused used to mark
him absent off and on, as a result of which,
money was deducted from his salary. The
accused used to demand Rs. 200/- per month
for not harassing him. On 8-9-89, the accused
had given him an ultimatum that if he did not
pay him Rs. 200/- before the noon of 9-9-89, he
would be marked absent and money will be
deducted from his salary.
(2)
This complaint was recorded in the
presence of panch-witness Shalender Gupta
(P.W.2). The bribe amount was provided by
complainant Sikandar in the form of two
currency notes of Rs.100/- each. Numbers of
these currency notes were noted down
phenolphthalein powder was applied to the
currency notes. Demonstration and necessary
instructions were given to the complainant and
the panch-witness and a raid was organized by
Inspector Kanwal Singh (P.W. 6).
(3)
The raiding party went to the N.D.M.C.
park on Rajdoor Marg, Chanakyapuri where the
money was settled to be paid. They reached
there at about 9.45 a.m. and waited there till
about 12 noon, but the accused did not turn up
at that place. The complainant informed the
raiding officer that the accused is now be
available at the Government Co-Education
Middle School, Malcha Marg. The raid was
shifted to that place. The complainant and the
panch-witness were sent ahead while the other
members of the raiding party took appropriate
positions. The complainant went and sat under
a tree where a cot was lying. At about 1.50 p.m.,
the accused came there. At 1.55 p.m., panchwitness Shalender Gupta gave the pre-arranged
signal. The accused was apprehended and
Rs.200/- were recovered from his right wrist.
The number of the currency notes were tallied
with the pre-raid report and right hand wash of

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

3

the accused gave positive test for presence of
phenolphthalein. The complainant and the
panch-witness informed the raiding officer that
the accused had demanded and accepted the
bribe money from the complainant and had
promised not to harass him in future. The
accused, on being challenged, became nervous,
first of all kept mum and then started pleading
that he may be excused.”

3.

After obtaining Sanction Order (Ex. PW-7/A) dated

16.05.1991

for

prosecution

of

the

appellant

from

the

Administrator of Municipal Committee, as required under Section
19 of the Act, the appellant was charge-sheeted for the offences
under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Act
and the Special Judge also framed charges for these offences
against the appellant to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed
trial. To prove the accusations against the appellant, the
prosecution had examined eight witnesses in all. The accused
when examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C. stated that he had
been falsely implicated because of complainant‟s grudge against
him as he (appellant) used to mark him absent in the duty
register for coming late which used to result in deduction of his
salary. Regarding the recovery of bribe money the plea put forth
Crl.A.No. 153/1999

4

by him was that the complainant Sikandar had borrowed Rs.
5,000/- as a loan from him on 3.3.88 against which a receipt (Ex.
DW-1/A) was also executed in the presence of one Gajender
Singh Kohli (who was examined as a defence witness) and one
T.R. Sharma. He further stated that it was agreed that the loan
amount would be paid in instalments of Rs. 200/300 every
month. On insistence of the appellant to pay up the loan amount
due to the complainant‟s failure to pay the installment of the
previous month the complainant implicated him in a false case.
The appellant went on to deny the recovery of bribe money at the
time of raid and stated that on the day of the trap he was taking
rest in the room in the school when the complainant came he
asked the complainant to bring tea and his waist-coat and at that
time the complainant clandestinely put the money in his waist
coat which was hanging in the room and when he (the appellant)
took out the money from the waist-coat he was apprehended by
the officers of Anti Corruption Branch. The defence witness Sh.
Gajender Singh Kohli deposed that on 03.03.1988 the
complainant had taken loan of Rs. 5,000/- from the accused Sri

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

5

Sharma for which a receipt Ex. DW-1/A was signed by the
complainant and further that the complainant at that time had
agreed to return the loan amount in installments of Rs. 200/- or
Rs. 300/- per month.

4.

The learned Special Judge after taking into consideration

the evidence adduced by both the sides found the appellant guilty
and convicted and sentenced him as already noticed. Feeling
aggrieved by the decision of the Special Judge the appellant
preferred this appeal.

5.

At the outset, it may be stated that although the impugned

judgment was challenged on various grounds set out in the
memorandum of appeal but at the time of hearing of this appeal
learned counsel for the appellant did not challenge the conviction
of the appellant and restricted his submissions only on the point
of sentence. It was submitted that considering the fact that the
incident was of the year 1989 and trial of the appellant took
almost ten years to conclude and thereafter this appeal has also

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

6

been pending for about nine years and during all these years the
appellant has undergone a lot of mental agony and also the fact
that he is now an old person of over 75 years of age suffering
from various kinds of old age ailments he should not be sent back
to jail. Learned counsel also contended that the appellant had
remained in jail from 23.07.1999, when he had surrendered
himself to serve the sentence after the rejection of his bail
application by this Court, till 09.12.1999 when he again came out
of the jail after his release on bail was ordered by this Court vide
order dated 07.12.1999 and during the trial also the appellant
had remained in jail for some days and so interest of justice
would be fully met if considering the aforesaid mitigating
circumstances as also the fact that he has been convicted for
having accepted bribe of a paltry sum of Rs.200/- the sentence
of imprisonment is reduced to the period which the appellant has
already spent in jail. In support of this prayer the learned counsel
for the appellant cited three judgments of the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court which are reported as AIR 1995 SC 2121, “ Ramesh Kumar
Gupta v. State of Madhya Pradesh”, (1995) 3 SCC 567, “M.W.

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

7

Mohiuddin v. State of Maharashtra” and AIR 1992 SC 2064, “Ajit
Kumar Vasantlal Zaveri v. State of Gujarat”.

6.

Learned Additional Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

while supporting the judgment of the learned Special Judge
contended that the appellant cannot be let off with the sentence
of imprisonment only for the period which he has already spent in
jail during the trial as well as this appeal since for both the
offences for which he has been convicted by the trial Court
minimum sentence of imprisonment is provided and under
Section 13(2) of the Act the minimum sentence of imprisonment
being one year and there being no discretion given to the Court by
the legislature to award less than the minimum prescribed
punishment for the offences of corruption punishable under the
Act of 1988 the submissions made on behalf of the appellant for
reducing the sentence of imprisonment only to the period already
spent by him in jail cannot be accepted.

7.

Even though the findings of the learned Special Judge

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

8

holding the appellant guilty, as already noticed, were not
challenged in this appeal at the time of its hearing by the learned
counsel for the appellant but still in order to satisfy myself about
the correctness of the decision of the learned trial Court I have
examined the evidence adduced during the trial. The prosecution
had sought to establish its case through the evidence of the
complainant Sikandar (PW1), panch witness Shailender Gupta
(PW2) and the Raid Officer Kanwal Singh (PW6). I have gone
through the evidence of all of them and have found that they have
supported the prosecution case against the appellant in entirety
and they have all deposed about the making of the complaint (Ex.
PW-1/A) by the complainant Sikandar with the Anti Corruption
Branch on 09.09.1989, PW6 deciding to lay a trap to apprehend
the appellant, a public servant, red-handed while accepting illegal
gratification from the complainant. Thereafter these witnesses
had also deposed about the pre-raid formalities conducted by the
Raid Officer at the Anti Corruption Branch and then about the
actual raid proceedings during which the appellant was
apprehended. The complainant as well as the panch witness

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

9

deposed about the payment of Rs.200/- to the appellant by the
complainant as bribe and the complainant handing over two
phenolphthalein treated currency notes of the denomination of
Rs.100 each as per the raid plan chalked out by the Raid Officer
(PW6). The Raid Officer, the complainant and the panch witness
had also deposed about the recovery of the two phenolphthalein
treated currency notes from the appellant‟s hand after the panch
witness had given the pre-arranged signal to the raid officer after
acceptance of the bribe money by the appellant. From the
evidence of the complainant (PW1), panch witness (PW3) and the
Raid Officer (PW6) it clearly stood established beyond any doubt
that at the time of raid the appellant-accused had accepted
Rs.200/- from the complainant as illegal gratification.

8.

As far as the recovery of Rs.200/- from the appellant is

concerned the appellant had himself also admitted the payment
of Rs.200/- to him by the complainant at the time of the raid
when he cross-examined the complainant. His plea, however, was
that the complainant had taken from him a loan of Rs.5000/-

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

10

which was to be repaid in installments of Rs.200/300 every
month and in the cross-examination of the complainant it was
suggested to him that it was the loan installment of Rs.200/which he had paid to him(appellant-accused). This suggestion
clearly shows that the appellant-accused was admitting that at
the time of raid he had taken Rs.200/- from the complainant.
However, when statement of the appellant was recorded under
Section 313 Cr.P.C. he came out with a different version of the
recovery of two phenolphthalein treated currency notes at the
time of the raid. While claiming that the complainant had taken a
loan of Rs.5000/- from him on 03.03.1988 against a proper
receipt executed in the presence of two persons namely G.S. Kohli
who was examined as a defence witness and T R Sharma (who
was however not examined as a defence witness) denied that at
the time of the raid he had demanded money from the
complainant or that the complainant had given him Rs.200/- and
the same was recovered from his hand by the Raid Officer after
he had reached the place of raid on getting a signal from the
panch witness. He took the plea that when the complainant had

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

11

come to the school (at the time of raid) he was taking rest in his
room and at that time he had asked the complainant to bring tea
as he was not feeling well and also to bring his waist coat which
was hanging there in the room and at that time the complainant
had surreptitiously put the money in his waist-coat pocket and
further that while he (appellant-accused) was taking out money
from the waist-coat (the appellant perhaps intended to convey
that he was taking out his own money to be given to the
complainant for bringing tea) the Anti Corruption Branch officials
came there and pounced upon him and took him to the Anti
Corruption Branch and falsely implicated him in this case. Now, as
far as this plea of the appellant-accused taken by him at the time
of his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., is concerned, the
same has been rejected by the learned Special Judge and in my
view rightly so. To none of the witnesses who had participated in
the raid proceedings it was suggested in their cross-examination
that the complainant had clandestinely put the phenolphthalein
treated currency notes in the pocket of his waist-coat. That shows
that at the time of recording of his statement under Section 313

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

12

Cr.P.C. a false plea was taken by the appellant-accused and that
circumstance falsifies his plea that the complainant had taken
loan from him and he was supposed to return the loan amount in
installments and in order to avoid repayment of that loan amount
the complainant got him falsely implicated by lodging a false
complaint with the Anti Corruption Branch and getting him
trapped by clandestinely keeping phenolphthalein treated
currency notes in his waist-coat pocket.

9.

The learned Special Judge came to a conclusion of

appellant being guilty of taking bribe money from the
complainant after proper appreciation of evidence brought on
record and I am fully satisfied that the learned Special Judge was
justified in coming to this conclusion. As I am in general
agreement with the view expressed by the learned Special Judge I
need not re-appraise the evidence in detail all over again. In two
decisions of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court reported as AIR 1981 SC
1417, “State of Karnataka v. Hema Reddy and Anr.” and AIR
1967 SC 1124, “Girija Nandini Devi & Ors. v. Bijendra Narain

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

13

Chaudhary”, it has been held that when the appellate Court is in
general agreement with findings of the trial Court it is not
necessary for the appellate Court to repeat the narration of
evidence or to reiterate the reasons given by the trial Court and
expression of general agreement with those reasons would
suffice.

10.

In view of the foregoing, I do not find any reason whatsoever

to interfere with the decision of the trial Court and in my
considered opinion, the appellant was rightly convicted for the
offences punishable under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) of the Act.

11.

Coming to the point of quantum of sentence the learned

counsel for the appellant contended that since the appellant has
already suffered a lot due to prolonged trial and had also spent
some time in jail his sentence should be reduced to the period
already undergone in jail. The appellant was ordered to undergo
six months imprisonment under Section 7 and one year and six
months imprisonment under Section 13(1)(d) of the Act. Section 7

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

14

and Section 13(1)(d) of the Act provide for a minimum sentence
of six months and one year respectively. Contention of the learned
counsel to reduce the sentence to the period already undergone
cannot be accepted in view of the ruling of the Apex Court in
“State v. Ratan Lal Arora”, 2004 Cri.L.J. 2105 wherein it has been
held that awarding of sentence of imprisonment below the
minimum sentence prescribed in the Act is impermissible. The
judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant
also are of no respite to him as in all the decisions cited by the
learned counsel the accused were charged under the provisions of
the old Prevention of Corruption Act of 1947 whereunder Court
could award a sentence of imprisonment less than the minimum
sentence for special reasons. However, in the present Act of 1988
under which the appellant stands convicted, there is no such
discretion available to the Court. However, taking into account the
mitigating circumstances highlighted by the counsel for the
appellant the minimum sentence prescribed for the offence under
Section 13(1)(d) of the Act can be awarded to the appellant and
this is the only relief which he can get in this appeal.

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

15

12.

In view of the foregoing, while confirming the conviction of

the appellant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 and also the sentence awarded to him for
his conviction under Section 7 the sentence of imprisonment
under Section 13(1)(d) is reduced to one year‟s rigorous
imprisonment while the sentence of fine with default clause is
maintained. Subject to this modification of the sentence in
respect of the conviction of the appellant under Section 13(1)(d)
this appeal is dismissed.

P.K.BHASIN,J

March 12, 2008
sh

Crl.A.No. 153/1999

16

