*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl.A.No.239/1998

Date of Decision: 14th February, 2008

%

#

JAG RAM

!

...Appellant
Through Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Advocate

Versus
$

STATE

...Respondent
Through Mr. M.P.Singh, APP
WITH

+
#

Crl.A.No.363/1998
MUNNI

!
Advocate

...Appellant
Through Mr.Lekh Raj Rehalia,

Versus
$

STATE

...Respondent
Through Mr. M.P.Singh, APP

CORAM
*

Hon'ble Mr. Justice Vikramajit Sen
Hon'ble Mr. Justice P.K.Bhasin

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the judgment?(Yes)

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not?(Yes)

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(Yes)
JUDGMENT

P.K. BHASIN, J:

The two appellants are impugning the judgment of conviction dated
24.01.1998 and order of sentence dated 28.01.1998 delivered by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi in Sessions case No. 23/96 whereby both the
appellants were convicted under Section 302 r/w Section 34 I.P.C. for the murder
of one Ramesh, who was the husband of appellant Munni and elder brother of
appellant Jag Ram, and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and also to
pay a fine of Rs. 10,000/- each and to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for
one year in case of default in payment of fine. Further, both the appellants were
also convicted and sentenced for the commission of the offence punishable under

Section 201 r/w Section 34 I.P.C. Since both the appeals arose out of the same
judgment of the trial Court they were heard together and now are being disposed
of by this common judgment.
2.

The prosecution case in nutshell is that on 1.4.95 an information was

received at Police Station Seema Puri about a dead body lying in a nallah near
Railway Lines, SDN Hospital, Shahdara. That information was recorded as DD No.
15(Ex. PW-8/A) and then PW-21 Sub-inspector Sajjan Kumar along with constable
PW-13 Yudvir Singh reached the spot and took out a dead body from the nullah
which was wrapped in a quilt (razai). The dead body was in a highly decomposed
condition. Since it appeared to be a case of murder FIR No.147/95 (Ex. PW-3/A)
was got registered under Section 302 IPC. As the dead body could not be got
identified and it was preserved in the mortuary. On 5.4.95 post-mortem
examination was conducted on the dead body and as per the post-mortem
report(Ex.PW-18/B) the cause of death of the deceased was shock due to cut
throat injuries. As per the further prosecution case PW-17 Pratap had lodged a
report (Ex PW-19/A) at the Mansarover Park police station on 03.04.1995 that his
brother Ramesh(husband of appellant Munni) was missing since 27-03-95. In the
said report it had been stated by PW-17 Pratap that his brother Ramesh had left
the house on 27-3-95 after saying that he was going to Chander Prakash in Ashok
Nagar and would come back within 2/3 days but had not come so far. It is also the
case of the prosecution that on coming to know that a dead body had been

recovered by the policemen of Seema Puri police station on 01.04.1995 and had
been kept in the mortuary for identification Pratap contacted the police at Seema
Puri Police Station on 06.04.1995 and then he was taken to the mortuary by
Inspector Ram Niwas Vashisht(PW-15) and there he was shown the dead body
which was recovered on 1.4.95. Pratap identified the dead body being that of his
brother Ramesh. Thereafter investigation started to find out as to who had killed
Ramesh. The son(PW-2) and one daughter(PW-1) of the deceased Ramesh and
appellant Munni claimed before the police during investigation that the two
appellants and their maternal uncle Satish had killed their father. During the
investigation statement of daughter of the deceased, PW-1 Seema, was got
recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. also. As per that statement (Ex. PW-20/A)
Seema had claimed before the Metropolitan Magistrate that one day a quarrel had
taken place in their house when Jag Ram was also present. Then she gave a
detailed version as to what had transpired on the day when that quarrel had taken
place and what happened on the night when her father was killed. This is what she
narrated before the Magistrate:“My uncle Jagram and my mother were talking at upstairs.

My mother asked me to inform her if father comes. I replied
that I would not tell. In the meantime, my father came and
asked me as to where was my mother. I replied that mother
was at upstairs and that Jagram uncle was also there. my
father asked Jagram to pick up his Baza and get lost from
there. whereupon Jagram went away from there. My father
asked me to take care of my mother. My father picked up a
pat(Thapki) and started giving beatings to my mother
whereupon my mother went to the shop. Two or three days

thereafter, I was sleeping in the upper room and my brother
who is younger to me was also sleeping with me. My brother
used to quarrel with my sister. I was waking. I was hearing
shouting voice whereupon I asked my mother as to who was
there thereupon my mother said that none was there and she
asked me to sleep comfortably but I did not sleep. My mother
switched off the light of our room. I was present in that very
room but I was watching stealthily from the quilt. At that time
my mother, my father and uncle Jagram were present in the
room besides me and my brother. My maternal uncle was
sleeping outside. My uncle Jagram was holding a knife in his
hand. In the meantime my maternal uncle also came inside.
My uncle Jagram and my maternal uncle Satish strangulated
my father and closed the mouth of my father. My mother
closed the mouth of my father from her hand. Thereafter, my
uncle Jagram inflicted a knife blow on the back of my father
and after that my mother, maternal uncle and uncle put my
father into a gunny-bag and then wrapped my father in a
quilt. Thereafter, Jagram uncle said to my mother that he
would throw the dead body into the nullah. My maternal
uncle also left for somewhere. I again inquired from my
mother as to what was the matter whereupon my mother
asked me to sleep and she threatened me that if I would
disclose anything to anyone else, they would do the same with
me also. My mother also threatened my brother likewise.
Thereafter, I went to the house of my Mausi(mother’s sister).
My mother is in jail these days.”

During investigation the police also came to know that the two appellants had
illicit relationship with each other.
3.

The appellants were then arrested but their accomplice Satish could not be

arrested and so he was got declared by the police as a proclaimed offender. On
completion of investigation charge sheet was filed against the two appellants and
in due course their case was committed to the Court of Session and then they were

tried for having murdered Ramesh and causing disappearance of the evidence of
his murder in furtherance of their common intention.
4.

The prosecution examined 24 witnesses to establish its case. When the

statements of the appellants were recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. appellant
Munni in her statement admitted that report Ex. PW-19/A was lodged by PW-17
Pratap on 3-4-95 with the police at Mansarovar Park police station that her
husband Ramesh was missing. She, however, pleaded that she was innocent and
had been falsely implicated by the police and regarding the disappearance of her
husband Ramesh she claimed that her husband had gone to his friend Sat Prakash
either on 25th March, 1995 or 26th March, 1995 but thereafter he had not come
back and she made enquiries for 2-3 days but she found that he was not there.
Appellant-accused Jag Ram in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. had
claimed that he was innocent and was falsely arrested by the police on 7-4-95
when he had come to Delhi with his father from Kanpur on getting the information
that his brother Ramesh was missing. At the time of recording of their statements
both the appellants had stated that they would adduce evidence in defence but
finally did not adduce any evidence.
5.

During the trial PW-17 Pratap, brother of the deceased, did not support the

prosecution and claimed that the dead body which he was shown in the mortuary
was not of his brother Ramesh and stated that, in fact, he could not identify that
dead body as it was in a badly decomposed condition. This witness was also

examined to establish the motive part of the prosecution case, namely, illicit
relationship between the two appellants but he did not support the prosecution on
this aspect also. Not only this brother of the deceased Ramesh but even the
daughter of the deceased, PW-1 Seema, who was examined as an eye witness of
the incident, turned hostile and she deposed that she did not know how her father
had died.
6.

The learned trial Court, however, convicted the two appellants on the basis of

the evidence of son of the deceased (PW-2 Sunil) who was also examined as an
eye witness. Feeling aggrieved, the appellants preferred separate appeals
challenging their conviction by the trial Court.
7.

We have heard the learned counsel for the appellants and the learned

additional public prosecutor for the State and with their assistance we have also
gone through the relevant prosecution evidence which only was referred to from
both the sides during the course of hearing of these appeals.
8.

The common argument which was advanced on behalf of both the appellants

by their counsel was that the prosecution case should have been rejected by the
trial Court solely on the ground that the prosecution had failed to establish that the
recovered dead body which it was claiming to be that of appellant Munni’s
husband Ramesh was, in fact, that of Ramesh. It was further contended that the
learned trial Court had, in fact, wrongly come to the conclusion that it had been
established from the evidence of the investigating officer that the recovered dead

body was that of Ramesh since he had claimed that PW-17 Pratap had claimed
before him during investigation that that dead body was of his brother Ramesh
since, according to the learned counsel, whatever PW-17 had claimed before the
investigating officer during the investigation stage was inadmissible piece of
evidence and could not have been taken into consideration by the learned trial
Court and particularly when PW-17 himself had not claimed so during his
evidence. On this aspect we are in agreement with the learned counsel for the
appellants that the statement of the investigating officer(PW-21) SI Sajjan Kumar
to the effect that PW-17 Pratap had claimed before him that the dead body which
was shown to him in the mortuary on 6-4-95 was that of his brother Ramesh could
not have been taken into consideration by the learned trial Court for coming to the
conclusion that the prosecution had been able to establish that the dead body
recovered on 1/4/95 was that of the husband of appellant Munni.

Whatever was

stated by PW-17 Pratap before the investigating officer was a statement made to a
police officer in the course of investigation of a crime and so is hit by Section 162
Cr.P.C. So, it can be said that the prosecution had not been able to establish that
the dead body which was recovered from a nullah on 1-4-95 by the police officials
of Seema Puri police station was that of Ramesh for whose murder the appellants
were tried.

As has been noticed already, the witness who was examined for

establishing the identity of the dead body, namely, PW-17 Pratap had not
supported the prosecution and there is no other evidence adduced by the

prosecution to establish that the dead body recovered on 1-4-95 was of appellant
Munni’s husband.
9.

However, it is now well settled by a catena of judgments of the Hon’ble

Supreme Court that in a case of murder even if the dead body of the person who is
alleged to have been murdered is not recovered the prosecution can still establish
the factum of homicidal death of that person either by adducing direct evidence of
the murder or by adducing reliable circumstantial evidence. In this regard we may
make a useful reference to only one such decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
which is reported as (1981) I SCC 511, “Rama Nand & Ors. Vs. State of Himachal
Pradesh”. In this case while dealing with the importance of corpus delicti in a
murder case it was held as under:“27. Although the High Court has held that the body

recovered was that of Sumitra deceased and that the bones
sent to the medical experts were not parts of the decomposed
body found, but appeared to have been fraudulently replaced
with the bones of a child during transmission to the medical
experts, we would assume that the identity of the body found
in the river was not established beyond reasonable doubt. In
other words, we would take it that the corpus delicti, i.e., the
dead body of the victim was not found in this case. But even on
that assumption, the question remains whether the other
circumstances established on record were sufficient to lead to
the conclusion that within all human probability, she had been
murdered by Rama Nand appellant? It is true that one of the
essential ingredients of the offence of culpable homicide
required to be proved by the prosecution is that the accused
“caused the death” of the person alleged to have been killed.
28. This means that before seeking to prove that the
accused is the perpetrator of the murder, it must be

established that homicidal death has been caused. Ordinarily,
the recovery of the dead body of the victim or a vital part of it,
bearing marks of violence, is sufficient proof of homicidal
death of the victim. There was a time when under the old
English law, the finding of the body of the deceased was held
to be essential before a person was convicted of committing
his culpable homicide. “I would never convict,” said Sir
Mathew Hale, “a person of murder or manslaughter unless the
fact were proved to be done, or at least the body was found
dead.” This was merely a rule of caution, and not of law. But
in those times when execution was the only punishment for
murder, the need for adhering to this cautionary rule was
greater. Discovery of the dead body of the victim bearing
physical evidence of violence, has never been considered as
the only mode of proving the corpus delicti in murder. Indeed,
very many cases are of such a nature where the discovery of
the dead body is impossible. A blind adherence to this old
“body” doctrine would open the door wide open for many a
heinous murderer to escape with impunity simply because
they were cunning and clever enough to destroy the body of
their victim. In the context of our law, Sir Hale’s enunciation
has to be interpreted no more than emphasizing that where
the dead body of the victim in a murder case is not found,
other cogent and satisfactory proof of the homicidal death of
the victim must be adduced by the prosecution. Such proof
may be by the direct ocular account of an eyewitness, or by
circumstantial evidence, or by both. But where the fact of
corpus delicti, i.e. ‘homicidal death’ is sought to be established
by circumstantial evidence alone, the circumstances must be
of a clinching and definitive character unerringly leading to the
inference that the victim concerned has met a homicidal
death. Even so, this principle of caution cannot be pushed
too far as requiring absolute proof. Perfect proof is seldom to
be had in this imperfect world, and absolute certainty is a
myth. That is why under Section 3, Evidence Act, a fact is said
to be “proved”, if the court considering the matters before it,
considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought,
under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the
supposition that it exists. The corpus delicti or the fact of
homicidal death, therefore, can be proved by telling and
inculpating circumstances which definitely lead to the
conclusion that within all human probability, the victim has

been murdered by the accused concerned.”

10.

So, prosecution case cannot be rejected because it has not been established

that the dead body recovered from the nullah on 1/4/95 was that of appellant
Munni’s husband Ramesh. We shall now proceed to examine whether the
prosecution has adduced other reliable and sufficient evidence to establish that
the husband of appellant Munni was murdered by the appellants. As noticed
already, the prosecution had examined two witnesses who during the investigation
stage had claimed to have witnessed the murder of the deceased Ramesh. Those
witnesses are PW-1 Seema and PW-2 Sunil. Both of them are the children of
appellant Munni and Ramesh. The daughter, however, did not support the
prosecution and it is quite understandable that being a daughter she may have
decided not to state anything against her in Court and because of her having
already lost her father she may not be willing to lose her mother also. However,
PW-2 Sunil, the son of appellant Munni had fully supported the prosecution case
and his evidence has been found by the learned Additional Sessions Judge to be
reliable and sufficient enough to hold the appellants guilty for the murder of the
deceased Ramesh. PW-2 Sunil was a small child of 8 years of age at the time
when he was examined in the trial court and about 7 years of age on the day of
incident. In order to satisfy itself that this child witness was mature enough to
testify the learned trial court had done a preliminary questioning of this witness

and thereafter on being satisfied that he could give evidence the learned Additional
Sessions Judge had then proceeded to record his testimony which, of course, was
without administration of oath to him since he was less than 12 years of age. The
statement of this child witness was a brief one and we would like to reproduce
here his entire chief-examination and the same is to the following effect:“Munni is my mother and accused Jagram is my uncle who are

present in the court. About a year ago during the night he was
lying in the house mentioned in the above address my mother and
Jagram inflicted knife injury on the neck of my father. Accused
Jagram was holding a knife with which he inflicted a knife injuries
on the neck of my father. My mother had caught hold the feet of
my father at that time. After killing my father my maternal uncle
Satish and uncle Jagram wrapped the dead body of my father in a
quilt and threw him in the nala. I was asked by my sister Seema
and we were in the same room lying on a wooden takhat. I had
seen the incident while lying on the takhat. I had not told this
incident to any one nor my mother had asked me anything
whether to disclose this facts or not. I do not know as to why the
accused had killed my father. Before the above incident a quarrel
had taken place between my father on the one side and my
mother and my uncle Jagram on the other side. I do not know as
to why that quarrel had taken place.”
11.

The learned Additional Sessions Judge had found that the testimony of this

child witness was wholly reliable. In these appeals the evidence of this child
witness has been attacked on behalf of both the appellants by their learned
counsel on the ground that he cannot be said to have witnessed the incident since
during his cross-examination he had stated that at the time of incident there was
no light in their house and that he could not see anything in the darkness during
night. It was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellants that since this

witness himself was admitting that at the time of the incident there was no light in
his house where the incident had allegedly taken place and further that he could
not see anything during night it becomes clear that this child had not actually
witnessed appellant Jag Ram inflicting knife injuries on the neck of his father and
appellant Munni catching hold the feet of his father at that time as had been
deposed to by him and that in fact he had been tutored to say so. Learned counsel
submitted that the fact that this witness was tutored by the police is also evident
from his own admission made in the cross-examination that the policeman had
told him his statement before his making the statement in Court as to what he had
to say about the incident. In support of the submission that evidence of this child
witness should not be accepted some decisions of the Apex Court which are
reported as “Nirmal Kumar v. State of U.P.” 1993 SCC (Crl.) 289, “Arbind Singh v.
State of Bihar”, 1994 SCC (Crl.) 1418 and “Chhagan Dame v. State of Gujarat”
1995 SCC (Crl.) 182 were also cited by the learned counsel.
12.

There is no doubt that PW-2 in his cross-examination had stated at one time

that on the date of incident there was no light in their house. However, from this
answer alone given by the witness it cannot be concluded that his evidence to the
effect that he had actually seen the occurrence was false. In fact, in his crossexamination on behalf of the accused persons he had also stated that he had seen
both the accused(appellants herein) killing his father in the light of the candle and
then in reply to a leading question, which the trial court had allowed to be put to

him by the additional public prosecutor on the conclusion of cross-examination and
for which the defence counsel had not objected he had categorically stated that he
had himself seen the incident with his own eyes. He had also, no doubt, stated in
cross-examination that one police uncle had told him about his statement but from
this answer also it cannot be concluded that he was a tutored witness. Even if
some police official had told him about the statement to be made by him it cannot
be said that the policemen had tutored him to make a false statement in respect
of the incident which he had actually not witnessed. All that can be said is that
the policeman might have told him to state before the Court whatever he had
actually seen. In this regard reference can be made to a decision of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in “Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak Vs. State of Gujarat”, AIR 2004
SC 23 wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court had come to the conclusion while
analyzing the evidence of a child witness of the murder that from certain answers
given by the child witness it appeared that the witness was repeating what
somebody else had asked her to say. However, the Hon’ble Supreme Court did not
reject the testimony of the child witness on this ground and it was observed that
mere fact that the child was asked to say about the occurrence and as to what she
had seen there was no reason to jump to a conclusion that it amounted to tutoring
and that the witness was deposing only as per tutoring and not what actually had
been seen by her. Similarly, in another case which is reported as (2003) 2 SCC
473, “State of Karnataka v. Shariff”, the prosecution witness of the occurrence was

a child witness whose mother had been murdered by his father. He had supported
the prosecution case. However, during his cross-examination it was elicited from
him that at the time when his mother had caught fire he was in his grand mother’s
house. The Supreme Court, however, did not attach any importance to this answer
given by the child witness and relied upon his evidence and observed that on
account of this stray sentence in his cross-examination his otherwise reliable
testimony could not be discarded particularly when the son of the accused could
not be attributed any motive for falsely deposing against his own mother. We may
refer to yet another decision also of the Supreme Court which is reported as AIR
1995 SC 959, “Mangoo and Anr. V. State of Madhya Pradesh” wherein also
evidence of a child witness of the murder was sought to be discredited on behalf of
the convicted accused. The reason put forth was that he had been brought to the
court by the police and before that he was with the police for some days and so
there was every chance of his being tutored. However, on this ground also the
evidence of child witness was not rejected despite the fact that the child witness
had also admitted that he was in the police headquarters for about 12 days before
adducing the evidence in court. It was observed by the Supreme Court that whether
or not the child witness was before should be found out after examining his
evidence and the mere fact that the witness was brought to the court by the police
was not a ground to conclude that the witness must have been tutored. So, the
evidence of PW-2 Sunil in the present case cannot be discarded for the aforesaid

reasons put forth on behalf of the appellants by their counsel.
13.

Another ground put forth for discarding the evidence of PW-2 Sunil by the

learned counsel for the appellants was that if actually this witness had seen his
father being killed by the appellants and that incident had actually happened
during the night of 25th or 26th March, 1995, as is the prosecution case, the
complaint to the police would have been about the murder of the deceased
Ramesh and not only of his disappearance as was lodged by PW-17 Pratap.
Learned counsel submitted that the children of the deceased would have definitely
told their uncle Pratap about the incident of murder if actually they had witnessed
any such occurrence and absence of any report of murder to the police belies the
claim of PW-2 Sunil that he had seen his father being killed by the appellants and
the proclaimed offender Satish. We do not find any force in this submission also of
the learned counsel for the appellants. It had not been elicited from PW-1 in his
cross-examination that when his mother had informed PW-17 Pratap that her
husband was missing he(PW-2) was present at that time nor was it elicited from
PW-17 Pratap. As far as PW-17 Pratap is concerned he must have reported to the
police whatever appellant Munni had told him and in the facts and circumstances
of this case it is quite obvious that Munni had got a missing report lodged through
PW-17 Pratap only to mislead the police.
14.

In the various judgments of the Supreme Court cited by the learned counsel

for the appellants on the point of appreciation of evidence of a child witness all

that has been laid down is that evidence of a child witness should be examined
carefully as a child is prone to tutoring. We have accordingly examined the
testimony of PW-2 Sunil with caution and minutely to find out if he is a tutored
witness, as was the submission of learned counsel. PW-2 is the son of appellant
Munni and nephew of appellant Jag Ram and this relationship between the witness
and the two appellants itself guarantees the truthfulness of this child witness.

No

reason has been put forth on behalf of the appellants as to why this child witness
had claimed during the trial that his father had been killed by his mother and his
uncle (Chacha). It was not even suggested to him in cross-examination that he had
falsely deposed against the appellants for some particular reason. It was also not
put to him on behalf of appellant Jagram that he (Jagram) was not in their house at
the time of alleged incident as was being claimed by him. So, the presence of
appellant Jagram in the house of the deceased, as claimed by PW-2, stood
admitted by Jagram and as far as Munni is concerned she is not even claiming that
she was not present in her house on the night of the incident as claimed by her son
Sunil. In these circumstances, we find no reason to discard the testimony of PW-2
Sunil. We do not find any traces of tutoring in his testimony which has credibility
and has a ring of truth. He withstood the test of cross-examination and could not
be discredited. As per the case of the prosecution, statement of this witness had
been recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. during investigation. On no point any
contradictions between his version during the investigation and during his evidence

in Court could be brought on record by the defence side during his crossexamination and that fact is also significant and shows that he had maintained
during his evidence in Court whatever he had claimed before the police also during
investigation. We are therefore of the view that the learned Trial Court was fully
justified in relying upon the testimony of PW-2 Sunil.
15.

It was also the submission of the learned counsel for the appellants that even

if for the aforesaid reasons put forth by them for discarding the evidence of the
child witness Sunil do not find favour with this Court and it is held that his
testimony was reliable his evidence by itself cannot be made the basis for
convicting the two appellants without corroboration and there is no corroborative
evidence adduced by the prosecution.

16.

We are not impressed by this argument as well raised by learned counsel for

the appellants. PW-2 Sunil had also deposed that before the present incident
there was a quarrel between his father on one side and the two appellants on the
other side.

In his cross-examination no suggestion was put to him that this part of

his statement was not true and he had made a false statement in this regard. So,
it also stood established that the relations between the deceased Ramesh and his
wife Munni and brother Jag Ram were not cordial and that is a circumstance which
corroborates the evidence of PW-2 Sunil despite the fact that the prosecution has
not been able to adduce any direct evidence to establish the illicit relationship

between the two appellants.
17.

The evidence of PW-2 Sunil gets corroborated from other circumstances

also.

As far as appellant Munni is concerned she has taken a plea that her

husband had one day gone to his friend Satya Prakash but did not come back
home thereafter and then she had made enquiries for 2-3 days but could not find
him. This she had stated in her statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. In the crossexamination of PW-2 Sunil it was put to him that on the night(about which he was
deposing) his father was not at home and had gone to Ashok Nagar to meet one
Chander Prakash and thereafter he had not returned back. PW-2 Sunil had
categorically denied that suggestion. Now, if, in fact, the husband of appellant
Munni had gone somewhere and had not returned back home she would have
informed her relatives and neighbours as well as the police on the first night itself
when her husband had not come back home. Although she is claiming that she
had been making enquiries for 2-3 days about her missing husband but no one had
been examined by her to substantiate this plea taken by her. As has been noticed
already, appellant Munni had claimed in her statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
that her husband was missing since 25th/26th March.

The missing report,

however, was got lodged by her through PW-17 Pratap only on 3rd April, 1995 and
there is no explanation coming forth from appellant Munni as to why she got the
missing report lodged after so many days. That abnormal behaviour of hers shows
her guilty mind and this circumstance can also be utilized for the corroboration of

the testimony of PW-2 Sunil.
18.

As far as appellant Jagram is concerned, the testimony of PW-2 Sunil to the

extent it implicates him is also duly corroborated. As held already, the statement of
PW-2 Sunil that Jagram was present in their house at the time of the incident had
remained unchallenged in his cross-examination. The plea taken by the appellant
Jagram in his statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. was that on the day of
occurrence he was in his village at Kanpur and that he had come to Delhi with his
father on 07.04.1995 only after coming to know that his brother Ramesh had been
missing for several days. However this plea has not been substantiated by Jagram.
He has even failed to examine his father with whom he stated to had come to
Delhi on 07.04.1995, as claimed by him. Father of Jagram was the best witness
who could have substantiated the version of Jagram. The Apex Court in its decision
reported as AIR 1975 SC 1703, “Gajendra Singh v. State of U.P.” had held that nonexamination of the most material witness to prove the defence version in a
criminal trial is the strongest possible circumstance to discredit the defence
version. So, in the present case non-examination of father of the appellant Jagram
discredits the plea of Jagram that on the day of the incident he was not in Delhi. In
fact, Jagram’s father himself also having chosen not to come to the rescue of his
son also clearly shows the falsity of the version of the appellant Jagram. The
circumstance of Jagram having taken a false plea also lends assurance to the
reliability of the testimony of PW-2.

19.

Learned counsel appearing for appellant Munni had also raised an argument

that appellants had not been accorded a fair trial and in support of this
submission the learned counsel placed reliance upon a decision of the Apex Court
in “Kalyani Baskar v. M.S. Sampoornam”, 2007 (1) SCC (Crl.) 577 and particularly
to the following observations:“Fair Trial” includes fair and proper opportunities

allowed by law to prove her innocence. Adducing evidence
in support of the defence is a valuable right and denial of
that right means denial of fair trial.”
We are, however, not impressed by this argument also of denial of fair trial
advanced by the learned counsel. After having perused the records of the trial
court we are of the opinion that the appellants were given a fair trial.
20.

For the reasons stated above, we are of the view that reliance placed by the

trial court on the evidence of PW-2 Sunil, which was duly corroborated also, was
fully justified and we do not find any infirmity in the impugned judgment of the
learned trial Court. There is no merit in the challenge thereto and these two
appeals are devoid of any merits and are accordingly dismissed.
Appellant Munni’s sentence was suspended during the pendency of her appeal.
She shall now be taken into custody to serve out the sentence awarded to her.

(P.K.BHASIN)
JUDGE

(VIKRAMAJIT SEN)
JUDGE
February 14, 2008
sh

