*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

CRL. APPEAL NO. 141 OF 1999

+
#

Date of Decision: 17th March, 2008
PYARE LAL

!

...Appellant
Through: Mr. K.B. Andley, Senior Advocate
with Mr. M.L. Yadav, Advocate.
versus

$

STATE

...Respondent
Through : Mr. M.N. Dudeja, APP

CORAM:
*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
This appeal takes exception to the judgment dated
11.03.1999 and order dated 12.03.1999 passed by the learned
Special Judge, Delhi in Sessions Case No. CC-169/1994 whereby

he was convicted under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as „the Act‟ ) and
was sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year and
also to pay a fine of Rs.5000/- with a default stipulation for his
conviction under Section 7 and under Section 13(1)(d) was
awarded rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years and also
to pay a fine of Rs.8000/- with a default stipulation.

2.

The relevant facts leading to the prosecution of the

appellant, who while posted as an Assistant Sub-Inspector of
Police(ASI) at Preet Vihar police station was apprehended by the
Anti-Corruption Branch officials accepting bribe from the
complainant(PW-2), have been noticed by the learned trial court
in para nos. 2 & 3 of its judgment and the same are being reproduced hereunder:-

“(2)
On 9-5-1992, P.W.2 Brij Mohan went to the
Anti-Corruption Branch and gave his complaining
statement Ex. PW2/A. Brij Mohan alleged that his
brother Ravinder Chhibbar had been married to Smt.
Veena in 1990. Smt. Veena left the matrimonial home
and went to her parents‟ house in February, 1991. She
lodged a complaint with the Crime against women Cell,

Crl.A. No. 141/99

2

Nanakpura upon which case F.I.R. No. 65/92 under
Sections 498-A and 406 I.P.C. was registered at Police
Station Preet Vihar. A.S.I. Pyare Lal was investigating
the case. Even though Crime Against Women Cell had
registered the case only against Revinder Chhibber,
A.S.I. Pyare Lal had implicated his father, mother, two
sisters and another brother in the case. His mother had
died due to this shock. Two days after the death of his
mother i.e. 2.4.92, accused A.S.I. Pyare Lal had come to
their house. He had searched their house at NOIDA and
had gone back after taking Rs.2000/- without arresting
anyone. A.S.I. Pyare Lal asked the complainant to meet
him in the police station. The complainant has further
alleged that he met A.S.I. Pyare Lal at P.S. Preet Vihar
on 8-5-92 at about 8.30 p.m. A.S.I. Pyare Lal demanded
Rs. 1500/- as bribe and threatened that if this amount
was not paid to him, he would get the bail of the entire
family cancelled and would send them to jail. The
complainant pleaded with the accused that his sister
Chandra Kanta was seriously ill and orders for her
anticipatory bail had already been passed by the court
and the accused should accept her bail bond at their
house. The accused had told the complainant that he
should come to the police station with Rs.1500/- on the
next day. The accused told the complainant to bring the
signatures of Chandra Kanta on a blank paper and that
the accused will accept the surety bond in the police
station itself.
(3)
On the aforesaid complaint of Brij Mohan
(P.W.2), a trap was arranged including panch-witness
Kailash Chand (P.W.3). Pre-raid proceedings were
conducted in the presence of the panch-witness.
Numbers of the currency notes provided by the
complainant were noted down and the phenolphthalein
powder was applied to the currency notes. Necessary
instructions were given to the complainant and the
panch-witnesses, as recorded in Ex.PW2/B. It is alleged
that the complainant and the panch-witness went to P.S.
Preet Vihar and met the accused in his Room No.30,
which was the quarter allotted to the accused in the
police station. The complainant knocked the door of the
accused Pyare Lal. Pyare Lal opened the door of his
room and complainant and the panch-witness went

Crl.A. No. 141/99

3

inside. The complainant gave the blank paper with the
signatures of Chandra Kanta to the accused. The
complainant introduced Kailash Chand, panch-witness
as the surety for his sister. He told the accused that his
sister was unwell and the accused should fill up the
surety bond on the signed paper brought by him. The
complainant also told the accused that he had brought
Rs.1500/- which had been demanded by the accused.
The accused filled up the surety bond of Chandra Kanta
with Kailash Chand as surety. The complainant then
took out the money from his pocket and advanced it
towards the accused. The accused opened his diary
which was lying on the table and asked the complainant
to keep the money in the diary. The complainant put the
money in the diary. The panch-witness then started
coughing and came out of the room to give the signal to
the raiding party. The accused was apprehended and
the money was recovered from the diary of the accused
which was lying on the table in front of him. “

3.

After the completion of usual investigation formalities the

Anti-Corruption Branch filed a charge-sheet against the appellantaccused in the Court of Special Judge constituted under the Act to
try corruption cases and the learned Special Judge tried him for
the offences punishable under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) of the Act.
Prosecution had examined eight witnesses to prove its case. In his
statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the appellant-accused had
pleaded as under:
“I am innocent. I never demanded or accepted any
bribe from any person. Similarly, I never made any
demand from the complainant at any stage. The true
Crl.A. No. 141/99

4

facts are that the FIR No. 65/92 was registered on the
statement of Smt. Veena Chibbar against the
complainant and against his other family members on
my endorsement on her statement. The complainant
wanted that the case be registered only against his
brother Ravinder Chhibbar who was the husband of
Smt. Veena Chhibbar and other person be dropped. I
refused to oblige him. The complainant and his other
co-accused got anticipatory bail from the Sessions
Court and their bail bonds and surety bonds were
accepted by me. I asked the complainant to get the
bail bond and surety bond of Smt. Chandra Kanta be
executed and asked him to come to the police station
along with Ms. Chandra Kanta. I met the complainant
on 26.04.92 in connection of bail of concerned
persons but he became angry why I had gone to his
house. He telephoned to the SHO, Kesho Puram, who
was known to the complainant and the said SHO
threatened me and asked me to go from the house
and he made the plan to trap me in this false case.
On 9.5.93, complainant came to me in my room
and knocked the door. I was sleeping as on the
previous night I was on patrol duty. A person was with
him and asked me to complete the papers i.e. surety
bond and bail bond of Ms. Chandra Kanta. I asked
about Smt. Chandra Kanta but complainant asked me
to fill up the surety bond first and that Smt. Chandra
Kanta will be coming. I began to fill up the surety bond
first and in the meantime the complainant asked for a
glass of water and I went to arrange for water. As soon
as I came, the panch-witness went inside and within
seconds he came with 3/4 persons who arrested me
falsely. I protested but no one heard me and took me
to Anti-Corruption Branch where police people
conducted the proceedings as per their wishes and I
was not allowed to say anything. I am innocent and
falsely implicated.”

4.

After analyzing the evidence produced from both the sides

Crl.A. No. 141/99

5

the learned Special Judge convicted the accused and feeling
aggrieved this appeal was filed by the accused challenging his
conviction as also the sentence awarded to him.

5.

In order to find out whether the appellant has been rightly

convicted or not I have examined the prosecution evidence. The
undisputed position which has emerged out of the evidence of the
prosecution witnesses and the statement of the appellantaccused recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. is that the appellantaccused was the investigating officer of a criminal case registered
against the complainant of the present case, namely, PW-2 Brij
Mohan and his family members under Sections 406/498-A IPC
vide FIR No. 65/92 registered at Preet Vihar police station on 2303-1992 on the complaint of one Smt. Veena Chhibbar, who was
the wife of complainant Brij Mohan‟s brother Ravinder Chibber.
Apprehending their arrest in that case the complainant Brij
Mohan and his other family members had obtained anticipatory
bail orders from the Sessions Court and the appellant-accused
had accepted the bail bonds of all the accused persons except

Crl.A. No. 141/99

6

that of PW-6 Smt. Chander Kanta, one of the sisters of the
complainant Brij Mohan, who as per the prosecution case during
those days was not keeping well.

6.

Now I come to that aspect of the prosecution case which

was strongly disputed by the appellant-accused before the trial
court. As per the case of the prosecution, the appellant-accused
had demanded bribe of Rs. 1500/- from the complainant Brij
Mohan for accepting the bail bond of his sick sister Chander
Kanta(PW-6) without her being required to come to the police
station and had told that he could bring the signature of his sister
Chander Kanta on

a blank paper (to be converted into her

personal bond) and he would accept her bail bond and at the
same time had also threatened to get the bail of his sister
cancelled and to arrest everyone in case of non-payment of bribe
money to him. This demand of bribe was made by the appellantaccused, as per the case of the prosecution case, at his house on
08-05-1992 when the complainant had gone there and the bribe
was to be paid to the appellant-accused on 09-05-92 at his

Crl.A. No. 141/99

7

residential quarter in the Preet Vihar police station Complex.
However, on 9/5/92 the complainant decided to lodge a
complaint with the Anti Corruption Branch against the appellantaccused regarding demand of bribe by him. Accordingly he went
there on 9/5/92 and got recorded his complaint Ex.PW-2/A. As is
usual in these kind of bribery cases instituted against public
servants who are apprehended during traps laid by Anti
Corruption Branch officials on complaints of demand of illegal
gratification by them the material witnesses are the complainant,
one independent public witness who is associated and the trap
laying officer. In the present case also the prosecution had sought
to establish its accusations against the appellant-accused on the
basis of the evidence of the complainant Brij Mohan(PW-2), panch
witness PW-3 Kailash Chand and the raid officer PW-7 Inspector
Tola Ram Mirwani. The complainant and the panch witness had
both deposed regarding the pre-raid proceedings conducted by
PW-7 at the Anti Corruption Branch office during which they were
explained by the raid officer as to how the actual raid was going to
be conducted to trap the appellant-accused accepting bribe from

Crl.A. No. 141/99

8

the complainant and what they were supposed to be doing during
the actual raid at the residential quarter of the accused. For the
purpose of raid the complainant had produced fifteen currency
notes of Rs.100/- denomination to be used as bribe money for
being offered to the appellant-accused at the time of raid. Those
currency notes were treated with phenolphthalein powder and a
solution of sodium carbonate was also prepared by the raid
officer. That is normally done in trap cases by the raid officers
since if phenolphthalein treated notes are touched by anyone and
that person‟s fingers are dipped in the colourless solution of
sodium carbonate that would turn pink and the raid officer would
be satisfied that the public servant who was to be trapped had
actually accepted the bribe at the time of raid from the
complainant alleging demand of bribe from him by that public
servant. Regarding the actual trap at the house of the appellantaccused PW-2 Brij Mohan, the complainant, as well as PW-3
Kailash Chand, the panch-witness have both deposed that at the
time of raid the complainant first of all handed over a blank paper
having the signature of his sister Chandra Kanta to the appellant-

Crl.A. No. 141/99

9

accused for being converted into the personal bond of Chandra
Kanta and he was also told by the complainant to prepare the
surety bond in the name of the panch-witness Kailash Chand who
was introduced to the appellant as the surety and the appellant
was also told that Chandra Kanta would be coming there and
thereafter the appellant-accused prepared a surety bond in the
name of Kailash Chand. The complainant and the panch witness
had then deposed that when the complainant had offered the
bribe money to the appellant-accused upon which he had opened
a diary lying on the table there and had asked the complainant to
keep the money in that diary (Ex. P-16) and accordingly the
complainant had kept the tainted currency notes in that diary
which was lying on a table in that room.

The raid officer, PW-7

Inspector Tola Ram Mirwani has deposed about the raid
proceedings and stated that when he entered the room of the
appellant-accused on receipt of the pre-arranged signal from the
panch witness he had challenged the appellant-accused that he
had accepted bribe of Rs. 1500/- from the complainant upon
which the appellant-accused had become nervous and had kept

Crl.A. No. 141/99

10

mum and thereafter he offered his own search to the appellantaccused and upon appellant-accused declining that offer he
recovered the tainted notes from the diary Ex. P-16 at the
instance of the panch witness.

7.

According to the appellant-accused that trap had been

falsely got arranged by the complainant in order to implicate him
in a false bribery case as he had refused to oblige him in the
dowry case which was registered against him and his family
members. His detailed explanation in this regard given at the time
of his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. has already been
reproduced. While according to the prosecution case it was a
legitimate trap.

8.

It was forcefully contended by Shri K.B.Andley, learned

senior counsel for the appellant, that from the mere recovery of
fifteen currency notes of the denomination of 100 each, Ex. P-1 to
P-15, from the appellant‟s diary Ex. P-16 it could not be said that
that money had been kept in that diary on the asking of the

Crl.A. No. 141/99

11

appellant-accused.

Mr. Andley submitted that just before the

apprehension of appellant-accused by anti-corruption branch
officials the complainant Brij Mohan had requested the appellantaccused to get some water for him and when the appellantaccused went from that room to fetch water for the complainant
the complainant surreptitiously kept the money in the diary lying
on the table in that room. It was further contended that this plea
of the appellant-accused is highly probable and should have been
accepted by the learned trial Court since the complainant in his
cross-examination had admitted that he had at that time asked
for water.

Mr. Andley contended that even though the

complainant had also claimed that, in fact, he himself had taken
water but that version of the complainant is highly improbable as
in normal course the appellant-accused cannot be expected to
have asked the complainant to himself go to the kitchen in his
house and drink water and it is more probable and plausible that
the appellant-accused only must have gone to the kitchen to get
water, as was his plea before the trial Court while cross-examining
the complainant and then at the time of his statement under

Crl.A. No. 141/99

12

Section 313 Cr.P.C. Mr. Andley further contended that an accused
in a criminal case is not expected to establish his defence plea
beyond reasonable doubt as is the case in respect of prosecution
allegations and all that an accused is supposed to show to the
Court is that the plea taken by him is probable and in the facts
and circumstances of the present case and particularly the fact
that the complainant himself was claiming that the appellantaccused was bent upon implicating everyone of his family in the
dowry case registered against his brother the plea taken by the
appellant-accused

is

very

much

probable

and

in

these

circumstances the possibility of the complainant keeping the
currency notes in the diary when the appellant-accused was away
from the room to get water for him cannot be ruled out. It was
also submitted that there are other serious infirmities also in the
prosecution case which make the case highly doubtful.

9.

Learned APP for the State urged to the contrary submitting

that the conviction of the appellant was justified and the
prosecution has proved the guilt of the appellant beyond any

Crl.A. No. 141/99

13

shadow of doubt. He supported the decision of the learned Trial
Court and submitted that there was no infirmity in the same
calling for interference by this Court.

10.

After examining the prosecution evidence I feel persuaded

to accept the submission of Mr. Andley, learned senior counsel for
the appellant, that in the facts and circumstances of this case the
prosecution cannot be said to have succeeded in establishing its
case beyond reasonable doubt and also that possibility of even
false implication of the appellant-accused by the complainant and
keeping of the tainted notes in the diary of the appellant by the
complainant while the accused was away from his room cannot
be ruled out. As has already been noted that a criminal case was,
as per the complainant himself, registered initially against his
brother at the instance of his brother‟s wife, Smt. Veena Chibber
and the investigation of that case was assigned to the appellantaccused. The prosecution case as spoken to by the complainant in
his evidence is that the appellant however, engulfed all the family
members while investigating the matter. On the other hand, it is

Crl.A. No. 141/99

14

the plea of the appellant that the complainant wanted him to
hush-up the case registered against him and his family members
and on his refusal to oblige him the complainant slapped a false
corruption against him. In my view it is quite possible that the
complainant had foisted a false case against the appellant in
order to get rid of him so that investigation could be entrusted to
someone else who may oblige them.

11.

Another reason for not believing the case as projected by

complainant PW-2 as to what had transpired at the time of raid
conducted by PW-7 at the house of the appellant is that the
complainant PW-2 in his testimony deposed that he handed over
a blank paper signed by his sister Chandra Kanta (PW-6) to the
appellant to fill up the bail bond on that paper and the appellantaccused, according to the complainant, filled up the bail bond on
that blank paper signed by his sister. The prosecution has,
however, not produced that paper which according to the
complainant had been prepared as a bail bond of his sister
Chnadra Kanta but instead it has placed on record a blank paper

Crl.A. No. 141/99

15

(Ex. P-19) purporting to be having signature of the sister of the
complainant and the document purporting to be the bail bond
written by the complainant which has been proved as Ex. P-19
does not bear the signature of the sister of the complainant. If,
the appellant-accused had utilized the blank paper having the
signature of the complainant‟s sister then how could this blank
document come into the possession of the Anti Corruption Branch
officials. This has remained unexplained from the side of the
prosecution since none of the three witnesses of recovery of
tainted notes has claimed that Ex. P-19 was recovered from the
possession of the accused as has been recorded in its seizure
memo Ex.PW-2/E and, therefore, not only the evidence of the
complainant but the prosecution case in general also becomes
highly doubtful.

12.

There is yet another reason also for doubting the

complainant‟s testimony in respect of the trap proceedings and
particularly his version that he had brought one blank paper
signed by his sister to the house of the accused and had then

Crl.A. No. 141/99

16

handed it over to him. This version becomes doubtful because
when the complainant‟s sister Chandra Kanta, who was also
examined as a prosecution witness as PW-6 to state that her
brother had obtained her signature on the blank paper Ex.P-19 on
the asking of the accused who had been coming to their house,
was cross-examined on behalf of the accused she stated that
when her brother had got her signature on Ex.P-19 the accused
was present at that time in their house. This statement of
complainant‟s sister thus also introduces considerable doubt
about the complainant‟s testimony and the genuineness of the
trap proceedings.

13.

Now coming to the prosecution case regarding recovery of

tainted notes from the diary Ex.P-16, which the appellant had
admitted before the trial Court to be belonging to him, lying on a
table in the room of the appellant where trap took place the
defence plea during the cross-examination of the complainant
and then during the statement of the accused under Section 313
Cr.P.C., as noticed already, was that the tainted currency notes

Crl.A. No. 141/99

17

were clandestinely kept by the complainant in the diary when
he(the accused) had gone out from the room to fetch water for
the complainant as was requested by him. Although there is no
other evidence except the statement made by the accused
himself in this regard at the time of recording of his statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and a suggestion to that effect put to
the complainant in his cross-examination the court can still
consider whether his statement alone is sufficient to rebut the
statutory presumption under Section 20 of the Act. Under Section
20 it is provided that when it is proved that a public servant has
obtained some gratification from someone other than his legal
remuneration then it shall be presumed that that gratification
obtained by the public servant was as a motive or reward for
showing some favour to the person from whom it was obtained in
discharge of his official functions as a public servant. It is now
well settled that if the explanation offered by an accused in these
kind of bribery cases regarding recovery of tainted notes either
from his person or from inside a diary etc. belonging to him is
found to be probable then he becomes entitled to an order of

Crl.A. No. 141/99

18

acquittal. It is also well settled that the burden upon an accused
to prove his plea in defence regarding the recovery of tainted
notes is not as onerous as is for the prosecution which has to
establish its accusations against an accused beyond any shadow
of doubt. In the present case the plea which has been taken by
the appellant-accused regarding the recovery of the tainted notes
from his diary, in my considered view, is very much probable and
acceptable when it is considered keeping in mind the fact that the
complainant PW-2, Brij Mohan had admitted during his crossexamination that at the time of trap proceedings in the room of
the appellant-accused he had desired to have water. There is no
doubt that he also claimed that the appellant-accused then told
him to go inside and drink water and then he himself went and
had water but in my view this statement of the complainant
appears to me to be highly improbable and the version of the
accused that he himself had gone to get water for the
complainant is more probable one. Since the complainant was
sitting in the house of the accused it is more likely that the
accused himself would have gone out of the room to get water for

Crl.A. No. 141/99

19

the complainant and it appears quite improbable that he would
have told the complainant to go to the kitchen himself and drink
water from there. I have already held that in the facts and
circumstances of this case there is every possibility of the
complainant having falsely implicated the accused because he
had a grievance that the appellant-accused was threatening to
implicate all his family members in the dowry case registered on
the complaint of the wife of his brother. That fact also probablizes
the defence plea regarding the keeping of tainted notes by the
complainant in the diary of the appellant-accused while he had
gone to get water for the complainant.

14.

It was contended by the learned Additional Public

Prosecutor that since the appellant-accused took this stand only
at the time of his making a statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
and not at the time of his apprehension it would not be safe to
rely upon the version stated by him which should be regarded as
an afterthought. It is, no doubt, true that the appellant did not
take this plea of the tainted money having been kept in his diary

Crl.A. No. 141/99

20

in his absence at the time of his apprehension but this fact alone
cannot be a ground to disbelieve him or render the plea taken by
him to be false which I consider to be quite probable. Reference
may be made in this context to one of the decisions of the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court reported as AIR 2002 SC 486, “Punjabrao Vs.
State of Maharashtra” where it was observed as under:

“It is, of course, true as observed by the High Court that
when the Investigating Officer seized the amount from
the Patwari-accused, he did not offer the explanation
that it was in relation to a collection of loan, but that by
itself would not be sufficient to throw away the
explanation offered by the accused in his statement
under Section 313 when such explanation could be
held to be reasonable under the facts and
circumstances of the case, as indicated by the learned
Special Judge while acquitting the accused.”

15.

Learned Additional Public Prosecutor also contended that

since the version of the complainant that he had kept the tainted
money in the diary lying on the table on the asking of the accused
is duly corroborated also by the evidence of the panch witness
PW-3 Kailash Chand who was an independent witness the
prosecution case cannot be viewed with any suspicion. There is no
doubt that the panch witness had also deposed that the

Crl.A. No. 141/99

21

complainant had kept the tainted notes in the appellant‟s diary on
the asking of the appellant-accused but his testimony cannot be
said to be that of an independent witness since in crossexamination he had admitted that he had been deputed in the
anti-corruption branch on 17 or 18 dates and also that he had
joined three such raids during that period. For this view I am
fortified by a decision of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in “G.V.
Nanjundiah v. State”, 1987 (Supp.) SCC 266, which was also a
case of bribery and one of the panch-witnesses in that case had
been associated in traps organized by the CBI on three or four
occasions and because of that fact he was not considered to be
an independent witness by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court.

16.

This panch-witness, in fact, has caused a dent in the

prosecution case instead of advancing it further on the way to
success by claiming in his evidence that all the writing work after
the raid was carried out at the office of the Anti Corruption Branch
and even the diary Ex. P-16 was sealed there and not at the spot
and as far as the recovered tainted money is concerned he

Crl.A. No. 141/99

22

deposed that the notes were not sealed at all. On this part of his
statement, which definitely was contrary to the prosecution case,
he was not cross-examined by the public prosecutor to establish
that on this aspect he had not stated correct facts. If this was
being so claimed by the prosecution witness whose services were
sought to be utilized as an independent witness then a serious
doubt about the trap being legitimate one creeps in and this is an
additional reason for doubting the prosecution case.

17.

In view of the foregoing conclusions, this appeal deserves to

be allowed and the same is accordingly allowed and judgment
dated 11.03.1999 and order dated 12.03.1999 passed by the
learned Special Judge, Delhi in Sessions Case No. CC-169/1994
are set aside and the appellant-accused stands acquitted.
Resultantly, his bail bonds stand discharged.

P.K.BHASIN,J
March 17, 2008
sh

Crl.A. No. 141/99

23

