*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: 13th November, 2007

+

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 144 OF 1996
STATE

....Appellant
Through: Mr. M.N.Dudeja, APP
versus

V.K.MUTTOO & ORS.

....Respondents

Through : Mr. M.C.Sanghi, Advocate
for respondents 1 and 3.
Mr. P.R.Thakur, Advocate for
respondent No.2.

CORAM:
*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.

(No)

Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:

This appeal has been filed by the State against the judgment dated 11.3.1996 passed by the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi in complaint case No.60/93 whereby the respondents herein were
acquitted of the charge under Sections 7/16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
2.
The relevant facts leading to the prosecution of the respondents herein as noticed by the learned trial
court in the impugned judgment are as under:-

“……………….On 28.7.92, a team of Food Inspectors comprising of FI Surinder
Kumar Sharma and FI Sham Lal and other members of PFA Department under the
supervision of Dr.G.C.Raha visited the hotel the Connaught Place, a unit of
Prominent Hotels Ltd., 37, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Marg, New Delhi, where accused
Sh.V.K.Muttoo, General Manager of the hotel was found conducting the business of
said hotel and storing paneer, a food article for the purpose of use in preparation of
vegetables and other food articles for sale for human consumption and at about 3.15
pm, he sold a sample consisting of 750 grams of paneer, which was taken from an
open container kept in cold storage to FI Surinder Kumar Sharma for analysis and
price of Rs.26.25 p was offered but was refused to be accepted. It has been further
alleged that sample of paneer was taken by cutting it into small pieces and after

proper mixing with the help of clean and dry knife in a clean and dry tray and FI
divided the sample, then and there, into three equal parts and each part was put in
three clean and dry glass bottles and 20 drops of formalin was added to each bottle.
Each bottle containing the sample was separately packed, fastened, marked and
sealed according to PFA Act and rules. Signature of accused No.1/vendor were
obtained on the paper slip and wrapper of the sample bottle. Notice in form VI was
prepared at the spot and given to accused VK Muttoo and price of sample was
offered but he refused to accept the same. Panchnama was also prepared at the spot
by FI SK Sharma. It has been further alleged that before start of sample proceedings,
efforts were made to join public witnesses but none came forward and thereupon, FI
Sham Lal was joined as a witness to the sample proceedings. One counter part of
sample was sent to P.A. for analysis intact condition and remaining two counter
parts were deposited with LHA also in intact condition. It has been further alleged
that PA analysed the same and found the same to be adulterated and not conforming
to the standard prescribed under PFA Act and rules as milk fat on dry matter is less
than the prescribed limit of 50.0%. It has been further alleged that sample
commodity was sold and supplied to the hotel. The Connaught Place by accused
No.2 Ashwani Kumar, the then Executive /Prop. Of M/s Sh.Ram Paneer Regd. T.M.
Shri Ram House, 97, LIG, DDA Complex, Motia Khan, New Delhi, (who is now
respondent no. 2 in this appeal) vide challan No.315 dated 27.7.92 under a contract.
It has been further alleged that establishment M/s Shri Ram Paneer is also known as
M/s Shri Ram Surya Associates and the hotel the Connaught Place is a unit
belonging to Prominent Hotels Ltd. Regd. Office 37, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Marg,
New Delhi, which is a company of which Sh.V.K.Muttoo, General Manager, is the
nominee of the said company (which is respondent no. 3 in this appeal) and he was
found the person incharge of and responsible for the conduct of the business of the
hotel in question. Thus, it is alleged that accused have violated the provisions of
Section 2(ia)(a)(m) punishable u/s 16(1) and Section 7 of PFA Act. Thereafter,
consent as provided u/s 20 of PFA Act for prosecution of accused was granted by
Sh.M.P.Tyagi, the then Director, PFA. Hence, the present complaint.”
3.
After institution of the complaint the accused were served with intimation letter along with copy of
report of the Public Analyst and thereupon, accused No.1 exercised his right before the Trial Court (respondent
no. 1 herein), as provided u/s 13(2) of PFA Act and the second counter part of the sample was sent to the
Director, CFL, Mysore, for analysis who vide his certificate No.117/PFA/93 dated 13.4.93 opined that the
sample does not conform to the standard as milk fat contents fell below the minimum specified limit of 50.0% on
dry matter basis.
4.
After considering the evidence adduced by the prosecution and taking into consideration other
relevant circumstances, the learned trial court acquitted the three respondents herein and observed in para Nos.
11 and 12 of the impugned judgment as under:-

“The sample in the present case was taken on 28.7.92 and the present complaint has
been filed on 23.2.93 i.e. after delay of more than 7 months. None of the PW has given
any specific reason as to why they have taken such an inordinate delay in completing
the investigation in the present case. Moreover, it is on record that PA report is dated
12.8.92 and no investigation was carried out by FI S.K.Sharma, who has taken the
sample in the present case, during the period 7.9.92 till 23.12.92 when he has issued
notice u/s 14(A). Nowhere it was explained as to what was being done during this long
period of time. This has become important in view of the perishable nature of sampled
commodity. I am accordingly, of the opinion that right of accused as granted u/s 13(2)
of PFA Act is frustrated and prosecution should have been launched against the accused
could have exercised his right to get the second counter part of sample analysed from
the Director, CFL, Mysore, before the expiry of period of four months.

For the fore-going reasons, I am of the opinion that present case has been instituted
after a great delay without any just reason or sufficient cause thereby depriving the
accused of their right u/s 13(2) as it has been stated by various experts that a food
articles with milk and milk products are perishable in nature even if formaline is added
and chemical changes are bound to occur and fat and fatty acid contents are bound to
decrease with the passage of time. Accordingly, accused are given benefit of doubt and
are acquitted.”
5.
Feeling aggrieved the state sought leave to appeal which was granted. I have heard Mr. M.N.Dudeja,
APP for the State,
Mr. M.C. Sanghi, Advocate for respondent nos. 1 and 3 and Mr. P.R. Thakur for
the respondent no. 2. I have also gone through evidence adduced during the trial by the prosecution.
6.
Hon’ble Supreme Court in a number of cases has laid down the guidelines which an appellate court
should keep in mind while dealing with the judgment of acquittal. I may notice the views expressed in two
judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. In “State of Punjab Vs. Ajaib Singh And Others”, 2005 SCC (Cri)
43, while dealing with a case of acquittal it was observed as under in para no. 10 of the judgment:

“10.

…… It is well settled that in an appeal against acquittal, the appellate
court is entitled to reappreciate the evidence on record, but having done so it will
not interfere with the order of acquittal unless it finds the view of the court
acquitting the accused to be unreasonable or perverse. If the view recorded by the
court acquitting the accused is a possible, reasonable view of the evidence on record,
the order of acquittal ought not to be reversed.”

7.
In an earlier judgment reported as 1980 CAR 359 (SC), “Sirajuddin alias Siraj Vs. State of Karnataka”
also Hon’ble Supreme Court had observed while dealing with the scope of an appeal against a judgment of
acquittal as under:

“……. It is well settled that if the view of the evidence taken by the trial Court is
reasonably possible, the High Court should not, as a rule of prudence, disturb the
acquittal.”

8.
Keeping in view these observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court I would now examine if the findings
of the learned trial judge can be said to be perverse, as is being claimed on behalf of the State in this appeal. The
findings in the impugned judgment of the learned trial Court whereby the accused were acquitted have already
been reproduced above. Learned Trial Court has relied upon one judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
“Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ghisa Ram” 1975 PFA cases 186. In that case complaint was filed in the
court after about seven months from the date of raid and taking of sample of milk product (curd) from the shop
of the accused which was on 20/09/1961. The complaint was filed on 23/05/1962. Hon’ble Supreme Court held
that in these circumstances, the valuable right available to the accused under section 13(2) of the Act of having
the sample tested at Central Food Laboratory had stood denied to him. It was also observed that ordinarily it
was possible for the prosecution to obtain the report of the Public Analyst and institute the prosecution within
17 days of the taking of the sample. Learned APP had submitted that this judgment was not applicable to the
facts of the present case inasmuch as in that case the Director of Central Food Laboratory had found the sample
sent to him to be unfit for analysis because of decomposition and because of that reason the accused could not
have the benefit of the report of the Director which, if had been given, would have superceded the report of the
Public Analyst so the Hon’ble Supreme Court had held that the delay in launching the prosecution against the
accused had resulted in denial of the benefit of Section 13(2) of the Act to him while in the present case despite
the delay in the filing of the complaint in court the sample which was sent to the Director of Central Food
Laboratory was found to be fit for analysis. So, learned APP contended, the acquittal of the accused of the

present case by the trial Court relying upon the said judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court was totally
unjustified and not sustainable at all. However, in my view the acquittal of the respondents in the present case
in view of the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Ghisa Ram’s case (supra) cannot be said to be
unjustified because the crux of the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court is that prosecution in these kind of
cases should be launched promptly. In that case reference was also made to the opinion of an expert that if a
food article, like curd, is kept in a refrigerator and a preservative is added to the sample the total period which
may be available for making analysis of that sample without decomposition will be six months. In the present
case, the sample of the paneer was sent to the Central Food Laboratory after more than seven months from the
date when it was taken from the shop of the respondent no. 1 and there is no explanation forthcoming from the
side of the prosecution for that delay. In these circumstances, if the learned Trial Court has come to the
conclusion that the accused’s right under section 13(2) of the Act had got frustrated it cannot be said that this
conclusion of the trial Court is unreasonable, wholly unjustified or perverse.
9.
No other point was urged by the learned APP for the state.
10.
This appeal being devoid of any merit is accordingly hereby dismissed.

November 13, 2007
da

P.K.BHASIN,J

