*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 285 OF 1999

+
#

Date of Decision:25th March, 2008
TEK BAHADUR

!

……….Appellant
Through:Mr.Raman Sawheny, Advocate

versus
$

STATE

^

*

….....Respondent
Through : Mr. M.N. Dudeja, APP

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
By way of this appeal the appellant has taken exception to his
conviction under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code („IPC‟ in short)
as also the sentence of seven years rigorous imprisonment and
payment of fine of Rs.5000/- awarded by the Additional Sessions
Judge, Delhi in Sessions Case No.151/1998.

2.

Relevant facts leading to the prosecution of the appellant-

accused and two others, out of whom one Bharat Bhushan died during
the trial and the other one Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta was acquitted, are
that PW-1 Krishan Lal used to reside at House No.72, Indira Park,
Delhi along with his wife(PW-3 Radha) and daughter Seema. He was
doing the job of welding from his shop in Chander Nagar. The acquitted
accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta was also having a shop of building
material near the shop of PW-1. PW-1 used to keep sarias etc. in the
gali in front of the shop of Jagdish Kumar which used to cause
inconvenience to his customers and the same was objected to by him
and because of that there used to be frequent quarrels between the
two. As per the further prosecution case on 7th November, 87 the
acquitted accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta decided to get rid of Kishan
Lal by getting him killed and for that purpose he hired appellant Tek
Bahadur and paid him Rs.7000/- as a reward for executing the job.
That conspiracy was allegedly hatched at the shop of Jagdish Kumar on
7/11/87 and Krishan Lal has claimed that he had heard both these
accused hatching that conspiracy. The appellant-accused in turn
associated

the

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

deceased

accused

Bharat

Bhushan

for

the

2

accomplishment of the object of the said conspiracy. On the same day
i.e. 7th November, 1987, in the evening at about 7.30 p.m. appellantaccused Tek Bahadur and the deceased accused Bharat Bhushan
came to the house of PW-1 Kishan Lal who at that time was present
there alongwith his wife and daughter. The two accused knocked at
his door and his wife Radha opened the door. Krishan Lal also came to
the door. As soon as the door was opened they saw two boys, aged
about 22-23 years and one of whom boy was a pahari(accused Tek
Bahadur). The pahari looking boy was having a plastic container in his
hand and he threw the liquid which was there in that container on
Krishan Lal, his wife and their daughter Seema who was also around
that place at that time. That liquid was later on found to be Sulphuric
acid. Thereafter both the accused ran away. Somebody from the
neighborhood informed the police and then PW-12 Inspector Rajbir
Sharma, PW-6 Constable Suresh Chand and PW-9 Constable Dayanand
reached there after sometime but before that all the three injured
persons had been removed to JPN hospital. PW-12 then went to JPN
Hospital where the three injured had been medically examined and he
collected their MLCs (Ex.PW-12/B, Ex.PW-10/A&B) which showed acid
injuries on the face of all the three. Since the injured were found to be

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

3

unfit for making any statement PW-12 on the basis of his own
assessment of the incident got FIR (Ex.PW-8/A) registered under
Sections 452/307/324 IPC. On 9.12.87 Krishan Lal gave a statement
to the investigating officer (PW-12) in which he expressed suspicion
that Jeeta @ Jagdish (acquitted accused) could be the person behind
this incident. Jeeta had a shop of building material by the side of his
shop of welding works and many a times altercation had taken place
between him and Jeeta whenever iron rods etc. were kept in front of
his shop. Jeeta had also extended threats to him many a times that he
would teach him a good lesson.

3.

Even though PW-1 Krishan Lal had expressed his suspicion

against the acquitted accused Jagdish @ Jeeta on 9.11.87 the police
did not take any action against him. It appears that on 14.7.88 PW-1
Krishan Lal saw appellant-accused Tek Bahadur sitting in the shop of
Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta and he identified him to be that pahari boy who
had thrown acid on him on 7.11.87. At that time the acquitted-accused
Jagdish Kumar was also sitting at his shop. PW-1 Krishan Lal informed
the police immediately and it is the prosecution case that the police
rushed to the shop of accused Jagdish Kumar and arrested him and on

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

4

the pointing out of PW-1 Krishan Kumar appellant-accused was also
arrested from the shop of Jagdish Kumar.

It also appears that

appellant-accused informed the police regarding his associate who had
also gone to the house of Krishan Lal on day of incident and on the
basis of that information the police then arrested accused Bharat
Bhushan (since deceased on 8.9.88). During the investigation period
the police obtained the medical opinion regarding the nature of injuries
sustained by the three victims.

As per the medical opinion PW-1

Krishan Lal and his wife Radha sustained grievous injuries as a result
of throwing of acid on their faces which had resulted into disfigurement
of their faces. As far as their daughter is concerned, it appears that
she did not sustain serious injury and so she did not get herself reexamined by the doctor in JPN Hospital even though she had been
advised on the day of incident itself to come again. Therefore, the
police could not get the opinion about the nature of her injury.

4.

After conclusion of the investigation, the investigating agency

filed a charge-sheet in the Court against appellant-accused as well as
the acquitted accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta and the deceased
accused Bharat Bhushan @ Kaka.

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

In due course the case was

5

committed to the Sessions Court where the learned Additional
Sessions Judge framed charge under Section 120-B IPC against all the
three accused persons and under Sections 307/34 IPC also against all
three of them. Appellant-accused and the deceased Bharat Bhushan
were additionally charged under Section 452 read with Section 34 IPC.
The prosecution had examined twelve witnesses in all including the two
victims of the incident, namely PW-1 Krishan Lal and his wife PW-3
Smt. Radha. During the pendency of the trial accused Bharat Bhushan
@ Kaka, as noticed already, expired and so the proceedings qua him
stood abated. Appellant-accused and the acquitted accused Jagdish
Kumar @ Jeeta, when examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C. denied the
prosecution allegations in toto and pleaded false implication. As far as
the acquitted accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta is concerned he also
claimed that he had made a complaint against Krishan Lal (PW-1) to
the Secretary of their market association who had tried to bring about
a compromise between them after making Krishan Lal realize that he
was doing wrong by keeping iron rods outside the shop of Jagdish
Kumar. He also claimed that on coming to know about the incident in
question he had visited Krishan Lal in the hospital to enquire about his
well being on the date of incident itself.

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

6

5.

The learned trial court after analysis of prosecution evidence

came to the conclusion that the prosecution had failed to establish its
case against accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta and accordingly
acquitted him of all the charges vide judgment dated 11.5.1999.
However, appellant-accused Tek Bahadur was held guilty for having
committed the offence under Section 307 IPC and for the offences
under Section 120-B and 452 IPC he was acquitted. Vide order dated
15.5.1999 the appellant-accused was awarded seven years rigorous
imprisonment and a fine of Rs.5,000/- with a default stipulation of one
year‟s further rigorous imprisonment.

Feeling aggrieved by the

judgment of conviction and order on sentence the present appeal was
filed.

6.

The star prosecution witnesses in this case on whose testimony

the appellant-accused was convicted are the two victims of the
incident, namely, PW-1 Krishan Lal and PW-3 Smt. Radha. Both these
witnesses had narrated the incident as per the prosecution story and
supported each other‟s version regarding the involvement of the
acquitted accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta as well as the appellant-

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

7

accused. However, the learned trial Court did not accept their evidence
regarding the involvement of accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta. Not only
the learned trial Judge rejected their evidence in respect of accused
Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta but PW-1 Krishan Lal was severely castigated
for having fabricated facts to falsely implicate the acquitted accused.
Since the observation made by the learned trial Court regarding the
evidence of PW-1 Krishan Lal in respect of his allegations against the
acquitted accused were heavily sought to be utilized by the learned
counsel for the appellant to secure his acquittal in this appeal, I would
like to reproduce here itself the exact observation of the learned trial
Judge. In para no.10 of his judgment the learned trial Judge observed
as under:“ On meticulous scrutiny of the testimony of
Krishan Lal, it comes over the record that this
witness had made improvements from his previous
statement made to the police on the account that
Jeeta @ Jeet Singh had given a sum of Rs.7,000/- to
accused Tek Chand and Kaka for throwing acid on
them. It is crystal clear that this witness had tried to
add facts, which were not narrated by him before
the police in his statement made under Section 161
of the Code………….As referred above the said
statement was fabricated by Krishan Lal, with a
psychological hatred, growing in his mind.”

Then, in para no.11 of the judgment the learned trial Judge
further made the following observations against PW-1 Krishan Lal

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

8

“ When the testimony of Krishan Lal was
considered, it became evident that on certain points
this witness has fabricated facts. Admittedly the
testimony of Shri Krishan Lal cannot be said to be
wholly reliable.”

7.

However, even after making the aforesaid observations

regarding the testimony of PW-1 Krishan Lal the learned trial Court
came to the conclusion that the testimony of Krishan Lal fell in the
category of evidence of a partially reliable witness whose evidence
could be relied upon in respect of the other accused if it was
corroborated by other independent evidence. Thereafter, the learned
trial Judge after examining the evidence of PW-3 Smt. Radha, the other
victim of the incident and the wife of PW-1 Krishan Lal, came to the
conclusion that the evidence of PW-1 Krishan Lal was fully
corroborated by the evidence of his wife as far as the involvement of
appellant-accused Tek Bahadur was concerned. The testimony of PW3 Radha was found to be wholly reliable. Holding so, the learned trial
Court held the case against the appellant-accused fully established for
the offence under Section 307 IPC.

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

9

8.

It was submitted by Shri Raman Sawhney, learned counsel for

the appellant that the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside for
two strong reasons. The first reason was that the prosecution had not
conducted any Test Identification Parade after the arrest of appellantaccused to have his identify fixed as one of the culprits and in the
absence of prior Test Identification Parade the identification of
appellant-accused for the first time in Court by PW-1 Krishan Lal and
his wife PW-3 Smt. Radha was valueless and based upon dock
identification alone. The appellant-accused could not have been held
guilty. In support of the submission that absence of prior Test
Identification Parade in the present case was fatal for the prosecution
learned counsel placed reliance upon a few decisions of the Apex
Court reported as 1999 (3) SCC 54, “Vijayan v. State of Kerala”, 1979
(3) SCC 319, “Kanan & Ors. v. State of Kerala”, AIR 1998 SC 1922,
“Shaikh Umar Ahmed Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra”, 2004 SCC (Crl.)
185, “Devinder Singh & Anr. v. State of Himachal Pradesh”, 2004 SCC
(Crl.) 93, “Joseph v. State of Kerala” and 2006 (1) SCC 600, “D.
Gopalakrishnan v. Sadanand Naik & Ors.”.

The other reason put forth

by the learned counsel for the appellant for securing the acquittal of
the appellant was that the learned trial Judge himself having severely

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

10

castigated the star witness Krishan Lal for his fabricating facts to
secure conviction of the acquitted accused Jagdish Kumar@ Jeeta
could not have held the appellant-accused guilty relying upon his
evidence. It was also contended by Mr. Sawhney that nowhere from
the prosecution evidence it gets established as to how and on what
basis the appellant-accused came to be arrested for his involvement in
the present incident and in the absence of any evidence to that effect
also the entire prosecution case against him also should have been
viewed with suspicion and considered by the trial court to be highly
doubtful.

9.

Per contra, learned Additional Public Prosecutor supported the

conviction of the appellant by the trial Court and submitted that there
being no infirmity with the reasoning given by the trial Court regarding
the involvement of appellant-accused no interference is called for in
this appeal. Regarding the absence of Test Identification Parade the
submission of learned Prosecutor was that Test Identification Parade
was not conducted in this case since the appellant-accused was
apprehended at the instance of victim himself, namely, PW-1 Krishan

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

11

Lal and further that even though PW-1 Krishan Lal had during his crossexamination on behalf of accused Bharat Bhushan (since deceased)
had denied having got the appellant-accused Tek Bahadur and the
acquitted accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta arrested but despite that the
prosecution allegation against the appellant-accused had stood fully
established from the evidence of the two victims of the incident which
according to him was in fact wholly reliable even in respect of
acquitted accused. Mr. Dudeja also contended that even though the
State had not filed any appeal against the acquittal of accused Jagdish
Kumar @ Jeeta this Court can still disagree with the observations of
learned trial Court to the effect that PW-1 Krishan Lal had fabricated
facts to implicate acquitted accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta and come
to an independent conclusion that the evidence of PW-1 Krishan Lal
was wholly reliable and he had not fabricated any facts to falsely
implicate any one. Mr. Dudeja also cited one judgment of the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court reported as AIR 1998 SC 1376 “George & Ors. Vs. State
of Kerala & Anr.” to seek support for his submission that non-holding of
Test Identification Parade even in respect of accused who is a stranger
for the eye-witnesses of an incident is not always fatal for the

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

12

prosecution. Mr. Dudeja drew my special attention to the following
observation of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in this judgment.:“25.
That brings us to the question whether the
ground canvassed by the trial Court for rejection of
her evidence regarding identification of the
appellants, whom she, admittedly, did not know
from before, as the assailants are improper or not.
So far as the first ground is concerned, law is well
settled that identification of an accused in Court is
the substantive evidence of the person identifying
and his earlier identification in a T.I. parade
corroborates the same. In other words, want of
evidence of earlier identification in a T.I. parade
does not affect the admissibility of the evidence of
identification in court.”

10.

I have given my thoughtful consideration to the rival

submissions and with those submissions in mind I have examined the
prosecution evidence also and on an independent analysis thereof I
find myself in full agreement with the learned counsel for the appellant
that this accused also deserves to be acquitted. In these kind of cases
where there is a murderous attack on somebody by a total stranger
the most crucial aspect which needs to be examined by a criminal
Court is as to how the person who has been sent up for trial was picked
up by the police and booked for the crime. If the prosecution fails to
bring any cogent evidence on record during the trial to justify the arrest
itself of the accused the entire prosecution becomes suspect. In the
Crl. A. No. 285/1999

13

present case, as noticed already, the appellant-accused, as per the
prosecution case, was arrested at the instance of the victim of the
incident, namely, PW-1 Krishan Lal on 14/07/88 i.e. after about eight
months of the incident when he happened to see the appellantaccused sitting at the shop of the acquitted accused. PW-1 had
informed the police and then both these accused were arrested on
14/07/88 at the instance of PW-1. That was, however, the position
during the investigation stage and when the stage came during the
trial in Court for the prosecution to establish the factum of arrest of the
appellant-accused on the pointing of PW-1 this witness flatly refused to
accept that. When he was being cross-examined he categorically
claimed that he had not seen the appellant-accused and the acquitted
accused arrested and had in fact seen the appellant-accused at the
police station after the incident. Even the investigating officer has not
deposed as to how he could arrest the appellant-accused and at whose
instance. He has simply stated during his evidence that he arrested the
appellant-accused and the acquitted accused. In the absence of any
evidence justifying the very arrest of the appellant-accused his
involvement in the incident definitely becomes doubtful. Unfortunately,
the learned trial Court did not address itself to this aspect of the matter

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

14

which should have been done and this crucial question as to how and
on what basis the prosecution was able to justify the arrest of accused
Tek Bahadur from the evidence of its witnesses should have been
answered. Even during the course of hearing in this appeal learned
Prosecutor while defending the impugned judgment could not point out
any evidence which could show that the appellant‟s arrest was on
some basis. His main contention was that this deficiency in the
prosecution evidence was not fatal in view of the reliable and
trustworthy evidence of the two victims of the incident and their
evidence had been rightly accepted by the trial Court in respect of the
appellant-accused. However, I am unable to persuade myself to accept
this submission of the learned prosecutor. The prosecution cannot
succeed simply on the basis of identification evidence of the victim of
some incident without establishing as to how the accused who was a
total stranger to the victim came to be arrested. The police just cannot
pick up anybody from the street and prosecute him for some crime.

11.

There is another reason also for doubting the genuineness of

the arrest of the appellant-accused in this case. As noticed already, the

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

15

prosecution case is that the appellant-accused and the acquitted
accused Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta were both arrested together on
14.07.88. As also noticed already, two days after the incident PW-1
Krishan Lal had expressed his suspicion against the acquitted accused
Jagdish Kumar @ Jeeta who was having a shop near the shop of PW-1.
The police, however, did not arrest Jagdish Kumar for about eight
months and there is no reason forthcoming for that delay and there is
also no explanation as to what prompted the police to arrest him all of
a sudden on 14.07.88. Thus, for this reason also the prosecution case
becomes doubtful even in respect of the involvement of the appellantaccused.

12.

I am also unable to agree with the submission of the learned

prosecutor that PW-1 Krishan Lal was a wholly reliable witness.
Although the learned trial Court has found him to be partly reliable and
because of that reason his testimony has been relied upon for
convicting the appellant-accused but in my view considering the fact
that he has been found by the trial Court itself to have fabricated facts
to falsely rope in the acquitted accused Jagdish Kumar and that he had

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

16

disowned even the factum of arrest of the appellant-accused on his
pointing out he definitely is a wholly unreliable witness and no reliance
whatsoever could have been placed on his testimony.

13.

PW-1 Krishan Lal having been held to be wholly unreliable

witness and his having denied to have got arrested the appellantaccused and there being no other evidence whatsoever adduced by the
prosecution to justify his arrest even the evidence of PW-3 Smt. Radha,
the other victim of the incident who also identified the appellantaccused as the culprit who had thrown acid on her, cannot be of any
help to the prosecution case. She also did not know the appellantaccused before the incident and in the absence of prior test
identification parade her identifying the appellant-accused in Court
after about eight months of the incident does not inspire any
confidence and more particularly when she herself stated during her
cross-examination that the accused persons had switched off the light
in connivance with the DESU officials and further that even the street
light was not there at the time of the incident in their street and if her
evidence is also excluded from consideration there remains nothing in

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

17

the prosecution evidence on the basis of which the conviction of the
appellant can be maintained.

14.

In view of the foregoing, this appeal is allowed and the

impugned judgment to the extent it holds the appellant-accused guilty
is set-aside and consequently the appellant-accused stands acquitted.

P.K.BHASIN,J
March 25, 2008
sh

Crl. A. No. 285/1999

18

