*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 221 OF 1997

%
#
!

Date of Decision: 22nd February, 2008
RAM CHANDER SHARMA @ PANDIT
....Appellant
Through: Mr. Bahar U Barqi, Advocate

versus
$
^

*

THE STATE

....Respondent
Through : Mr. M. N. Dudeja, APP

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(Yes)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(Yes)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(Yes)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
This appeal arises out of the judgment and order dated
27.02.1997 delivered by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Delhi (Designated Court under Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic

Substances Act, 1985) in Sessions Case No. 128/95 whereby the
appellant has been convicted under Section 21 of the NDPS Act,
and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 12 years and
also to pay a fine of Rs. 1,00,000 and to further undergo one year
rigorous imprisonment in case of default of payment of fine.

2.

The case set-forth by the prosecution against the appellant is

that an eye was being kept on the persons meeting the terrorists
detained in Tihar Jail by the officials of Operation Cell of Delhi
Police and during the surveillance it was revealed that some jail
warders were engaged in the sale of drugs inside jail to the
inmates. On 15.07.95 at 5.00 p.m. secret informer gave an
information on telephone to Inspector Surender Singh (PW-8)
posted in the Operation Cell and who was deputed for the purpose
of keeping a vigil at the movements of terrorists in the Jail, that
one jail warden Ram Chander Sharma, appellant herein, had gone
to get „smack‟ from somewhere and would come to Hari Nagar Bus
Depot after about 2 ½ hours with huge quantity of „smack‟. ACP
P.P. Singh(PW-9) was informed of that secret information which
was recorded as DD No. 25 at the Operation Cell. A raiding party
was then organized under the supervision of Insp. Surender Kumar
Crl.A. 221/1997

2

(PW-10) who then along with other police officials reached Hari
Nagar Bus Depot at 6.15 p.m. where the secret informer was
present there. Anuj Kumar (PW-3), a public person, agreed to
become a witness and so was joined in the raid team. ACP P.P.
Singh(PW-9) also arrived at that place at 7.00 p.m. and at about
7.30 p.m. the appellant got down from the bus and started
proceeding towards the jail on Jail Road. He was apprehended at
the instance of the informer. It is the further case of the
prosecution that that the appellant was informed in writing vide
notice Ex. PW-8/A, as required under Section 50 of the NDPS Act,
that the police had information that he was having smack in his
possession and he was to be searched and in case he wanted his
search to be conducted in the presence of a Magistrate or some
Gazetted Officer necessary arrangement could be made to arrange
the presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer as it was his
legal right. The appellant, however, did not exercise the option of
search either before a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer and signed
the notice under Section 50 declining the aforesaid offer made to
him by the police officer PW-10 SI Surender Kumar. PW-10 then
offered himself to the appellant to be searched before his search.
The appellant searched PW-10 and did not find anything in his
Crl.A. 221/1997

3

possession. Then person of the appellant was searched by PW 10
SI Surender Kumar upon which he was found to be in possession of
500 gms of „smack‟ concealed in a polythene bag „thaili‟ tied to his
waist. Out of that smack 10 gms of smack was taken and sealed in
a pullanda with the seal of “SS” and the remaining quantity of
smack was sealed in a separate parcel which was also sealed with
the seal of “SS”. CFSL form was also filled up on the spot and on
that form ACP P.P. Singh affixed his seal “PP”. The seal after use
was handed over to the public witness Anuj (PW-3). A rukka was
then prepared by SI Surender Kumar and sent to Police Station
Hari Nagar through ASI Nand Ram along with the sealed pullandas
and CFSL form which were kept with the SHO (PW-6) for safe
custody and the SHO put his own seal also on the pullandas. FIR
no. 470/95 (Ex. PW-1/A) was registered at Hari Nagar Police
Station for the offence punishable under Section 21 of the Act.
During investigation the sealed packet containing 10 grams of the
powder recovered from the possession of the appellant was sent to
CFSL for analysis and on examination that powder was found to be
„heroin‟. CFSL report (Ex. PX) to that effect was obtained. After
completion of investigation the appellant was charged-sheeted and
in due course he was tried by the designated Court under the NDPS
Crl.A. 221/1997

4

Act for the offence under Section 21 of the NDPS Act.

3.

Prosecution had examined 11 witnesses to prove the guilt of

the appellant. At the time of recording of the statement under
Section 313 Cr.P.C. the appellant had taken a plea that he had
been taken away from his house on 12.07.95 by Inspector
Surender Singh of Operation Cell and there he was kept upto
15.07.95 and then falsely implicated in this case. In defence, he
examined one police official from Hari Nagar Police Station who
proved on DD no. 6A dated 15.07.95 which was an information
given to the police by the son of the appellant that the appellant
was missing from 12.07.95. During the trial, Anuj Kumar (PW-3),
who was joined as an independent witness to the search conducted
on the person of the appellant, had turned hostile. However, the
learned trial Court relied upon the testimony of police officials and
on the basis of the testimony of those witnesses of recovery of
smack from the appellant found the appellant guilty. Feeling
aggrieved by the judgment of the trial Court holding him guilty, the
appellant filed this appeal.

4.

Learned counsel for the appellant had submitted that there

Crl.A. 221/1997

5

was gross violation of the provisions of Sections 50, 52, 55 and 57
of the NDPS Act and so the conviction of the appellant cannot be
sustained.

5.

Learned APP for the State, on the other hand, submitted that

there was no infirmity in the judgment passed by the learned trial
Court and this appeal deserved to be dismissed.

6.

I shall now consider the submission of the learned counsel

for the appellant regarding non-compliance of the provisions of
Section 50 of NDPS Act.
Section 50 of NDPS Act reads as under:1)
When any officer duly authorized under Section
42 is about to search any person under the provisions
of Section 41, Section 42 or Section 43 he shall if such
persons so requires, take such person without
unnecessary delay to the nearest Gazetted Officer of
any of the departments mentioned in Section 42 or to
the nearest Magistrate.
2)
If such requisition is made, the officer may
detain the person until he can bring him before the
Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate referred to in subsection (1).
3)
The Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate before
whom any such person is brought shall, if he sees no

Crl.A. 221/1997

6

reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge the
person but otherwise shall direct that search be made.
4)
No female shall be searched by any one
excepting a female.
5)
When an officer duly authorized under Section
42 has reason to believe that it is not possible to take
the person to be searched to the nearest Gazetted
Officer or Magistrate without the possibility of the
person to be searched parting with possession of any
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, or controlled
substance or article or document, he may, instead of
taking such person to the nearest Gazetted Officer or
Magistrate, proceed to search the person as provided
under Sec.100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973(2 of 1974).
6)
After a search is conducted under sub-section
(5), the officer shall record the reasons for such belief
which necessitated such search and within seventy-two
hours send a copy thereof to his immediate official
superior.

7.

In this case the appellant was searched by PW-10 SI

Surender Kumar. Section 43 of NDPS Act provides that any officer
of any of the departments mentioned in Section 42 can detain and
search any person whom he has reason to believe to have
committed an offence punishable under the said Act.

Police

department is one of the departments specified in Section 42
whose officers above the rank of a constable can detain any person
and conduct his search if there is a reason to believe that he has
Crl.A. 221/1997

7

committed an offence punishable under the NDPS Act. As far as
the plea of non-compliance of the provisions of Section 50 of the
NDPS Act is concerned, the submission of learned counsel was that
in this case the appellant was not informed by the police officer
(PW-10) who had conducted his search that he had a right to be
searched in the presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer but
all that was told to him was that if he wanted to be searched in the
presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer arrangement could
be made to ensure presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer
but that offer, according to the learned counsel, did not satisfy the
requirement of law.

Reliance in this regard was placed on a

Constitution Bench decision of Hon‟ble Supreme Court in “ State of
Punjab vs Baldev Singh”, (1999) 6 SCC 172 and also on a latter
judgment in “K.Mohanan Vs. State of Kerala”, (2000) SCC Criminal
1228.

An earlier judgment of the Apex Court reported as 1996

Cri.L.J. 3996, “State of Punjab v. Labh Singh etc.” was also cited.
In these decisions it was no doubt held by the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court that if a person suspected of being in possession of some
narcotic substance, like, smack etc. is to be searched he has to be
informed by the officer who is to conduct the search before
searching him that he has a right to be searched in the presence
Crl.A. 221/1997

8

of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer. Now, in the present case the
appellant was told in writing by the search officer PW-10 SubInspector Surender Kumar vide notice Ex.PW-8/A, purporting to be
a notice under Section 50 of the NDPS Act that it was being
suspected that he was is possession of smack and he was to be
searched and he was also asked whether he desired to be
searched in the presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer. The
appellant declined to avail of that offer and his statement to that
effect was also recorded. All this was deposed to by PW-10 SubInspector Surender Kumar, who had conducted his search, as well
as PW-8 Inspector Surender Singh, PW-9 ACP P.P.Singh and PW-11
ASI Nand Ram who were also members of the raid party. No
attempt was made before this Court by the learned counsel for the
appellant to discredit the evidence of these witnesses on this
aspect of the matter. Even before the trial Court in their crossexamination it was not suggested that the appellant was not given
the notice Ex.PW-8/A or that the appellant had not declined the
offer given to him.

8.

There is no doubt that the appellant was not specifically told

before his search that „he had a right‟ to be searched in the
Crl.A. 221/1997

9

presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer but the question is
whether the failure of the search officer to inform the appellant
specifically, either orally or in writing, that he had such a right
would amount to non-compliance of the provisions of Section 50 of
the NDPS Act. In this regard, learned APP had cited a recent
judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in “Prabha Shankar Dubey
vs State of Madhya Pradesh”, AIR 2004 Supreme Court 486,
wherein also an exactly similar notice, as in the present case, i.e.
Ex.PW-8/A, was served upon the accused of that case before his
search by the search officer. An argument was advanced on behalf
of the accused of that case, who had been convicted under Section
18 of the NDPS Act, that the

search of the accused

was

conducted without informing him of his right to have search
conducted in the presence of a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer
and so there was non-compliance of the requirements of Section
50 of the NDPS Act and in support of this argument the
Constitution Bench judgment in Baldev Singh‟s case (supra), which
has been cited before me also, was relied upon. Hon‟ble Supreme
Court after considering the observations in the said Constitution
Bench decision repelled the argument of non-compliance of
Section 50. This is how the Hon‟ble Supreme Court dealt with this
Crl.A. 221/1997

10

ground of attack in para nos. 7 to 13 of its judgment :-

“7. It is not disputed that there is no specific form
prescribed or intended for conveying the information
required to be given under S.50. What is necessary is
that the accused(suspect) should be made aware of the
existence of his right to be searched in presence of one
of the officers named in the section itself. Since no
specific mode or manner is prescribed or intended, the
Court has to see the substance and not the form of
intimation. Whether the requirements of S.50 have
been met is a question which is to be decided on the
facts of each case and there cannot be any sweeping
generalization and/or strait-jacket formula.
8.
Section 50 does not involve any selfincrimination. It is only a procedure required to protect
the rights of an accused(suspect) being made aware of
the existence of his right to be searched if so required by
him before any of the specified officers. The object
seems to be to ensure that at a later stage the
accused(suspect) does not take a plea that the articles
were planted on him or that those were not recovered
from him.
To put it differently, fair play and
transparency in the process of search has been given
the primacy.
In Raghbir Singh v. State of Haryana
(1996 (2) SCC 201), the true essence of S. 50 was
highlighted in the following manner:
“8.
The very question that is referred to
us came to be considered by a Bench of two
learned Judges on 22-1-1996 in Manohar Lal v.
State of Rajasthan (Crl. MP No. 138/96) in SLP
(Crl.) No. 184/1996). One of us (Verma, J.),
speaking for the Bench, held:
“It is clear from S. 50 of the NDPS Act that
the option given thereby to the accused is only to
choose whether he would like to be searched by
the officer making the search or in the presence
of the nearest available Gazetted Officer or the
nearest available Magistrate. The choice of the
nearest Gazetted Officer or the nearest
Magistrate has to be exercised by the officer
making the search and not by the accused.”

Crl.A. 221/1997

11

9. We concur with the view taken in Manohar
Lal‟s case(supra).
10. Finding a person to be in possession of
articles which are illicit under the provisions of
the Act has the consequence of requiring him to
prove that he was not in contravention of its
provisions and it renders him liable to severe
punishment. It is, therefore, that the Act affords
the person to be searched a safeguard. He may
require the search to be conducted in the
presence of a senior officer. The senior officer
may be a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate,
depending upon who is conveniently available.
11. The option under S. 50 of the Act, as it
plainly reads, is only of being searched in the
presence of such senior officer.
There is no
further option of being searched in the presence
of either a Gazetted Officer or of being searched
in the presence of a Magistrate. The use of the
word „nearest‟ in S.50 is relevant. The search
has to be conducted at the earliest and, once the
person to be searched opts to be searched in the
presence of such senior officer, it is for the police
officer who is to conduct the search to conduct it
in the presence of whoever is the most
conveniently available Gazetted Officer or
Magistrate.”
9.
As has been highlighted in Baldev
Singh‟s case (supra) it has to be seen and gauzed
whether the requirements of S.50 have been met.
Section 50 in reality provides for additional safeguards
which are not specifically provided by the statute. The
stress is on the adoption of a reasonable, fair and just
procedure. No specific words are necessary to be used
to convey existence of the right. In the case at hand the
information was conveyed in the following manner:
“By way of this notice you are informed that
we have received information that you are
illegally carrying opium with you, therefore, we
are required to search your scooter and you for
this purpose. You would like to give me search
or you would like to be searched by any Gazetted
Officer or by a Magistrate.”
Crl.A. 221/1997

12

In response to the aforesaid intimation each of the
accused gave in writing as follows:
“Sir, I have no objection if you search me or my
scooter.”
Sd/Ram Vilas
3-11-1995

Sd/Prabhashankar
3-11-98

Sd/at 14.20 p.m.
Thana
Shahjaibad
at 14.25 p.m.
Thana Shahjaibad”

10.
The notice in the presence case has great
similarity with what has conveyed to the accused in
Joseph Fernandez v. State of Goa (2000 (1) SCC 707).
It was inter alia held in the said case as follows:
“2.
Learned counsel tried to highlight a point
that S.50 of the Act has not strictly been complied with
by P.W.8, the officer who conducted the search.
According to the learned counsel for the appellant the
searching officer should have told the person who was
subjected to search that he had a right to be searched
in the presence of a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate.
In this case P.W.8 has deposed that she told the
appellant that if he wished he could be searched in the
presence of the Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate to
which the appellant had no favourably reciprocated.
According to us the said offer is a communication
about the information that the appellant has a right to
be searched so. It must be remembered that the
searching officer had only S.50 of the Act then in mind
unaided by the interpretation placed on it by the
Constitution Bench. Even then the searching officer
informed him that „if you wish you may be searched in
the presence of a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate.”
This according to us is in substantial compliance with
the requirement of S.50. We do not agree with the
contention that there was non-compliance with the
mandatory provision contained in S.50 of the Act.”
(Underlined for emphasis)
Though, learned counsel for the appellants
submitted that this was a case where the Court
erroneously held that substantial compliance would be
sufficient, we find that the underlined portion is what
Crl.A. 221/1997

13

was held by the Court to be information of the right.
The offer in the present case is almost a replica of
what was said in that case.
11.
Though there cannot be any quarrel with the
general principle highlighted by learned counsel for the
appellants that if a thing is required to be done in a
particular way it should be done in that way, the
position here is different in view of our conclusions that
the requirements of S.50 of the Act were sufficiently
complied with. The general principle as noted has
been stated illuminatingly in Nazir Ahmad v. KingEmperor (AIR 1936 PC 253), and later by this Court in
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Singhara Singh and others
(1964 (4) SCC 485). What the concerned officer is
required to do is to convey about the choice the
accused had. The accused(suspect) has to be told in a
way that he becomes aware that the choice is his and
not of the concerned officer, even though there is no
specific form. The use of the word „right‟ at relevant
places in the decision of Baldev Singh‟s case(supra)
seems to be to lay effective emphasis that it is not by
the grace of the officer the choice has to be given but
more by way of a right in the „suspect‟ at that stage to
be given such a choice and the inevitable
consequences that have to follow by transgressing it.
12.
The use of the expression „substantial
compliance‟ was made in the background that the
searching officer had S.50 in mind and it was unaided
by the interpretation placed on it by the Constitution
Bench in Baldev Singh‟s case (supra). A line or a word
in a judgment cannot be read in isolation or as if
interpreting a statutory provision, to impute a different
meaning to the observations.
13.
Above being the position, we find no substance
in the plea that there was non-compliance with the
requirements of S.50 of the Act.”

In my view, this decision of the Supreme Court applies on all
fours to the facts of the case in hand and in view thereof the
argument of non-compliance of the requirements of Section 50 is
Crl.A. 221/1997

14

rejected since in the present case the search officer had complied
with the requirement of Section 50 when he gave the written notice
Ex. PW-8/A to the appellant. And since the appellant himself had
waived his right to have the search conducted in the presence of a
Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate he could not be permitted to
contend during his trial that that there was non-compliance of
Section 50.

9.

Learned counsel for the appellant had also submitted that

there is non-compliance of Sections 52 and 57 also of the NDPS
Act and conviction ought to be set aside on this ground also.
Section 52 reads as under:
“(1) Any officer arresting a person under Section 41,
section 42, section 43 or section 44 shall ,as soon as
may be, inform him of the grounds of such arrest.
(2) Every person arrested and article seized under
warrant issued under sub-section (1) of section 41 shall
be forwarded without unnecessary delay to the
Magistrate by whom the warrant was issued.
(3) Every person arrested and article seized under subsection (2) of section 41, section 42, section 43 or
section 44 shall be forwarded without unnecessary
delay to –
(a) the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station,
or
(b) the officer empowered under section 53.
(4) The authority or officer to whom any person or
article is forwarded under sub-section (2) or subCrl.A. 221/1997

15

section(3) shall, with all convenient dispatch, take such
measures as may be necessary for the disposal
according to law of such person or article.”

Section 57 reads as under:“Whenever any person makes any arrest or seizure
under this Act, he shall, within forty eight hours next
after such arrest or seizure, make a full report of all the
particulars of such arrest of seizure to his immediate
official superior.”

Before I proceed further I would like to mention here that the
requirements envisaged under Sections 52 and 57 of the NDPS Act
are not mandatory in nature and are only directory. This was held
to be so by the Apex Court in “State of Punjab v. Balbir Singh”,
(1994) 3 SCC 299. Para 25 of the said judgment deals with this
aspect and the same is reproduced here under:
“(6) The provisions of Sections 52 and 57 which deal
with the steps to be taken by the officers after making
arrest or seizure under Sections 41 to 44 are by
themselves not mandatory. If there is non-compliance or
if there are lapses like delay etc. then the same has to
be examined to see whether any prejudice has been
caused to the accused and such failure will have a
bearing on the appreciation of evidence regarding arrest
or seizure as well as on merits of the case.”

10.

It was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that

the testimony of Inspector Bharat Singh (PW-6) who was the S.H.O.
of Hari Nagar Police Station those days shows that the appellant
was not produced before him on 15.07.1995 and that only the case
Crl.A. 221/1997

16

property was produced before him by ASI Nand Ram(PW-11). As
regards violation of the provisions of Section 57 it was contended
by the learned counsel for the appellant that no report had been
prepared as contemplated under Section 57 and submitted by the
search officer to his superior officer. As far as contention regarding
non-production of the accused before the SHO of Hari nagar is
concerned, there is no doubt that the concerned SHO who was
examined as PW-6 has not claimed in his evidence that the accused
was produced before him and has simply deposed about production
of the case property before him by ASI Nand Ram of operation
cell(PW-11) but for this reason the prosecution case cannot be
viewed with suspicion. PW-11 ASI Nand Ram had deposed in his
chief-examination that after arrest of the accused and preparation
of rukka etc. he had gone to Hari Nagar Police Station along with
the case property and there he had produce the sealed parcels,
CFSL form, copy of seizure memo before the SHO. In crossexamination he was asked whether the accused was taken to the
police station he had replied that after the arrest of the accused he
was taken to the police station. Thereafter it was not suggested to
him that the accused was not taken to the Hari Nagar police station
as was being claimed by him. In these circumstances, just because
Crl.A. 221/1997

17

the SHO did not depose that the accused was produced before him
it cannot be said that there was non compliance of the provisions of
Section 52(3) of the NDPS Act, as was the submission made by the
learned counsel for the appellant.

11.

As far as the argument regarding non-compliance of Section

57 is concerned, the same is also liable to be rejected in view of the
fact that when the appellant was apprehended and smack was
recovered by SI Surender Kumar two of his superior officers,
namely, PW-9 ACP P.P. Singh and PW-8 Inspector Surender Singh
were present at the spot as members of the raid team and the
documents prepared at the spot viz notice under Section 50 of the
NDPS Act (Ex. PW-8/A) and seizure memo (Ex. PW-8/B) were signed
by them also. So, there was no non compliance of Section 57 of the
NDPS Act.

12.

It was then contended by the learned counsel for the

appellant that in this case the public witness PW3 Anuj Kumar not
having supported the prosecution case regarding recovery of
smack from the possession of the appellant and his having
claimed that he had simply been asked by the policemen to sign
Crl.A. 221/1997

18

certain documents stating that some quarrel had taken place the
evidence of police officials should be viewed with suspicion and so
rejected. There is no doubt that this public witness joined at the
time of raid claimed so before the trial Court but for this reason the
evidence of police officials who have deposed about the recovery of
smack from the possession of the appellant cannot be rejected.
PW-3 had in his cross-examination by the public prosecutor had
admitted his signatures on the notice Ex.PW-8/A as well as on the
seizure memos which clearly recite that smack was recovered from
the possession of the appellant in his(PW-3‟s) possession. I have no
reason to believe that the policemen would have obtained his
signatures on blank papers without allowing him to go through the
contents of the memos. It is apparent that this witness was not
telling the truth before the Court. As far as the evidence of the
witnesses of recovery of smack from the possession of the
appellant, namely, PWs 8,9, 10 and 11, is concerned I have found
the same to be quite reliable and during the course of arguments
no infirmity in the evidence of any one of them was highlighted by
the learned counsel for the appellant. All of them had deposed
consistently regarding the apprehension of the appellant, his
search and recovery of smack from his possession, as is the case
Crl.A. 221/1997

19

of the prosecution.

13.

As far as the plea of the appellant-accused that he had been

taken away from his house on 12.07.95 by SI Surender Kumar and
kept at the Operation Cell, Lodhi Road till 15.07.95 Is concerned
the same has not even been attempted to be substantiated by the
appellant-accused. If actually he had been taken away by the
police illegally from his house he could have examined some
member of his family but he has not done that. So it cannot be
accepted that the appellant was confined illegally at the Operation
Cell by the police from 12.07.95 to 15.07.95. The appellant did not
examine his son who allegedly had lodged a missing report at the
Hari Nagar Police Station on 15.07.95. So, even the missing report
cannot be said to have been proved to have actually been lodged
by son of the appellant. In any case, even in the missing report
being relied upon by the appellant i.e. Ex. DW-1/1 it was not
claimed that the appellant had been taken away by SI Surender
Kumar and it was simply reported that the appellant had left his
house on 12.07.95 but had not come back till 10 a.m. on
15.07.95. The learned Trial Court on this aspect of the matter has
rightly observed that if the appellant had actually gone missing
Crl.A. 221/1997

20

from his house on 12.07.95 the missing report would have been
lodged on that day itself and not after three days. I am therefore of
the view that the appellant took a false plea before the Trial Court
and that conduct of his adds further strength to the prosecution
case.

14.

Having rejected the contentions raised by the learned

counsel on behalf of the appellant I am inclined to hold that there
is no infirmity in the judgment of the learned trial Court whereby
the appellant was held guilty and convicted under Section 21 of the
NDPS Act. This appeal being devoid of any merits is liable to be
dismissed and is hereby dismissed.

P.K.BHASIN,J
February 22, 2008
sh

Crl.A. 221/1997

21

