*
%

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
C.S. (OS) No. 1475 of 2007

+

#
!

Date of Decision: 28th April, 2008

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
...Plaintiff
Through: Mr. V.N.Kaura and Mr.
Paramjeet Benipal, Advocates
versus

$
^

Hindustan Petroleum Management
Staff Association & Ors.
Through : None

*

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

...Defendants

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? (No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT (Oral)
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The plaintiff has filed this suit for restraining the defendants
who represent the employees employed with the plaintiff
Corporation from going on definite strike as threatened by them in

their strike notice dated 04-07-2006.

2.

Briefly stated, facts necessary for the disposal of this suit

are that the plaintiff is a Government of India undertaking
engaged in the business of refining and marketing petroleum
products in India and it supplies petroleum products to Indian
Defence Services and also for domestic and international civil
aviation etc. It has been declared to be a public utility service by
the Central Government vide its notification dated 19-06-2007.
Defendant no. 1 is the Officers’ Association representing the
officers of the plaintiff Corporation and defendant no. 2 is its
President. Defendant no. 3 is the Apex Body of the Officers
Association of public sector undertakings in the Oil sector and
defendant no. 4 is its Convener. It is averred by the plaintiff in the
plaint that a pay commission under the chairmanship of Justice S.
Mohan (retired Judge of the Supreme Court) was appointed in
1996 by the Government to examine the existing structure of pay,
allowances, perquisites and related benefits in respect of the
Central Government and Public Sector Undertakings. The
recommendations
CS(OS) No. 1475/2007

of

the

Committee

were

submitted
2

on

31.10.1998 and pursuant thereto Government came out with
some guidelines for pay revision in 1999. The defendants,
however, protested against the implementation of those
guidelines and decided to go on strike in case of non-fulfillment of
their demands by 25.08.06. Apprehending that its employees may
go on strike as proposed the plaintiff filed an injunction suit in this
Court in which ad-interim stay against the employees going on
strike was passed. That suit (being CS(OS) no. 1684/2006) was
later on withdrawn as the cause of action did not survive because
of the employees’ strike not taking place.

3.

It is further averred by the plaintiff that the Ministry of

Petroleum and Natural Gas constituted a Committee with regard
to the grievances of the defendant no. 3 Association but without
waiting for this Committee’s report the defendant no. 3 again
reagitated

its demands for immediate ad hoc relief of wage

revision etc. vide its resolution dated 26.06.07 and also decided to
start its agitation including indefinite strike in public sector
petroleum industry w.e.f. 21/08/07. A notice of the said
resolution was forwarded to Dy. Chief Labour Commissioner
CS(OS) No. 1475/2007

3

(Central) by the plaintiff Corporation vide its letter dated
11.07.2007. The Regional Labour Commissioner, Mumbai took
cognizance and initiated conciliation proceedings and first
meeting was fixed for 17.08.2007 vide its notice dated 02.08.07
addressed to the plaintiff and defendants wherein their attention
was also drawn to the provisions of Sections 22(1 & 2) and 23 of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the defendants were
requested not to resort to go on strike during the pendency of
conciliation proceedings. Despite that the defendants gave a
strike notice dated 04.07.2007 threatening to go on indefinite
strike with effect from 21.08.2007.

4.

The plaintiff then filed this suit on 14.08.2007 praying for

an injunction restraining the defendants to go on strike. By an
order dated 17.08.2007 this Court restrained the defendants from
going on strike or abetting its agents etc. also from doing that.
The defendants after entering appearance in this case were given
time to file their written statements but they failed to file their
written statements within the given period of time.

The

defendants no. 3 and 4 filed an application under Order XXXIX
CS(OS) No. 1475/2007

4

Rule 4 CPC for vacating the ex-parte injunction granted against
them.

Along with that application certain documents were also

filed one of which was a copy of the minutes of meeting held on
28-02-2005 between the Regional Labour Commissioner, Mumbai
and defendants when they had earlier given a strike notice. When
the matter was taken up for hearing today in Court there was no
appearance on behalf of the defendants. On the last date, i.e. 1712-2007 also none had appeared for defendants.

In these

circumstances it was deemed fit to invoke the provisions of Order
VIII Rule 10 CPC which provides for passing of a judgment
straightaway in case of failure of the defendant to file written
statement within the time permitted by the Court.

5.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that there is a

statutory bar under Section 22 of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 against going on strike by the employees of a public utility
service during the pendency of conciliation proceedings.

My

attention was also drawn to one judgment of the Supreme Court
in

“Syndicate Bank Vs. K. Umesh”, 1994 (V) SCC 572 with

particular reference to the following observations made therein by
CS(OS) No. 1475/2007

5

the Supreme Court:
“ 29.
The strike as a weapon was evolved by
the workers as a form of direct action during their long
struggles with the employers. It is essentially a weapon
of last resort being an abnormal aspect of the employeremployee relationship and involves withdrawal of labour
disrupting production, services and the running of the
enterprise. It is abuse by the labour of their economic
power to bring the employer to see and meet their
viewpoint over the dispute between them. In addition
to the total cessation of work, it takes various forms
such as working to rule, go slow, refusal to work
overtime when it is compulsory and a part of the
contract of employment, “irritation strike” or staying at
work but deliberately doing everything wrong,
“runningsore strike”, i.e., disobeying the lawful orders,
sitdown, stay-in and lie-down strike etc. etc.
The
cessation or stoppage of works whether by the
employees or by the employer is detrimental to the
production and economy and to the well-being of the
society as a whole. It is for this reason that the
industrial legislation while not denying the right of
workmen to strike, has tried to regulate it along with the
right of the employer to lockout and has also provided
machinery for peaceful investigation, settlement,
arbitration and adjudication of the disputes between
them.
Where such industrial legislation is not
applicable, the contract of employment and the service
rules and regulations many times, provide for suitable
machinery for resolution of the disputes. When the law
or the contract of employment or the service rules
provide for machinery to receptive the disputes, resort to
strike or lockout as a direct action is prima facie
unjustified. This is, particularly so when the provisions
of the law or of the contract or of the service rules that
behalf are breached.
For then, the action is also
illegal.”

6.

Since the averments made by the plaintiff in the plaint to

the effect that conciliation proceedings in respect of the demands
CS(OS) No. 1475/2007

6

raised by the employees in public undertakings in the oil sector
including the plaintiff Corporation were initiated on receipt of the
impugned strike notice dated 04-06-2007, as provided under
Section 12 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, have not been
refuted by the defendants the same stand admitted. If that be so,
the plaintiff’s contention that there is a bar under Section 22 of
the Industrial Disputes Act to the employees in a public utility
service going on strike during the conciliation proceedings and
consequently the threatened action of the employees of the
plaintiff Corporation represented by the defendants to go on strike
is illegal appears to be fully justified and the plaintiff Corporation
is entitled to a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
defendants and their office bearers, agents etc. from going on
strike not only during the pendency of the conciliation proceedings
but also for a period of seven days after the conclusion thereof as
provided under Section 23 of the Industrial Disputes Act.

7.

This suit is accordingly decreed and the defendants, their

agents, representatives, office bearers and the employees of the
plaintiff Corporation are restrained from going on strike for the
CS(OS) No. 1475/2007

7

acceptance of the demands of the employees employed with the
plaintiff

Corporation

during

the

pendency

of

conciliation

proceedings in the office of the Regional Labour Commissioner
(Central), Mumbai and also for a period of seven days after the
conclusion of conciliation proceedings whenever the same are
concluded.

8.

Decree be drawn accordingly.

P.K.BHASIN,J
April 28, 2008
sh

CS(OS) No. 1475/2007

8

