*
%

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 158 OF 1999

+

#
!

Date of Decision: 28th March, 2008

MOHD. KAYUM & ANR.

...Appellants
Through: Mr. B. D. Batra, Advocate
versus

$

STATE

...Respondent
Through : Mr. M.N. Dudeja, APP

*

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? (No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:

By this appeal the appellants are assailing the judgment
dated 27.02.1999 and order dated 05.03.1999 passed by the

learned Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi in Session Case No.
55/97 whereby appellant no.2 Asif was convicted under Section
307 IPC and was awarded seven years rigorous imprisonment
and a fine of Rs. 5000/- with a default stipulation to further
undergo one year rigorous imprisonment and

appellant no.1

Kayum was convicted under Section 307 read with Section 34
IPC and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of five years and fine of Rs.2000/- and to undergo further
five months rigorous imprisonment in default of payment of fine.

2.

Factual matrix leading to the conviction of the appellants is

that on 16.07.1996 at about 12.00 noon when the complainant
was working in his factory, appellant Asif, whom he knew earlier,
came to his factory and called him outside the factory on the
pretext of having some discussion. Appellant Asif took the
complainant near the gate of Khadde Wala School where
appellant Kayum was already present. Kayum asked the
complainant as to why he had slapped him yesterday and that he
would teach him a lesson for the same. On saying so Kayum

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

2

caught hold of the complainant and Asif took out a knife from his
dub and caused injuries to the complainant on the left side of his
chest and also on his back. On raising of alarm by the injured the
appellants-accused fled from the spot and thereafter the injured
was removed to the GTB hospital by his elder brother Yunus who
had also reached the spot after hearing the cries of his brother.
On the basis of a rukka (Ex. PW- 13/B) FIR no. 402/96 (Ex. PW3/A) under Sections 307/34 IPC was registered with Seelam pur
police station and investigation was carried out. During
investigation blood stained shirt of injured Fujail was taken into
possession vide memo (Ex. PW-9/A). On 18.7.1996 at about 8.45
p.m. a raiding party was organized comprising of Ct. Satish,
Jeetpal and Head-constable Dayanand by Sub-inspector Krishan
Kumar(PW-13) on receipt of secret information and the
appellants-accused Mohd. Kayum and Asif were apprehended
from gali no. 2, Jamaalon ka baag. On personal search of the
appellant Asif one buttondar knife was recovered and in respect
of that recovery a separate FIR No. 406/96 was registered under
the Arms Act. As per the medical opinion, the complainant-

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

3

injured PW-1 had received grievous injuries inflicted with a sharp
edged weapon.

3.

After completion of investigation the police charge-sheeted

both the appellants and the trial Court tried them for the offence
under Section 307 read with Section 34 IPC. Both the appellants
had pleaded false implication. The Sessions Court after
examining the evidence of the thirteen witnesses examined by
the prosecution held appellant Asif guilty of the offence under
Section 307 IPC and appellant Kayum under Section 307 read
with Section 34 IPC. Being aggrieved by their conviction the
appellants have come up in appeal.

4.

Sh. B.D. Batra, learned counsel appearing for the

appellants, had contended that the conviction of the appellants
cannot be sustained on the sole testimony of the injured witnesscomplainant PW-1 Mohd. Fujail being totally unreliable. He
further contended that the learned trial Court ought not to have
relied upon the testimony of the complainant (PW-1) who himself

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

4

did not support the prosecution case and was declared hostile by
the learned prosecutor since the complainant had not stuck to his
version as given in the FIR which was got registered at his
instance wherein he had clarified that it was Asif who came to
call him in the factory and when he had come out of the factory
Kayum who was standing out caught hold of him and Asif
inflicted injuries on his person with a knife. While in Court he gave
a total contradictory version and claimed that it was accused
Kayum who had stabbed him and no role was assigned to Asif at
all.

5.

On the other hand Shri M.N.Dudeja, learned Additional

Public Prosecutor, supported the judgment of the trial Court and
also the sentences awarded to the two appellants and submitted
that there was no infirmity in the impugned judgment

and

prosecution case stood established despite the fact that injuredcomplainant in his initial statement to the police had ascribed
role of causing injury to appellant Asif and later on in the Court
assigned that role to appellant Kayum.

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

5

6.

After having gone through the testimony of the prosecution

witnesses and particularly that of the injured-complainant (PW-1),
who is the only eye-witness of the incident, I have unhesitatingly
come to the conclusion that the prosecution has failed to prove
its accusations against both the appellants beyond reasonable
doubt. The injured witness, who is normally considered to be a
truthful witness, in the present case, has turned out to be a wholly
unreliable witness. As noticed already, PW-1, Mohd. Fujail, on
whose complaint the case was registered, had stated in his first
information statement to the police that on the day of incident at
about 12.00 noon when he was working in his factory appellant
Asif had come inside and took him out and brought him near
Khadde Wala School where appellant-accused

Kayum was

already present. Both the appellants then, as per complainant’s
version in FIR, started quarreling with him and Kayum caught
hold of him and Asif took out a churri and stabbed him on the
left side of his chest and also on the back. However, before the
court the complainant deposed in his chief-examination that

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

6

appellant Kayum had come inside his factory and had brought
him outside the factory on the pretext of having some talks and
took him to Khadde Wal School where appellant Asif was already
present at the spot and then quarrel ensued between them.
Kayum took out a knife and attacked him with a knife and that
although he wanted to stab him on his chest but he could not do
that as he(PW-1) had turned around to save himself and in that
process the knife hit him on the back side and on his raising hue
and cry both the accused fled away from the spot. No role was
assigned to appellant Asif, who as per the FIR was the actual
assailant. He also denied having lodged the FIR of the incident
and claimed that the police had taken his thumb impression on
some paper in the hospital. In view of his turning hostile he was
cross-examined by the APP but the complainant even then
maintained his version of the incident given by him in his chiefexamination. He denied that appellant Kayum had caught hold of
him at the time of the incident and appellant Asif had stabbed
him.

On these aspects he was confronted with his first

information statement to the police which he admitted to have

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

7

made. It was then suggested to him that he being the friend of
PW-1 had given a false statement and both had compromised
the matter. Since the complainant had not claimed that he had
claimed accused Asif to be the actual assailant in the FIR by
some mistake his evidence cannot be said to be that of a reliable
witness at all and could not be made the basis of conviction by
the learned trial Court.

7.

There was no other eye witness of the incident and

prosecution had not sought to establish its case on any
circumstantial evidence also. The testimony of these type of
witnesses who give one version of the incident to the police and
another version of the same incident in Court came up for
consideration before the Apex Court in “State of Uttar Pradesh v.
Arvind Kumer”, 2007 (6) SCALE 367 and “Ramesh Maruti Patil
v. State of Maharashtra”, AIR 1994 SC 28. In both these cases
the eye witnesses of the incident had changed the roles of the
main assailants while deposing in Court and because of that
change in version of the incident the Apex Court had declined to

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

8

place any reliance upon their evidence. So, in the present case
also no reliance could be placed on the evidence of the sole eye
witness Mohd. Fujail despite the fact that he is an injured witness.
I find it quite strange that despite the fact that the complainant
has not at all supported the prosecution case the learned trial
Court observed in para no. 30 of the impugned judgment that “In
the present case PW-1 Mohd. Fujail has fully supported the
prosecution case on each and every material particular. There is
nothing

on

record

to

disbelieve

his

testimony.”

This

commendation of the complainant was absolutely unjustified.

8.

When despite the fact that no role whatsoever had been

ascribed to appellant Asif he has been convicted substantively
under Section 307 IPC by the trial Court it became a matter of
anxiety to find out on what reasoning he has been convicted
relying upon the evidence of hostile complainant. In this regard
the submission of the Mr. Dudeja was that evidence of even a
hostile witness can be relied upon to the extent it receives
corroboration from other independent and reliable evidence and

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

9

the learned trial Judge had found sufficient corroboration to the
evidence of the complainant and had rightly relied upon his
evidence. There is no doubt that evidence of a witness cannot be
ignored totally just because he is declared

hostile by the

prosecution and that part of his evidence which is corroborated
by other reliable evidence can definitely be used. However, in the
present case I have not found that any part of the version of the
complainant given in Court has been corroborated by any other
evidence. Now, let me see what corroborative evidence has been
pressed into service by the trial Court while convicting the
appellants on the basis of evidence of PW-1. This is how the trial
Judge has dealt with the matter in paras 22, 25 & 26 of his
judgment: “22.
It has also been argued by Ld. Counsel for
accused persons that weapon of offence has not
been recovered in this case. This contention of Ld.
defence counsel is wrong. It has come on record
that a buttondar knife was recovered from the front
side pocket of the pant of the accused Asif at the
time of his arrest. Further, accused in his disclosure
statement has admitted that this is the same knife
which was used by him at the time of causing
injuries to Mohd. Fujail. The only thing is that the
copy of recovery memo of knife has not been placed
on this file but simply for this deficiency it cannot be
said that knife i.e. weapon of offence was not

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

10

recovered from the accused and on this ground this
case of prosecution cannot be thrown away.
25.
The next point raised by the ld. Defence
counsel is that it has not been explained as to who
caused the injury to the injured. On the other hand
Ld. PP has submitted that injured in his compliant
ex. PW 1/A lodged to the police has clearly stated
that it was accused Asif who caused injuries on his
person, however, while appearing in court he has
tried to save him but at the same time in crossexamination he has admitted that statement ex. PW
1/A was made by him and the same was read over
to him by the police. He has also admitted that
statement bears his thumb impression and thus by
admitting his statement, he has corrected his earlier
version.
26.
In natural course, when assailant is known
one, injury is fresh and the statement is recorded
soon after the occurrence, there are no chances of
substituting the real culprit. In this case, PW-1 in his
complaint lodged to the police has ascribed injuries
to accused Asif but while appearing in court he has
tried to help him by stating that it was Kayum who
gave injury to him. To some extent, we find
corroboration from the statement of PW-4 Mohd.
Yunus who saw the accused Asif with a knife in his
hand. As already discussed, knife was recovered
from the possession of accused Asif. Hence, all
these facts goes to prove that it was accused Asif
who caused injury on the person of Mohd. Fujail and
none else.”

This is the only discussion in the impugned judgment
regarding the contentions raised on behalf of the two accused
that evidence of the complainant should not be relied upon. This
discussion and the findings of the learned trial Judge show that
Crl.A.No. 158/1999

11

prosecution case as was projected in the FIR has been accepted
despite the complainant not sticking to that version of his
accepting the case of the prosecution that there was recovery of
weapon of offence from the possession of appellant Asif and
further because this accused had accepted in his confessional
statement made before the police that he had attacked the
complainant with the churri recovered from his possession at the
time of his arrest and also because in the FIR he had named Asif
as the assailant and Kayum to be the person who had caught
hold of him at the time of the incident when Asif had assaulted
him.

9.

In my view, the approach of the learned trial Judge while

coming to the aforesaid conclusions was not the correct
approach. It appears that the learned judge has not kept in mind
the well settled legal position while making the aforesaid
observations in his judgment. Since the complainant had not
claimed before the trial Court that it was Asif who had stabbed
him and Kayum had caught hold of him at the time of stabbing it

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

12

could not be said that the complainant’s version of the incident
given by him in Court stood corroborated by his version in his first
information statement to the police. In fact, when the public
prosecutor had cross-examined him and had confronted him with
his statement before the police the complainant stood
completely contradicted. An FIR is not a substantive piece of
evidence and its contents can be used by the prosecution either
to corroborate the testimony of its maker or to contradict him if
he chooses to resile from that version while deposing in Court.
The accused can use the FIR to contradict its author if in Court he
reiterates that version. Thus, in the present case the complainant
having not stuck to his version of the incident given by him to the
police in the form of his first information statement it could not
be said that the complainant’s version in Court stood
corroborated by whatever he had narrated in the FIR. Just
because the complainant had admitted during his crossexamination by the public prosecutor that Ex. PW-1/A, which is
his first information statement to the police, bore his thumb
impression it could not be said, as has been observed by the

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

13

learned trial Judge in para 25 of the impugned judgment, that by
making that admission in the cross-examination by the public
prosecutor the complainant had corrected his earlier version. The
complainant never admitted that Asif had stabbed him as had
been stated in the FIR. Of course, if during the cross-examination
by the public prosecutor the complainant had admitted that in
fact Asif had stabbed him and by mistake he had stated in his
chief-examination wrongly that Kayum had stabbed him the
position would have been different and in that situation only
statement made by the complainant in his cross-examination by
the prosecutor could have been relied upon and that too if it had
received corroboration from other independent evidence which in
the present case is in any case totally missing.

10.

Similarly, the learned Trial Judge has wrongly sought

corroboration for the prosecution case in respect of accused Asif
from the fact that there was alleged recovery of weapon of
offence used in the present incident from his possession. The
prosecution itself never claimed that the knife which was
Crl.A.No. 158/1999

14

recovered from the possession of accused Asif was the one which
was used in the incident in question. As noticed already, in
respect of that recovery a separate case was registered under the
Arms Act and that knife was not even produced in the present
case during prosecution evidence and that also shows that the
prosecution never treated the recovered knife as the weapon of
offence of the present incident. The learned trial Judge, however,
adopted a queer approach in this regard also by observing that in
the confessional statement of accused Asif he had confessed
having stabbed the complainant with the knife which was
recovered from him at the time of his arrest. That was wholly
impermissible in law. The confessional statement could not be
relied upon at all since it had not led to the discovery of anything
incriminating.

11.

In the afore quoted observations of the learned trial Court it

also appears that corroboration to the evidence of PW-1 was
sought by the learned trial Court from the testimony of PW-4
Mohd. Yunus, the brother of PW-1. Admittedly, PW-4 had not
Crl.A.No. 158/1999

15

witnessed the incident and as per the prosecution case he had
come to the spot only on hearing the cries of his brother Fujail. He
himself has also claimed so in his evidence. All that he deposed
was that when he reached the spot he had seen both the
appellants present there and at that time appellant Asif was
having a knife in his hand. It appears that the learned Trial Judge
was looking for corroboration of whatever had been stated in the
FIR ignoring the legal position that whatever is stated in FIR is not
substantive evidence which can be utilized in favour of the
prosecution. If whatever had been stated by PW-1 in his first
information

statement

to

the

police

is

excluded

from

consideration because of PW-1 himself having not stuck to that
version the evidence of PW-4 could not be utilized by the trial
Court as corroborative evidence for holding the appellants guilty.
In fact, even the learned prosecutor while arguing in support of
the impugned judgment did not contend that the learned trial
Court was justified in relying upon the confessional statement of
appellant Asif as well as the contents of the FIR to hold that since
that version was given by the injured soon after the incident when

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

16

injuries on his person were fresh he would not have wrongly
stated therein that it was Asif who had stabbed him.

12.

I am therefore of the view that evidence of the sole eye

witness having been held to be unreliable cannot be relied upon
against any of the two accused and the prosecution cannot be
said to have established its case against the appellants beyond
reasonable doubt and consequently their conviction cannot be
sustained. This appeal is accordingly allowed and the impugned
judgment of conviction and order on sentence are set-aside and
both the appellants stand acquitted. They were on bail and now
their bail bonds stand cancelled and sureties discharged.

P.K.BHASIN,J
March 28, 2008
sh

Crl.A.No. 158/1999

17

