*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: 20th November, 2007
Crl.M.C.No.2906/2007

#

R.L. VERMA & ORS.

!

.....Petitioners
Through Mr. Sanjay Bahl, Advocates

versus
$

J.K.VERMA & ORS.

^

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Sanjeev Mahajan,
Respondent no. 1

Advocate for

CORAM:
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(yes)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(yes)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:

By this petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the
petitioners have prayed for setting aside the order dated 29.03.2007 passed by
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate in complaint case no. 669/2007 whereby the
petitioners and respondents no. 2 and 3 were summoned for the offence under

Section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter referred to as
‘the Act’) and also for quashing the said complaint.
2.

The Respondent no. 1-complainant filed a complaint case against M/s. Vasu

Tech Ltd., respondent no. 2 herein and its Directors, who are the petitioners no. 1 &
2 as well as respondent no. 3 herein, under Section 138 of the Act. It is alleged by
the complainant-respondent no.1 in the complaint that he entered into an
agreement to sell with petitioner no. 3 herein (which is an HUF firm of which
petitioner no. 1 is the karta and which was arrayed as accused no. 5 in the
complaint), in respect of one flat. However at the time of execution of the flat buyer
agreement, that flat was on rent with some tenant. Accused no. 2-4 arrayed in the
complaint, are all family members and accused no. 1 (M/s Vasu Tech Ltd.) and 5
were their family concerns. Accused no. 2 to 4 had requested the complainant that
their family concern was in dire need of money for some technological
development and urged the complainant not to claim rent amounting to Rs.
2,50,000/- per month for the said flat for the time being from the tenant and that
request the complainant accepted. To secure the debt on account of rent due from
the tenant, the accused Company, respondent no.2 herein, issued a post dated
cheque for Rs. 35,00,000/-. However on presentation to the bank of the Company,
the said cheque was dishonoured for the reason “insufficient funds”. After serving
statutory demand notice on the petitioners as well as respondents no. 2 & 3, the
respondent no. 1 filed a criminal complaint in Court in respect of the said

dishonoured cheque. The learned Metropolitan Magistrate took cognizance for the
offence under Section 138 of the Act and vide his order dated 29.03.2007
summoned the petitioners herein as well as respondents no. 2 and 3 as accused.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioners have filed this petition.
3.

The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that since petitioners no. 1

& 2 are neither the signatories of the agreement to sell between the complainant
and petitioner no. 3(HUF) nor have they signed the dishonoured cheque and since
the so called understanding regarding the rent payment arrived at between the
complainant-respondent no. 1 and respondent no. 2, the accused Company, was
without their consent or knowledge and the cheque in dispute was also issued by
respondent no.2-Company without their consent, they are not liable for the
dishonour of the cheque as Directors of the said Company. It was further
contended that the complaint does not contain specific averments from which it
could be inferred that the petitioners were in any way in-charge of and managing
day to day affairs of the Company, namely, M/s. Vasu Tech Ltd. and, therefore, they
could not have been summoned as accused in respect of the offence allegedly
committed by the said Company. In support of the said contention the learned
counsel for the petitioners has placed reliance upon the judgments of the Apex
Court in “K. Srikanth Singh v. M/s North East Securities Ltd. & Anr.” JT 2007(9) SCC
449 and “Saroj Kumar Poddar v. State & Anr.” 2007 (2) SCALE 36. Further reliance
has been placed on some judgments of this Court also which are reported as in

“J.N. Bhatia & Ors. v. State & Anr.” 139(2007) DLT 361, “Everest Advertising Pvt.
Ltd. v. State & Ors.” 124 (2005) DLT 353, and “Rachna Kapoor v. State & Ors.”
121(2005) DLT 431. As far as petitioner no. 3 is concerned, learned counsel
argued that against this petitioner, which is an HUF, there is no averment at all in
the complaint as to how it could be prosecuted for the dishonouring of the cheque
issued by the accused Company, respondent no. 2 herein, and consequently the
complaint qua this petitioner also deserves to be quashed.
4.

Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent no. 1-complainant

contended that there was no deficiency in the averments in the complaint
regarding the liability of the petitioners no. 1 and 2 inasmuch as in para no. 16 of
the complaint it had been categorically pleaded by the complainant that these
petitioners were in-charge and responsible for the affairs and business of the
accused Company (respondent no. 2 herein) and that is what was required to be
pleaded. In support he has placed reliance on the judgement of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in “N. Rangachari v. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd.” AIR 2007 SC
1682. Regarding the petitioner no.3 it was submitted that since the complainant
had agreed not to claim rent from the tenant in the flat purchased by him from
petitioner no. 3 on the joint request of all the petitioners and respondent no. 2 and
3, and the accused Company (respondent no. 2) and HUF (petitioner no. 3) being
family concerns the petitioner no. 3 is also liable to be prosecuted.
5.

Para no. 16 in the complaint contains the averments against the Directors of

the accused Company including petitioners no. 1 and 2 herein. That para is
reproduced below:
“That the accused no. 2 to 4 are the directors of the

company and in charge of the accused no. 1 company and
were responsible to the company for the conduct and
business of the company as well as the company and are
such liable for the dishonour of the above said cheque.”
6.

In the case relied upon by the learned counsel for respondent no.1-

complaiant (AIR 2007 SC 1682), the complainant had filed a complaint under
Section 138 of the Act against a Company and its Directors and regarding the
Directors the averments in the complaint were similar as have been made by the
complainant in the present case in his complaint and which have already been
reproduced above. In that case also the Directors had sought quashing of the
complaint against them on the ground that they had nothing to do with the affairs
of the Company and the averments in the complaint were not sufficient to make
them liable for the offence under Section 138 of the Act with the aid of Section
141 of the Act. Hon’ble Supreme Court, however, rejected the said contention
raised on behalf of the Directors of the accused Company by observing that if in
the complaint it had been averred that the accused Directors were in-charge of and
responsible to the accused Company, of which they were Directors, for the conduct
of business then that would satisfy the requirement of Section 141 of the Act and
nothing more was required to be pleaded in the complaint and further that it was
not reasonable to expect the complainant to spell out in the complaint the exact

duties being performed by the Directors as those matters are within the knowledge
of the Company and those in charge of it. Therefore, the complaint against the
petitioners no. 1 & 2 in the present case cannot be quashed just because they
have claimed that they had nothing to do with the affairs of the Company or the
transaction with the complainant in respect of which their Company (respondent
no. 2 herein) had issued the cheque in favour of the complainant which on
presentment to the bank was dishonoured. The judgements of this Court relied
upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners were all rendered before the
pronouncement of decision in Rangachari’s case (supra) and so cannot be of any
benefit to the petitioners and in the two judgments of Hon’ble Supreme Court cited
by him it was held that it has to be pleaded in the complaint under Section 138 of
the Act that the accused Directors were in-charge of the affairs of the accused
Company. In those two judgments it was not pleaded in the complaint that the
concerned Directors of the accused Company were responsible for the day to day
affairs of the Company which had issued the dishonoured cheques and so for that
reason the complaints qua those Directors were quashed. However, as noticed
already, in the present case the complainant had specifically pleaded in his
complaint that petitioners no. 1 & 2 herein were the Directors of respondent no. 2
herein and were also responsible to the said Company for the conduct of the
business of the Company. So, the two decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court relied
upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners also do not help the case of the

petitioners no. 1 & 2.
7.

This petition qua petitioner no.3, however, is liable to be allowed because

there is no basis laid down in the complaint for its prosecution for the offence
under Section 138 of the Act. The only reason urged by the learned counsel for
respondent no.1 in this regard, which has been noted already, is not sufficient to
sustain the complaint against petitioner no.3 for the offence under Section 138 of
the Act in respect of which only the complaint had been filed and learned
Magistrate also took cognizance only for that offence.
8.

In view of the foregoing, this petition with respect to petitioners no. 1 and 2 is

dismissed but qua petitioner no. 3, M/s Rattan Lal Varma & Sons (HUF), this
petition is allowed and the summoning order dated 29.03.2007 as well as the
complaint qua the petitioner no. 3 stand quashed.

P.K.BHASIN,J

November 20, 2007
sh

