*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No. 115-16/2006
Date of Decision: 26th November, 2007

%

#

Sunil Gupta & Anr.

!

.....Petitioners

Through Mr. Rahul Gupta with Mr. Dhiraj Kumar, Advocate
along with petitioners in person.

Versus

$

State of NCT of Delhi & Ors.

^

.....Respondents

Through Mr. Pawan Bahl, APP for State
Mr. Vijay Kumar Sondhi with Mr. Kapil Arora, Advocates for
R-2, Complainant present in person.

CORAM:
*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT

P.K.BHASIN, J:

This joint petition has been filed by the petitioners, out of whom petitioner
no. 1 is the accused and petitioner no. 2 is the complainant, under Section 482 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (‘Cr.P.C.’ in short) for quashing FIR no.
679/2005 for the offences under Sections 467/471/468/420/408/34 IPC
registered at police station New Friends Colony on 31.12.2005 against petitioner
no. 1 and respondent no. 2 Sunil Kumar at the instance of the complainant M/s K
& A Securities Pvt. Ltd.

2.

Facts leading to the registration of the FIR against petitioner no. 1 and

respondent no. 2 and filing of this petition are that a complaint was filed by the
complainant M/s. K & A Securities Private Limited, which was dealing with shares,
against respondent no. 2, who was an employee of the complainant Company, and
the petitioner no. 1 herein, who was running a proprietorship concern under the
name of M/s. S.G. Consultants alleging that both Sunil Kumar and the petitioner
no. 1 had committed cheating and defrauded the complainant Company to the
tune of Rs. 23,39,700/-.

3.

During the investigation the complainant and the accused resolved their

dispute and arrived at an amicable settlement. A Memorandum of Understanding
dated 06.01.2006, copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure 3, was
executed between the complainant and petitioner no. 1-accused. In view of that
compromise this petition has been filed for quashing of the FIR in question.
Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that since compromise has been arrived
at between the parties no useful purpose would be served if the investigation in
respect of the FIR is allowed to continue. In support of the prayer for quashing of
the FIR he placed reliance upon three judgments of the Apex Court in “Nalini
Shankaran & Ors. v. Neelkanth Mahadeo Kamble & Ors.” 2007 (2) Crimes 329
(SC), “B.S.Joshi & Ors. Vs. State of Haryana & Anr.”, AIR 2003 SC 1386 and
“Central bureau of Investigation v. Dunikons Agro Industries Ltd.” 1996 (V) SCC
591 and three judgments of this Court in “Rishi Raj & Ors. v. The State” 2001 (2)
JCC 234 , “Ajay Kumar & Ors. v. State & Ors.” 131(2006)DLT 130 and “Ramesh
Kumar v. State” 106(2003) DLT 534.

4.

Notice of this joint petition was given to the State as well as the other

accused, respondent no.2 herein who also entered appearance. Though accused
Sunil Kumar had not filed a petition for quashing of the FIR it was submitted by the
counsel for the complainant that since the money has been received by the
complainant, it is no more interested in pursuing the FIR even qua him and the FIR
can be quashed against both the accused.

5.

Learned APP for the State, however, opposed quashing of the FIR on the

ground that allegations against the petitioner no. 1 and co-accused, respondent no.
2, are grave in nature and the offences which are being investigated are not
compoundable under Section 320 Cr.P.C. and so if these offences are permitted to
be compounded that would amount to bye-passing the provisions of section 320
Cr.P.C. which should not be done by this Court by exercising the inherent
jurisdiction vested in it under Section 482 Cr.P.C. In support of this submission one
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court reported as 2003 SCC (Crl.) 1238,
“Inspector of Police, CBI v. B. Raja Gopal & Ors.” was also cited by the learned
APP.

6.

I have considered the rival submissions. It is now well settled by many

judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court that FIRs even in respect of those
offences which are not compoundable under section 320 Cr.P.C. can be quashed
as also the criminal proceedings emanating therefrom if it is felt by the Court
while dealing with a quashing petition under section 482 Cr.P.C. that it would
secure the ends of justice if the FIR and criminal proceedings arising therefrom are
quashed and continuation of the investigation/criminal proceedings would amount
to abuse of the process of law. The judgment in B.S. Joshi’s case (supra), relied
upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners is one of such judgments wherein it

has been so held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Similarly in the case (2007 (2)
Crimes 329) relied upon by the counsel for the petitioners criminal case pending in
the Court for the offences punishable under Sections 418/409/166 I.P.C. was
quashed because of the settlement between the complainant Trust and the
accused persons despite the fact that offence under Section 409 I.P.C. attracts
sentence of even life imprisonment. Even in the judgments of this Court, cited by
the counsel for the petitioners, FIRs for the offences of cheating, forgery etc. were
quashed in view of the settlement between the complainants and the accused
persons. In fact, in another case decided by a learned Single Judge of this Court,
which is reported as 2006 (2) JCC 1127 “Sanjay Goel & Ors. v. The State” FIR and
the criminal proceedings emanating therefrom even in respect of an offence
punishable under Section 467 I.P.C., for which offence also even life imprisonment
can be awarded, were quashed since the complainant and the accused had
amicably compromised the matter. So, just because in the present case offences
of forgery were invoked at the time of registration of FIR the prayer of the
complainant and the accused for quashing of the FIR cannot be declined for that
reason, as was the submission of the learned APP. The judgment of Hon’ble
Supreme Court cited by him does not say that whenever offences of forgery are
reported to the police FIR can never be quashed. In Ajay Kumar’s case (supra) a
learned Single Judge of this Court had taken notice of this judgment of Hon’ble
Supreme Court and in view of the settlement between the parties quashed the FIR

of that case in which also offences of forgery were invoked against the accused by
observing that it was not a case of public transaction (as was the case in the
decision cited by the APP). Therefore, in the present case also the FIR deserves to
be quashed because of the settlement between the complainant and the accused
as that would secure the ends of justice and continuation of the investigation
against the accused would amount to abuse of process of law and also because no
public money was involved in the transaction between the parties.

7.

In view of the foregoing, I allow this petition and consequently FIR no.

679/2005 for the offences under Sections 467/468/471/420/408/34 I.P.C.
registered at New Friends Colony Police Station on 31.12.2005 stands quashed in
respect of both the accused persons.

P.K.BHASIN, J
November 26, 2007
sh

