*
%

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 9 OF 1999

+

#
!

Date of Decision:

ATMA RAM

24th March, 2008

...Appellant
Through: Mr. M.P. Singh and Mr.
Rahul Singh and Mr. K.K. Singh,
Advocates
versus

$

STATE

...Respondent
Through : Mr. M.N. Dudeja, APP

*

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? (No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The appellant has filed this appeal challenging his
conviction by the learned Special Judge, Delhi in Sessions Case

No. CC-344/1994 under Sections 7 and Section 13(1)(d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the
„Act‟) as also the sentences awarded to him.

2.

The relevant facts leading to the conviction of the appellant-

accused are that PW-2 Naresh Pal Singh(hereinafter to be
referred as „the complainant‟) was working as a Home Guard and
the appellant

was his Platoon Commander and he

used to

assign duty to the Home Guards. The Home Guards used to get
wages only for the days when they actually performed duty.
Sometime around June, 1992 the appellant stopped assigning
any duty to the complainant and when the complainant asked
him the reason for not assigning duty to him the appellant
demanded Rs.1,000/- as bribe from him for taking him on duty.
Since the appellant did not take him on duty for quite sometime
the complainant was left with no option but to accept his demand
of bribe and as per the prosecution case he gave Rs.700/- to the
appellant sometime in June,1992 but still the appellant did not
take him on duty and insisted for payment of balance amount of

Crl. A. 9/1999

2

Rs.300/- also. On 2/7/92 also the appellant, when contacted by
the complainant, told him to pay the balance bribe amount of
Rs.300/- and only then he shall be taken on duty and also told
him to come with the money around 2 p.m. next day. At that time
Naresh Pal Singh had agreed to pay the balance amount to the
appellant but then changed his mind and decided to report the
matter to the anti-corruption branch. Accordingly he went to the
office of the anti-corruption branch on 03/07/92 before noon and
lodged his complaint(Ex.PW-2/A) wherein he narrated all these
facts regarding the demand of bribe of Rs.1000/- by the
appellant and his having already paid Rs.700/- to the appellant.
In view of the complaint against a public servant it was decided to
lay a trap to nab the appellant red handed while accepting bribe
from the complainant. Inspector Abhey Ram(PW-6) was entrusted
the task of laying the trap.

3.

PW-6 then conducted pre-raid proceedings during which the

complainant and one Government official(PW-4), who was
already present there on duty to act as an panch witness if some

Crl. A. 9/1999

3

trap was to be laid, were explained by the raid officer as to how
the raid was going to be conducted to trap the appellant while
accepting bribe from the complainant and what they(the
complainant and the panch witness) were supposed to be doing
during the actual raid at the spot where the appellant had called
the complainant along with bribe money. For the purpose of raid
the complainant had produced three currency notes of Rs.100/denomination to be used as bribe money for being offered to the
appellant-accused at the time of raid. Those currency notes were
treated with phenolphthalein powder and a solution of sodium
carbonate was also prepared by the raid officer. That is normally
done in trap cases by the raid officers since if phenolphthalein
treated notes are touched by anyone and that person‟s fingers
are dipped in the colourless solution of sodium carbonate that
solution would turn pink and the raid officer would be satisfied
that the public servant who was to be trapped had actually
accepted the bribe at the time of raid from the complainant. The
panch-witness Kanhaiya Lal (PW-4) was instructed to remain
close to the complainant and to listen to the talks between the

Crl. A. 9/1999

4

complainant and the appellant and on being satisfied that the
appellant had demanded and obtained money as bribe only to
give a signal to the police party. The raid officer drew pre-raid
proceedings. Thereafter the raid team proceeded for the place
where the raid plan was to be actually executed. As per the
further prosecution case the complainant along with the panchwitness went to the place where the appellant was taking
attendance of the Home Guards and after all the Home Guards
had left the complainant approached the appellant and asked
him to take him on duty on which the appellant demanded
money from him. The complainant then took out the
phenolphthalein treated three currency notes from his pocket and
gave it to the appellant saying that he had already given him
Rs.700/- and now he was giving him Rs.300/-. The appellant
accepted the money with his right hand and after counting the
notes with his both hands told the complainant that he would
now get duty.

The panch-witness who was listening to the

conversation between the complainant and the appellant and
also saw the appellant accepting money from the complainant

Crl. A. 9/1999

5

then gave the pre-arranged signal as per the plan to the raid
officer who was standing at some distance from that place. On
receipt of the signal from the panch witness the raid officer
rushed there and apprehended the appellant and challenged him
that he had accepted bribe from the complainant. The appellant
became nervous and kept mum and did not give any explanation
for the tainted money which he was still holding in his hand. The
raid officer seized the tainted money, conducted phenolphthalein
test by dipping the fingers of both the hands of the appellant in
separate solutions of sodium carbonate which turned pink. The
numbers of the recovered currency notes also tallied with the
numbers already recorded by the raiding officer before going for
the raid in the pre-raid proceedings. On being convinced that the
appellant had accepted money from the complainant as bribe the
raid officer got an FIR(Ex. PW-6/C)

registered at the anti-

corruption branch for the offences under Sections 7 & 13(1)(d) of
the Act. The appellant was then formally arrested by PW-8
Inspector B.M. Sharma to whom the investigation after the
apprehension of the appellant was entrusted. Sanction for the

Crl. A. 9/1999

6

prosecution of the appellant was granted by Sh. R.K. Sharma,
Commandant, Home Guards(PW-3) vide his order dated
28.07.1994(Ex. PW-3/A) and then the Anti-Corruption Branch
filed a charge-sheet against the appellant-accused in the Court of
Special Judge constituted under the Act to try corruption cases
and the learned Special Judge tried him for the offences
punishable under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) read with 13(2) of the
Act.

4.

The prosecution had sought to establish its case through

the evidence of the complainant, panch witness and the raid
officer all of whom had supported the prosecution case on
material

aspects.

During

the

cross-examination

of

the

complainant the suggestion put to him on behalf of the appellantaccused was that both of them used to lend money to each other
and to the panch witness a suggestion was given that he knew
that the complainant had returned loan amount to the accused
and also that at the time of the raid the complainant had told the
appellant-accused that he had already returned Rs.700/- and

Crl. A. 9/1999

7

now he was returning the balance of Rs.300/-. Similarly it was
suggested to the raid officer in his cross-examination that the
complainant had in fact informed him that he had taken loan of
Rs.1000/- from the accused and had already returned Rs.700/out of that amount and that the accused had been troubling him
since he could not return the balance loan amount of Rs.300/-.
These suggestions put to the witnesses were refuted by them.
When examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the explanation given
by the appellant-accused as to the recovery of tainted money
from him was as under:“It is a false case. Complainant had borrowed
Rs. 1,000 from me on the ground that he was
sick and had to undergo medical treatment.
However, he tried to put me off when I
demanded money. He had given Rs. 700/- to
me towards the loan about 15/20 days prior to
the raid, and had promised to pay the balance
amount within a week. After a week I insisted
payment of balance amount of Rs. 300 but he
avoided to pay on the one pretext or the other.
Ultimately he, in connivance with the anticorruption branch staff, got me falsely
implicated by giving false statement.”

5.

From the foregoing narration it becomes clear that the

appellant-accused had admitted before the trial Court that at the

Crl. A. 9/1999

8

time of raid he did obtain payment of Rs.300/- from the
complainant. His explanation was however that this money was
re-payment of loan by the complainant. Even during the course of
final arguments in the trial Court the counsel for the appellantaccused had contended(which submission is noticed by the
learned Special Judge in para no. 15 of his judgment) that the
amount which the accused had obtained from the complainant at
the time of raid was the loan amount which he had earlier
advanced to the complainant. The learned trial Judge however
did not accept the loan story put forth by the appellant-accused
and on the basis of the evidence adduced by the prosecution
regarding the recovery of the tainted notes from the appellantaccused and the admission of the appellant-accused that he had
obtained Rs.300/- from the complainant and consequently vide
judgment dated 08/12/98 held the appellant-accused guilty for
the commission of both the offences for which he was tried and
then vide order dated 10/12/98 the trial Court awarded six
months rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.1,000/- with a
default stipulation of two months further rigorous imprisonment

Crl. A. 9/1999

9

under Section 7 and rigorous imprisonment for one year and a
fine of Rs.2,000/- with a default stipulation four months further
rigorous imprisonment under Section 13(1)(d) of the Act. Feeling
aggrieved by his conviction and the sentences awarded to him the
convicted accused filed this appeal questioning the correctness
thereof.

6.

It was contended by the learned counsel for the appellant

that even though the complainant and the panch witness had
deposed that the appellant-accused had accepted tainted notes
at the time of raid and he was not challenging their evidence on
that aspect and the appellant-accused himself had also admitted
having received Rs.300/- from the complainant but the
explanation given by the appellant for taking Rs.300/- from the
complainant was very much probable and plausible and should
have been accepted by the learned Special Judge despite the
fact that the appellant-accused had not adduced any independent
evidence to substantiate his plea that he had advanced loan of
Rs.1000/- to the complainant sometime before the date of the

Crl. A. 9/1999

10

raid and the payment of Rs.300/- was towards repayment of that
loan. Learned counsel also submitted that in the facts and
circumstances of the case the appellant should not have been
convicted merely on the basis of recovery of tainted money from
him when there was no positive proof that that money was
tendered to him and accepted by him as bribe.

7.

Learned Additional Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

urged to the contrary submitting that the conviction of the
appellant was justified and the prosecution had proved the guilt
of the appellant beyond any shadow of doubt through the
evidence of the complainant, panch witness and the raid officer
coupled with the appellant‟s own admission that he had received
tainted notes from the complainant at the time of raid. Regarding
the reasoning given by the appellant before the trial Court for
accepting that money it was contended that that explanation had
not even been sought to be substantiated by the appellant by any
evidence. He did not even enter the witness box himself to say on
oath that he had advanced some loan to the complainant and his

Crl. A. 9/1999

11

own ipse dixit was not sufficient to rebut the statutory
presumption which had to be drawn against him under Section
20 of the Act because of his admission that he had accepted the
tainted notes from the complainant. The presumption was that he
had accepted that money as a motive or reward for showing
some favour to the complainant in discharge of his official
functions as a public servant. Learned prosecutor also submitted
that even though the burden of the appellant for rebutting this
presumption was not a heavy one and could be discharged even
on the basis of preponderance of probabilities but the appellantaccused had not been able to tilt even the probability factor in his
favour, what to say of proving his defence plea. Learned APP
supported the decision of the trial Court and submitted that there
was no infirmity whatsoever in the same justifying interference by
this Court in appeal.

8.

Before proceeding further to consider the rival submissions

I would like notice here the relevant portions only of the
statements of the two star prosecution witnesses in this case,
Crl. A. 9/1999

12

namely, the complainant PW-2 Naresh Pal Singh and panch
witness PW4 Kanhaiya Lal.

Relevant portion of the chief-

examination of the complainant relating to the pre-raid demand
of bribe from him by the appellant-accused is as under:-

“ During the year 1992 I was a Home Guard
Constable and my belt No. was 6640. Accused
Atma Ram present in the court was a Sub Inspector
in Home Guard and was my Platoon Commander.
He used to mark my attendance. He also used to
put me on duty. During these days, we used to get
paid only for the days on which we performed duty.
I had fallen ill for some time. Thereafter the
accused was not allotting me any duty. I had been
requesting him for more than one month to put me
on duty. The accused demanded that I should pay
him Rs. 1000/- and only then he would allot me
duty. I had given him Rs. 700/- 3 or 4 days before
this raid. The accused did not give me any duty and
demanded that I should pay him the balance of Rs.
300/-. The accused asked me to give the money to
him in P.S. Seelampur by 2 p.m. On the day when
the raid was organized.

Then, regarding what transpired at the place of raid the
complainant deposed to the following effect:“We went to P.S. Seelampur in Govt. vehicle which
was stopped at some distance. I and panch witness
were sent ahead to contact the accused while other
members of the raiding party took positions nearby.
The panch witness and myself went to the place
outside police station where the accused was

Crl. A. 9/1999

13

marking attendance of Home Guards. After the
attendance was over the Home Guards left for duty.
I told the accused that I have already given Rs.
700/- and I have brought the balance amount of Rs.
300/- and that he should put me on duty. I then
gave the money to the accused which he accepted
in his left hand and counted the money with both of
his hands. The accused put the money in the upper
shirt pocket.”
The police party reached there and apprehended
the accused, and brought him to the Anti-Corruption
Branch along with me and the panch witness.
Before we came to the Anti-Corruption Branch,
money was recovered by the Inspector from the
shirt
pocket
of
the
accused..………………………………………..”

This witness had been cross-examined by the prosecutor
since he had claimed that money was recovered from the shirt
pocket of the accused and also because there was some
discrepancy between his version in Court regarding the actual
conversation between him and the accused at the time of raid
and what he had told to the raid officer immediately after the raid
which was noted by the raid officer in his post-raid proceedings
prepared at the spot. During that cross-examination the
complainant admitted that money was recovered from the hand

Crl. A. 9/1999

14

of the accused and also that after taking money the accused had
said that now he would be put on duty.

9.

PW-4 Kanhaiya Lal, panch witness, after deposing about

pre-raid proceedings deposed about the actual trap proceedings
as under :-

“……………The raiding party then went to Seelampur
i.e. To the place near the police station. The accused
was not present at that place. He came there at 2 or
2.15 p.m. The accused started marking attendance .
When other people had gone, accused present in
the court asked the complainant if he had brought
the money. The complainant asked the accused to
take him on duty. The accused then asked him if he
had brought the money. The complainant took out
the money and gave it to the accused. The accused
accepted the money with his right hand and before
he could put it in his pocket, I gave the signal by
moving my hand over my head. The members of the
raiding party immediately came there. The accused
had also counted the money with both of his hands.
In the meantime the inspector came there and the
accused was apprehended by his wrists. The
Inspector disclosed his identity to the accused. The
accused became perplexed. The Inspector offered
his search but the accused refused to take search of
the Inspector. The money was then recovered from
the hand of the accused. Members of the notes
were tallied and found to be the same as recorded
in the pre-raid report.”

Crl. A. 9/1999

15

10.

Raid officer (PW-6) has deposed about the recovery of

tainted notes from the hand of the appellant-accused. As noticed
already, in the cross-examination of none of these three
witnesses the recovery of tainted notes was disputed on behalf of
the accused. The suggestions put to them have also been noted
earlier which clearly show that the accused was admitting the
recovery of Rs.300/- from him at the time of raid as also the fact
that that money he had taken from the complainant. To the
complainant it was not even suggested that the money he had
given to the accused at the time of raid was towards repayment
of loan which he had some days back taken from the accused.
From the testimony of the complainant and the panch witness it
is quite clear that the money was given to the accused so that the
complainant was taken on duty by him. So, that has to be
considered as demand and acceptance of illegal gratification only
by the appellant-accused. Even otherwise, it is now well settled
that in these type of cases of bribery if it is proved that some
public servant had obtained some gratification from someone
other that his legal remuneration then unless it is proved to the

Crl. A. 9/1999

16

contrary it shall be presumed by the Court that that gratification
was taken as a motive or reward by the public servant for
showing some undue favour in discharge of his official functions
as a public servant. This is a legal presumption as provided under
Section 20 of the Act and once it is raised it then becomes the
burden of the public servant concerned to rebut the presumption.
He has to come out with some probable and plausible
explanation for accepting the gratification. This presumption
would, however, not stand rebutted just by offering an
explanation but it has to be proved also. Hon‟ble Supreme Court
in “State of Maharashtra v. Rashid Babubhai Mulani”, AIR 2006
SC 825 while dealing with similar type of presumption provided
under Section 4 of The Prevention of Corruption Act of
1947(which provision is now akin to one provided under Section
20 of the Act of 1988) had observed as under:-

“11. Section 4 of the Act, inter alia , provided that
where in any trial of an offence punishable under
Section 161 IPC or Section 5(1)(a) or (b) punishable
under Section 5(2) of the Act, it is proved that an
accused person has accepted any gratification
(other than legal remuneration), it shall be
presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he
Crl. A. 9/1999

17

accepted that gratification as a motive or reward,
such as is mentioned in the said Section 161. This
would mean that a mere explanation in the
statement under Section 313 that the amount was
received towards a loan will not be sufficient. The
contrary position should be established by the
accused either from inferences legally drawn from
the evidence on record let in by the prosecution or
by letting in direct evidence in regard to the
explanation. The statutory presumption raised under
Section 4 will not stand rebutted merely by offering
an explanation under Section 313 if such
explanation does not find support from the evidence
let in by the prosecution.”

11.

I may also refer to a decision of the Apex Court in

Dhanvantrai Balwantrai Desai v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1964
SC 575 where it was observed:
“Therefore, the Court has no choice in the matter,
once it is established that the accused person has
received a sum of money which was not due to him
as a legal remuneration. Of course, it is open to that
person to show that though that money was not due
to him as legal remuneration, it was legally due to
him in some other manner or that he had received it
under a transaction or an arrangement which was
lawful. The burden resting on the accused person in
such a case would not be as light as it is where a
presumption is raised under Section 114 of the
Evidence Act and cannot be held to be discharged
merely by reason of the fact that the explanation
offered by the accused is reasonable and probable.
It must further be shown that the explanation is a
true one. The words „unless the contrary is proved‟
which occur in this provision make it clear that the
presumption has to be rebutted by „proof‟ and not by
a bare explanation which is merely plausible . A fact
is said to be proved when its existence is directly
Crl. A. 9/1999

18

established or when upon the material before it the
Court finds its existence to be so probable that a
reasonable man would act on the supposition that it
exists. Unless, therefore, the explanation is
supported by proof, the presumption created by the
provision cannot be said to be rebutted. Something
more than raising a reasonable probability, is
required for rebutting a presumption of law. The
bare word of the appellant is not enough and it was
necessary for him to show that upon the established
practice his explanation was so probable that a
prudent man ought, in the circumstances, to have
accepted it .”
(emphasis supplied)

12.

Keeping in mind the observations of the Apex Court in its

decisions as quoted above there is not an iota of doubt that the
appellant-accused in the case at hand has failed to rebut the
statutory presumption which has to be raised against him under
Section 20 of the Act in view of the prosecution having proved
that at the time of raid he had received Rs. 300 from the
complainant and his own admission also about his receiving
payment of Rs. 300 from the complainant at the time of raid. The
appellant-accused in the present case has not lead any evidence
in defence to prove his innocence. He had not even examined
himself as a witness to state on oath that the amount received by

Crl. A. 9/1999

19

him at the time of raid was not bribe money but was actually
balance payment towards loan amount. Not only that not even a
suggestion was put to the complainant that Rs. 1000/- had been
given to him as a loan some days prior to the raid or that Rs.
700/- which the complainant had returned to the appellantaccused few days back and Rs. 300/- paid on the day of raid was
towards repayment of that loan amount. In the absence of crossexamination of the complainant in this regard the suggestion put
to the panch-witness and the raid-officer that the accused had
given loan to the complainant and the complainant had returned
the loan amount only becomes meaningless and of no help to the
appellant-accused.

13.

In these circumstances, I do not find any infirmity in the

judgment passed by the learned trial Court holding the appellantaccused guilty and convicting him. Consequently this appeal
being devoid of any merit is dismissed. The sentence of
imprisonment awarded to the appellant-accused was suspended
during the pendency of this appeal and now that his appeal

Crl. A. 9/1999

20

stands dismissed he shall be taken into custody to be sent to jail
to serve out the remaining sentence of imprisonment.

P.K.BHASIN,J

March 24, 2008
sh

Crl. A. 9/1999

21

