*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 268 OF 1997

%
#
!

Date of Decision: 27th February, 2008
R. Ravi Chandran

....Appellant
Through: None

versus
$
^

*

Djibrilla Diallo

....Respondent
Through : None

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
This appeal has been filed against the judgment dated
28.05.1997 passed by the Designated Court under the Narcotic

Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 („NDPS Act‟ in short)
in Sessions Case no. 64/1996 whereby the respondent was
acquitted of the charges under Sections 21 and 23 r/w Section
28 of the NDPS Act solely on the ground of non-compliance of the
mandatory provisions of Section 42 of the NDPS Act at the time
of apprehension and search of the respondent and his baggage
at Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi on 28/29-2-1996
when he had gone there to fly to London.

2.

The facts leading to the prosecution of the respondent

herein as noticed by the learned trial court in para nos. 1 to 7 of
the impugned judgment are as under:-

“ …..on the intervening night of 28/29.2.96 in the
International Departure Hall of I.G.I. Airport New
Delhi while proceeding on BA Flight No. 142 and on
his search for having been found to be in illegal and
unlawful possession of 1704 gms. diacetyl
morphine/heroin and thereby prima facie guilty of an
offence punishable U/s 21 of the NDPS Act as also
his attempt to export the said contraband out of the
country and thereby punishable for an offence U/s
28 read with 23 of the said act.
2. The case of the prosecution is that after the
accused had been cleared by the customs he was
intercepted by PW-1 and the accused was carrying

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

2

three hand bags but had no checked in luggage. Two
panch witnesses PW-2 Viresh and PW-4 Shri Ram
Avtar were asked to join the proceedings and the
accused on being questioning was noticed not to
understand the English language as he was a French
national and one Sanjay, a custom officer brought
PW-3 Shri Gopi Nath, the interpreter who could
understand both the English and the French
language.
3. In the presence of the two panch witnesses the
provisions of Sec. 50 of the NDPS Act were explained
by the interpreter PW-3 to the accused about his
option of having his search of the person and the
bags conducted before a Gazetted Officer or a
Magistrate vide Ex. PW1/A to which vide
endorsement Ex. PW1/B he stated that he has no
objection if his search is conducted by any custom
officer. As per the version of the prosecution the
contents of the requirement of the notice U/s 50 of
the NDPS Act had been explained to the accused
through PW-3.
4. That on the search of the yellowish brown printed
zipper bag Ex. P-5 which was opened with the key Ex.
P-13 produced by the accused, it revealed a blue
coloured bucket with a white lining Ex. P-6 which on
opening contained six plastic containers of a body
lotion which when cut opened contained a polythene
packing each except one container which contained
two polythene packets one big and one small. In all
seven poly packets were recovered from the six
plastic containers of which six contained a brownish
powder and one packet contained whitish powder
which when tested with the field testing kit gave
positive indication for heroin. The total weight of the
heroin recovered from the 7 packets weighed 1704
gms.
5. Two representative samples of 5 gm. each were
drawn from each of the 7 poly packets; in all 14
samples were drawn which were subsequently
placed in a polythene pouch each and kept in a
brown paper envelope and sealed with the seal

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

3

No.08 of the Air Customs over a paper slip bearing
the sign. of the accused, the two panch witnesses
and PW-1. The remaining contraband was also
sealed by putting it back in the six plastic containers
and then again in the blue coloured bucket Ex. P-6 as
also the wrappers and stitched with a cloth and
sealed in the similar fashion over a paper slip
bearing the sign. of the aforestated persons. The
personal effects of the accused i.e. the air ticket Ex.
P-1, Boarding Card Ex. P-2 and the three receipts of
hotel Roxy Ex. P-3/1-3 were also seized and sealed in
a similar fashion.
6. The panchnama Ex.PW1/C was prepared on the
spot.
7. The case property including one set of sample was
deposited with the SDO Arrival vide detention receipt
Ex. PW1/D to Ex. PW1/F. The second set of sample
which were to be sent to the CRCL for analysis was
deposited by PW-1 with PW-5 Shri Lovdev, the Supdt.
The statement of the accused was recorded in his
handwriting in French through PW-3, the interpreter
in the presence of PW-5 and is Ex. PW3/A and the
English translation of the same is Ex. PW3/B. The
samples were sent for analysis through PW-5 and the
report of the CRCL is Ex. PW6/A testing the drawn
samples positive as heroin.”

3.

On the aforesaid allegations the respondent was charged

and tried by the learned trial Court for the commission of offences
punishable under Sections 21 and 23 r/w Section 28 of the NDPS
Act. The prosecution had examined six witnesses in all to prove
the aforesaid allegations levelled against the respondent. The
respondent had at the time of recording of his statement under

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

4

Section 313 Cr.P.C. denied the entire prosecution case and
pleaded false implication. He had pleaded that this was a false
and fabricated case foisted upon him because of his having
fought with custom officers and slapping one of them.

4.

Before the trial Court, acquittal of the accused was sought

on the grounds of non-compliance of the provisions of Sections
42, 50 and 57 of the NDPS Act. The learned trial Judge found on
considering the prosecution evidence that there was no noncompliance of the provisions of Section 50 and 57 of the NDPS
Act. However, accepting the submissions of learned counsel for
accused regarding non-compliance of the provisions of Section 42
of NDPS Act, learned trial Court after concluding that since the
compliance of Section 42 of the NDPS Act was mandatory and
the Search Officer having not complied with the same passed an
order of the acquittal of the accused on this ground alone.

5.

The prosecution felt aggrieved by the acquittal of the

accused and approached this Court with a prayer for leave to

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

5

appeal against the impugned judgment of the trial Court whereby
the respondent was acquitted. Leave to appeal was granted and
the appeal was admitted for hearing.

6.

There was no appearance in the matter from both the sides

when the appeal was taken up for hearing. Since the trial Court
record was available, this Court decided to dispose of the appeal
on merits instead of dismissing it for non-prosecution since from
the non-appearance of the counsel for the parties who were
earlier appearing it appeared to this Court that none of them was
interested in advancing arguments. At least Custom Department‟s
counsel should have appeared to pursue this appeal in which
reversal of acquittal of the accused for the offence under the
NDPS Act was being sought.

7.

This being an appeal against acquittal by the trial Court an

Appellate Court before interfering with the judgment of the trial
Court acquitting the accused has to keep in mind certain
guidelines which have been laid down by the Apex Court in

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

6

various judgments. I may refer to two of them only. In “State of
Punjab Vs. Ajaib Singh and Ors.” (2005) 9 SCC 94, it was
observed by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court that:
“11. This being an appeal against acquittal we have
with the assistance of counsel for the parties gone
through the evidence on record with a view to find
whether the view favourable to the accused taken by
the High Court is based on the evidence on record and
is reasonable. It is well settled that in an appeal
against acquittal, the appellate court is entitled to reappreciate the evidence on record, but having done so
it will not interfere with the order of acquittal unless it
finds the view of the court acquitting the accused to be
unreasonable or perverse. If the view recorded by the
court acquitting the accused is a possible, reasonable
view of the evidence on record, the order of acquittal
ought not to be reversed.”

In its earlier decision reported as AIR 2000 SC 2212,
“Narinder Sing & Anr. V. State of Punjab”, Hon‟ble Supreme Court
had observed:
“12. The High Court while considering the appeal
against acquittal is not exercising any extra ordinary
jurisdiction. Its power to consider and decide the
appeal against the judgment of acquittal is same as
against the judgment of conviction. However, there are
certain guidelines. One is that if there are two views on
evidence which are reasonably possible one supporting
acquittal and the other indicating conviction. High
Court in an appeal against judgment of acquittal
should not interfere merely because it feels that it
would as a trial Court have taken a different view. High
Court will certainly interfere if it finds that the

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

7

judgment of acquittal is manifestly erroneous and that
the trial Court has acted with material irregularity or its
appreciation of evidence lacks coherence or it has
made assumptions which are unwarranted or its
evaluation of evidence is such as to shock the sense of
justice and which has led to miscarriage of justice or
its reasoning is unintelligible or defies logic or its
conclusions are against the weight of the evidence.”

8.

Now, keeping in mind these views of the Hon‟ble supreme

Court it is to be seen if the impugned judgment in the present
case can be said to be perverse. As noticed already, the
respondent was tried on the allegations that on the night of
28/29-2-1996 he was intercepted in the International Departure
Hall of IGI Airport at New Delhi while he was proceeding to board
a plane (BA Flight no. 142) for flying to London and during the
search of his baggage 1704 gms. of heroin was recovered. The
learned trial Court came to the conclusion that there was noncompliance of the provisions of Section 42 of the NDPS Act since
that part of the Airport where the accused was intercepted and his
baggage was searched was not a „public place‟ and so the
provisions of Section 43 were not attracted as was the
submission made before it on behalf of the Custom Department.

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

8

For coming to this conclusion the learned Trial Court relied upon
the statement of the Search Officer PW1 Sh. Ravi Chandran, who
was the ACP (Preventive) and posted at the Departure Hall of the
IGI Airport, New Delhi on the night when the respondent was
apprehended, in his cross-examination, to the effect that the area
where the accused was intercepted was not open to public
persons without prior permission of the superior custom officers.
Another witness, PW2 Sh. Viresh was a Safai Karamchari posted
at IGI Airport and was on duty at the Departure Hall on the night
of 29.02.1996. In cross-examination he had also claimed that the
Customs Counter where the accused was intercepted was
intercepted was in the Departure Hall but one could visit that
place only with a permit/pass. Referring to these answers of PW1
and PW2 given in their cross-examination on behalf of the
accused the learned trial Judge in para 21 of the impugned
judgment observed as under:
“21.
It is thus clear from the aforestated
testimony of PW-1 & PW-2 that the custom counter of
the departure hall where the accused was searched
was a place which was not accessible to the public at
large and entry was restricted and was permissible
only by a permit or a pass or was for the departing

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

9

passengers………”

And then trial Court proceeded ahead to acquit the accused
since the search officer had not complied with the mandatory
requirements of Section 42 of the NDPS Act.

9.

Section 42 of the NDPS Act reads as under:
(1)
Any such officer (being an officer superior in
rank to a peon, sepoy or constable) of the departments
of central excise, narcotics, customs, revenue,
intelligence or any other department of the Central
Government including para-military forces or armed
forces as is empowered in this behalf by general or
special order by the Central Government, or any such
officer (being an officer superior in rank to a person,
sepoy or constable) of the revenue, drugs control,
excise, police or any other department of a State
Government as is empowered in this behalf by general
or special order of the State Government, if he has
reason to believe from personal knowledge or
information given by any person and taken down in
writing
that any narcotic drug, or psychotropic
substance, or controlled substance in respect of which
an offence punishable under this Act has been
committed or any document or other article which may
furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or
any illegally acquired property or any document or
other article which may furnish evidence of holding any
illegally acquired property which is liable for seizure or
freezing or forfeiture under Chapter V-A of this Act is
kept or concealed in any building, conveyance or
enclosed place, may between sunrise and sunset,-

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

10

(a) enter into and search any such building, conveyance or
place;
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove
any obstacle to such entry;
(c) seize such drug or substance and all materials used in
the manufacture thereof and any other article and any
animal or conveyance which he has reason to believe
to be liable to confiscation under this Act and any
document or other article which he has reason to
believe may furnish evidence of the commission of any
offence punishable under this Act or furnish evidence
of holding any illegally acquired property which is liable
for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter V-A
of this Act; and
(d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any
person whom he has reason to believe to have
committed any offence punishable under this Act:
Provided that if such officer has reason to
believe that a search warrant or authorization cannot
be obtained without affording opportunity for the
concealment of evidence or facility for the escape of
an offender, he may enter and search such building,
conveyance or enclosed place at any time between
sunset and sunrise after recording the grounds of his
belief.
(2)
Where an officer takes down any information in
writing under sub-section (1) or records grounds for his
belief under the proviso, thereto, he shall within
seventy-two hours send a copy thereof to his
immediate official superior.”

From a reading of this Section it is clear that the mandate of
law is that the Search Officer should reduce the information

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

11

received by him through a secret informer or the information
which he may have from his personal knowledge about the
commission of an offence punishable under the NDPS Act in
writing before proceeding to conduct the search and detain any
person who is suspected to have committed such an offence. This
was held to be so by a three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court
also in one of its judgments which is reported as AIR 2001 SC
3190, “Sajan Abraham v. State of Kerala” . This is what was
observed by the Supreme Court in para 6 of its judgment:

“….It is true under Section 42(1), the officer concerned,
when he has reason to believe from his personal
knowledge or information received from any person,
he is obliged to take it down in writing if such
information constitutes an offence punishable under
Chapter IV of the Act and send it forthwith to his
immediate superior….”
(underlining is mine)

10.

In the present case, admittedly, the Search Officer, PW-1,

did not reduce into writing the information which he had about
the commission of an offence under the NDPS Act by the
respondent herein nor did he give any written intimation to his
immediate superior about his suspicion that the respondent

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

12

could be in possession of heroin etc. Before the trial Court as
well as in the grounds of appeal challenging the acquittal of the
respondent it was contended on behalf of the prosecution that
the provisions of Section 42 were not attracted in the present
case since the search of the baggage and the person of the
respondent was conducted at a „public place‟. The learned trial
Court had, as noticed already, come to the conclusion that since
the place where search was conducted was a restricted place not
open to public at large Section 42 was attracted. In my view,
there is no perversity in this conclusion of the learned trial Court
since there was a decision of a Single Judge Bench of this Court
itself, which is reported as 1997 Cri.L.J. 2741, “Richard Thomas
Wrigley v. Customs and Anr.” wherein it had been held that the
customs counter at the Airport where a passenger has to go
after immigration check is not a public place since that place is
not open to the members of general public. In that case, the
learned Single Judge of this Court while acquitting the accused
of the charges under NDPS Act because of the failure of the
Search Officer to comply with the mandatory requirements under

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

13

Section 42 of the NDPS Act before searching the baggage of the
accused near the Customs Counter at the Airport had observed
as under:
“The basic difference between Section 42 and Section
43 is that while the provisions of Section 42 of the Act
would be attracted if it involves search of vehicles,
places, premises. Section 43 applies to search and
seizure at a public place. In the present case, the
question would be whether Luggage Hold Area of the
Customs Authorities could be described as a public
place. The Luggage Hold Area is an area set apart in
the departure hall after the Airlines Check-in counter
and the immigration counter. When the passengers
check in their luggage to be loaded into the luggage
hold of the aircraft and collect their boarding cards and
they thereafter pass through the Immigration Check
counter and reach the customs counter. There they
are checked up by the Customs Authorities and the
luggage hold area is behind the customs counter which
area is not open to public and the entry is restricted. In
that sense that area cannot be described as a public
place because the entry thereto is restricted. The
luggage after check in is brought to this area before
being loaded into the aircraft, in this case luggage was
kept in the luggage hold area and it was brought for
search and the luggage was duly opened and searched
wherefrom the incriminating material was recovered.
The question arises if the baggage was searched in the
customs area by taking baggage out from the luggage
hold area. Even the customs counters which are
beyond the Immigration check counter where again
members of general public cannot enter without due
permissions. Therefore, that area would be covered by
the provisions of Section 42 of the Act. The person
concerned is required to take down information in
writing and forthwith send a copy thereof to his
immediate superior and admittedly this was not
complied with in the present case. The provisions of
Section 42 of the Act are mandatory.”
(emphasis laid)

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

14

11.

In view of this decision of this Court itself the learned trial

Court cannot be said to have erred in any way in concluding that
the search of the baggage of the respondent not having been
conducted at a public place the Search Officer was obliged to
comply with the mandatory requirement of Section 42 of the
NDPS Act and that having not been done the accused was entitled
to be acquitted. Thus, there being no perversity in the reasoning
given by the learned trial Judge for acquitting the respondent this
appeal is bound to fail and is accordingly dismissed.

P.K.BHASIN,J
February 27, 2008
sh

Crl.A.No. 268/1997

15

