*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No. 5024/2006

Date of Decision: 26th November, 2007

%

#

Dinesh Kumar

!

.....Petitioner
Through Mr. Braham Singh, Advocate

Versus

$

State of NCT of Delhi & Ors.

^

.....Respondents

Through Mr. Pawan Behl, APP
Mr. Ajay Kumar Gupta, Advocate for respondent no. 4complainant.

CORAM:
*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:

The petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (‘Cr.P.C.’ in short) for quashing of FIR no.
568/2002 for the offences punishable under Sections 406/420/120-B IPC
registered on 31.12.2002 at police station Ambedkar Nagar and also the criminal
proceedings arising out of the said FIR pending in the Court of Ms. Geetanjali Goel,
Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi.
2. The facts leading to the registration of FIR against the petitioner and his
prosecution are that for the economic development of educated urban people,
the Central Government of India launched 'Prime Minister Rojgar Yogna' for
which purpose financial assistance was also provided to the unemployed
persons. To avail that facility petitioner applied for a loan for purchase of a
computer set and after considering the case of the petitioner the Commissioner
of Industries of National Capital Territory Government of Delhi recommended his
case for financial assistance to the respondent no. 4, Punjab National Bank
which then sanctioned a loan of Rs. 60,000/- to the petitioner on 18-3-1996.

For that purpose an agreement was executed between the respondent no. 4 and
the petitioner and the petitioner hypothecated the computer set with the bank
but later on the computer in question was disposed of by the petitioner which
resulted in the violation of terms and conditions of the loan agreement. To
recover that loan amount respondent no. 4 got registered a criminal case at
Police Station Ambedkar Nagar for the offences under Sections 406/420/120-B
I.P.C. The police investigated the matter and after completion of the
investigation filed charge sheet in the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, New
Delhi where the case is still pending.
3. During the pendency of the above said criminal proceedings the petitioner and
respondent no. 4 after having resolved their dispute regarding the loan amount
have come to an amicable settlement and the petitioner is stated to have made
the payment to the complainant bank as per the settlement.
4. Since one of the offences for which the petitioner was being prosecuted,
namely, under Section 406 IPC was not compoundable as per the provisions of
Section 320 Cr.P.C the present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. was filed by
the petitioner. Notice of the petition was sent to the State and the complainant
bank. The bank entered appearance through its counsel on 10.10.2007. In
support of this petition learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance upon
one judgment of the Apex Court in “Nalini Shankaran & Ors. v. Neelkanth
Mahadeo Kamble & Ors.” 2007 (2) Crimes 329 (SC), and three judgments of this

Court in “Rishi Raj & Ors. v. The State” 2001 (2) JCC 234, “Ajay Kumar & Ors. v.
State & Ors.” 131(2006)DLT 130 and “D.C. Singham v. State & Anr.” 2006 (1)
JCC 371.
5. The counsel for respondent no. 4-complainant submitted before this Court that
bank has received its loan amount and affirmed that the matter has been
amicably resolved and so it was no more interested in pursuing the case against
the petitioner. He supported the prayer of the petitioner stating that respondent
no. 4 has no objection if the FIR and criminal proceedings arising there from are
quashed.
6. Learned APP for the State, however, opposed quashing of the FIR on the ground
that allegations against the petitioner are grave in nature and the offence under
Section 406 IPC is not compoundable under Section 320 Cr.P.C. and if this
offence is permitted to be compounded that would amount to bye-passing the
provisions of section 320 Cr.P.C. which should not be done by this Court by
exercising the inherent jurisdiction vested in it under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
7. I have given my due consideration to the rival submissions. It is now well settled
by many judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that FIRs even in respect of
those offences which are not compoundable under Section 320 Cr.P.C. can be
quashed as also the criminal proceedings emanating therefrom, if it is felt while
dealing with a quashing petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. that it would secure
the ends of justice if the FIR and criminal proceedings arising therefrom are

quashed and continuation of the criminal proceedings would amount to abuse of
the process of law. Reference in this regard can be made in one of the
judgments of Hon’ble Supreme Court which is reported in “B.S.Joshi & Ors. Vs.
State of Haryana & Anr.”, AIR 2003 SC 1386 wherein it has been so held by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court. It is significant to note that one of the offences in that
case was also under section 406 I.P.C. but still the criminal proceedings were
quashed because of the compromise between the complainant side and the
accused persons. In the present case, the FIR against the accused came to be
registered primarily because of his failure to repay the loan amount which the
complainant bank had disbursed. Since the complainant has received back the
loan amount from the accused it would secure the ends of justice if the FIR
registered against the petitioner and the ongoing trial are quashed.
8.

This petition is accordingly allowed and consequently FIR No. 558/2002

under Sections 406/420/120-B IPC registered at police station Ambedkar Nagar
and criminal proceedings arising therefrom pending in the Court of Ms. Geetanjali
Goel, Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi are hereby quashed.

P.K.BHASIN,J
November 26, 2007
sh

