*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No. 7256-59/2006
Date of Decision: 26th November, 2007

%

#

Santosh & Ors.

!

.....Petitioners
Through Mr. Francis Paul, Advocate along with petitioners in
person.

Versus
$

State of NCT of Delhi & Ors.

^

.....Respondents

Through Mr. O.P.Saxena, APP for the State.
Complainant present in person.
CORAM:

*

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(No)
3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(No)

JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The petitioners have filed the present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for

quashing of the FIR NO.689/06 registered under Section 420/34 IPC at police
station, Badarpur.
2.

The facts of the case are that on 1.7.2005 the petitioners, who are property

dealers, sold a piece of land measuring 40 square yards situated at Roshan Nagar,
Village Agvanpur, District Faridabad, Haryana at the rate of Rs.1500/- per square
yards payable in the monthly instalment of Rs.2000/- to the complainant Mohd.
Afzal, who after paying two instalments constructed one room and one latrine-cumbathroom but the same were subsequently demolished by Faridabad Municipal
Corporation in January 2006. On the complainant lodging a complaint with the
petitioners regarding demolition of the construction raised by him by Faridabad
Municipal Corporation, they constructed one room on the aforesaid plot. However
once again, that construction was demolished by the Municipal Corporation.
Thereafter, the complainant not only stopped paying the installments but also
demanded back his money from the petitioners who refused to return the amount
paid by the complainant to them. Then the complainant lodged a complaint
against the petitioners. It was his grievance that he had been cheated by the
petitioners of Rs.9000/- which he had paid to them in installments towards the
price of the plot and as a result of cheating he had also been deprived of
Rs.45,000/- approximately which he had spent on construction on the plot which
the petitioners had sold to him.
3.

When the matter was still under investigation, the complainant and the

petitioners arrived at some settlement and resolved their disputes amicably and
thereafter the petitioners-accused filed the present petition for quashing of the
aforesaid FIR registered against them at the instance of the complainant. On
10.9.2007, the petitioners as well as complainant, who was identified by the
counsel for the petitioners, appeared in person in court and all of them affirmed
that the matter had been amicably settled. The complainant has filed his affidavit
also to that effect.
4.

Since the only offence alleged to have been committed by the petitioners was

under Section 420 IPC, learned APP for the State had nothing to say in the matter
because of the aggrieved person having settled the dispute with the accused
person who had cheated him.
5.

It is now well settled that if it is felt by High Court while dealing with a

quashing petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. that it would secure the ends of justice
if the FIR in question is quashed then FIR can be quashed. So, since in this simple
case of cheating, the victim and the accused persons having arrived at an amicable
settlement no useful purpose would be served by allowing continuation of
investigation by the police and if the FIR is not quashed in the aforesaid
circumstances it would amount to abuse of process of law by unnecessarily giving
a chance to the police to file a charge sheet against the accused persons and to
force them to face criminal proceedings despite their having settled the matter
with the complainant. Accordingly, FIR No. 689/06 registered under Section

420/34 IPC at police station Badarpur is quashed.
November 26, 2007

P.K.BHASIN,J

