*
%

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 236 OF 1999

+
#
!

Date of Decision: 28th April, 2008
DHAN BAHADUR

...Appellant
Through: Mr. Rajender Kumar
and
Mr.
S.P.
Pandey,
Advocates.
versus

$
^

STATE

...Respondent
Through: Mr. Sanjay Lao, APP
WITH

+
#
!

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 244 OF 1999
LAL SINGH

..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Rajender Kumar
and
Mr.
S.P.
Pandey,
Advocate
Versus

$
^

*

STATE

.....Respondent
Through : Mr. Sanjay Lao, APP

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?(No)
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?(Yes)
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the digest?(Yes)
JUDGMENT
P.K.BHASIN, J:
The

appellants

have

assailed the

judgment

dated

16.04.1999 and order dated 20.04.1999 rendered by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi in Sessions Case No.20/96
whereby they were convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 304(Part I) read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code
and were awarded sentence of five years rigorous imprisonment
and a fine of Rs.5000/- each with a default clause of six months
rigorous imprisonment in case of non-payment of fine. Since
these two appeals arose out of the same judgment they were
heard together and will now be disposed of by this common
judgment.

2.

The relevant facts leading to the trial and conviction of the

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

2

appellants for causing the death of one Mahender Singh have
been noticed by the learned trial Court in para nos. 1 & 2 of the
impugned judgment and are reproduced as under:-

“ Destiny was cruel to Mahender Singh on ill-fated
night of 25.5.95 at about 11/12 pm when he was
coming from Bangla Sahib Gurudwara alongwith his
wife and other family members in Maruti van No.
DBV 8026. When they reached near Nova Steel
Mills, Mandoli Road, a truck No. UP 80C 9607 was
standing on the road. Thus the road was blocked
due to improper parking of the truck and the van
could not pass. The house of Mahender Singh was
nearby. Kaka Singh was the driver of the van. He
stopped the van and got down and went to the truck
and asked the driver to park the truck aside leaving
the road. Dhan Bahadur was the driver of the truck
and Lal Singh was the cleaner. There was an
altercation between Dhan Bahadur and Lal Singh,
occupant of the truck with Kaka Singh, driver of the
van and Kaka Singh was assaulted on his face by
Dhan Bahadur. Since there was commotion,
Mahender Singh got down from the van to rescue
Kaka Singh the driver. Mahender Singh was badly
assaulted by Dhan Bahadur by an iron rod on his
head. Lal Singh caught hold of Mahender Singh. Due
to repeated blows of iron rod on the head of
Mahender Singh, he received serious injuries and
became unconscious and fell down on the ground
and was immediately removed in Maruti Van to GTB
Hospital. Since there was no Cat Scan facility
available at GTB Hospital, as such Mahender Singh
was removed to St. Stephans Hospital and was got
admitted there where he expired on 27.5.95.
2.
DD No. 69B dated 25.5.95 was recorded
at P.S. Man Sarovar Park on the basis of telephonic
information given by Bittoo at 12.25 a.m. (night)

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

3

that near Nova Steel Mills a truckman had
assaulted a man who is lying unconscious. HC
Charan Pal alongwith constable Ram Pal Singh of
Homeguard went to the spot and from there to GTB
Hospital since he came to know from the spot that
injured Mahender Singh has been removed to
hospital. He collected the MLC of Mahender Singh
who was unfit for his statement. From the Hospital,
he returned to the spot and found SI Har Pal Singh
alongwith his staff. HC Charan Pal gave DD No. 69B
to SI Har Pal Singh who on this DD prepared a rukka
and the same was sent to the police station on the
basis of which case FIR U/s 308 IPC bearing FIR No.
86/95 was registered. IO later on arrested Dhan
Bahadur. Accused Lal Singh was subsequently
arrested by SI Fateh Singh. During the course of
investigation, accused Dhan Bahadur in pursuance
of his disclosure statement got recovered an iron
rod. After completion of investigation the challan
was filed against accused persons in the court of
Metropolitan Magistrate U/s 304/34 IPC from
where it was committed to the sessions court for
trial.”

3.

The trial Court charged and tried the appellants-accused

under Section 304(I) read with Section 34 IPC and relying upon
the evidence of PW-1, PW-5 and PW-6, who were examined as
the eye-witnesses to the incident, found both the accused guilty
and convicted and sentenced them as noticed already. Feeling
aggrieved, both the convicted accused have challenged their
conviction by filing these appeals.

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

4

4.

Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants

vehemently argued that the prosecution had miserably failed to
establish that the appellants-accused Dhan Bahadur and Lal
Singh had caused the death of the deceased Mahender Singh.
Learned counsel also contended that there were many infirmities
in the prosecution case which had been totally ignored by the
learned trial court and the accused have been convicted without
there being any reliable evidence against anyone of them. It was
also contended that none of the eye witnesses examined by the
prosecution could be said to be an eye witness of the incident
and their evidence was not reliable at all and consequently their
identification of the appellants as the assailants and one iron rod
allegedly got recovered by Dhan Bahadur as the weapon of
offence was of no value.

5.

Learned Additional Public Prosecutor, on the other hand,

while fully supporting the impugned judgment of the trial Court
contended that there were no infirmities in the impugned

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

5

judgment and the two appellants having been rightly convicted
their appeals deserve to be dismissed by this Court.

6.

With the assistance of the learned counsel for the

appellants and the learned prosecutor I have gone through the
evidence of material prosecution witnesses and on an
independent analysis thereof I have unhesitatingly come to the
conclusion that the prosecution case cannot be said have been
established beyond reasonable doubt. As noticed already, the
prosecution had sought to establish its case on the basis of
evidence of three eye-witnesses all of whom are the family
members of the deceased and were all sitting in the van in which
they had come from the gurudwara upto the place of incident
where their van had to be stopped in front of Nova Steel Mills,
Mandoli Road, since the appellants’ truck was parked there due
to which the van could not go further. When the appellant Dhan
Bahadur, who was the driver of that truck, was asked to remove
his truck from the way by the driver of the van he (the driver of

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

6

the van, who has not been examined by the prosecution) was
assaulted by Dhan Bahadur and when the deceased Mahender
Singh came to the spot after getting down from his van to save
his driver he was also severely beaten with an iron rod by Dhan
Bahadur and appellant-accused Lal Singh, who was the cleaner of
that truck, had at that time caught hold of Mahender Singh. This
entire incident was allegedly witnessed by PW-1, Tarsem Singh,
who is the son of the deceased, PW-5 Gurdayal Kaur, widow of
the deceased and PW-6 Jeet Singh, uncle of PW-1, who was also
coming in the van from the gurudwara alongwith the deceased
and PWs 1 and 5. All these witnesses have no doubt deposed
that Dhan Bahadur had assaulted the deceased when he had
tried to save his driver Kaka when he was assaulted by Dhan
Bahadur but there are very serious doubts about their having
actually witnessed the incident and that is so for more than one
reason.

PW-9, HC Charan Pal is the police official who had

reached the spot on getting the information on telephone from a
stranger that some truck wallah had injured someone and that
person was lying unconscious on the road in front of Nova Steel

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

7

Mills. This witness had stated in his evidence that he had
proceeded to the spot opposite Nova Steel Mills on receipt of DD
no. 69B but there where he did not find any eye-witness and the
injured had also been removed to GTB Hospital. He then along
with Ct. Ram Pal Singh(PW-12) went to GTB Hospital where
Mahender Singh, the deceased, was found admitted but was unfit
to make a statement and even there he did not come across any
eye-witness of the incident. He collected the MLC of Mahender
Singh and then again went to the spot where the incident took
place and there the appellant Dhan Bahadur was arrested.

7.

It is surprising as to how the appellant Dhan Bahadur could

be arrested on the night of the incident itself when by that time
the police had no information as to how the deceased Mahender
Singh had got injured and who had assaulted him. There is no
doubt that appellant Dhan Bahadur had admitted that he was the
driver and appellant Lal Singh had not denied that he was the
cleaner of the truck no. UP-80C-9607 which as per the

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

8

prosecution case was parked on the road in front of Nova Steel
Mills but that fact by itself was not sufficient to infer that they had
injured the deceased. None of the so-called eye witnesses of the
incident, about which they have deposed in Court, had reported
the incident to the police immediately after the incident and in
fact none of them had himself approached the police to lodge a
complaint. When the police approached them two days after the
incident only then they came out with their version of the incident
in which they blamed the driver and cleaner of the truck to be
responsible for the injuries caused to the deceased. There is no
explanation for the delay in their informing to the police about the
incident. So, their conduct after the incident was highly unnatural
which makes their claim of being eye witnesses highly doubtful.
The doubtful manner of arrest of the appellant Dhan Bahadur
also makes the very foundation of the prosecution case highly
doubtful and in fact for this reason alone the entire prosecution
case was liable to be rejected. As far as other accused Lal Singh
is concerned he had surrendered himself in Court on 26/10/95
after Dhan Bahadur had involved him also in the incident in his

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

9

confessional statement which was allegedly made by him after
his arrest.

8.

Even otherwise the dock identification of the appellants by

the three eye witnesses for the first time without there being any
prior test identification parade during the investigation is
valueless in the facts and circumstances of this case and in
taking this view I am fortified by the two decisions of the Apex
Court reported as 1995 JCC 585, “Ten Singh v. State” and 1982
SCC (Crl.) 334, “Mohanlal Gangaram Gehani v. State of
Maharashtra” which were cited by the learned counsel for the
appellants. In these judgments the Apex Court has held that the
testimony of a witness who identifies the accused for the first
time in Court without knowing him before would be valueless in
the absence of prior test identification parade. So, in the present
case the identification of the appellants by the three eye
witnesses for the first time in Court becomes valueless in view of
the fact that the witnesses did not know the appellants prior to

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

10

the date of incident.

9.

Although the prosecution had not offered any explanation

for not arranging test identification parade after the arrest of the
accused the learned trial Court still proceeded to convict the
appellants in the absence of test identification parade on the
ground that prosecution had succeeded in establishing that the
appellant Dhan Bahadur was arrested at the place of incident
itself soon after the incident. In my view the findings of the
learned trial Court in this regard are upon a wrong and
misreading of the prosecution case set out in the charge-sheet
and also its evidence. Admittedly, appellant Dhan Bahadur was
arrested at the spot but sometime after the incident and not at
the time of the incident by any eye-witness. If any eye witness
had apprehended Dhan Bahadur while he was assaulting the two
injured or while he was running away the position would have
been different. That however is not the prosecution case. Just
because this accused was arrested after the incident from the

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

11

place of incident where, of course admittedly he had parked his
truck, that will not be sufficient to say that test identification
parade was not necessary. Since I have already held that the very
arrest of Dhan Bahadur was not justified when he was arrested
because at that time the police had no information that the
deceased had been assaulted by the driver and cleaner of truck
no. UP-80C-9607. It appears that since somebody had informed
the police on phone that some truck driver had assaulted
someone outside Nova Steel Mills the investigating officer PW-19
SI Harpal Singh finding the truck of Dhan Bahadur parked outside
Nova Steel Mills arrested him just like that and later on a case
was made out with the help of the so-called eye-witnesses two
days after the incident that it was the driver of the said truck who
had assaulted the deceased with the help of its cleaner Lal Singh.
The prosecution story does not inspire confidence at all.

10.

Regarding the identification of other appellant Lal Singh the

trial Court had come to the conclusion that in the disclosure

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

12

statement of appellant Dhan Bahadur he had also roped in Lal
Singh and on that basis he was made an accused and he had
also not disputed that he was the cleaner on duty on truck no.
9607 with Dhan Bahadur on the night of the incident. In my view
this view taken by the trial Judge was also not correct view which
could be taken. Surrender of this accused did not show that he
was actually involved in the incident and confessional statement
of Dhan Bahadur could not be used against him and for him also
test identification was required to be conducted which was not
done. So, his identification also in Court by the eye-witnesses for
the first time two years after the incident is valueless.

11.

It was the submission of the learned prosecutor Mr. Lao

that because of the failure of the investigating officer to get test
identification parade conducted the accused should not be given
any benefit of that lapse and for that reason the wholly reliable
evidence of the eye witnesses examined by the prosecution
should not be rejected. It was also submitted that all the three

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

13

eye witnesses of the incident examined by the prosecution were
the family members of the deceased within whose sight the
deceased was brutally assaulted and as such they cannot be
expected to falsely implicate innocent persons. In my view also
no accused can be given any benefit because of some lapses
committed by the investigating agency during investigation but
those lapses can be ignored only in case prosecution adduces
reliable evidence regarding the involvement of the accused on
trial. In the present case, the prosecution had sought to rely upon
the evidence of the three eye witnesses who were the family
members of the deceased and I also agree with the submission
of the prosecutor that being the close relatives of the deceased
they would not normally to falsely implicate someone. However,
as noticed already, I have not found any of the three eye
witnesses examined by the prosecution to be reliable because of
their unnatural conduct in not even reporting the incident to the
police either immediately after the incident or even on the next
day. In fact, as also noticed already, none of them had actually
himself approached the police for making a complaint about the

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

14

incident and that conduct of theirs has been found to be
sufficient not only to view their claim of being eye witnesses with
suspicion but also the entire prosecution case. Therefore, I am
not inclined to accept this submission of the Additional Public
Prosecutor and extend any benefit to the prosecution on the basis
of evidence of the three witnesses examined by it as eye
witnesses of the incident. Their evidence cannot cure the defect
which has crept in the prosecution case because of non holding
of a prior test identification parade and the three so called eye
witnesses not reporting the incident at the earliest to the police
and the police arresting appellant Dhan Bahadur without any
reason when he was actually arrested.

12.

Since the evidence of the three eye-witnesses regarding the

identity of the appellants has been found to be not reliable and
acceptable their evidence about the identification of the iron rod
allegedly got recovered by Dhan Bahadur as the weapon of
offence used in the incident also cannot be accepted.

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

15

13.

For the foregoing reasons, both these appeals are allowed

and consequently judgment dated 16.04.1999 and order dated
20.04.1999 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge in Sessions
case No. 20/96 are set aside and both the appellants-accused
stand acquitted. During the pendency of the appeal the sentence
of imprisonment awarded to the appellants was suspended and
now that they have been acquitted their bail bonds would stand
cancelled and the sureties furnished by them would stand
discharged.

P.K.BHASIN,J

April 28, 2008
sh

Crl. A. Nos. 236/99 & 244/99

16

