IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.868/2004
#
!

M/s.Terumo Penpol Ltd. & Ors. ...
through: Ms.Reena George

Petitioners

VERSUS
$
^

The NCT of Delhi & Anr.
through: None.

%

...

DATE OF DECISION:

Respondents

04.10.2007

*

CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioners have been impleaded as accused in a

complaint filed by the second respondent under Section 156 (3)
Cr.P.C. alleging that petitioners have committed an offence under
Section 499/500 IPC.

Petitioners pray that the said complaint

being complaint case No. 1183/1/2003 titled J.Mitra & Co. Vs.
Terumo Penpol Ltd. & Anr. be quashed.
2.

Gravement of the allegations against the petitioners

culled out from the complainant is that the complainant and first
petitioner

were

competitors

in

the

same

business

i.e.

manufacturing and supplying blood bags. A tender was floated

by the Delhi State Aids Control Society, Government of NCT Delhi.
Pursuant thereto complainant and first petitioner had submitted
offers and in support of their respective products had furnished
the requisite literature. The tender inquiry pertained to supply of
blood bags.

Along with the literature submitted with the offer,

first petitioner had submitted a graph under the caption:- “Is
venepuncture comfortable for your donor?” Said graph illustrated
that the result of a needle penetration test pertaining to the
product of the complainant was 26.4 on a scale of 45 and
pertaining to the product of first petitioner was 16.8.

It was

alleged that by showing the product of the complainant inferior
to that of the first petitioner, the accused had defamed the
complainant.
3.

The

venepuncture

comfort

in

relation

to

needle

penetration test needs to be understood and explained at this
juncture.
4.

Prick by a needle is painful and the measure of pain is

determined by how effectively and conveniently the needle
punctures the skin. The venepuncture comfort penetration test
purportedly evidences that lesser is the value on the scale, more
comfortable would be the prick by the needle. Vice versa, more is
the figure on the index, lesser would be the comfort level when
the needle is pricked.
5.

According to the complaint there was no scientific

basis to conduct, much less measure or certify the penetration
test, and that the graph submitted by the first petitioner along
with the tender was nothing but an act to defame the complainant
and tarnish its image.
6.

According to the petitioners the venepuncture comfort

limit determined by the needle penetration test has a scientific
basis and in Japan, where product of first petitioner was first
manufactured, Japanese Industrial Standard for Injection Needle is
specified and needle penetration test equipments are being
manufactured and sold. It is further the case of the petitioners
that the equipment is specifically designed for puncture testing of
straight needles. It stated that the system measures how sharp is
the head of the needle to penetrate tissues with minimum force.
It is further explained by petitioners that a polyethylene
membrane having 50 microns, equivalent to the skin tissue, is
used as a skin substitute for penetration and the force of
penetration gets automatically reflected on a graph when needle
penetration test is carried out with the needle penetration test
equipment. According to the petitioners, the graph in question
has a scientific basis.
7.

Question which arises for consideration would be,

whether the graph submitted by the petitioners would be
defamatory of the complainant and whether by submitting the
graph, petitioners have adversely commented viz-a-viz quality of

the product of the complainant. If so is the comment actionable.
8.

It is permissible in law for a manufacturer to highlight

the qualities of its products and in so doing it is permissible for a
manufacturer to refer to similar features in identical or near
identical products of third parties. But, no disparaging remarks or
comments can be made vis-a-vis products of others while so
marketing ones products.
9.

In relation to injunctive reliefs, in the decision reported

as 1999 PTC (19) 741 Reckitt and Colman of India Vs. M.P.
Ramchandran & Anr. 5 guiding principles were laid down. They
are as under:“I
A tradesman is entitled to declare his goods to be
best in the words even though the declaration is
untrue.
II
He can also say that my goods are better than his
competitors', even though such statement is untrue.
III
For the purpose of saying that his goods are the
best in the world or his goods are better than his
competitors' he can even compare the advantages of
his goods over the goods of the others.
IV
He, however, cannot while saying his goods are
better than his competitors', say that his competitors'
goods are bad. If he says so, he really slanders the
goods of his competitors. In other words he defames
his competitors and their goods, which is not
permissible.

10.

V
If there is no defamation, to the goods or to the
manufacturer of such goods no actions lies, but if there
is such defamation, an action lies and if an action lies
for recovery of damages for defamation, then the Court
is also competent to grant an order of injunction
restraining repetition of such defamation.”
The aforesaid 5 principles have been followed with

approval in various subsequent judgments. I note but a few. The
same are:1.
2003 (27) PTC 305 (Del) (DB) Pepsi Co., Inc. and
Ors. Vs. Hindustan Coca Cola Ltd. and Anr.
2.
114 (2004) DLT 373 Dabur India Ltd. Vs. Colgate
Palmolive India Ltd.

11.

3.
104 (2003) DLT 490 Reckit Benckiser (India) Ltd. Vs.
Naga Ltd. & Ors.
Principle 2 and 3 in the decision in Reckitt & Colman's

case (supra) guides that even though it may be untrue, a person
is entitled to declare that his goods are better than those of his
competitors and is also entitled to compare the advantages of his
goods over the goods of others.
12.

Unless the advertisement or comparison falls within

the mischief of point No. 4, any advertisement pertaining to one's
products and comparison thereof with the products of others
would be non actionable.
13.

Point No. 4 comes into operation where it is alleged

that the goods of the competitor are bad, resulting in the tort of
libel or slander. In other words, the competitor is defamed with
reference to his goods.
14.

In

commented,

the
much

instant
less

case,

petitioners

adversely,

on

the

have
goods

nowhere
of

the

complainant. Petitioners have merely projected what according
to them is the result of the needle penetration test to determine
the venepuncture comfort level.

15.

I note that the petitioners justify the said test on a

scientifically recognized norm and have explained the same, as
noted hereinabove.
16.

I fail to understand as to how the complainant would

be defamed by the mere submission of the graph of the needle
penetration test.
17.

Under the circumstances, I hold that the complaint

does not disclose an actionable cause much less attracting
offence under Section 499/500 IPC.
18.

The petition is allowed.

19.

The complaint is quashed.

20.

No costs.

October 04, 2007
MM

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

