*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.289/1998
Sh. K.L. Malhotra through
........ Appellants
his legal heirs
through:
Mr.Bhupesh Narula, Advocate
VERSUS
Smt. Sudershan Kumari & Anr.
........ Respondent
through:
Mr.Aly Mirza, Advocate
RESERVED ON:
20.03.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
01.04.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes.

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes.

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

On 20.03.2008 the matter was reserved for judgment. On

the said date, appellants were directed to file written submissions
within a week. Respondent was granted a week's time to respond. I
waited till 31.03.2008 for the written submissions to be filed by the
appellant. Unfortunately, appellant has chosen not to file the written
submissions therefore I have no option but to decide the present
appeal with reference to the grounds urged in the memorandum of
appeal which alone were projected at the hearing.
2.
FAO 289/08

The question involved in the appeal is whether the finding
Page 1 of 26

returned by the learned trial court that the will dated 17.04.1973
Ex.PW1/1 is the last legal and valid testament executed by the Late
Smt Mela Devi @ Iqbal Devi is correct.
BACKDROP FACTS
3.

Smt. Mela Devi @ Iqbal Devi (hereinafter referred to as the

testatrix) died on 10.02.1987 leaving behind her two married
daughters namely Smt. Sudershan Kumari Handa and Smt. Pushpa as
her heirs.
4.

Smt. Sudershan Kumari was the natural daughter of the

testatrix and Smt Pushpa was the adopted daughter of the testatrix.
5.

Testatrix was the owner of the property bearing Municipal

No.K-16, East of Kailash, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the
property).
6.

Smt. Sudershan Kumari Handa always lived in Delhi after

her marriage whereas Smt.Pushpa never stayed in Delhi after her
marriage.
7.

On 04.05.1987 Smt. Sudershan Kumari Handa (hereinafter

referred to as the propounder) filed a petition under Section 276 of the
Indian Succession Act 1925 seeking probate of a will purported to have
been executed by the testatrix on 17.04.1973.
8.

Along with the probate petition, two identically worded

affidavits dated 21.04.1987 executed by Mr. Jagdish Pershad Jain and
Mr. Joginder Pal Mathur respectively were also filed. During evidence
affidavit executed by Mr.Joginder Pal Mathur was exhibited as
Ex.PW1/2 while the one executed by Mr.Jagdish Pershad Jain was
marked as Mark Z. In said affidavits, it was deposed that on
FAO 289/08

Page 2 of 26

17.04.1973 the testatrix who was in a state of sound disposing mind
executed the will in their presence. That the contents of the will were
explained to the testatrix by her husband Mr.Basheshar Nath Puri in
Punjabi language and that the testatrix appended her signatures on
the will after understanding its contents.
WILL
9.

The will dated 17.04.1973 Ex.PW1/1 is a computer typed

document and consists of 4 sheets. It has been typed in English
language.
10.

The will bears the purported signatures of the testatrix at 3

points A-1, A-2 and A. Point A-1 appears in the first line on the first
sheet where the date 17th April, 1973 has been filled in hand in a blank
space. Point A-2 appears towards the end of the third sheet where a
correction has been made. Point A appears at the end of the will at the
place where the word 'Executant' is typed. The purported signatures of
the testatrix have been appended in devnagri script.
11.

The will is an unregistered document.

12.

The will has been witnessed by Mr.Jagdish Pershad Jain and

Mr.Joginder Pal Mathur.
13.

Under the will, the testatrix has bequeathed the property in

favour of the propounder. However, a life interest in respect of the first
floor of the property has been vested in the favour of the other
daughter Smt. Pushpa and her husband Mr.Khairati Lal Malhotra.
14.

The will contains a reference to an earlier will executed by

the testatrix on 26th April 1967 and revokes the same.

FAO 289/08

Page 3 of 26

OBJECTIONS TO THE WILL
15.

Smt. Pushpa and Mr.Khairati Lal Malhotra filed objections to

the will. Relevant portion of the objections reads as under: “PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS: 2……..The will in question was never validly executed by
late Smt.Mela Devi alias Iqbal Devi. The petitioners and her
husband got the alleged will typed out without any
instructions of the alleged testator and obtained her
signatures fraudulently. As such the alleged will does not
show the free will and intention of the alleged testator.
3………In case, it is found that the alleged will was signed
by the deceased Smt. Mela Devi, the same was not only
got signed by the petitioner and her husband fraudulently,
with undue influence, and coercion, but they also
deliberately concealed and unauthorisedly took possession
of and kept the same till ten days after the death of
Smt.Mela Devi…….
ON MERITS: 3……..the petitioner and her husband have procured the
signatures of the deceased fraudulently, which are also not
genuine…..It is pertinent to mention here that late
Smt.Mela Devi was an illiterate lady. She could hardly sign
in Hindi……”
16.

From a perusal of the afore-noted objections it is clear that

the defence set up by the objectors was that the petitioner and her
husband obtained signatures of the testatrix on the will by playing
fraud upon her. That the signatures of the testatrix on the will are not
genuine. In the alternative, it was pleaded that if the will indeed
contains the genuine signatures of the testatrix, same were obtained
by the petitioner and her husband by exercising undue influence and
coercion upon the testatrix.
EVIDENCE LED BY THE PROPOUNDER
17.
FAO 289/08

Besides

examining

herself

as

PW-3,

the

propounder
Page 4 of 26

examined two other witnesses namely Mr.Joginder Pal Mathur PW-1
and Mr.Inder Pal Singh PW-2.
18.

Mr.Joginder

Pal Mathur

PW-1 was

examined

by

the

propounder to establish the due execution of the will by the testatrix
and the capability of the testatrix to append her signatures on the
documents. He deposed that he was a tenant in the property between
the years 1958-1979. That on 17.04.1973 the testatrix called him to
the ground floor of the property where she used to reside and asked
him to witness the execution of the will. That Mr.Jagdish Pershad Jain
who was the neighbour of the testatrix was the second attesting
witness to the will. That the will was executed at about 5 PM. That the
testatrix was in a state of sound disposing mind at the time of the
execution of the will. That at the time of the execution of the will he,
his wife, testatrix, her husband and Mr.Jagdish Pershad Jain were
present. That before signing the will the testatrix told all the persons
present that she has understood the contents of the will. That the
testatrix appended her signatures at point A on the will in his presence
as also in the presence of the other attesting witness. That thereafter
he and the other attesting witness appended their signatures on the
will. That he used to receive rent receipts containing the signatures of
the testatrix. That he has no knowledge about the preparation of the
will. That the husband of the testatrix had explained the contents of
the will to the testatrix. That he does not remember whether the
testatrix had appended her signatures on the points A1 and A2
appearing on the will in his presence.
19.
FAO 289/08

Inder Pal Singh PW-2 who was a clerk in the Punjab and
Page 5 of 26

Sindh Bank, Kailash Colony Branch, New Delhi was examined by the
propounder to establish the genuineness of the signatures of the
testatrix on the will. PW-2 proved an account opening form dated
01.07.1975 containing the signatures of the testatrix as Ex.PW2/1. He
however deposed that the signatures appearing on the form Ex.PW2/1
were not appended by the testatrix in his presence.
20.

Propounder in her testimony as PW-3 deposed that the will

dated 17.04.1973 is the last legal and valid testament executed by the
testatrix. That the will was found in the trunk of the testatrix which was
opened by her in the presence of her husband and both the objectors.
That the testatrix was an illiterate lady but she could sign in Hindi
language. That the testatrix was in a state of sound disposing mind
and was enjoying good physical health till her death. That the relations
between the testatrix and her sister Ms.Pushpa were cordial.
EVIDENCE LED BY THE OBJECTORS
21.

On behalf of the objectors, only the objector Mr.Khairati Lal

Malhotra was examined as RW-1. He deposed that the testatrix was an
illiterate lady. That the husband of the testatrix had very little
knowledge of Urdu language but was otherwise uneducated. That the
testatrix had executed a will in the year 1967 as per which the rear
portion of the ground floor of the property and front portion of the first
and barsati floor of the property was bequeathed in favour of his wife.
That the will which was executed by the testatrix in the year 1967 was
duly implemented and given effect to. That he had no knowledge
about the will dated 17.04.1973 till he received the summons in the
present case. That the propounder never opened any trunk after the
FAO 289/08

Page 6 of 26

death of the testatrix in his presence or in the presence of his wife.
That in the year 1987 the front portion of the first and barsati floor of
the property were in the possession of two tenants who were paying
rent to the testatrix till her death. That the health of the testatrix was
normal in the year 1973.
22.

A letter dated 04.03.86 written by the propounder to Smt.

Pushpa was also filed by the objectors. Propounder admitted having
written the said letter to Smt.Pushpa. The original and photocopy of
the said letter were marked as Ex.RW1/1 and Ex.PW3/RX2 respectively.
In the said letter propounder has informed Smt.Pushpa that the
testatrix is not a state of sound disposing mind and that her mental
condition is deteriorating day by day. Relevant portion of the letter
dated 04.03.1986 is being quoted hereinunder:“You would be distressed to learn that our dear mother has
been reduced to a skeleton and even her mental faculties
have deteriorated beyond redemption. Her looks are
hollow. She behaves insane for example tears her clothes;
beats children.”
23.

A sale deed dated 9.4.1958 was also filed by the objectors

to establish that the will does not contain the genuine signatures of the
testatrix. The propounder admitted that the said sale deed contains
the signatures of the testatrix. The sale deed was marked as
Ex.PW3/RX1.
IMPUGNED ORDER
24.

After noting and considering the pleadings, evidence and

arguments of the parties vide impugned order dated 01.04.1998 the
learned trial court has held that the will dated 17.04.1973 is the last
legal and valid testament executed by the testatrix and that the same
FAO 289/08

Page 7 of 26

was executed by the testatrix in a state of sound disposing mind and
thus granted letters of administration in respect of the will in favour of
the propounder.
LAW RELATING TO WILLS
25.

'Will' as defined under Section 2(h) of the Indian Succession

Act means 'the legal declaration of the testator with respect to his
property which he desires to be carried into effect after his death'. The
essential characteristic of a will, as is well known, is that it is a mere
declaration of an intention so long as the testator is alive, a declaration
which may be revoked or varied by the testator during his lifetime; it is
a disposition that requires the testator's death for its consummation
and is but ambulatory or without fixed effect until the happening of
this event. The document is a will if it contains specific words of
bequest to come into effect after the death of the testator.
26.

A will is a solemn document. By it, a dead man entrusts to

the living to carry out his wishes and since it is impossible that he can
be called either to admit or deny his signatures or to explain the
circumstances in which it was executed, duty of care is cast on the
shoulders of the court while considering a probate case.
27.

The rules governing the propounding of a will are two. First,

the onus probandi lies in every case upon the party propounding the
will and he must satisfy the conscience of the Court that the
instrument so propounded is the last will of the testator. Second, if a
party actively participates in the execution of a will under which he
takes a benefit, it is a circumstance to excite the suspicion of the Court
and calls upon the court to be vigilant and zealous in examining the
FAO 289/08

Page 8 of 26

evidence on record.
28.

The strict meaning of the term 'onus probandi' is this, that

if no evidence is given by the party on whom the burden is cast, the
issue must be found against him. In all cases the onus is imposed on
the party propounding the will. It is in general discharge by proof of
capacity and the fact of execution from which the knowledge of and
assent to the contents of the instrument are assumed.
29.

The nature of proof required to prove a will is not different

from those required to prove other documents except the requirement
of attestation prescribed under Section 63 of the Indian Succession
Act. The proof is to be tested on the usual satisfaction of a prudent
mind. What distinguishes a will from other document is that the
testator would not be available to testify the same as his last will. This
introduces an element of solemnity in the decision. Even then the
Court has to proceed with the enquiry in the same manner as is done
in respect of any other document. The propounder is called upon to
show by satisfactory evidence that (1) the will was signed by the
testator in the presence of two attesting witnesses; (2) at the relevant
time he was in sound and disposing state of mind; (3) he understood
the nature and effect i.e., the content of the disposition; (4) he put the
signature to the document of his own free will. The onus of the
propounder can be said to be discharged on proof of the above
essential facts.
30.

However,

in

a

case

surrounded

by

suspicious

circumstances viz.: the disposition may appear to be unnatural,
improbable or unfair in the light of the relevant circumstances; or there
FAO 289/08

Page 9 of 26

may be indications that the disposition was not the result of the
testator's free will and mind, such suspicious circumstances make the
initial onus very heavy; and unless satisfactorily discharged, the Court
would be reluctant to treat the document as the last will of the
testator. Where the propounder takes a prominent part in the
execution of the will conferring benefit upon him, that is a suspicious
circumstance attending the execution of the will; the propounder is
required to remove the doubt by clear and satisfactory evidence. In
other words the propounder must satisfy the conscience of the Court
that the document is the last will and testament of the testator.
31.

Where the caveator alleges undue influence, fraud and

coercion, the onus is on him to prove the same. Even if there is no
such plea but the circumstances give rise to doubts, it is for the
propounder to satisfy the conscience of the Court. If the propounder is
able to satisfy the conscience of the Court, the Court shall grant the
probate, even if the will cuts off, wholly or in part, near relations. It is
the will of the testator that is reflected in the will. Being the testator's
own property, he has the liberty to deal with it absolutely. It is not for
the Court to find out justification or equity or otherwise in the action of
the testator. It is not for the Court to make it fair or to sermonize. It is
not for the Court to refuse the grant on account of the fact that the
disposition is not just and fair or is unnatural or improbable when the
conscience of the Court is clear about the proof of the execution of the
will on the face of the evidence, satisfactorily sufficient, to remove the
suspicious circumstances.
32.
FAO 289/08

As the wills are too frequently made by the sick and dying,
Page 10 of 26

the degree of understanding and memory which the law requires is
such as may be reasonably expected from persons in that condition.
Therefore, it is wrong to suppose that those qualities of mind should be
possessed by the testator in the highest degree, position or to the
same extent as before the illness in order to enable him to validly
make his will. Section 59 of the Indian Succession Act requires that the
testator should have a sound mind. The sound mind referred to does
not mean that the testator should have his mental faculty in their
fullest vigour, but means that he should have the capacity to
understand the nature of his property; memory to remember the
relations and persons normally having claims on his bounty and has
also a judgment. As observed by their Lordships of Privy Council in the
decision reported as Judah v. Isolyne AIR 1945 PC 174, the fact that the
testator was unwell when he executed the will is a long way from
saying that he had no testamentary capacity. The testator does not
have to be found in perfect state of health to have his will declared
valid. It is sufficient to prove that he was able to outline the manner in
which his estate was to be disposed of.
33.

The general principles governing the presumption of due

execution and attestation are, if a will appears on the face of it to have
been duly executed and attested in accordance with the requirements
of the Act, the maxim 'omnia presumuntur rite esse acta' applies,
unless it is clearly proved that the will in fact, was not duly executed.
The Court of probate has long being accustomed to give great weight
to the presumption of due execution arising from the regularity ex
facie of the testamentary paper produced where no suspicion of fraud
FAO 289/08

Page 11 of 26

has occurred.
34.

Where once it has been proved that a will has been

executed by a person of competent understanding, the burden of
proving that it was executed under undue influence is on the party who
alleges it. The Privy Council laid it down in the decision reported as
Mst. Gomtibai v. Kanchhedilal AIR 1949 PC 272 that undue influence in
order to invalidate a will must amount to coercion or fraud. Its extents
must be established and it must also appear that it was actually
exercised on the testator.
35.

The burden of proving undue influence is not discharge by

merely establishing that the person had power unduly to overbear the
will of the testator. It must be shown that in any particular case that
power was, in fact, exercised and that it was by means of exercise of
that power that the will was obtained. This was observed by the
Calcutta High Court in the decision reported as Chandra Majumdar v.
Akhil Chandra Majumdar AIR 1960 Cal 551. Relying upon the decision
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as Naresh
Charan Das Gupta v. Paresh Charan Das Gupta and Anr. AIR 1955 SC
363 it was observed that it is elementary that law does not regard or
charactize every interest which is brought to bear upon a testator as
undue. It is open to a person to plead his case before the testator and
to persuade him to make a disposition in his favour and if the testator
retains his mental capacity and there is no element of fraud or
coercion, the will cannot be attacked on the ground of undue influence.
Not

all

importunities

are

undue

influence.

While

making

said

observation, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Naresh Charan Das Gupta's
FAO 289/08

Page 12 of 26

case (supra) quoted the observation of Lord Penzance in the decision
reported as Hall v. Hall 1868 (1) P & D 481 "but all influences are not
unlawful. Persuasion, appeals to the affections or ties of kindred, to a
sentiment of gratitude for past services, or pity for future destitution,
or the like - these are all legitimate and may be fairly pressed on a
testator. On the other hand, pressure of whatever character, whether
acting on the fears or the hopes, if so exerted as to overpower the
volition without convincing the judgment, is a species of restraint
under which no valid will can be made. ......... In a word, a testator may
be led, but not driven; and his will must be the offspring of his own
volition, and not the record of some one else's".
36.

The golden rule in interpreting a will is to give effect to the

testator's intention as ascertained from the language, which he has
used. The overriding duty of a Court is to construe the language which
the testator has in fact employed giving due weight to all the words
and rejecting none to which a meaning can reasonably be assigned.
The Court is entitled to put itself into the testator's arm chair to
construe a will and to form an opinion apart from the decided cases
and then, to see whether those decisions require any modification of
that opinion and not to beckon by considering as to how far the will in
question resemble other will upon which the decisions have been
given. The proposition that the will has to be read as a whole cannot
be disputed. Whether there is a will on the basis of the document, the
probate Court certainly will not proceed to consider as to whether or
not the disposition of the property was good or bad. The primary duty
of the probate Court is to see first whether prima facie, the document
FAO 289/08

Page 13 of 26

constituted a will.
GROUNDS URGED IN THE MEMORANDUM OF APPEAL
37.

Under-noted

grounds

have

been

urged

in

the

memorandum of the appeal: A

Attesting witness’s deposition that he does not remember

whether signatures appearing at the points A-1 and A-2 in the will were
appended by the testatrix in his presence casts a serious suspicion
about the due execution of the will by the testatrix.
B

The admission of the attesting witness PW-1 in his

testimony that the signatures appearing at the points A-1 and A-2 in
the will are not identical with those appearing at point A in the will and
that of the propounder that the signatures of the testatrix appearing
on the sale deed Ex.PW3/RX1 and the will Ex.PW1/1 are not identical
casts a doubt upon the authenticity of the signatures of the testatrix
on the will.
C

The fact that no evidence was led by the propounder to

establish who had appended the date mentioned in the first line of the
will casts a suspicion upon the genuineness of the will.
D

The fact that no evidence was led by the propounder to

establish the preparation of the will casts a suspicion upon the
genuineness of the will.
E

In the two affidavits dated 21.04.87 Mark Z and Ex.PW1/2

executed by the attesting witnesses to the will it has been deposed
that on 17.04.1973 at about 5.30 PM they were called by the husband
of the testatrix to his residence to witness the due execution of the will
whereas PW-1 has deposed that the will was executed at about 5.00
FAO 289/08

Page 14 of 26

PM. The said contradictions pertaining to the time of the execution of
the will has not been considered by the trial court.
F

Propounder in her testimony has deposed that the testatrix

was in a state of sound disposing mind and was enjoying good physical
health till her death whereas in the letter dated 04.03.86 Ex.PW3/RX2
admittedly written by the propounder to objector Smt.Pushpa it has
been stated that the testatrix is not in a state of sound disposing mind.
The trial court did not consider this aspect of the matter.
G

The fact that the testatrix never mentioned about the

execution of the will during her lifetime is a circumstance throwing
suspicion upon the execution and genuineness of the will.
H

The testimony of the objector Khairati Lal Malhotra RW-1

that the husband of the testatrix who according to the attesting
witness PW-1 had explained the contents of the will to the testatrix had
little knowledge of Urdu language but was otherwise an uneducated
person was ignored by the trial court.
I

The testimony of the attesting PW-1 that he cannot identify

the signatures of the other attesting witness to the will has been
ignored by the trial court.
J

Learned trial court has wrongly held that no will was

executed by the testatrix in the year 1967 when the will Ex.PW1/1
itself contains a referance to the will executed by the testatrix in the
year 1967.
K

The contradictions pertaining to the execution of a will by

the testatrix in the year 1967 in the testimony of propounder has been
ignored by the trial court.
FAO 289/08

Page 15 of 26

L

The trial court failed to note that there was no reason for

the testatrix to make a disproportionate bequest particularly when the
propounder had herself deposed that the relations between the
testatrix and the objector Smt.Pushpa were cordial.
DISCUSSION
38.

A perusal of the impugned order shows that the ground ‘A’

raised in the memorandum of appeal has not been discussed by the
trial court. It appears that the said ground was not argued before the
trial court.
39.

It is settled law that in case where a ground which was

argued before a court has not been considered it is open to the party
aggrieved to draw the attention of the court which has passed the
order by filing a proper application for review or clarification. The time
of the superior courts is not to be wasted in enquiring whether a
certain ground to which no reference is found in the judgment of the
subordinate court was argued before that court or not. (See the
decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court reported as Daman Singh & Ors
v State of Punjab & Ors AIR 1985 SC 973).
40.

Notwithstanding the afore-noted proposition, I proceed to

consider the ground ‘A’.
41.

In the decision reported as Smt Krishna Bera & Ors v Sri

Prabir Pramanaik & Ors (2007) 2 CALLT 484 (HC) it was held that there
is no denying that an attesting witness would have imperfect
recollection particularly if the date of execution is long prior to the
evidence of the attesting witnesses being received.
42.
FAO 289/08

In the decision reported as Senthil Kumar v Dhandapani
Page 16 of 26

AIR 2004 Mad 403 an attesting witness to the will was unable to state
the exact month and date on which the will was executed. Attention of
the court was also drawn to certain discrepancies in the testimony of
the attesting witness. Nothing that the attesting witness was examined
nearly 4 years after the execution of the will, the court held that it
cannot be expected that the attesting witness would be able to dispose
all the details about the will accurately. Further noting that the
attesting witness was otherwise able to establish that he was one of
the attester to the will and that he saw the testator signing the will in
his presence, the court refused to disbelieve his testimony.
43.

From the afore-noted two judgments the legal principle

which emerges is that it is natural for an attesting witness to have an
inaccurate memory and inaccuracy would not by itself cast any serious
aspersion on his testimony unless the contradictions are material.
44.

In the instant case the will was executed on 17.04.73 and

PW-1 was examined on 16.02.95 i.e. 22 years after the execution of
the will. It is therefore quite natural for PW-1 to have forgotten whether
the signatures on points A-1 and A-2 were appended by the testatrix in
his presence.
45.

Pertaining to ground ‘B’ it is relevant to note that three

defences were set up by the objectors. First, that the signatures of the
testatrix on the will were obtained by the propounder and her husband
by playing fraud upon the testatrix. Second, that the signatures of the
testatrix upon the will are not genuine. Third, that the signatures of the
testatrix upon the will were obtained by the propounder and her
husband by exercising undue influence and coercion upon the
FAO 289/08

Page 17 of 26

testatrix.
46.

It seems that the objectors were shooting arrows in the

dark in the hope that at least one of the arrow would hit the bull’s-eye.
47.

Objectors

have

miserably

failed

to

prove

that

the

signatures of the testatrix on the will were obtained by the propounder
and her husband by playing fraud upon her.
48.

As already noted, the burden of proving undue influence is

not discharged by merely establishing that the person had power
unduly to overbear the will of the testator. It must be shown that in any
particular case that power was, in fact, exercised and that it was by
means of exercise of that power that the will was obtained. Nothing of
the sort has come on record.
49.

A feeble attempt was made by the objectors to prove that

the will does not contains the genuine signatures of the testatrix.
50.

Admissions made by the attesting

witness

and the

propounder in their respective testimonies of variations in the
signatures of the testatrix at different places was pressed into service
by the objectors to establish that the will does not contain the genuine
signatures of the testatrix.
51.

Suffice would it be to note that neither the attesting

witness nor the propounder is a handwriting expert therefore their
opinion as to variations in the signatures of the testatrix at different
places is of no use to the objectors.
52.

No handwriting expert was examined by the objectors to

compare the signatures of the testatrix appearing at different places
and thereupon comment upon the genuineness of the signatures of the
FAO 289/08

Page 18 of 26

testatrix upon the will.
53.

Section 73 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 empowers a

court compare the admitted signatures of a person with his disputed
signatures and thereupon decide the genuineness of the disputed
signatures.
54.

In respect of stated admission of the attesting witness that

the signatures of the testator at points A, A-1 and A-2 were not the
same suffice would it be to state that a visual comparison of three
signatures with naked eye reveals that the said signatures are near
identical. It would be relevant to note that the ink used to pen the
signatures is the same. Pen used is the same.
55.

With reference to the admission of the propounder that the

signatures on the sale deed Ex.PW3/RX1 and the will Ex.PW1/1 are
different suffice would it be to state that the said sale deed was
executed on 09.04.1958 whereas the will was executed on 17.04.1973
i.e. 15 years after the execution of the sale deed Ex.PW3/RX1. It is trite
that with age variations are bound to occur in the signatures of a
person. I further note that the signatures of the testatrix on the will
and the account opening form Ex.RW2/1 upon which the testatrix had
appended signatures on 01.07.1975 i.e 2 years after the execution of
the will are identical.
56.

I therefore find no merit in the ground 'B' raised by the

objectors.
57.

As regards ground ‘C’ suffice would it be to note that the

attesting witness PW-1 was cross-examined at length by the objectors.
No question was put to him as to who had appended the date
FAO 289/08

Page 19 of 26

mentioned in the first line of the will. In such circumstances, I find no
merit in the ground ‘C’ raised by the objectors.
58.

In so far as ground ‘D’ pertaining to absence of evidence

regarding the preparation of the will is concerned, suffice would it be
to note the following observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
decision reported as Ramabai Padmakar Patil v Rukminibai Vishnu
Vekhande AIR 2003 SC 3109.
“......... The learned District Judge has observed that Smt.
Yamunabai was very old when she executed the will and
she was hard of hearing and was unable to walk. He
further observed that Chhaya Dighe who typed the will and
one Shri Tiwari, Advocate, who was present at the time of
preparation and execution of the will, were not examined
and these facts together created a doubt regarding the
authenticity of the will. As discussed earlier, in view of
Section 63 of Indian Succession Act and the proviso to
Section 68 of the Evidence Act, the requirement of law
would be fully satisfied if only one of the attesting witness
is examined to prove the will. That this had been done in
the present case by examining PW2 Raghunath Govind
Sogale cannot be disputed. No infirmity of any kind had
been found in the testimony of this witness. Chhaya Dighe
merely typed the will and she is not an attesting witness
nor it is anybody's case that Smt. Yamunabai had put her
thumb impression on the will in her presence, therefore,
her examination as a witness was wholly redundant. The
mere non examination of the Advocate who was present at
the time of preparation or registration of the will cannot,
by itself, be a ground to discard the same.......”
59.

Noting the law laid down by the Hon’ble Court in the

Ramabai’s case (supra), I can safely conclude that the absence of the
evidence regarding the preparation of the will is not fatal to the
genuineness of the will.
60.

Pertaining to ground 'E' i.e. contradictions in the testimony

of the attesting witness I note the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court reported as Durga v Anil Kumar (2005) 11 SCC 189.

FAO 289/08

Page 20 of 26

61.

In Durga's case (supra) examining the genuineness of the

will in question, the Hon'ble Supreme Court having found that two
witnesses to the will deposed that the testator was in sound disposing
mind at the time of execution of the will and he had executed the will
after understanding the contents thereof and that the witnesses had
put their signatures on the will in presence of the testator and in
presence of each other, held that, minor contradictions in their
testimony cannot put to any doubt the execution of the will.
62.

The contradiction pointed out in the appeal are that in the

two affidavits dated 21.04.87 Mark Z and Ex.PW1/2 executed by the
attesting witnesses to the will it has been deposed that on 17.04.1973
at about 5.30 PM they were called by the husband of the testatrix to
his residence to witness the due execution of the will whereas PW-1
has deposed that the will was executed at about 5.00 PM.
63.

It is already noted that the PW-1 has been examined 22

years after the execution of the will. PW-1 surely could not have
remembered the exact time of the execution of the will after a period
of 22 years. Therefore the mere difference of ½ hour between the time
of execution of the will in the testimony of PW-1 and the affidavits
Ex.PW1/2 and Mark Z are not at all a material contradiction. It is not
even a minor contradiction.
64.

Pertaining to ground ‘F' it is relevant to note that the courts

have time and again taken judicial notice of the fact that in India
parties and witnesses have tendency to exaggerate their case. (See
the decision of the Hon’ble Court reported as Rai Singh v State of
Haryana AIR 1971 SC 2505).
FAO 289/08

Page 21 of 26

65.

The maxim “Falsus in uno falsus in omnibus” is not

applicable in India. While analyzing the evidence, the courts are
required to separate grain from the chaff, truth from the falsehood.
The court has to sift the evidence with care in each case and on full
consideration of all the relevant material circumstances to come to a
decision, which part of the testimony of the witness to accept and
which to reject. (See the decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
reported as Gurcharan Singh & Anr v State of Punjab AIR 1956 SC 460,
Sucha Singh & Anr v State of Punjab (2003) 5 Supreme 445, Narain v
State

of

Madhya

Pradesh

(2004)

2

SCC

455

and

Gubbala

Venugopalaswamy & Ors v State of Andhra Pradesh (2004) 10 SCC
120).
66.

It is quite possible that the propounder picked up a

rumour/gossip that a will is held to be not genuine if the testator is
found to be not in a state of sound disposing mind during his lifetime
and thus deposed that the testatrix was in a state of sound disposing
and enjoying good physical death till her death.
67.

Notwithstanding that the objectors have not raised a

ground in the memorandum of appeal that the letter dated 04.03.1986
Ex.PW2/RX2 establishes that the testatrix was in a state of sound
disposing mind at the time of the execution of the will I proceed to
consider the same with a view to foreclose the issue once for all.
68.

The

will

was

executed

on

17.04.1973.

The

letter

Ex/PW3/RX2 was written by the propounder on 04.03.1986 i.e. 13
years after the execution of the will. Therefore it can safely be held
that the letter Ex.PW3/RX2 throws no light upon the physical or mental
FAO 289/08

Page 22 of 26

condition of the testatrix at the time of the execution of the will for the
reason it was written 13 years after the making of the will.
69.

Additionally I note that the objector in his testimony as RW-

2 has deposed that the health of the testatrix was normal in the year
1973. Testatrix died in the year 1987 i.e 14 years after the execution
of the will.
70.

Noting the testimony of RW-1 as also the fact that the

testatrix had outlived the execution of the will by a period of 14 years
it can safely be presumed that the testatrix was in a state of sound
disposing mind at the time of the execution of the will.
71.

Pertaining to ground ‘G' suffice would it be to note that it is

not at all uncommon for a testator to keep the will executed by him a
secret from his heirs and relatives during his lifetime. More often than
not a will surfaces after the death of a testator.
72.

A feeble attempt was made by the objectors to taint the

will by establishing that the testatrix had executed the will without
understanding its contents. PW-1 in his testimony as also the other
attesting witness in his affidavit Mark Z had deposed that the contents
of

the

will

were

explained

to

the

testatrix

by

her

husband

Mr.Bashseshar Nath Puri. Objector in his testimony as RW-1 had
deposed that Mr.Bashseshar Nath Puri had very little knowledge of
Urdu language but was otherwise an uneducated person. In this
context, it was contended that how could Mr.Bashseshar Nath Puri who
was himself an uneducated man was able to explain of the will typed in
English language to the testatrix.
73.
FAO 289/08

In this regards, besides the mere testimony of the objector
Page 23 of 26

no evidence was led by the objectors to establish that Mr.Bashseshar
Nath Puri was an uneducated man. No question was put to the
propounder who was the daughter of the Mr.Bashseshar Nath Puri and
was examined much after the evidence of PW-1 regarding the
educational qualifications of her father.
74.

In such circumstances, I find no force in the ground ‘H’

raised by the objectors.
75.

As regards ground ‘I’ it is necessary to carefully scrutinize

the testimony of PW-1. He had deposed that the other attesting
witness Mr.Jagdish Pershad Jain had appended his signatures on the
will in his presence. He however expressed his inability to identify the
signatures of Mr.Jagdish Pershad Jain appearing on the affidavit Mark Z.
He had also deposed that other than seeing Mr.Jagdish Pershad Jain
appending his signatures upon the will he has never seen him signing.
76.

As already noted PW-1 was examined 22 years after the

execution of the will. Obviously PW-1 could not identify the signatures
of Mr.Jagdish Pershad Jain appearing on the affidavit Mark Z whom he
had seen signing only once and that too 22 years ago.
77.

Pertaining to ground 'J' suffice would it be to note that the

issue of the stated will executed by the testatrix in the year 1967 is a
non issue because no such will ever surfaced in the trial.
78.

Pertaining to ground ‘K’ i.e. certain alleged discrepancies in

the testimony of the propounder regarding the execution of a will by
the testatrix in the year 1967 suffice would it be to note that no such
will was proved.
79.
FAO 289/08

No doubt the will Ex.PW1/1 does refers to an earlier will
Page 24 of 26

stated to have been executed by the testatrix in the year 1967. Merely
because the propounder of the instant will disputed the said fact would
not render testimony of the propounder to be suspect for the reason it
is quite possible that the testatrix never informed her about having
executed a will in the year 1967.
80.

Pertaining to ground ‘L’ suffice would it be to note that the

courts have repeatedly held that the disproportionate nature of a
bequest is not a suspicious circumstance for the reason the whole idea
behind the execution of a will is to alter the natural line of succession.
81.

A court of probate does not make a will of its own. The

court is not the testator. Its function is to see if the will propounded by
the propounder was duly made and executed by a capable testator. In
order to do that if the court of probate has to sit in the arm-chair of the
testator, it has also to sit there with the mind of the testator keeping in
mind the surrounding circumstances and context of the testator’s
family and other environment very much in the forefront in its
deliberations.
82.

In the instant case it can be very well be presumed that the

fact that the objector Smt Pushpa was her adopted daughter coupled
with the fact that the propounder lived closer to her led the testatrix to
bequeath the property in favour of the propounder.
DECISION
83.

In view of above discussion I concur with the view taken by

the learned trial court that the will dated 17.04.1973 Ex.PW1/1 is the
last legal and valid testament executed by Late Smt.Mela Devi @ Iqbal
Devi.
FAO 289/08

Page 25 of 26

84.

Impugned order dated 01.04.1988 is affirmed.

85.

Appeal is dismissed.

86.

No costs.

April 01, 2008
saahila

FAO 289/08

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 26 of 26

