IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No.1995/2007
#
!

Vinod Kumar Jha
through:

$
^

C.B.I.

%

........ Petitioner
Mr.K.B.Sinha, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Harinath Ram.
VERSUS

through:

........ Respondent
Ms.Mukta Gupta.

DATE OF DECISION: 08.10.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

FIR No. RC 2A/2006
U/S. 120-B IPC read with
Sections 3 & 5 of Official Secrets Act
P.S. CBI ACU IX
Petitioner is one amongst the many persons accused in

afore-noted case.
2.

He seeks bail, inter alia, alleging that he has remained

in judicial custody since 6.4.2006 and till date arguments

on

charge have not been advanced. It is stated by the petitioner
that as per charge sheet filed, gravement of the allegations
against the petitioner are as detailed in para 89 of the charge
sheet. It is submitted that according to the prosecution, petitioner
page 1 of 5

has committed an offence under Section 5 of the Official Secrets
Act, 1923. It is urged that the offence of which the petitioner is
charged, if proved, entails a punishment of imprisonment upto a
maximum period of 3 years with fine or with both.
3.

In a nutshell, what is urged by the petitioner is that

since half the maximum period of detention has already been
undergone at the trial stage by the petitioner and there is no
likelihood of the trial being completed in the near future,
considering that he is charged of the offence under Section 5 of
the Official Secrets Act, 1923, case is made out for release of the
petitioner on bail.
4.

Opposing the application for bail, learned counsel for

the State points out that though the charge sheet alleges against
the petitioner of having committed offence under Section 5 of the
Official Secrets Act, 1923,

the case stands registered and

investigation proceeded even for the offence of conspiracy.
Further, counsel submits that the computers entrusted

to the

petitioner were permitted by the petitioner to be unauthorisedly
used by co-accused, Vijender Rana by taking the same to his, i.e.
Vijender Rana's house. Thus, counsel submits that petitioner
would also be guilty of an offence under Section 409 IPC.
5.

It is pointed out that punishment under Section 409 IPC

could extend to life imprisonment.

page 2 of 5

6.

The rival versions have led this court to peruse the

challan which has been presented. Indeed, in the entire challan I
do not find any allegation against the petitioner that he acted in
furtherance of a conspiracy.

The gravement of the allegations

against the petitioner are admittedly in para 89 of the charge
sheet which has been filed. The same reads as under :-

7.

'89. That Ex-Commander Vinod Kumar Jha (A-5)
s/o Shri Hardev Narain Jha r/o Raghopur New Colony,
PO Bhikampur, Distt. Muzaffarpur, Bihar while working
as Joint Director (Systems) and (Administration and
Coordination) in Directorate of Naval Operations failed
to take reasonable care of, and also so conducted
himself as to endanger the safety of the sensitive
information related to the Defence, available in the
computer systems of the Directorate of Naval
Operations. He used unauthorized non-official pendrive on the official computer and unauthorizedly
accessed internet in the secure DNO network thereby
compromising with the security of sensitive
information. He also provided an official computer to
Vijender Rana (A-4) unauthorizedly for use at his
home, which was used by Vijender Rana (A-4) for
communication with Kulbhushan Parashar (A-1) and
Ravi Shankaran (A-2) by way of e-mails and online
chatting passing of the sensitive information copied
from the computers of the Directorate of Naval
Operations, thus committing offences under Section
5 of the Official Secrets Act, 1923.”
A bare perusal of the case of the prosecution against

the petitioner as disclosed to the court and for which prosecution
intends to charge the petitioner, is of failure to take reasonable
care as the Joint Director

(Systems) and (Administration and

Coordination) in Directorate of Naval Operations and by said
conduct permitting non-official use of the pen drive on the official

page 3 of 5

computer enabling unauthorized access to the internet through
the secure DNO network. The result was that the security of the
State was endangered as sensitive information, not in public
domain, was accessed.
8.

The said act of the petitioner, if proved by the

prosecution would attract penalty under Section 5 of the Official
Secrets Act, 1923, prima facie, no more.
9.

Pertaining to the offence under Section 409 IPC, suffice

would it be to note that the same would also be a consequence of
failure to take reasonable care and being lax in not realising the
consequence of permitting Vijender Rana to take home for use a
computer which was entrusted for use only in the office.
10.

Under the circumstances, I am of the opinion that case

is made out to to direct release of the petitioner on bail for the
reason there is no possibility of the trial commencing in the near
future, much less concluding.
11.

I dispose of the petition directing that on the petitioner

furnishing a personal bond in sum of Rs.15,000/- with one surety
in the like amount to the satisfaction of the learned Trial Judge,
petitioner would be released on bail in afore-noted case. It would
be a condition of the bail which is being granted to the petitioner
that he would keep informed the Investigating Officer the
residence in which petitioner would be residing.

Further once

page 4 of 5

every 2 months, petitioner would report to the IO. The petitioner
would not contact any witness of the prosecution, much less try to
influence them. If petitioner has a passport, the same would be
surrendered to the IO.
12.

Needless to state, the learned Trial Judge would

consider the matter as per law, uninfluenced by any observations
in the present order, when arguments are heard on framing of
charge. The facts noted here-in-above and the expression on the
merits is restricted for purposes of considering the issue of grant
of bail.
13.

Dasti.

October 08, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 5 of 5

