IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO 329/2003
#
!

Shri Vijay Nath Tiwari
.......
Appellants
through: Mr.O.P.Mannie, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Shri Surender & Anr.
.......
Respondents
through: Mr.J.N.Aggarwal, Advocate with
Mr.Banamali Shukla, Advocate
RESERVED ON : 19.04.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION:

07-05-2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Injured Vijay Nath Tiwari aged 22 years received

injuries in a road accident which took place on 18.10.1996. He
filed a claim petition claiming a compensation of Rs.5 lacs on
account of injuries sustained by him in the said road accident.
2.

Case of the injured is that on 18.10.1996 he boarded a

DTC bus bearing no. DBP 6136. He further stated that while he
was in the process of alighting from the bus, the driver of the bus,

FAO.329/03

page 1 of 6

in a rash and negligent manner, started the bus as a result thereof
he fell down from the bus resulting in a fracture of his left hand.
3.

Holding that the injured was himself responsible for the

accident, the claim petition has been dismissed by the Tribunal.
In so holding, Tribunal has noted DD entry no. 21 A dated
18.10.1996. The said DD entry was purportedly recorded on the
basis of the statement of injured. The DD entry records that when
driver of the bus did not stop the bus at the bus stand where
injured was to get down, injured immediately jumped from the
front gate of the moving bus and as a result of which injured had
fallen on the road and sustained injury on his hand.

DD entry

further records that there was no mistake on part of the driver of
the bus.
4.

Aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal in dismissing

his claim petition, injured has filed the present appeal.
5.

Learned counsel for the injured contended that Tribunal

had not correctly appreciated the evidence on record and has
wrongly come to the conclusion that accident in question was
caused due to the negligence of the injured.
6.

Injured examined himself as PW-2 to establish that

accident in question was caused due to rash and negligent driving
of the driver of the bus.

Driver of the bus, Surinder, examined

himself as RW-1 to establish that accident in question was caused

FAO.329/03

page 2 of 6

solely due to the negligence of injured. Besides the testimony of
afore-noted witnesses, there is no other evidence to suggest the
manner in which the accident in question took place.
6.

However, the DD entry in question is a pointer

indicating the manner in which the accident in question took
place. As noted hereinabove, said DD entry was recorded on the
basis of statement of injured and records that injured jumped out
of the moving bus.
7.

It is a relevant fact that said DD entry was recorded

nearly 12 hours after the accident took place.

DD entry also

records that injured was examined by police officials only when he
was declared fit for examination by the doctor who was treating
him.
8.

On being confronted with the said DD entry during cross

examination, injured stated that said DD entry has been wrongly
recorded as he had stated to the police officials that accident in
question was caused when driver of the bus started the bus in a
rash and negligent manner while he was in the process of
alighting from the bus.

He stated that police officials did not

record his statement and obtained his signatures on a blank
paper.
9.

It is difficult to believe the stand taken by the injured.

The fact that said DD entry was recorded few hours after the

FAO.329/03

page 3 of 6

accident leads to an inference that injured stated the truth when
he gave his statement to the police officials who recorded the DD
entry.

It is difficult to believe that police officials distorted the

statement of injured and recorded false DD entry at the instance
of the driver of the bus. It is difficult to believe that police officials
were manipulated by the driver of the bus.
10.

Therefore, the Tribunal has rightly relied upon the

afore-noted DD entry in coming to the conclusion that the injured
jumped out of the moving bus.
11.

However, Tribunal is not right in holding that accident in

question was caused solely due to the negligence of the injured.
12.

It is the duty of the driver and conductor of the bus to

ensure that the passenger stand inside the bus and not on the
foot board of the bus. It is the duty of the owner of a passenger
bus more so, of a bus plying within a city to install a movable
devise which closes the exit gate and is operated by the driver to
open the exit gate by causing the devise to move.

A lever

operated mechanism akin to turn sty gate has to be installed in an
intra city passenger bus.

The reason is that state of public

transport is not too happy.
passengers board the bus.

More often than not, excess

There is pushing and jostling inside

the bus.
13.

FAO.329/03

Thus, I hold that the owner of the bus is guilty of

page 4 of 6

contributory negligence to the extent of 50%.
14.

In respect of the pecuniary and non pecuniary loss to

the injured deposed that his left hand got fractured on account of
injuries sustained by him in the said road accident.
15.

Treatment record Ex.PW-2/2, PW-2/3 and PW-2/4 shows

that the injured suffered a fracture of the humerus bone of left
hand.
16.

Injured has also placed on record a disability certificate

Ex.PW-2/11. The said disability certificate records that injured had
suffered a permanent disability to the extent of 55%.

The said

certificate is issued by an Orthopedic Surgeon and Eye Surgeon. I
see no reason as to why said certificate has been issued by an
Eye Surgeon for the reason kind of injury sustained by the injured
is such which is outside the purview of an Eye Surgeon.
17.

Even otherwise, it is difficult to believe that because of

a fracture of the left hand, the injured has suffered a permanent
disability to the extent of 55%.
18.

Treatment record filed by the injured does not suggest

that on account of injury on left hand suffered by the injured, he
has suffered a loss in his earning capacity.
19.

However, considering that left hand of the injured got

fractured in the accident and his contribution was 50%, I consider
reasonable to award him compensation in sum of Rs.10,000/-.

FAO.329/03

page 5 of 6

The same would be for pain and suffering and medical expenses.
20.

The

appeal

stands

disposed

of

by

awarding

compensation in sum of Rs.10,000/- to the injured.
21.

Compensation shall be paid together with interest @

6% per annum from date of claim petition till date of realization.
22.

No costs.

May 7, 2005
mm

FAO.329/03

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 6 of 6

