IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA.No.119/2001 & C.M. No.531/2003
#
!

Sh. Ishwar Lal Shah
through:

........
Appellant
Mr. Kuljit Rawal, Advocate

VERSUS
$
^

Smt. Prem Lata Tiwari
through:

........
Respondent
Mr. Ravi Sikri, Advocate
Mr. Saket Sikri, Advocate

RESERVED ON: 16.11.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION:

07.12.2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Following substantial question of law is

being

considered:-

2.

“Whether on the evidence on record view taken by the
courts below is legal and valid?”
The above captioned second appeal arises out of the

judgment and decree dated 23.2.2001 passed by the learned
Additional District Judge Delhi whereby the judgment and

RSA No.119/2001

Page No.1 of 17

decree dated 15.11.1999 passed by the learned Civil Judge
Delhi in the favour of the respondent was confirmed.
3.

Brief facts necessary to dispose of the present

appeal are that the respondent filed a suit for perpetual
injunction against the appellant.

Material averments in the

plaint were that:I.

The defendant was the owner of the property
bearing Municipal No. 30/4, Nangia Park, Shakti
Nagar, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the suit
property).

II.

Defendant was a tenant in respect of a shop,
veranda and store situated in the front side of the
suit property and a room and bathroom situated in
the rear side of the suit property.

III.

Front portion consisting of shop, veranda and store
was let out to the defendant for commercial
purposes while the rear portion consisting of a room
and bathroom was let out for residential purposes.

IV.

At the time of filing of the suit defendant was paying
rent @ Rs.400/- per month in respect of both the
portions.

V.

That the tenant could not sublet, assign or otherwise

RSA No.119/2001

Page No.2 of 17

part with the possession of the tenanted premises
and that he could also not make any additions,
alterations
premises

or

constructions

without

the

in

prior

the

consent

tenanted
of

the

subletting

the

respondent.
VI.

Defendant

was

contemplating

tenanted premises after effecting alterations and
additions

in

the

tenanted

premises

and

was

threatening to change the user of the rear portion of
the

tenanted

premises

from

residential

to

commercial.
VII.

Thus the suit was filed by the respondent seeking a
decree of perpetual injunction against the appellant
restraining appellant from subletting the tenanted
premises,

making

alterations/additions

in

the

tenanted premises and changing the user of the rear
portion of the tenanted premises.
4.

Relevant portion of the plaint reads as under:“2. That the defendant is a tenant under the plaintiff
in respect of one shop, one veranda out side the said
shop and a store and one room and a bath room
situated on the rear side of the property on the ground
floor and forming part of the aforesaid property. The
shop, veranda and store were let out to the defendant
for non residential purposes. The room and the bath

RSA No.119/2001

Page No.3 of 17

5.

room were let out to the defendant for residential
purposes alone. The shop etc. has been used for
commercial purposes alone. The room and the bath
room has been used for the residential purposes alone.
The portion in the tenancy of the defendant are shown
in red colour in the site plan attached and the
defendant pays Rs.400/- per month on account of rent
for the portions of the premises in his tenancy.”
Appellant denied the averments made in the plaint.

Defence set up by the appellant was that:I.

Tenanted premises was let out to the father of the
appellant Late Sh. Shadi Lal.

II.

After the death of his father appellant being the legal
heir of his father has inherited the tenancy rights in
respect of the suit property.

III.

Entire tenanted premises comprising of the front and
rear portion was let out to the father of the appellant
for composite purposes.

6.

Relevant portion of the written statement reads as

under:“Para 2 of the plaint is correct only to the extent that
the defendant is a tenant under the plaintiff in
respect of shop, store, veranda, room and bathroom
on the ground floor of the property and the said
portion was taken on rent by the father of the
defendant for composite purposes i.e. residential cum
commercial from the father of the plaintiff. Rest of
the averments as stated are wrong and denied. The
tenanted portion was taken on rent for residential
cum commercial purposes and the defendant has a
right to use the tenanted premises for residential
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.4 of 17

purpose or commercial purpose and the plaintiff has
no right to raise objection against the use of the
property either for residential purpose or for
commercial purpose or for both the purposes. The
plaintiff has not correctly stated the facts.
The
defendant has a right to use any portion of the
tenanted premises for commercial purpose or
residential purpose according to his convenience and
the plaintiff cannot raise any objection against the
user of particular portion for particular purpose.

7.

3.
Para 3 of the plaint as stated is not correct and
as such the averments are denied. The premises
were not let out by the plaintiff to the defendant nor
the terms were settled between the plaintiff and the
defendant. The premises were taken on rent by the
defendant's father for commercial cum residential
purposes and the same are being used for
commercial cum residential purposes from the very
beginning. The defendant inherited the tenancy from
his father.”
On behalf of the respondent, Sh. Rajiv Lochan

Sharma who was the attorney and son of the respondent was
examined.

In his testimony as PW-1 he reiterated the stand

taken in the plaint. The said witness admitted that initially the
tenanted premises was let out to the father of the appellant
Late Sh. Shadi Lal. He further deposed that initially rate of rent
of front portion was Rs.60/- per month and that of rear portion
was Rs.30/- per month.
8.

Site plan Ex. PW-1/11 and 7 rent receipts Ex. PW-1/2

to Ex. PW-1/7 and Ex. PW1/10 were produced and duly proved
at the trial by the respondent. Ex.PW1/2 pertains to the rent

RSA No.119/2001

Page No.5 of 17

received by the respondent for the month 1.4.1959 to
31.4.1959. Ex.PW1/3 pertains to the rent received for the period
1.7.1969 to 31.7.1969. Ex.PW1/4 and Ex.PW1/7 is the rent
received for the period 1.1.1970 to 31.1.1970. Ex.PW1/5 is the
rent received for the period 1.3.1959 to 31.3.1959. Ex.PW1/6 is
the rent received for the period 1.6.1969 to 30.6.1969. As per
rent receipts Ex.PW1/2, Ex.PW1/3 and Ex.PW1/4 rent @ Rs.60/per month was received by the respondent. As per rent receipts
Ex.PW1/5, Ex.PW1/6 and Ex.PW1/7 rent @ Rs.30/- per month
was received by the respondent. Ex.PW1/10 pertains to the rent
received by the respondent for the year 1998. Respondent has
accepted rent @ Rs.400/- per month.
9.

On behalf of the appellant, appellant himself stepped

into the witness as DW-1. Besides reiterating the stand taken in
the written statement appellant deposed that he has no
intention of either subletting the tenanted premises or making
any alterations or additions in the tenanted premises. No other
witness was examined by the appellant.
10.

No documentary evidence was led by the appellant.

11.

Noting the statement of the appellant that he has no

intention of either subletting the tenanted premises or making
any alterations or additions in the tenanted premises, vide
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.6 of 17

judgment dated 15.11.99 the learned Trial Court passed a
decree against the appellant restraining the appellant from
subletting or otherwise parting with the possession of the
tenanted premises as also from making any alterations,
additions or constructions in the tenanted premises.
12.

The main controversy between the parties was

regarding the user of the tenanted premises.
13.

After carefully analysing the evidence relating to the

user of tenanted premises vide judgment dated 15.11.99
learned Trial Court has held that the evidence on record
probablises that the front portion of the tenanted premises was
let out for commercial purposes and that rear portion was let
out for residential purposes. Accordingly, a decree was passed
by the learned Trial Court in favour of the respondent
restraining the appellant from changing the user of the
tenanted premises. In arriving at the said conclusion the
learned Trial Court has reasoned as under:I.

Site plan Ex.PW1/11 shows that the said portions are
two different units in as much as there is no
connection between the two portions.

Trial Court

has further noted that there is considerable open
space between the two portions.
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.7 of 17

II.

Rent receipts Ex.PW1/2 to Ex.PW1/7 strengthens the
testimony of the PW-1 that initially rate of rent of
front portion was Rs.60/- per month and that of rear
portion was Rs.30/- per month. And the fact that rate
of rent of the two portions was different and that
separate rent receipts were being issued in respect
of two portions leads to an inference that the two
portions were let out for different purposes as
opposed to composite purposes.

III.

The testimony of the appellant that a double bed
was lying in the room situated in the rear portion of
the tenanted premises is a pointer indicating that the
rear portion was let out for residential purposes only.

IV.

The fact that no documentary evidence was led by
the appellant in support of his version weakens the
case of the appellant.

14.

Against

the

said

judgment

and

decree

dated

15.11.99 the appellant filed an appeal before the court of
Additional District Judge limited to the decision of the learned
Trial Court on the issue of user of tenanted premises.
15.

After considering the contentions advanced by the

appellant as also evidence on record the appellate court
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.8 of 17

concurred with the view taken by the Trial Court and thus
dismissed the appeal.
16.

In support of the present second appeal, counsel for

the appellant had urged following three contentions:A.

That Late Sh. Shadi Lal who was the original tenant

was survived by the appellant and two daughters namely Smt.
Kiran Lata and Smt. Seema Dhawan. That after the death of Sh.
Shadi Lal, the tenancy rights in respect of the suit property
were inherited by all the three legal heirs of the Sh. Shadi Lal
i.e. appellant and his two sisters. Therefore the suit of the
respondent was not maintainable for the reason sisters of the
appellant were not impleaded as a party in the suit. In order to
establish that tenancy rights were also inherited by his sisters
the appellant has moved an application under Order XLI Rule 27
CPC for production of additional evidence. (C.M. No.531/03).
Additional evidence sought to be produced is a rent receipt
dated 14.7.88 showing Smt. Seema Dhawan and the appellant
as tenants in the suit property.
B.

That

the

courts

below

failed

to

attach

due

importance to rent receipt Ex.PW1/10. That the said rent receipt
evidences that the rent @ Rs.400/- per month was paid in
respect of both the portions of the tenanted premises. That the
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.9 of 17

fact that a single rent receipt is issued in respect of whole of the
tenanted premises leads to an inference that both the portions
of the tenanted premises were let out for composite purposes.
C.

That the courts below failed to consider following

three material facts:i)

Rent of the tenanted premises was enhanced to

Rs.400/- per month.
ii)

At the time of the filing of the suit, appellant was

paying rent @ Rs.400/- per month for whole of the tenanted
premises as opposed to paying rent at different rates for two
portions.
Iii)

A single rent receipt was being issued by the

respondent.
That even if it is assumed that front portion of the
tenanted premises was let out for commercial purposes and
rear portion was let out for residential purposes, the afore-noted
three facts when coupled together suggest that subsequently a
new tenancy was created where under both the portions were
let out for composite purposes.
17.

Objection pertaining to non-impleadment of his

sisters was not pleaded by the appellant in his written
statement.
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.10 of 17

18.

Appellant has not even spoken a word about his

sisters in his testimony as DW-1.
19.

It is well settled that a party can be permitted to

adduce evidence on the basis of the case pleaded by him in his
pleading. In the decision reported as Abubakar v Harun AIR
1996 SC 612, the Supreme Court has observed as under:-

20.

“.......No amount of proof can substitute pleadings
which are the foundation of the claim of a litigating
party........”
Be that as it may, it is relevant to note the decision

of the Supreme Court reported as H.C. Pandey v G.C. Paul AIR
1989 SC 1470 wherein it was held as under:“4. It is now well settled that on the death of the
original tenant, subject to any provision to the
contrary either negativing or limiting the succession,
the tenancy rights devolve on the heirs of the
deceased tenant. The incidence of the tenancy are
the same as those enjoyed by the original tenant. It is
a single tenancy which devolves on the heirs. There is
no division of the premises or of the rent payable
therefor. That is the position as between the landlord
and the heirs of the deceased tenant. In other words,
the heirs succeed to the tenancy as joint tenants. In
the present case it appears that the respondent acted
on behalf of the tenants, that he paid rent on behalf of
all and he accepted notice also on behalf of all. In the
circumstances, the notice served on the respondent
was sufficient. It seems to us that the view taken in
Ramesh Chand Bone (supra) is erroneous where the
High Court lays down that the heirs of the deceased
tenant succeed as tenants in common. In our opinion,
the notice under Section 106 of the Transfer of
Property Act served by the appellant on the
respondent is a valid notice and therefore the suit
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.11 of 17

21.

must succeed.”
The legal position relating to joint tenancy was laid

down by the Supreme Court in the decision reported as Ashok
Chintaman Juker & Ors v Kishore Pandurang Mantri and Anr AIR
2001 SC 2251. In the said decision, the Supreme Court has held
as under:-

22.

“11. The question that arises for consideration in
such cases is whether the tenancy is joint or separate.
In the former case notice on any one of the tenants is
valid and a suit impleading one of them as a
defendant is maintainable...........”
In view of law laid down by the Supreme Court in

H.C.Pandey and Ashok Chintaman's cases (supra), the fact that
the daughters of Late Sh. Shadi Lal were not impleaded as a
party in the suit filed by the respondent is of no consequence.
At this stage I may deal with C.M. No.531/03. As noted above
prayer made is to lead additional evidence to establish that the
appellant's sister Smt. Seema Dhawan was a joint tenant in the
suit property. There is no requirement of said evidence for the
reason even if it is assumed Smt. Seema Dhawan was a joint
tenant in the suit property it would make no difference. Even
otherwise additional evidence is allowed to be produced where
foundation has been laid in the pleadings to a matter in issue.
23.

As regards the issue pertaining to non-appreciation

of rent receipt Ex.PW1/10 by the courts below, suffice would it
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.12 of 17

be to note the following observations of the Supreme Court in
the decision reported as Vilas Pandurang Patil v State of
Maharashtra (2004) 6 SCC 158:-

24.

“18. .........It is true that when on the evidence
brought on record two views are possible and the
court has taken a view which is possible, interference
by the appellate court would not be proper.......”
From the evidence noted in para 13 above, the view

taken by the learned Trial Court that front portion of the
tenanted premises was let out for commercial purposes and
that rear portion of was let out for residential purposes is
possible. No fault could be found with the view taken by the
learned Trial Court.
25.

Therefore, even if it assumed that rent receipt

Ex.PW1/10 is pointing towards a view contrary to the view
taken by the learned

Trial Court, the same is of no

consequence for the reason there is sufficient evidence on the
record supporting the view taken by the learned Trial Court.
26.

On the issue pertaining to creation of new tenancy

evidenced by enhancement of rent and change of manner of
payment of rent, it is relevant to note the following portion of
the testimony of PW-1.
“Even though single rent receipt is being issued to the
defendant, at present yet the purpose of letting of the
portion Mark 'C' in the plan Ex.PW1/11 is commercial
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.13 of 17

27.

and the purpose of letting of the room is residential
and is being used for residential purposes by the
defendant.”
During cross-examination of PW-1, no suggestion

was given to him that a new tenancy was created when rent
was enhanced to Rs.400/- per month and a single rent receipt
was issued in respect of both the portions.
28.

The following passage occurs in the Halsbury's Laws

of England (para 448, pf 354, Vol 27, Fourth Edition):“448. Variation of terms of lease - Where the
terms of the relationship between the landlord and
the tenant are altered by agreement, it is necessary
to decide whether the alteration amounts to the
creation of a new tenancy upon the altered terms, and
thus of necessity the surrender by operation of law of
the previous tenancy, or whether the alteration
merely continues the previous tenancy in a varied
form. Certain agreed alterations necessarily involve
the surrender of the previous tenancy and its
replacement by a new tenancy. The only way in which
new land may be added to the demised premises is by
this process of surrender by operation of law of the
old lease and the grant of a new lease to include both
the old and the new premises. Equally the duration of
a lease can only be extended by the surrender of the
existing lease and its replacement by a new lease for
the longer term. As a matter of law the parties can
only achieve this intention by the fiction of a
surrender and re-grant.
Other agreed alterations do not necessarily involve a
surrender and re-grant. If the parties wish they may
increase the rent payable under a tenancy without
creating a new tenancy; the old tenancy continues at
the increased rent. The rent may be reduced in the
same way. Other minor variations may be effected
without a surrender and re-grant. Where the
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.14 of 17

agreement between the parties does not affect the
terms of an existing tenancy there is no reason to
imply a surrender and re-grant. However, where the
parties intend that their altered relationship is to
amount to a new tenancy there will be a surrender of
the previous tenancy.
29.

In the decision reported as Goppulal v Thakurji Shriji

Shriji Dwarkadheesji & Anr AIR 1969 SC 1291 four shops were
let out to the defendant in 1944 on a rent of Rs. 150/- per
month and two more shops were let out to him in 1945 on a
rent of Rs. 65/- per month. In 1953 the defendant agreed to
pay a consolidated rent of Rs. 251.8 per month for all the six
shops. The plaintiff contended that by reason of the change in
the quantum of rent a new tenancy had come into existence.
The first two courts found that in 1953 there was no new
contract of tenancy, that there was only an increase of rent and
that the other terms and conditions of the tenancy remained
unaltered. In para 5 of the said decision, the Supreme Court
has observed as under:“A mere increase or reduction of rent does not
necessarily import the surrender of the existing lease
and the grant of a new tenancy. As stated in Hill and
Redman's Law of Landlord and Tenant, 14th ed.,
Article 385, p. 493:“But a surrender does not follow from a mere
agreement made during the tenancy for the
reduction or increase of rent, unless there is
some special reason to infer a new tenancy,
where for instance, the parties make the
RSA No.119/2001

Page No.15 of 17

change in the rent in the belief that the old
tenancy is at an end.”
In the present case the first two courts on a review of
the entire evidence came to the conclusion that the
increase of rent did not import a new demise. This
finding of fact was binding on the High Court in
second appeal. The High Court was in error in holding
that there was one integrated tenancy of the six
shops.”
30.

In

the

decision

reported

as

N.M.

Ponniah

v

Kamalakshmi Ammal AIR 1989 SC 467 the question before the
Supreme Court was whether a mere increase in rent would
affect the terms of an existing tenancy so as to conclude a
surrender of existing rights and re-grant of fresh rights. In the
said decision, the Supreme Court has held as under:“The textual passages extracted above and the
decision of this Court in Gopulal's case set out lucidly
that a mere increase or reduction of rent will not
necessarily import a surrender of an existing lease
and the grant of a new tenancy. We may add that if
on account of the variation in the quantum of rent any
consequential change is made regarding the time and
manner of the payment of the rent it cannot have the
effect of graver consequences being imported into the
change of rent than what the parties had intended
and warrant a finding by the Court, that the parties
had intended to create a new tenancy in supersession
of the earlier one or that by operation of law a new
tenancy had come into existence.”
31.

In light of afore-noted two decisions, it is held that

the mere increase of rent or issuance of one rent receipt for

RSA No.119/2001

Page No.16 of 17

both the portions does not mean that a new tenancy was
created.
32.

The appeal and C.M. No.531/03 are dismissed.

33.

No costs.

December 7, 2007
mm

RSA No.119/2001

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page No.17 of 17

