IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.A.No.8653/2004 in Crl.M.C.No.2709/1995
#
!

Rajiv Shetty
through:

....... Petitioners
Mr.Ashwani Matta, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Vaibhav Dang, Mr.A.K.Mehta,
Advs.
VERSUS

$
^

The State & Ors.
through:

%

....... Respondent
Mr.M.M.Shandilya, Respondent No.2/
applicant in person
Ms.Fizani Husain, APP for State

DATE OF DECISION: 1-10-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
On 27.11.1995, Rajiv Shetty, the petitioner was enlarged on

bail till disposal of the complaint filed by Mohan Murti Shandilya,
the applicant.
2.

In his complaint under Sections 156(3) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, it was pleaded by Mohan Murti Shandilya that
he was a non-resident Indian based in Singapore and had opened
a NRE Saving Account bearing No.6523 with Vijaya Bank, Defence
Colony Branch, New Delhi.

That Rajiv Shetty, working as a

Manager with said bank had induced him to make deposits in the
bank.

That in the month of April, 1990 when Mohan Murti

Shandilya was not in Delhi, Rajiv Shetty went to his house and
requested his wife to hand him over a leaf of a cheque to him
stating that he, i.e. Rajiv Shetty had talked on this issue with the
complainant. That wife of the complainant handed over one leaf
of a cheque. That Rajiv Shetty, in fact, wanted a leaf of the
cheque pertaining to the NRE account and hence induced his wife,
i.e. wife of complainant to hand over a leaf of a cheque pertaining
to the NRE account. That utilizing the said cheque, Rajiv Shetty
defrauded the complainant. That the accused had falsified the
NRE Saving Account 6523.
3.

While seeking bail Rajiv Shetty relied upon the account

opening form and specimen signature card pertaining to a current
account No.1571 in the name of a company M/s. Gambro Nexim
(India) Medical Ltd and pleaded that the complainant, Mohan
Murti Shandilya, and his wife Renu Murti Shandilya had opened
the account as directors of the said company. Pertaining to the
pleadings with respect to the said current account 1571, Rajiv
Shetty placed on record, as Annexure P-1, the photocopy of
specimen signature card bearing signatures of Renu Murti
Shandilya and Mohan Murti Shandilya.
4.

The photocopy of the specimen signature card pertaining to

the signatures of Renu Murti lists the writing of NRE 6523 as

under :Jeevan Nidhi Deposit
NRE

5.

A/C No.
6523

I need not note any other fact pertaining to the grant of bail

to Rajiv Shetty for the reason vide Crl. M. A. No.8653/2004
cancellation of the bail has been prayed for on the ground that in
other proceedings, Rajiv Shetty has filed a photocopy of the same
specimen signature card wherein Account No. NRE 6523 is written
as under :Jeevan Nidhi Deposit
NR

6.

A/c No.
E 6523

Stating that the letter 'E' has shifted on the right side of the

divider line pertaining to the Column of account number it is
urged that the accused, i.e. Rajiv Shetty obtained bail from this
court by falsification of record i.e. the specimen signature card
that Annexure P-1 relied upon while seeking bail is a fabricated
document.
7.

I note that photocopy of the specimen signature card being

relied upon in support of the application is the one filed by Vijaya
Bank in Suit No.1154/1993 and in the said suit Rajiv Shetty is
appearing as a witness of the

bank and in relation to the

controversy pertaining to the specimen signature card has given
his evidence.
8.

I do not intend to discuss the testimony of Rajiv Shetty for

the reason evidence is still being recorded in the suit and it would

not be desirable for me to comment upon the issue in the
absence of complete evidence.
9.

Issues pertaining to grant of bail, challenge in appeal to an

order granting bail and cancellation of bail arise in mutually
exclusive jurisdictions and have to be dealt with on different
basis, i.e. on different considerations.
10.

As stated in the decision reported as 1995 (1) SCC 349

Dolat Ram & Ors. Vs. State of Haryana, generally speaking, the
grounds for cancellation of bail, broadly (illustrative and not
exhaustive) are: interference or attempt to interfere with the due
course of administration of justice or evasion or attempt to evade
the due course of justice or abuse of the concession granted to
the accused in any manner. The satisfaction of the court, on the
basis of material placed on the record of the possibility of the
accused

absconding

cancellation of bail.

is

yet

another

reason

justifying

the

However, bail once granted should not be

cancelled in a mechanical manner without considering whether
any supervening circumstances have rendered it no longer
conducive to a fair trial to allow the accused to retain his freedom
by enjoying the concession of bail during the trial.
11.

In the decision reported as 2005 (3) SCC 143 Panchanan

Mishra Vs. Digambar Mishra, it was observed as under :“The object underlying the cancellation of bail is to
protect the fair trial and secure justice being done to
the society by preventing the accused who is set at
liberty by the bail order from tampering with the

evidence in the henieous crime.......It hardly requires
to be stated that once a person is released on bail in
serious criminal cases where the punishment is quite
stringent and deterrent, the accused in order to get
away from the clutches of the same indulge in various
activities like tampering with the prosecution
witnesses, threatening the family members of the
deceased victim and also create problems of law and
order situation.”
12. It is not the case of the applicant that after bail was granted,
petitioner Rajiv Shetty has interfered with or attempted to
interfere with the due course of administration of justice in the
criminal complaint filed by the applicant or that petitioner
attempted to evade the due course of justice or has abused a
concession granted to him.
13.

In my opinion, it would not be permissible for this court to

revoke the bail on the ground that in some other proceedings a
different copy of specimen signature form has been relied upon.
14.

More often than not, more than once specimen signatures

are taken by a bank.

Slight variation in the place where

signatures are found would not lead to the conclusion that a
forgery has been committed. Be that as it may, Rajiv Shetty has
testified in the suit with respect to the 2 specimen signature
forms being relied upon by the bank and him. Issue would have
to be decided on merits keeping in consideration the total
evidence led.
15.

Lastly I note that the applicant had opposed the bail

application filed by the petitioner and had availed the opportunity
to make comments on the specimen signature card.

16.

I hold that no case is made out to cancel the bail granted to

Rajiv Shetty.
17.

The application is dismissed.

18.

No costs.

October 01, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

