IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA No.292/2007
#
!

Shiksha Devi & Ors.
........
through: Mr. S.S.Tomar, Advocate

Appellants

VERSUS
$
^

Gaon Sabha Rithala & Ors.
through: None.

%

........

Respondents

DATE OF DECISION: 06.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)
Dispute pertains to agricultural land in village Rithala

which as stated in the plaint was acquired vide award No.16/8586 and vested in the Union of India.
2.

Contemporaneous

with

the

proceedings

for

acquisition of the land, the revenue assistant had initiated
proceedings under Section 81 of Delhi Land Reforms Act on the
ground that the land had been put to non-agricultural use. A
conditional order required by law was passed giving

3

monthstime to the recorded bhuomidars to restore the land to
agricultural use.

It was followed by a vesting order dated
page 1 of 9

26.4.1985 holding that since

land was not restored to

agricultural use it stood vested in the Gaon Sabha.
3.

The land owners had a grievance that proceedings

under Section 81 were concluded without notice to them. They
moved an application before the Revenue Assistant for review
of the order dated 26.4.1985.

Review was dismissed on the

ground that since award was pronounced and lands had vested
in the Central Government

pursuant to the acquisition no

proceedings under Delhi Land Reforms Act,1954 chould be
continued.
4.

The land owners had a problem. Before the award

was published, land was shown as vested in Gaon Sabha. Thus,
no compensation could flow to them.

Their grievance that

vesting order was without following principles of natural justice
could not be got adjudicated under the Delhi Land Reforms
Act,1954. They filed a civil suit stating in the plaint (para 1)
that they were the recorded bhumidars of the land. That the
land was acquired vide award No.16/85-86 and was vested in
the Union of India (para 2). They stated that the conditional
vesting order and the final vesting order were without notice to
them.

They prayed that declaration be issued that the land

acquired vide award No.16/85-86 was owned by them as
Bhumidars and that vesting order dated 26.4.1985 was illegal.
page 2 of 9

They sought a permanent injunction against the
Acquisition Collector restraining

him from

Land

making any

payment to the Gaon Sabha.
5.

The learned Trial Judge has held that remedy of the

appellants was to proceed under Section 18 of the Land
Acquisition Act.

Learned Appellate Judge

has held that the

vesting order ought to have been challenged by way of appeal
before the Additional Collector under the Delhi Land Reforms
Act.
6.

Result is that for different reasons suit filed stands

dismissed.
7.

Prima facie, view taken by the learned Trial Judge is

correct.
8.

My reason for the same is the ratio of

law as is

culled out from the decision of the Division Bench of this Court
reported

as

94

(2001)

DLT

348

Pyare

Vs.

Financial

Commissioner & Ors. and the decision of the Supreme Court
reported as AIR 2003 SC 942 Sharda Devi Vs. State of Bihar. In
para 23 and 28 of the decision in Sharda Devi's case (supra) it
was observed as under :“23.
The two provisions contemplating
power of the Collector to make reference as
contained in Section 18 and Section 30 of the
Act need a comparative study. Under Section
18 the subject-matter of reference can be a
dispute as to any one or more of the following:
page 3 of 9

(i) as to the measurement of the land, (ii) as to
the amount or the quantum of the
compensation, (iii) as to the persons to whom
the compensation is payable, (iv) as to the
apportionment of the compensation among the
persons interested. Under Section 30 the
subject matter of dispute can be: (i) the
apportionment of the amount of compensation
or any part thereof, (ii) the persons to whom
the amount of compensation or any part
thereof is payable. Though the expression
employed in Section 18 is 'the amount of
compensation' while the expression employed
in Section 30 is 'the amount of compensation
or any part thereof, this distinction in
legislative
drafting
is
immaterial
and
insignificant and a dispute as to entitlement or
apportionment of part of the compensation
would also be covered by Section 18 of the Act
on the principle that the whole includes a part
too. Thus, at the first blush, it seems that
Section 30 overlaps Section 18 in part; but as
will be seen shortly hereinafter, it is not so.
28.
Under Section 18 of the Act the
Collector does not have power to withhold the
reference. Once a written application has been
made satisfying the requirements of Section
18, the Collector shall make a reference. The
Collector has no discretion in the matter,
whether the dispute has any merit or not is to
be left for the determination of the Court.
Under Section 30 the Collector may refer such
dispute to the decision of the Court. The
Collector has discretion in the matter. Looking
to the nature of the dispute raised, the person
who is raising the dispute, the delay in inviting
the attention of the Court, and so on are such
illustrative factors which may enter into the
consideration by the Collector while exercising
the discretion. If the Collector makes the
reference it may be decided by the Court
subject to its forming an opinion that the
dispute was capable of reference and
determination under Section 30 of the Act. In
page 4 of 9

case the Collector refuses to make a reference
under Section 30 of the Act, the person
adversely affected by withholding of the
reference or refusal to make the reference
shall be at liberty to pursue such other remedy
as may be available to him under the law such
as filing a writ petition or a civil suit.”
9.

The Division Bench of this court in para 8 of the

decision in Pyare's case (supra) observed as under :“8.
It was submitted by Mr. Ramesh
Chandra, leaned senior counsel for the
petitioner that in case it be held that section
185 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act has no
application to the present case since
bhumidhari rights stand extinguished on
acquisition of the land in question, the
petitioner will certainly have a right to file a
civil suit to establish his right as a Bhumidhar
of the land. We have considered the
submission of the learned senior counsel.
Under section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, the courts have jurisdiction to try all
suits of civil nature excepting suits of which
their cognizance is either expressly or
impliedly barred. In case the petitioner wishes
to establish bhumidhari rights over the land
after acquisition but with reference to a period
prior to the acquisition of the land, for the
purposes of claiming compensation the suit
will not be maintainable
as the question
relating
to apportionment of compensation
and all questions incidental thereto including
the question as to who is entitled to receive
compensation, as already noted, are to be
gone into by the Collector under section 11 of
the Land Acquisition Act. Again, in reference
proceedings under section 18 of the Land
Acquisition Act, power has been conferred
upon the District Judge to determine the
question as to the persons to whom
compensation is payable. Since the question
as to who is entitled to receive compensation
is required to be determined by the Collector
page 5 of 9

under section 11 of the Land Acquisition Act
and the District Judge in reference under
section 18 of the land Acquisition Act, a suit for
the purpose of establishing bhumidhari rights
over the land for the purpose of claiming
compensation is barred by implication, the
Land Acquisition Act being a self-contained
code. In case the petitioner seeks to establish
bhumidhari rights over the land for the
purpose other than seeking compensation, the
remedy by way of civil suit would be available
to him.”
10.

Concluding sentence in para 8 of the decision of the

Supreme Court and the Division Bench of this court needs a
little explanation.
11.

In both the decisions it is observed that if the Land

Acquisition Collector chose to decline a reference under Section
18 or Section 30 of the Land Acquisition Act the remedy of the
aggrieved person under law is to file a writ petition or a civil
suit. It would mean to take resort to an action compelling the
Land Acquisition Collector to make the reference either under
Section 18 or Section 30 of the Land Acquisition Act.

The

concluding sentence does not mean that a regular civil suit for
resolution of the dispute can be filed.
12.

The reason is obvious.

The Land Acquisition

Act,1894 is a complete code. It envisages a speedy acquisition
and settlement of claims pertaining to acquisition

of land.

Thus, any dispute pertaining to right, title or interest pertaining
to acquired land has to be got adjudicated under the

Land

page 6 of 9

Acquisition Act. As observed by the Division Bench of this court
in Pyare's case (supra) (para 7) :“7.
Thus, under clause (b) of section 67,
the interest of a Bhumidhar automatically gets
extinguished when the land comprised in his
holding is acquired under any law, such as the
Land Acquisition Act, or any other Act relating
to the acquisition of the land. Since the interest
of the petitioner, assuming that he was a
Bhumidhar, stands extinguished under section
67(b) of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, the
revenue court ceases to have jurisdiction in the
matter. Therefore, the application filed by the
petitioner under section 185 of the Delhi Land
Reforms Act seeking declaration of Bhumidhari
rights was not maintainable and the Revenue
Assistant rightly held that it had no jurisdiction
to try the case. Both the Additional Collector
and the Financial Commissioner also took the
correct view in upholding the order of the
Revenue Assistant. The decision of the
Supreme Court in Hatti (supra) to which our
attention has been drawn by Mr. Chandra is of
no avail to the petitioner inasmuch as this was
not a case where Bhumidhari rights of the
appellant stood extinguished by virtue of the
acquisition of the land under the Land
Acquisition Act. Section 185 applies in a case
where the Bhumidhar rights do not stand
extinguished. Once the Bhumidhari rights
stand extinguished, section 185 of the Delhi
Land Reforms Act will have no application.”
13.

Before concluding I may note why the first appellate

court has held that the remedy of the appellant was to
challenge the vesting order by way of appeal before the
Collector under the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954.
14.

Appellant change tracks before the appellate court.

With reference to some unproved documents they urged that
page 7 of 9

land had not vested in the Union of India. They sought to urge
that for the reason the LAC had refused to make a reference
under Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act 1894.
15.

It is in relation to this submission that the appellate

court has held that if award was not given effect to and land did
not vest in the Union of India the appellants were free to invoke
the remedy of appeal before the collector and challenge the
vesting order.
16.

I note that by virtue of Section 185 of the Delhi Land

Reforms Act 1954, in respect of orders passed by revenue
officers where appellate remedy is available under the statute,
civil courts have no jurisdiction to entertain suits.
17.

Be that as it may, the appellants have applied to the

Land Acquisition Collector

for making a

Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act.

reference under

The remedy of the

appellants is to file a writ petition seeking a mandamus against
the Land Acquisition Collector to refer the dispute under Section
18 of the Land Acquisition Act. If advised, appellants may file
a suit for mandatory injunction

claiming similar relief.

Alternatively, if acquisition has lapsed and land is not vested in
the Union of India the appellants have a remedy under the
Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954. But appellants have to make up
their mind and chose 1 forum.
page 8 of 9

18.

In view of settled legal position and in view of the

decisions of the Division Bench of this court in Pyare's case and
of the Supreme Court in Sharda Devi's case no substantial
question of law arose for consideration in the instant second
appeal.
19.

The appeal is dismissed.

December 06, 2007
pu

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 9 of 9

