IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No. 107/2006
#
!

M/s. Prestolite of India Ltd.
........
Appellant
through: Mr. Mahfooz Nazki, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

General Insurance Corp.
of India & Anr.
........
Respondents
through: Mr. Pradeep Gaur, Advocate and
Mr. Amit Kumar Pandey, Advocate
RESERVED ON: 29.11.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 03.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Vide

Ex. PW-1/2

M/s. Prestolite

Of India

Ltd.

(hereinafter referred to as Prestolite) obtained a burglary policy
of insurance from the National Insurance Company Ltd. a
subsidiary of General Insurance Corporation of India.

The

policy of insurance Ex. PW-1/2 relates to the goods at the
godown and the factory of Prestolite at Faridabad. The policy
was obtained from the branch office of National Insurance
Company at Sector 11, Faridabad (Haryana). Alleging that a
FAO No.107/2006

Page 1 of 11

burglary had taken place.

Prestolite lodged an FIR with the

local police at Faridabad, Ex. PW-2/1 and simultaneously
lodged a claim for indemnification of the loss suffered.
2.

As pleaded in para 7 of the plaint the claim was

lodged at the Faridabad Branch of the National Insurance
Company. Being relevant for determination of the issue arising
in the instant appeal, relevant averments in para 7 of the plaint
may be noted. They are as under:-

3.

“7. On 5th September, 1977, the plaintiff company
lodged its claim under the aforesaid insurance policy
with defendant No. 2 through its branch office at
Faridabad as the day to day business was being
conducted in the Faridabad Branch of defendant No. 2.”
The claim of Prestolite was repudiated by the

National Insurance Company on 2.1.1980 vide Ex. PW-1/6. The
letter has been addressed from the office of the Senior
Divisional Manager of National Insurance Company at New
Delhi.
4.

It is admitted by the parties that the registered

office of National Insurance Company is at Calcutta (West
Bengal).
5.

Vide impugned order dated 8.3.2006, holding that

the courts at Delhi have no territorial jurisdiction to entertain
the plaint, the issue framed:“Whether this court has no territorial jurisdiction to
entertain the present suit? OPD-1 & 2”
FAO No.107/2006

Page 2 of 11

has been decided against Prestolite.

The instant appeal

challenges the said order.
6.

Territorial Jurisdiction of the courts at Delhi has been

pleaded in para 18 of the plaint as under:-

7.

“18. This Hon'ble Court has jurisdiction to try this suit
as the Principal Offices of the defendants from where
they function particularly in so far as the pledged goods
are concerned are in New Delhi within the jurisdiction of
this Hon'ble Court. It may be stated here that the
offices of the defendants in Faridabad are merely like
post office and they function all the time under the
superintendence, control and directions of the
defendants from New Delhi.”
Ex facie, averments in para 18 of the plaint are at

variance with the averments made in para 7 of the plaint.
8.

The question of territorial jurisdiction of a civil court

has to be answered with reference to Section 20 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.
9.

Provisions of Section 20 of the Code have to be

considered with reference to the admitted fact that the contract
of insurance was entered into at Faridabad a place outside
Delhi and the policy was issued at Faridabad and related to a
factory and a godown at Faridabad as also that claim was
lodged at Faridabad.

Additionally, the issue of jurisdiction

would have to be decided with reference to the letter of
repudiation Ex. PW-1/6 admittedly issued from New Delhi.
10.

The test for determining the place where the cause

of action accrues in suits arising out of contract was originally
FAO No.107/2006

Page 3 of 11

clarified in the third explanation to Section 20 of the Code of
Civil Procedure of 1882 which Provided that in suits arising out
of contract the cause of action arises within the meaning of
Section 20 at any of the following places, viz..
"(1) the place where the contract was made;
(2) the place where the contract was to be performed
or performance thereof completed:
(3) the place where in performance of the contract any
money to which the suit relates was expressly or
impliedly payable."
11.

Although the third explanation has been omitted

from the present Code of 1908 it still provides a working test
for determining the place where the cause of action in suits
arising out of contract arises. See Arthur Butler and Co. Ltd. v.
District Board of Gava. Air 1947 Pat 134.
12.

What is a cause of action? Lord Esher, M.R. in Read

v. Brown.(1889) 22 Qbd 128 defined a cause of action as
"every fact which it would be necessary for the plaintiff to
prove if traversed in order to support his right to the judgment
of the Court. It does not comprise every Piece of evidence
which is necessary to prove each fact but every fact which is
necessary to be proved."
13.

Delivering the judgment of the Privy Council in Mt.

Chand Kaur v. Partap Singh. (1888) Ilr 16 Cal 98 (PC) Lord
FAO No.107/2006

Page 4 of 11

Watson said:
"Now the cause of action has no relation whatever to
the defence which may be set up by the defendant,
nor does it depend upon the character of the relief
prayed for by the plaintiff. It refers entirely to the
grounds set out in the plaint as the cause of action, or,
in other words to the media upon which the plaintiff
asks the Court to arrive at a conclusion in his favour."
14.

Sir D. F. Mulla in his commentaries on the Code of

Civil Procedure defines a cause of action as "a bundle of
essential facts which it is necessary for the plaintiff to prove
before he can succeed in the suit." (Volume I, Page 144. 13th
Edition).
15.

Applying this well known test to the facts of the case

it is not the plaintiff case that the contract of insurance was
made at Delhi nor has it been able to prove that the money
under the policies is payable to it at Delhi in performance of the
contract.
16.

Condition No. 4 of the policy Ex. PW-1/2 reads as

under:“Upon the happening of any loss or damage likely to
give rise to a claim under this policy the insured shall
forthwith give notice thereof to the police and notice
thereof in writing to the Issuing Office of the Company
stating the circumstances of the loss or damage.”
17.
office.

Thus, the claim had to be settled at the issuing
Admittedly, Prestolite has no office/branch office at

FAO No.107/2006

Page 5 of 11

Delhi. Thus, if claim was allowed, payment had to be made at
Faridabad.
18.

Though not pleaded in the plaint but since it was

urged that in view of rejection of the claim i.e. repudiation by
National Insurance Company (Ex. PW-1/6) emanating from
Delhi, courts at Delhi would have jurisdiction, issue of
jurisdiction is being considered by me with reference to Ex. PW1/6 being issued from Delhi.
19.

Hardy, J. (as his Lordship then was) in Suit No. 407

of 1967, Mrs. Sunanda Bakshi v. Life insurance Corporation of
India decided on May, 6. 1969 where the facts were much the
same said :
"Applying the test laid down in these decisions to the
present case, it is apparent that it is not at all
necessary for the plaintiff to prove for the success of
her suit that the repudiation of liability under the
policy was communicated by the defendant to her at
Delhi. This fact has nothing to do either with the
formation of the contract or with its performance nor
has it anything to do with the payment of money by
the defendant to the plaintiff in performance of the
said contract."
20.

Thus, rejection or repudiation of a claim in a contract

of insurance was not treated as a part of a cause of action.
21.

In Indian Pottery Works v. Dominion of India, (1962)

66 Cal WN 29 it was held that the communication of rejection
was no part of the cause of action. The learned Judge said:
FAO No.107/2006

Page 6 of 11

"The communication of rejection does not, in my view,
form the infringement of the right ... ... ... ...
The cause of action has already occurred or arisen."
22.

In that case the plaintiff entered into a contract with

the Governor General for supply of goods. The Inspector
rejected the goods. The plaintiff challenged the cancellation on
these facts the learned Judge said:
"... .... .... ...the foundation of the cause of action for
wrongful or illegal rejection is that the Officer-incharge. Ordinance Inspection Depot did not perform
the contractual obligations. The evidence in the
present case is that the rejection occurred at a place
outside the jurisdiction of this Court. I am therefore of
the opinion that the Plaintiff cannot contend that the
cause of action has arisen within the jurisdiction of this
Court."
23.

The alternative submission with reference to the

Divisional Office of National Insurance Office being at Delhi, the
same needs to be noted and rejected for the reason the same
relates to the explanation to Section 20 which reads as under :"Explanation :- A corporation shall be deemed to carry
on business at its sole or principal office in India or, in
respect of any cause of action arising at any place
where it has also a subordinate office at such place."
24.

No doubt the Divisional Office of the National

Insurance Company is at Delhi, but if no part of the cause of
action has arisen at the place where the branch of subordinate
office is situated the mere fact of the corporation having a
FAO No.107/2006

Page 7 of 11

branch office will not give the Court of that place jurisdiction to
entertain a suit. The law is well settled that if no part of the
cause of action arises at the place of the branch office, the
mere fact of the Corporation having a branch office at the place
will not give the Court jurisdiction: See Bhola Nath Aggarwal v.
The Empire of India Life Assurance Co. Ltd., AIR 1948 Lah 56;
Bharat Insurance Co.. Delhi v. Wasudeo Ramchandra- AIR 1956
Nag 203 and Nedungadi Bank Ltd. v. Central Bank of India Ltd.
MANU/KE/0016/1961.
25.

The issue is no longer res integra. It has been late

to rest in the decision reported as 1991 (4 ) SCC 270 Patel
Roadways Vs. Prasad Trading Co. In para 9 of the report it was
held as under:Clauses (a) and (b) of Section 20 inter alia refer to a
court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
defendant inter alia "carries on business". Clause (c)
on the other hand refers to a court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the cause of action
wholly or in part arises. It has not been urged before
us on behalf of the appellant that the cause of action
wholly or in part arose in Bombay. Consequently
Clause (c) is not attracted to the facts of these
cases. What has been urged with the aid of the
Explanation to Section 20 of the Code is that since
the appellant has its principal office in Bombay it
shall be deemed to carry on business at Bombay
and consequently the courts at Bombay will also
have jurisdiction. On a plain reading of the
Explanation to Section 20 of the Code we find an
apparent fallacy in the aforesaid argument. The
Explanation is in two parts, one before the word "or"
occurring between the words "office in India" and
FAO No.107/2006

Page 8 of 11

the words "in respect of" and the other thereafter.
The Explanation applies to a defendant which is a
corporation which term, as seen above, would
include even a company such as the appellant in the
instant case. The first part of the Explanation applies
only to such a corporation which has its sole or
principal office at a particular place. In that event
the courts within whose jurisdiction the sole or
principal office of the defendant is situate will also
have jurisdiction inasmuch as even if the defendant
may not be actually carrying on business at that
place, it will "be deemed to carry on business" at
that place because of the fiction created by the
Explanation. The latter part of the Explanation takes
care of a case where the defendant does not have a
sole office but has a principal office at one place and
has also a subordinate office at another place. The
words "at such place" occurring at the end of the
Explanation and the word "or" referred to above
which is disjunctive clearly suggest that if the case
falls within the latter part of the Explanation it is not
the Court within whose jurisdiction the principal
office of the defendant is situate but the court within
whose jurisdiction it has a subordinate office which
alone shall have jurisdiction "in respect of any cause
of action arising at any place where it has also a
subordinate office".
26.

Even otherwise, the Divisional Office of the National

Insurance Company cannot be equated with the Principal
Office. In Palmer v. Caledonian Railway Co (1892) 1 Qb 823
the term principal office was explained by Lord Esher M.R. He
said:
"That being so, we have a Scotch company to be
served with a writ, and the question is whether Carlisle
is the principal office, or one of the principal offices, of
the company. I should have thought without any
authority that the principal office of the company must
be the place at which the business of the company is
controlled and managed. The only office that answers
this description is the company's office at Glasgow. No
FAO No.107/2006

Page 9 of 11

part of the business of the company is controlled or
managed, in the sense that it is independently
controlled or managed at Carlisle. The directors meet
at Glasgow, and the office from which and through
which they manage the business of the company is at
Glasgow. If the expression "principal office" means the
office at which the business of the company, is
managed, it does not apply to Carlisle; and the service
of the writ at the office there was not a service at the
principal office of the company, and must be set
aside."
Lopes, L. J. said:
"It was contended that the Caledonian Railway
Company was in point of fact two companies - one
Scotch and the other English; one domiciled and
resident in England, and the other in Scotland. I cannot
agree to this. It appears to me to be one company and
that a Scotch company, having its principal office at
Glasgow, What I understand by principal office is that
office where the General Superintendence and
management of the business of the railway is carried
on, and as to that I may refer to Garton v. Great
Western Rly. Co., (EB & E 837)."
27.

Looked at from any angle, courts at Delhi would

have no jurisdiction to entertain the plaint.
28.

The submission made by counsel for the appellant

that the issue has been decided after many years and if plaint
is refiled at Faridabad trial will take considerable time and
hence on equitable grounds the impugned order should be set
aside is neither here nor there for the reason the defendant
raised the issue of territorial jurisdiction at the very inception
when written statement was filed.
jurisdiction was framed.
FAO No.107/2006

An issue of pertaining to

Prestolite took a calculated risk of
Page 10 of 11

invoking jurisdiction of courts at Delhi and must bear the
consequence thereof.
29.

The appeal is dismissed.

30.

No costs.

31.

LCR be returned.

December 3, 2007
MM

FAO No.107/2006

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page 11 of 11

