*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.378/2006
National Insurance Co.Ltd.
........ Appellant
through: Mr.Pradeep Gaur, Advocate and
Mr.Dev Dutt, Advocate.
VERSUS
Kanshi Ram & Ors.
........ Respondents
through: Mr.Sunil Sehrawat, Advocate and
Mr.Gaurav Malhotra, Advocate
for respondents No.1 and 2.
Mr.Basant Kumar, Advocate
for respondent No.3.
DATE OF DECISION:
01.05.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2.

The instant appeal filed by the insurance company

limits challenge to the order dated 11.9.2006 passed by the
Commissioner Workmen's Compensation insofar it hold that
12% interest on the compensation amount with effect from the

FAO No.378/06

page 1 of 10

date of the death of the deceased workman shall be borne by
the insurance company.
3.

It is urged at the hearing today that there is no

statutory liability cast by any law requiring insurance company
to pay interest and that the policy of insurance does not
contain a covenant requiring insurance company to pay
interest

if

a

claim

Compensation Act.

is

allowed

under

the

Workmen's

Second contention urged is that the

liability to pay compensation accrues on the day the same is
adjudicated and hence the interest becomes payable with
effect from the date liability is adjudicated upon.
4.

While

fastening

liability

to

pay

interest

the

Commissioner Workmen's Compensation has noted a decision
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Ved Prakash vs.
Premi 1998 ACJ (SC) 1.
5.

For the first opposition learned counsel for the

appellant cites PJ Narayan vs. UOI & Ors. 2004 ACJ 52 and New
India Assurance Co. vs. Harshadbhai Amrutbhai Modhiya & Anr.
AIR 2006 SC 196 the counsel also cites the decision reported
as AIR 1976 SC 222 Pratap Narayan Singh Deo vs. S.Sriniwas
Sabata & Anr.
6.

The said contention advanced by the learned

counsel for the insurance company needs to be adjudicated
FAO No.378/06

page 2 of 10

upon with reference to Section 4-A of the Workmen's
Compensation Act 1943 which reads as under:“4A. Compensation to be paid when due and penalty for
default.-(1) Compensation under Section 4 shall be paid
as soon as it falls due.
(2)

In cases where the employer does not accept the
liability for compensation to the extent claimed, he shall
be bound to make provisional payment based on the
extent of liability which he accepts, and, such payment
shall be deposited with the Commissioner or made to
the workman, as the case may be, without prejudice to
the right of the workman to make any further claim.

(3)

where any employer is in default in paying the
compensation due under this Act within one month from
the date it fell due, the Commissioner shall-

(a)

direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount
of the arrears, pay simple interest thereon at the rate of
twelve per cent per annum or at such higher rate not
exceeding the maximum of the lending rates of any
scheduled bank as may be specified by the Central
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, on
the amount due; and

(b)

if, in his opinion, there is no justification for the delay,
direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount
of the arrears and interest thereon, pay a further sum
not exceeding fifty per cent of such amount by way of
penalty:
PROVIDED that an order for the payment of penalty shall
not be passed under Clause (b) without giving a
reasonable opportunity to the employer to show cause
why it should not be passed.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section,
"scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being
included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).

(3A) The interest and the penalty payable under sub-section
(3) shall be paid to the workman or his dependant, as
the case may be.”

FAO No.378/06

page 3 of 10

7.

In Ved Prakash's case (supra) question arose before

the Hon'ble Supreme Court whether the phrase 'liability arising
under the Workmen's Compensation Act' as used in the proviso
to sub-section 1 of Section 147 of the M.V.Act 1988 and as
found under the proviso to clause (i) of sub-section (1) of
section II of the insurance policy would cover only the principal
amount of compensation as computed by the Commissioner
Workmen's Compensation or whether it includes interest and
penalty

imposed

on

the

employer

under

contingencies

contemplated by Section 4A(3)(a) and (b) of the Workmen's
Compensation Act.
8.

After examining the scheme of the Workmen's

Compensation Act, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that:(1)

Payment of interest and penalty are two distinct
liabilities
arising
under
the
Workmen's
Compensation Act.

(2)

Penalty is not a part and parcel of the legal liability
of the employer to compensate his employee and
since the insurer is under contractual obligation to
indemnify the employer for his legal liability the
insurer is not liable to pay the penalty.

(3)

Liability to pay interest is part and parcel of legal
liability of the employer to pay compensation upon
default of payment of that amount within 1 month.
Therefore, claim for compensation payable under
the Workmen's Compensation Act along with
interest thereon will have to be made good by the
insurance company jointly with the insured
employer.

FAO No.378/06

page 4 of 10

9.

The decision in PJ Narayan's case (supra) relates to

a writ petition filed seeking mandamus to be issued against the
insurance company requiring it to delete from the policy of
insurance a clause that insurance company would not be liable
to pay any interest on the compensation which may be
awarded by the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation, a
relief which was declined.
10.

The decision cannot be read as laying down the law

that the insurance company cannot be fastened with liability to
pay

interest

on

the

compensation

assessed

under

the

Workmen's Compensation Act.
11.

In Harshadbhai Modhiya's case (supra) the Hon'ble

Supreme Court held that where there existed a clause in the
policy of insurance excluding liability to pay interest, in view of
a specific covenant between the insurer and the assured, the
insurance company would not be liable to pay interest on the
principal amount awarded by the Commissioner Workmen's
Compensation. Pratap Narayan Singh Deo's case (supra) did
not deal with issue of interest as none was raised.
12.

A focussed analysis of the judgment of the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in Ved Prakash's case (supra) makes it clear
that the Hon'ble Supreme Court made a distinction in policies
which excluded a clause pertaining to liability of the insurance
FAO No.378/06

page 5 of 10

company to pay interest vis-a-vis a policy which was silent on
the issue of payment of interest by the insurance company.
13.

It would be interesting to note that in Ved Prakash's

case (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court noted the decision of
the Karnataka High Court reported as Oriental Insurance Co.
Ltd. vs. Raju 1994 ACJ 191 wherein a Bench of 2 learned Judges
of the Karnataka High Court after noting the express terms of
the insurance policy in that case took the view that the policy
did not extend to indemnify the insured in respect of any
interest and/or penalty which may be imposed on the insured
on account of his failure to comply with the requirement of the
Workmen's Compensation Act.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court

noted that there was an express exclusion clause qua the
liability of the interest under the insurance policy and therefore
the Karnataka High Court rightly came to the conclusion on the
facts of that case that liability arising under Section 4-A of the
Workmen's Compensation Act to pay interest on the principal
amount as imposed upon the insured was not required to be
met by the insurance company.
14.

I may note that in the instant case it is not the case

of the insurance company that the policy of insurance excluded
liability to pay interest by incorporating a clause in the contract
in said terms.
FAO No.378/06

page 6 of 10

15.

On the issue whether insurance company would be

liable to pay interest on the compensation assessed with effect
from the date of the death of the workman, the issue has been
receiving judicial consideration and was the subject matter of
my decision dated 19.3.2008 in FAO No.268/2004 New India
Assurance Co. Ltd. vs. Musammat Momina Khatum. In paras
25 to 35 I had observed as under:“25. Lastly, learned counsel for the insurance company
contended that in view of the decision of the Supreme
Court reported as National Insurance Company Ltd. vs.
Mubasir Ahmed & Anr. 2007 (2) Scale 455, the
Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation should have
awarded interest only from the date of the adjudication
of claim and not from the date of the accident.
26.

Section 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923
deals with 'employer's liability for compensation'.

27.

Section 4 of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923
deals with 'amount of compensation'.

28.

Section 4-A of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923
deals with the time for payment of compensation as
computed under Section 4.
Sub-section 1 thereof
mandates that compensation shall be paid as soon as it
falls due.
Sub-section 2 contemplates a situation
wherein the employer though accepting his liability to
pay compensation to his workman disputes the extent of
claim of compensation and in such case sub-section 2
enjoins him to make provisional payment based on the
extent of accepted liability by depositing it with the
Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation or paying it
directly to the workman.

29.

In case where provisional payment has to be made by
the insured employer as per Section 4-A(2) of the
Workmen's Compensation Act then the one month
period contemplated under Section 4-A(3) would start
running from the date such provisional payment
becomes due.

FAO No.378/06

page 7 of 10

30.

But, in cases where the employer totally disputes his
liability to pay on the grounds like the injured person
being not his employee or that the accident was caused
to him at a time when he was not in the course of
employment or that the accident caused to him did not
arise out of his employment then Section 4-A(2) would
not get attracted and one month's period would start
running from the date on which due compensation
payable by the employer is adjudicated upon by the
Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation.

31.

In Ved Prakash's case (supra) after noting the aforenoted 2 situations the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held
that in either case the Commissioner, Workmen's
Compensation would be justified in directing payment of
interest not only from the date of the award but also
from the date of the accident concerned.

32.

Therefore a discretion has been vested in Commissioner,
Workmen's Compensation with regard to the date of the
payment of the interest which he has to exercise
judiciously keeping in mind the nature of the dispute
raised by the employer. If a bona fide dispute is raised
by the employer then Commissioner, Workmen's
Compensation should award interest from the date of
the adjudication of the claim. But where a wholly
frivolous dispute was raised by the employer then
Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation should award
interest from the date of the accident.

33.

In Mubasir's case (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court
dealt with the specific situation where a workman
suffers from an injury resulting in permanent partial
disablement and the injury is not specified in Schedule I
to the Section 4 of the Workmen's Compensation Act
1923. In such a case, loss of earning capacity suffered
by the workman has to quantified by a qualified medical
practitioner and on the basis of which compensation
payable to the workman is to be computed. Noting that
in such cases employer would not be in a position to
either admit or pay compensation unless loss of earning
capacity is quantified by a qualified medical practitioner,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the
compensation becomes due on the date of the
adjudication of the claim.

34.

This decision has no application in cases where a
workman dies or suffers from an injury resulting in total

FAO No.378/06

page 8 of 10

disablement, permanent partial disablement (injury
specified in Schedule-I) and temporary disablement as a
result of an accident arising out of and in course of his
employment because in said cases computation of the
compensation is based on a formula on determined
indices.
35.

16.

Since the instant case is a case of death of workman the
Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation was justified
in awarding interest from the date of the accident.”

It is no doubt true that in case of injury or death

information would be given to the employer and never to the
insurance company because the injured workman or in case of
death the dependents of the deceased workman would not be
having the particulars of the insurance company and to that
extent it may be possible for the insurance company to
maintain an argument that liability to pay interest qua the
insurance company has to be restricted from the date
intimation of the death or the accident was given to the
insurance company.
17.

But noting that the provisions of the Workmen's

Compensation Act are beneficial legislation also noting the fact
that not a single case has been noted by the Court where the
insurance company voluntarily settles the claim under the
Workmen's Compensation Act I refuse to go for the bite.
18.

In the instant case, the fact of the death of the

workman came to the knowledge of the insurance company, if
not earlier, at least when notice was received from the office of
FAO No.378/06

page 9 of 10

the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation intimating that a
claim had been received.

No reasons are forthcoming as to

why the insurance company did not proceed to forthwith
deposit the compensation payable.
19.

It would not be irrelevant to note that the factum of

death, the vehicle being insured, the nature of employment of
the deceased workman and that he died during course of
employment were all not in dispute.

When the insurance

company received notice of claim from the Commissioner
Workmen's Compensation all that was required to be done was
to refer to the formula prescribed under the Workmen's
Compensation Act and apply the applicable indices to compute
the compensation payable.
20.

I find no merits in the appeal.

The same is

dismissed.
21.

No costs.

May 01, 2008
dk

FAO No.378/06

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 10 of 10

