IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C.No.6621-24/2006
#
!

Basara & Ors.
through:

........
Petitioners
Mr.R.M.Tufail, Advocate

VERSUS
$
^

State & Anr.
through:

........
Respondents
Mr.M.N.Dudeja for the State

RESERVED ON: 29.08.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 03.09.2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The petitioners have filed this petition seeking quashing of

FIR No.4/2005 registered against them under Section 307 read
with Section 34 IPC with Police Station, Samay Pur Badli.
2.

Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the FIR in

question was registered against the petitioners on 2.1.2005 on
the statement of respondent No.2, Sheikh Muslim.
3.

As per the contents of FIR, on 1.1.2005, at about 7:00 PM

an altercation had taken place between accused Noora and
Page No.1 of 7

Basara and nephew of the complainant. Altercation ended with
the intervention of the complainant. Later on, at about 9:30 PM
when the complainant along with his family members were
doing some work in the front of their shop, accused Basara,
Noora, Sammad and Jahangir came along with their friends.
That Basara was carrying a knife, Noora was carrying a sariya,
Sammad was carrying a sword and Jahangir was carrying a
hockey. That accused Noora attacked with sword on thigh of
the left leg of the complainant and Basara gave a knife blow in
the abdomen of the son of the complainant, Zakir.
4.

Trial commenced before the learned Addl. Sessions Judge.

Charges under Section 307 read with Section 34 IPC were
framed against the 4 accused.

Out of 16 prosecution

witnesses, 5 have been examined and discharged.
5.

The parties have amicably compromised the subject

matter of the FIR in question amongst themselves and
therefore both the parties have requested that the aforementioned FIR registered against the petitioners on the
complaint of respondent No.2 be quashed by this court.
6.

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State had

opposed the quashing of the FIR in question, inter alia, on the
ground that accusations against the accused are serious. The
Page No.2 of 7

learned counsel had further submitted that the offence under
Section 307 IPC for which FIR in question is registered is noncompoundable and therefore he had prayed that the request of
the petitioners for quashing of FIR be not accepted. He relied
upon following judgments of the Supreme Court in support of
his contention:(i)

Surendra Nath Mohanty Vs. State of Orrisa AIR 1999 SC

2181
(ii)

Bankat Vs. State of Maharashtra 2005 Cri.L.J. 646

(iii)

Ram Lal & Anr. Vs. State of Jammu & Kashmir AIR 1999 SC

895
7.

Per contra, learned counsel for the petitioners has relied

upon following judgments of the Supreme Court :(i)

Ram Pujan Vs. State of UP (1973) 2 SCC 456

(ii)

Y. Suresh Babu Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh 1987 2 (JT) SC

361
(iii)

Mahesh Chand Vs. State of Rajasthan 1990 (Supp.) SCC

681
On the strength of these 3 judgments, counsel had
contended that the power of this court to quash the FIR is not
limited by Section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
8.

I need not note all the judgments cited by the learned
Page No.3 of 7

counsel for the parties and distinguish one from another.
Suffice would it be to note the decision reported as B.S.Joshi Vs.
State of Haryana AIR 2003 SC 1386 wherein it was held by the
Supreme Court that Section 320 of Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 does not limit or effect the powers of the High Court to
quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint even in noncompoundable offences.

Para 8 of the said judgment is

relevant and is reproduced here-in-below:-

9.

“8. It is thus clear that Mahdu Limaye's case does
not lay down any general proposition limiting power
of quashing the criminal proceedings of FIR or
complaint as vested in Section 482 of the Code or
extraordinary power under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. We are, therefore, of the view
that if for the purpose of securing the ends of
justice, quashing of FIR becomes necessary,
Section 320 would not be a bar to the exercise of
power of quashing. It is, however, a different
matter
depending
upon
the
facts
and
circumstances of each case whether to exercise or
not such a power.”
It is apparent from the judgment of the Supreme Court in

B.S.Joshi's case (Supra) that this court is not powerless to quash
the

criminal

proceedings

compoundable offences.

in

cases

arising

out

of

non-

What this court has to look for is

whether the quashing would secure the ends of justice or not?
10.

In Ram Pujan's case (Supra) appellants and 3 others were

convicted by Sessions Court under Sections 326 and 323 read

Page No.4 of 7

with Section 149 IPC and sentenced to undergo rigourous
imprisonment for a period of 4 years on former count and 3
months on latter count. On appeal to the High Court, the
conviction of the appellants was altered to that under Sections
326 and 323 read with Section 34 IPC and each of them was
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 2
years. High Court rejected the application for compromise filed
on behalf of injured and the appellants. Noting the compromise
Supreme
appellants.

Court

reduced

the

sentence

awarded

to

the

It was held that even though major offences for

which appellants were convicted were non-compoundable but
the fact of compromise can be taken into account in
determining the sentence.
11.

In Y.Suresh Babu's case (Supra) appellant was convicted

under Section 326 IPC and sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for a period of one year. Treating the matter as
a special case, leave to compound the offence was granted by
the Supreme Court.
12.

In Mahesh Chand's case (Supra) accused were acquitted

by the Trial Court but they were convicted by the High Court for
the offence under Section 307 IPC. There was a counter case
arising out of the same transaction which was compromised.
Page No.5 of 7

Considering the nature of the case and circumstances under
which offence was committed, leave to compound the offence
was granted by the Supreme Court.
13.

A perusal of afore-noted three decisions shows that

the Supreme Court has been granting leave to compound the
offences which were non-compoundable and serious in nature.
14.

In the present case since the parties have amicably

compromised the subject matter of FIR in question among
themselves, no useful purpose is likely to be served by
continuing with the afore-mentioned criminal case registered
against the petitioners.
residents of same locality.

Petitioners and complainant are
Peace has been brought in the

locality with the intervention of the well wishers of the locality.
When there is peace in locality, there will be peace in the town.
When there is peace in town, there will be peace in city. When
there is peace in city, there will be peace in State. When there
is peace in State, there will be peace in country. It is therefore
in the interest of the society that permission to quash the FIR in
question is granted by this Court. Moreover, since petitioners
and complainant are resident of same locality, continuation of
criminal proceedings will only revive the bitter memories of the
past and may lead to further enmity between them.
Page No.6 of 7

15.

The petition is accordingly allowed.

FIR No.4/2005

registered against the petitioners under Section 307 read with
Section 34 IPC with Police Station Samay Pur Badli is quashed
and all consequent proceedings pursuant thereto are also
ordered to be dropped.
16.

No costs.

03 September, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page No.7 of 7

