IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) No.879/2006
#
!

M/s. RKKR Steels Ltd .
....... Petitioner
through: Mr. Virender Goswami, Advocate with
Mr. Sandip Mahapatra, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

%
*
1.

M/s. Virender Paul Daga (HUF) & Anr. ...... Respondents
through: Mr. Harish Malhotra, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Tanuj Khurana, Advocate for R1
Mr. Rajat Singh Jain, Advocate for R2
DATE OF DECISION: 02-05-2007
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

I would be referring to the petitioner as defendant no.1

and to respondent no.1 as the plaintiff.

Respondent no.2 was

defendant no.2.
2.

Admitted fact on which neither plaintiff nor defendant

no.1 are at variance is that on 25.9.1985 an agreement to sell was
executed pertaining to a plot bearing no.95, Block B-2, Mohan
Cooperative Industrial Estate, New Delhi.

Plaintiff was the

purchaser. Defendant no.1 was the seller.
3.

The agreement to sell did not result in a sale deed

being executed. Plaintiff filed a suit, predicating a claim under the
agreement. The suit was captioned as:-

4.

"SUIT FOR POSSESSION BY SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF
THE AGREEMENT TO SELL AND FOR PERPETUAL
INJUNCTION".
After pleading what plaintiff thought were the essential

facts, prayer made was as under:“19. That the plaintiff prays that
(a) a decree for possession by specific performance of
the Agreement to Sell dated 25.9.85 may be passed in
favour of the plaintiff against the defendant no.1,
(b) A decree by issue of perpetual injunction may be
passed in favour of the plaintiff against the defendant
no.1 restraining the defendant no.1 from taking
possession of the property in dispute i.e. plot No.95 in
Block-B-II in the area of Mohan Cooperative Industrial
Estate Ltd. near Badarpur, Mathura Road, New Delhi,
(c) Costs of the suit be awarded to the plaintiff
against the defendant no.1.

5.

(d) Any other relief that the court deems fit may also
be granted.”
Various defences were raised. Issues were framed.

Parties led their respective evidence. Arguments were concluded.
Judgment was reserved.
6.

It appears that defendant no.1 argued that the

plaintiff's suit sought a decree for possession by specific

performance of the agreement to sell dated 25.9.1985. Thus, it
was argued that the plaintiff cannot split up the agreement to
only claim relief of possession by specific performance and not
claim specific performance of the entire agreement. It was urged
that the specific performance of the agreement to sell is
impossible as no sale deed pursuant thereto could ever by
executed.

It was pleaded that the plaintiff had not become a

member of the Mohan Cooperative Society, a sine qua non before
which plot could be transferred for the reason under the
document of title in favour of defendant no.1 there was a specific
covenant that the plot could be transferred only in favour of such
person who was a member of Mohan Cooperative Industrial
Estate.
7.

Various other submissions were made.

8.

Before judgment could be pronounced an application

under Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure was filed by
the plaintiff. Amendment prayed for was deletion of the words
“possession by" from the cause title of the suit as also in prayer
clause 'A' of para 19 of the plaint.
9.

Impugned order has permitted the said amendment.

Effect thereof is that the cause title of the suit, as amended, reads
as under:-

10.

"Suit for specific performance of the agreement to sell
and for perpetual injunction."
Prayer clause 'A' reads as under:-

11.

"A decree for specific performance of the agreement to
sell dated 25.9.1985 may be passed in favour of the
plaintiff and against the defendant no.1."
A three fold contention has been urged before me.

12.

First contention urged is that after arguments were

advanced and matter was reserved for judgment, no application
under Order 6 Rule 17 would lie.
13.

Analogy of Order 9 Rule 7 has been resorted to.

14.

Second contention urged is that the amendment has

resulted in introduction of an entirely different cause. Clarifying
and elaborating the contention, learned counsel for defendant
no.1 urges that a suit which was limited in relief seeking only
decree for possession by specific performance of the agreement
stands converted into a suit for specific performance of the
agreement. It is thus urged that not only has new cause of action
been inserted but the fundamentals of the suit have been altered.
15.

Last contention urged is that a time barred claim has

been permitted to be raised. It is urged that where a claim has
been barred by limitation, the same cannot be permitted to be
included in a plaint by way of an amendment thereof.
16.

It would be advisable to refer to the pleading in the

plaint lest a semantic or syntactical approach clouds the real
issues between the parties.
17.

It is trite that a prayer clause in a suit takes colour

from the pleadings in the main body of the plaint.
18.

A perusal of the plaint shows that after stating the

relevant facts pertaining to the agreement to sell dated
25.9.1985, facts have been pleaded as to why defendant no.1
gave possession of the property in question to defendant no.2,
stated to an associated firm of the plaintiff. It has been pleaded
that the stated sale consideration was Rs.4.50 lacs and since
Rs.50,000/- was paid at the time of execution of the agreement to
sell, balance sale consideration payable was Rs.4 lacs.

It has

been pleaded that interest @ 15% per annum on balance sale
consideration of 4 lacs gives a monthly interest of Rs.5,000/-. It is
pleaded that since sale consideration of Rs.4 lacs was deferred
but possession handed over to an associated firm of the plaintiff,
a tenancy document was created wherein possession of the suit
property to given to defendant no.2 on payment of Rs.5,000/- per
month as ostensible rent.
19.

It was pleaded that in the manner aforesaid, interest of

both parties stood adequately protected.

Defendant No.1 lost

possession but got interest @ 15% per annum on the balance sale

consideration, till the same was paid.

Plaintiff through its

associate firm got possession.
20.

After pleading the facts in respect of the dispute

between the parties, an attempt has been made in the plaint to
justify the stand of the plaintiff.
21.

Concluding the pleadings in para 12 by stating that

defendant no.1 has no right to avoid or cancel the contract and is
bound by the same, in para 13 and 14 of the plaint, it is pleaded
as under:“13. That the plaintiff has always been and still is and
willing to specifically perform the agreement on his
part.

22.

14. That the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of specific
performance against the defendant no.1.”
In para 18 of the plaint, pertaining to relief for specific

performance, following assertions have been made:-

23.

18. That the value of the suit for purpose of court
fee and jurisdiction is Rs.4,50,000/- for the relief of
specific performance on which Court fee stamp of
Rs.6,736/- has been paid and for the relief of
perpetual injunction is fixed at Rs.130/- on which the
court fee stamp of Rs.13/- has been paid.”
From the main body of the plaint, it stands out that all

material and necessary averments pertaining to a suit for specific
performance of an agreement to sell relating to immovable
property have been pleaded.

Further, court fee paid is on the

stated sale consideration and not on the market value of the

property, as is normally paid in a suit for possession.
24.

Answering the three submissions made by learned

counsel for defendant no.1, stand predicated on the analogy of
Order 9 Rule 7 CPC is to be noted and rejected for the simple
reason Order 9 Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure applies
where the Court has deferred the hearing of the suit ex-parte.
25.

The two words “the hearing” are important.

In

reference to the said two words, Order 9 Rule 7 of the Code of
Civil Procedure has been interpreted to mean that the right under
Order 9 Rule 7 CPC enures till the hearing of a suit is on. Meaning
thereby the moment hearing concludes, right under Order 9 Rule
7 is lost.
26.

The Code of Civil Procedure as existed prior to

1.7.2002 did not envisage oral arguments. Thus, where evidence
was closed by the parties, it was treated to be a case of hearing
being closed.

In a situation where judgment had yet to be

pronounced, it was held that the defendant had to await a
judgment and seek setting aside of the decree, if against him,
under Order 9 Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure. With the
introduction of Sub Rule 3 A in Rule 2 of Order 18 of the Code of
Civil Procedure with effect from 1.7.2002 by and under Act No.46
of 1999, a provision has been made creating a right in the parties

to address oral arguments, a right which hithertofore was being
granted by the courts as a matter of courtesy, intended to seek
assistance from learned counsel appearing for the parties.
27.

But, Order 9 Rule 7 CPC, nor analogy thereof is

appropriate to consider Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil
Procedure for the simple reason Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of
Civil Procedure does not contain the words “the hearing”.
28.

On the contrary, Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil

Procedure uses the expression “at any stage of the proceedings”.
29.

Proceedings pertaining to a suit terminate under Order

20 of the Code of Civil Procedure where the court, after hearing a
matter, pronounces a judgment.
30.

Thus, as long as a judge is seized of a matter and has

not pronounced judgment, Order 6 Rule 17 would apply to the
proceedings.
31.

On the twin issue whether there has been either a

substitution of a cause of action or has there been a modification
of the cause of action couped with the issue whether the
amendment allowed has permitted a time barred claim to be
inserted, as the issues overlap, I deal with second and third
submission made, unifying a consideration pertaining to the two.
32.

As observed by me, a prayer clause takes meaning and

colour from the substance of the plaint. Further, a plaint has to
be read meaningfully and not in a pedantic manner.
33.

Semantics and syntactical analysis has no place in

reading and understanding pleadings. Pleadings have to be read
meaningfully. I have extracted hereinabove averments made in
para 13 and 14 of the plaint.

I have noted hereinabove, in a

precise form, pleadings as originally laid.
34.

Meaningfully read, it is apparent that the plaintiff has

brought a suit seeking specific performance of the agreement to
sell.
35.

Since

the

agreement

in

question

relates

to

an

immovable property, Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act
1882, dealing with the rights and liabilities of the buyer and the
seller would be attracted. Clause f of Sub Section 1 of Section 55
of the Transfer of Property Act 1882 enjoins upon the seller to
give, on being so required by the buyer, such possession of the
property as its nature admits.
36.

It appears that the counsel for the plaintiff, while

drafting the plaint referred to and prayed for a decree requiring
and calling upon the court to pass a decree for possession by
specific performance of the agreement. In my opinion, the prayer
clause cannot be split and read as if the prayer was restricted to a

decree for possession alone.
37.

The inappropriateness in the prayer clause has to be

straightened with reference to the substance of the pleadings in
the main body of the plaint.
38.

Since a cloud was being cast upon the right of the

plaintiff, with reference to the language of the prayer clause, the
amendment was sought for. To my mind, the amendment clears
the haze.
39.

Neither has a new cause of action, much less a new

cause been inserted. Nor has a time barred claim been inserted.
In fact new claim has not been inserted at all. What was implicit
has been made explicit.
40.

The matter can be looked at from another angle. It is

always open to the court to modify the relief, keeping in view the
averments in the pleadings of the parties, the facts proved and
the law attracted. Thus a wrong prayer or a prayer imperfectly
stated would not be a hindrance in the court's power to do justice.
Pleadings are referred to as the main body of the plaint.
41.

The petition is dismissed.

42.

No costs.

May 2, 2007
mm

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

