IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CRP No.1/2007
#
!

Sh.Shyam Goenka
........
through: Mr.S.K.Anand, Advocate

Petitioner

VERSUS
$
^

Zevrat Premsons (India) Pvt.Ltd.
........ Respondent
through: Mr.R.K.Singla, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 07.03.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:
*

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)

1.

The petitioner impleaded as defendant is aggrieved

by an order dated 9.11.2006.

The order has disposed of an

application filed by the petitioner seeking leave to defend.
Holding that the application seeking leave to defend discloses
no triable issue and hence was liable to be dismissed,
surprisingly enough, learned Trial Judge concluded the order by
requiring the plaintiff to prove its case.

CRP.No.01/2007

page 1 of 9

2.

It is urged in the petition that there is a hiatus in the

reasoning and the concluding part of the impugned order.
3.

I would have expected the plaintiff of the suit to

have come to this Court with tears in his eyes in as much as,
after holding that the defendant failed to project a case which
entitled it to leave to defend, it was the plaintiff who was still
called upon to lead evidence.

Be that as it may, since the

defendant approached this Court, noting the apparent conflict
in the reasoning and the conclusion in the impugned order,
notice was issued.
4.

In the interregnum, the learned Trial Judge realised

the apparent error committed and rectified the error by
recalling the concluding part of the impugned order requiring
plaintiff to prove the case.

The result was that the suit was

decreed.
5.

Accordingly, instant petition has been considered

with reference to, as if, vide impugned order the leave to
defend has been declined.

The concluding direction in the

impugned order has been ignored.
6.

Before

merits

of

the

controversy

are

being

considered, an order dated 10.12.2007 passed by the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate where under a dispute pertaining to
the cheque which has been referred to in the plaint has been
CRP.No.01/2007

page 2 of 9

compounded is being noted. The order passed by the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate reads as under:“10.12.07
Present: Complainant
alongwith
Sh.R.K.Singhla
Accused
alongwith
Sh.S.K.Anand

counsel
counsel

An application for cancellation of NBW has
been moved.
After negotiating and consulting between the
parties following agreement has been reached
between the parties.
1)
That accused shall pay 12 months
installment in the sum of Rs.ONE LAC each.
This amount shall be adjusted in final payment
to be made by the accused to the complainant
as per the final decision of the Civil recovery
suit. It is jointly stated at bar by both the
sides that matter is coming on 6.3.08 in
revision before Hon'ble High Court of
Delhi/Civil court. Accused has paid a sum of
Rs.ONE LAC today in cash to the complainant.
2)
In view of the above agreement the NBW
stands canceled. Signatures of both the sides
identified by their advocates is taken on this
ordersheet. This order has been passed with
consent of both the parties as well as their
counsels.
It is also agreed between the parties that the
complainant upon receiving the actual amount
to be paid alongwith interest shall return the
dishonoured cheques also the criminal cases
and civil suit then stands disposed.
The
accused shall also withdraw the criminal
cases, if any filed against the complainant. It
is also stated by the accused that he had also
given five cheques on 22.5.07 out of two
CRP.No.01/2007

page 3 of 9

cheques of Rs.25,000/- each have been
honoured and three cheques of Rs.FIVE LAC,
FIVE LAC AND NINE LAC were dishonoured.
Put up for payment of the next installment on
10.1.08.
It is made clear to the accused that in case of
absence of the accused he should sent the
installment amount and in case in default the
payment the whole compromise is over. In
view of the above submissions NBW against
accused stands canceled.
Accused is admitted to court bail on his
furnishing P/B and S/B in the sum of
Rs.25,000/-. B/B furnished and accepted.
Copy of this order be given dasti to both the
sides.”
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner accordingly prays

that in view of the settlement between the parties the
impugned order be set aside leaving it open to the learned Civil
Judge to decide the controversy whether even principal amount
is payable. Learned counsel for the respondent disputes the
tenor of the settlement as is sought to be projected and urges
that the settlement before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
pertained only to the adjudication of the interest claimed in the
suit and not the principal sum.
8.

The principal sum claimed in the suit and indeed in

respect whereof a cheque has been issued is Rs.11,99,929/-. I
note that the cheque has been issued in sum of Rs.12 lacs.

CRP.No.01/2007

page 4 of 9

9.

Prima facie, the settlement between the parties

concludes the issue of liability of the principal sum payable. It
has to be restricted to the claim for interest.
10.

I now revert to the merits of the impugned order.

11.

The plaintiff filed a suit against the petitioner

claiming a decree in sum of Rs.17,39,929/-. Summary remedy
was invoked. The suit was predicated on an invoice/bill No.200
dated 22.10.2002.

It was further alleged that in partial

payment of the bill, 2 cheques bearing No.177148-49 dated
10.4.2003 and 10.5.2003 respectively, each in sum of Rs.4 lacs
were issued by the petitioner.
dishonoured.

That the cheques were

That thereafter petitioner issued another post

dated cheque No.582275 dated 8.11.2003 in sum of Rs.12 lacs
to clear the entire payment under the bill.

It was further

pleaded that the gold ornaments under the bill were duly
received by the petitioner evidenced by the endorsement on
the bill under the signatures of the petitioner recording:
'received goods.'
12.

It was stated that the cheque in sum of Rs.12 lacs

when presented for encashment was returned by the banker
with the remarks insufficient funds'.

Interest was claimed in

the suit @ 18% p.a. from the date of the bill.
13.

Seeking leave to defend a fairly interesting defence

CRP.No.01/2007

page 5 of 9

was projected. Pertaining to the 2 cheques issued in sum of
Rs.4 lacs it was pleaded as under :“G. That the defendant has given very good
business to the plaintiff and therefore the
plaintiff developed close relation with
defendant.
The plaintiff requested the
defendant to give some cheque to obtain
some
credit
from
the
bank/financing
institution. The defendant, being in good faith
and with the motive to promote plaintiff, gave
the cheques No.177148 dated 10.4.03 and
177149 dated 10.5.03 for Rs.400000/- each
without any legal liability.”
14.

Pertaining to the cheque in sum of Rs.12 lacs it was

pleaded as under :“Thereafter again the plaintiff requested the
defendant for giving one cheque and the
defendant gave cheque No.582275 dated
8.11.03 for Rs.1200000/-without any legal
liability. The said cheques were never given
for repayment of dues and same do not
corroborate with the bill amount. Thereafter
the defendant requested the plaintiff for
business favour and the plaintiff denied doing
any thing for defendant.
The defendant
requested the plaintiff to return said three
cheques but the plaintiff denied on the plea of
misplacement of the same.
The plaintiff
threatened the defendant to teach lesson in
future. The plaintiff has filed the present case.
The plaintiff also received advance money by
cheque. Statement of account is annexed.”
15.

Pertaining to the bill No.200 dated 22.10.2002,

admitting receipt of the goods under the bill as also the
correctness of the bill defence taken was as under :'That the defendant has paid the cost of
CRP.No.01/2007

page 6 of 9

articles under the bill No.200 dated
22.10.2002 to the plaintiff in cash and
adjustment of previous credits. There is no
outstanding dues against the defendant.'
16.

Suffice would it be to record that on what date cash

was paid and in what amount, none has been stated.

What

were the previous credits and in what manner have been
adjusted, none has been disclosed. The story of return is thus
but a moon shine.
17.

The issuance of the cheques in sum of Rs.4 lacs and

12 placs, as pleaded, is obviously also a moonshine.
18.

As noted from the pleadings of the defendant

pertaining to the 3 cheques it has to be noted that according to
the defendant the cheques were issued to enable plaintiff to
obtain credit from a bank/financial institution.
19.

How does one obtain a credit from a bank or other

financial institution on a cheque? Obviously by discounting the
same. When a post dated cheque is issued, a banker or a
financial institution purchases, by way of negotiation, the
cheque and pays immediate money to the holder of the
cheque. In the instant case, the cheques were not post dated.
I fail to understand as to in what manner the holder of the
cheque in due course would obtain any credit from a banker.
Why should a banker purchase the cheque which is already

CRP.No.01/2007

page 7 of 9

payable on demand?

Obviously, the defence is a complete

moonshine.
20.

Under the circumstances the amount payable under

the bill has to be paid and for that no triable issue has been
raised.
21.

It may be noted that the defence that a bill cannot

constitute a written agreement between the parties for the
purposes of maintainability of a suit under Order 37 CPC has
been repelled by the court concerned with reference to judicial
pronouncements. Indeed, a bill which is acknowledged by a
defendant constitutes a written contract/agreement between
the parties and can form the foundation of a suit under Order
37 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
22.

I refrain from opining on the issue of interest for the

reason parties have agreed before a learned Metropolitan
Magistrate that issue of interest may be decided by the learned
Trial Judge. I note that the criminal complaint related to the
cheque in sum of Rs.12 lacs referred to in the plaint.
23.

In harmony with the order passed by the learned

Metropolitan Magistrate on 10.12.2007 I accordingly dispose of
the

petition

setting

aside

the

impugned

order

dated

19.11.2006 and dispose of petitioner's application seeking
leave to defend granting limited leave to defend, in that, the
CRP.No.01/2007

page 8 of 9

defendant would be entitled to defend the suit and litigate only
with respect to the interest payable and rate thereof.
24.

I record that no case is made out for granting leave

to defend pertaining to the principal sum payable under the
bill.

I further record that the settlement before the learned

Metropolitan Magistrate concludes the liability of the petitioner
to pay the principal sum of Rs.12 lacs.
25.

Needless to state, the consequential decree passed

by the learned Trial Judge would be limited to the principal sum
of Rs.12 lacs. Only issue of interest would be gone into.
26.

I further record that the decree pertaining to Rs.12

lacs be not executed till the period of one year lapses as per
the compromise between the parties.
27.

Parties are directed to appear before the learned

Trial Judge on 30.4.2008.
28.

No costs.

March 07, 2008

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

vg

CRP.No.01/2007

page 9 of 9

