IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.4/2007
#
!

Jamirul Nisha & Anr.
through:

........ Appellants
Ms.Pratima N. Chauhan, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Union of India
through:

........ Respondent
Mr.S.R. Narayan

RESERVED ON: 03.03.2008
%

DATE OF DECISION: 05.03.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Present appeal lays a challenge to the order dated

20.11.2006 passed by the Railway Claims Tribunal, Principal Bench,
Delhi dismissing the claim application of the appellants.
2.

Appellants had filed a claim application under Section

124-A of the Railways Act, 1989 claiming compensation in sum of
Rs.6 lakhs on account of the death of Late Sh. Sarfaraj Khan
(hereinafter referred to as the deceased) alleged to have been
caused when he had accidentally fallen from a train.

FAO No.4/2007

Page No.1 of 12

3.

In

the

claim

application

it

was

averred

that

on

10.05.2003 the deceased had boarded EMU passenger train GDM 1
from Nizamuddin station for a journey from Nizamuddin to New
Delhi Railway Station. That since the train was overcrowded the
deceased got a place near the door of a compartment of the train.
That at around 8.45 AM when the train was approaching Tilak Bridge
Railway Station there was a sudden jerk due to which the deceased
fell down from the train and died of injuries received as a result
thereof. That the deceased was a bona fide passenger and that the
death of the deceased was a result of an 'untoward incident' which
happened when he was travelling in EMU passenger train GDM 1.
That the deceased was self-employed and earning his livelihood by
working as a painter. That the appellants are the widowed mother
and sister of the deceased and were dependent upon the earnings
of the deceased.
4.

The railways defended the claim by pleading that the

appellants are not entitled to any compensation as injuries which
resulted in the death of the deceased were not accidental but selfinflicted injuries. That the deceased was not a bona fide passenger
in the train. That the accident in question occurred when while
trying to cross the railway track the deceased came into contact
with the moving train. (Meaning thereby was run over while crossing
the railway track)
5.

In support of the claim appellants examined appellant

no.1 Jamirul Nisha mother of the deceased as AW-1 and one
Mr.Manik Mian as AW-2 who claimed to have witnessed the said
FAO No.4/2007

Page No.2 of 12

untoward incident.
6.

In her testimony appellant no.1 deposed on the lines of

the claim application. She further deposed that on the unfateful day
i.e. 10.05.03 the deceased left his residence situated at Sarai Kale
Khan, Delhi at about 8.15 in the morning. That the deceased told
her that he is going to New Delhi for taking payment from some
contractor. She also deposed how her son died.
7.

Sh. Manik Mian AW-2 stated that the deceased was

travelling under a valid ticket and that the death of the deceased
was a result of an untoward incident. He deposed that on
10.05.2003 at about 8.15 AM he met the deceased near the booking
counter of the Nizamuddin Station. That he purchased two tickets
for a journey from Nizamuddin Station to the New Delhi Railway
Station and gave one ticket to the deceased. That thereafter they
boarded the EMU passenger train GDM1. That since the train was
overcrowded they both got a place near the door of the
compartment. That when the train was approaching Tilak Bridge
railway station there was a sudden jerk due to which the deceased
fell down from the train. That after the deceased fell down from the
train he cried and requested other passengers to pull the alarm
chain but the train did not stop. That thereafter he got down at the
Tilak Bridge station and while going out of the platform he informed
one railway official regarding the said incident.
8.

It is relevant to note that in cross-examination AW-2

gave reason why he and the deceased were co-passengers. He
stated as under:FAO No.4/2007

Page No.3 of 12

“Mandawali is near Mother Dairy, Patparganj, Delhi. I
was accompanying the deceased as I was to take him to
Mandawali along with me. He had met at the station
itself. I had not taken any money from the deceased for
purchasing the ticket nor I received it after I had given
the ticket to him. I was taking him to Mandawali for
white washing my house. I had pulled the chain after the
deceased had fallen from the train, but the train did not
stop. The deceased had fallen at a short distance from
the Tilak Bridge station. I did not report the matter to
the police. I had informed one of the passengers about
this incident and left. I got down at ITO and did not go
back to the spot to enquire as to what had happened to
the deceased. It is incorrect to suggest that I was not
accompanying the deceased or that I am deposing
falsely”.
9.

On

behalf

of

the

appellants

following

17

documents were filed:(i)

AW1/2

....

True copy of the DD entry no.9A dated

10.05.03 which was recorded after the occurrence of the
accident.
(ii)

AW1/3 & AW1/4 ....

True

copies

of

the

medical

records of LNJP hospital where the deceased was
admitted.
(iii)

AW1/5

....

True copy of the DD entry no.20A

dated 14.05.03 which was recorded after the death of
the deceased.
(iv)

AW1/6

.....

True copy of the death report of the

.....

True copy of the post-mortem report of

deceased.
(v)

AW1/7

the deceased.
(vi)

AW1/8

.....

True copy of the inquest report.

(vii) AW1/9, AW1/10, AW1/11, AW1/12, AW1/13, AW1/14 and

FAO No.4/2007

Page No.4 of 12

AW1/15.... True copies of the statements of SI Jagdish
Singh,

Krishan

Mohan

Singh,

Vinod

Kumar,

Head

Constable Yashpal Singh, Jamirul Nisha and Nasim Khan
recorded before the police.
(viii) AW1/16

.....

True copy of the final report made by

the police.
(ix)

AW1/17

.....

True copy of the ration card.

(x)

AW1/18

.....

True copy of the guard's memo.

AW1/2

records

10.

the

wireless

information

received

regarding the happening of the said accident. Wireless information
stated to be received is that one person had fallen from a train.
11.

AW1/3 and AW1/4 records the injuries suffered by the

deceased.
12.

AW1/5 records that the deceased died on 14.05.03.

13.

AW1/9 is the statement of SI Jagdish Singh. It has been

recorded that on 10.05.03 the deceased was crushed by a train.
How the deceased came into contact with the train has not been
recorded.
14.

AW1/10 is the statement of one Mr. Krishan Mohan Rai

who was running a food cart at the Tilak Bridge railway station. It
has been recorded that on 10.05.03 he found that the deceased has
been lying near the railway line in an injured condition.
15.

AW1/11 is the statement of one Mr. Vinod Kumar who

was working as a Keyman at the Tilak Bridge railway station. It has
been recorded that on 10.05.03 he found that the deceased has
been lying near the railway line in an injured condition.
FAO No.4/2007

Page No.5 of 12

16.

AW1/12 is the statement of Head Constable Yashpal

Singh. It has been recorded that on 10.05.03 the deceased was
crushed by a train. How the deceased came into contact with the
train has not been recorded.
17.

AW1/13 and AW1/14 are the statements of the mother

and brother of the deceased respectively. Said statements pertain
as to how they received the information regarding the death of the
deceased.
18.

On behalf of the railways Head Constable Yashpal Singh

and one Mr. Vinod Kumar were examined as RW-1 and RW-2
respectively.
19.

Head Constable Yashpal Singh RW-1 deposed that on

receiving the information regarding the occurrence of the said
accident he went to the Tilak Bridge railway station where he was
informed that a person met with an accident under the over-bridge
between the two platforms and had already been removed to the
hospital.
20.

Vinod Kumar, RW-2, who was working as a Keyman at

the Tilak Bridge railway station deposed that on 10.05.03 when he
was conducting a routine inspection of the line near the platform at
the Tilak Bridge railway station he found that an injured person lying
on the railway track under the over-bridge between the platforms.
21.

After noting the respective stand of the parties and the

evidence led the learned Railway Claims Tribunal has held that the
deceased was neither a bonafide passenger nor had died of injuries
alleged to have been sustained by him after accidentally falling from
FAO No.4/2007

Page No.6 of 12

a train and thus dismissed the claim application of the appellants.
The tribunal has opined as under:-

“Since decision of both these issues mainly
depends upon the evidence of AW-2, we have taken
these issues together.
From the body of the
deceased ticket has not been recovered. It is not
unusual that when a passenger falls down from the
train his ticket may be lost but in the present case
we find that except for the statement of AW-2,
there is no other evidence to prove that the
deceased was allegedly travelling in the train or he
had purchased any ticket. In his affidavit AW-2 has
stated that on 10th May 2003, the deceased met
him near the booking counter of Nizamuddin
railway station and he purchased two tickets for
one himself and one for the deceased for going to
New Delhi. The witness was allegedly taking the
deceased to his house for the purposes of white
wash whereas AW-1 namely applicant no.1 in her
affidavit has stated that the deceased as going to
New Delhi for getting payment from some
contractor. The evidence of AW-2 does not inspire
confidence in as much as while it is stated by him
that when the train was approaching Tilak Bridge
railway station, the deceased fell down from the
moving train due to sudden jerk given by the train
and in his statement before the Tribunal also he
states that the deceased had fallen at a short
distance from Tilak Bridge railway station, the body
of the deceased was found at the station itself
between the two platforms. Though the witness was
allegedly travelling with the deceased and was
taking him to his house for white washing, he
neither informed the police about the same nor
informed any railway official. He also did not go
back to the spot, where the deceased had allegedly
fallen, to enquire as to what had happened to him.
This evidence is clearly contrary to the evidence
produced by the railways. Head Constable Yas Pal
Singh, who had visited the spot and investigated
the matter has stated that when he reached Tilak
Bridge railway station, he was informed that a
person had met with an accident under the over
bridge between two platforms and had already
been removed to the hospital. Vinod Kumar Singh,
who was posted as Key Man at Tilak Bridge railway
FAO No.4/2007

Page No.7 of 12

station has in his statement stated that while he
was on routine inspection of the line, he found an
injured person lying on the railway track under the
over bridge between the two platforms.
The
statement of the witness produced by the railways
clearly show that the body was recovered at the
railway station itself between the two platforms
under the over bridge which connects the two
platforms. The fact fact the body was recovered
between the two platforms at the railway station, in
our view clearly shows that the deceased had not
fallen from the train as has been stated by RW-2.
In our opinion AW-2 was not travelling with the
deceased and is a procured witness. We are thus
clearly of the opinion that the deceased was neither
a bonafide passenger nor had died of injuries
alleged to have been sustained by him after falling
from the train. Both these issues are accordingly
decided against the applicants.”
22.

Learned counsel for the appellants challenges the

impugned order on following two counts:I.

Learned Tribunal failed to take note of the DD Entry

no.9A dated 10.05.03 Ex.AW1/2 which according to her clearly
establishes that the deceased had fallen from the train.
II.

Learned Tribunal has acted contrary to the settled law

that the burden of proving that the death of a victim of a train
accident is not the result of an 'untoward incident' is upon the
railways. That in the instant case railways failed to discharge
the burden that the death of the deceased was not the result
of an 'untoward incident'. Reliance has been placed upon the
judgments reported as III (2002) AC 431 Union of India v B.
Koddekar & Ors. and 1993 ACJ 846 Raj Kumari & Anr. V Union
of India in support of this contention.
23.

No doubt DD Entry 9A dated 10.05.03 Ex.AW1/2 records

FAO No.4/2007

Page No.8 of 12

that a information has been received that a person had fallen from a
train. It is quite possible that after seeing the deceased lying in an
injured condition on the railway track some person might have
presumed that the deceased had fallen from the train and informed
the police on that basis. After the accident was investigated by the
police there has been no evidence or even traces of the fact that the
deceased had fallen from the train. All that is established is that the
deceased was crushed by a train and that he was lying on the
railway track under the over-bridge between the two platforms.
24.

The

learned

tribunal

has

rightly

disbelieved

the

testimony of AW-2. In my opinion, AW-2 was a planted witness.
25.

If testimony of AW-2 is believed, he was not obivously a

fortitious co-passenger with the deceased. As per his testimony AW2 was taking the deceased to his house for purpose of getting his
house white-washed by the deceased. In his examination-in-chief he
has deposed that he cried after seeing the deceased falling from the
train. In his cross-examination he has deposed that after the
deceased fell off from the train he got down at the Tilak Bridge
railway station and did not go back to the spot where the deceased
had allegedly fallen to enquire as to what had happened to him. If
AW-2 was so distressed that on seeing the deceased falling from the
train, he cried, he would have definitely gone to the spot where the
deceased had allegedly fallen to enquire as to what had happened
to him. Even otherwise, it was expected of him that after getting
down at the Tilak Bridge railway station he would have gone to the
spot where the deceased had allegedly fallen to enquire as to what
FAO No.4/2007

Page No.9 of 12

had happened to him. The conduct of AW-2 in getting down at the
railway station and just walking, without enquiring about the
deceased, is unnatural human conduct if indeed he had witnessed
the accident.
26.

Testimony of AW-2 suffers from two contradictions.

27.

AW-2 in his examination in chief has deposed that on

seeing

deceased

falling

from

the

train

he

requested

other

passengers to pull the alarm chain while in his cross examination he
has deposed that he had himself pulled the chain.
28.

AW-2 in his examination in chief has deposed that after

getting down at the Tilak Bridge Railway Station he informed one
railway official regarding the said incident while in his cross
examination he has deposed that he informed one of the
passengers about the said incident.
29.

Learned Tribunal has rightly opined that the positioning

of the body of the deceased also belies the testimony of AW-2.
30.

Additionally I note that had the deceased would have

fallen from the train

when

it

was

approaching

Tilak

Bridge

Railway Station as stated by AW-2 the deceased would not have
suffered such grievous injuries for the reason train in question was
an E.M.U Passenger Train which travel at a very less speed and the
speed of E.M.U Train further slows down when the train is
approaching the station.
31.

Testimony of AW-1 as to the manner in which the

deceased died is of no consequence for the reason she was not an
eye-witness to the said accident. In her cross-examination she has
FAO No.4/2007

Page No.10 of 12

categorically deposed that she has no personal knowledge about
the said incident.
32.

Second contention advanced by the learned counsel for

the appellants is predicated upon the assumption that the death of
the deceased was a result of an 'untoward incident'.
33.

Section 123(c)(2) of the Railways Act, 1989 provides

that the accidental falling of any passenger from a train carrying
passengers is an 'untoward incident'. Section 124-A provides that
when a persons suffers injury or dies due to an untoward incident it
is incumbent upon the Railways to pay compensation to the injured
or to the dependents of the deceased as the case may be provided
the injury or death does not fall within any of the five exceptions
indicated in the Section.
34.

From a perusal of the Sections 123(c)(2) and 124-A it is

clear that sine qua non for claiming compensation on account of
death or injury sustained in a train accident is that the victim of a
train accident or his dependents as the case may be must first
establish that the victim or the deceased had accidentally fallen
from a train.
35.

In the instant case appellants have failed to establish

that the deceased had accidentally fallen from the train therefore
the question of proof by the railways that the death of the deceased
was not result of untoward incident does not arise.
36.

In view of above discussion I find no merits in the instant

appeal.
37.

Impugned order dated 20.11.2006 is affirmed.

FAO No.4/2007

Page No.11 of 12

38.

The appeal is dismissed.

39.

No costs.

March 5, 2008
vg

FAO No.4/2007

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.12 of 12

