IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.4802/03
#
!

K.S. Bakshi & Anr.
through:

........
Petitioners
Mr. Sidharth Luthra, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.P.K.Dubey & Ms.Arundhati
Katju, Advocates.
VERSUS

$
^

State & Anr.
through:

None.

........

Respondents

RESERVED ON : 24.10.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 2.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The issue which has arisen for consideration in the

present petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 is the scope and ambit of the expression
“other liability” occurring in Section 138 of the N.I. Act.
2.

Petitioners, directors of the company Ansal Buildwell Ltd.,

impleaded as accused Nos. 4 and 5 in a complaint filed by the
respondent No.2 under Section 138 of the N.I. Act seek
quashing of the complaint as also the summoning order dated

Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.1 of 14

23.9.2002.
3.

Facts in brief are that Ansal Buildwell Company is a

company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956.

The

company is engaged in the business of construction of the
buildings.
4.

Respondent No.2, i.e. Ms.Usha Uppal and one Mr.Rakesh

Bedi were the owners of the property bearing No.4, Hailey
Road, New Delhi, (hereinafter referred to as the said property).
5.

On 10.6.1989, a MOU was entered into between the

respondent No.2, Rakesh Bedi and Ansal Properties and
Industries Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as confirming party). As
per the said MOU the confirming party was to construct a group
housing building on the said property.

In pursuance of said

MOU a sum of Rs.11.5 lacs was received by the owners from
the confirming party.

However, the aforesaid MOU was

cancelled by mutual agreement between the parties to the
MOU.
6.

Thereafter, on 17.1.2001, a collaboration agreement was

entered into between the respondent No.2, Rakesh Bedi, the
confirming party and Ansal Buildwell Co.

As per the

agreement, the Ansal Buildwell Co. had to construct the multistoreyed residential building on the said property.
7.

Clause V of the aforesaid agreement around which

controversy in the present petition revolves stipulated that as a
Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.2 of 14

security for due performance of agreement, a sum of Rs.138
lacs was to be deposited by the Ansal Buildwell Co. with the
respondent No.2 and other owner of the said property.
8.

Clause V reads as under :-

“V.

SECURITY DEPOSIT
(a) The Builder shall deposit with the Owners a
total sum of Rs.138 lakhs towards security for due
compliance of the terms of this Agreement by the
Builder. A sum of Rs.11.5 lakhs has already been
received by the Owners from the Confirming Party,
receipt whereof the Owners hereby acknowledges.
The Builder shall return the said sum of Rs.11.5
lakhs on behalf of the Owners, and the balance sum
of Rs.126.5 lakhs shall be paid by the Builder to the
Owners in 30 equal monthly instalments as per
Annexure-II hereto.
(b) Payment of the said cheques on the due dates
is the essence of the contract. In the event any
cheque is dishonoured for any reason, the Builder
shall replace the cheque with a demand draft within
7 days of the receipt of an intimation from the
Owners failing which the Owners shall be entitled to
take recourse to any right or remedy available to or
accruing to the Owners by such dishonour.
(c) The said deposit shall not carry any interest
and shall be refunded by the Owners to the Builder
upon the Builder delivering to the Owners the
possession of their areas in the Building.
(d) That upon failure of the Owners to refund the
Security deposit the Builder shall have full authority
and power to adjust the same by reduction of the
allocation of the area of the Owners calculated on
price prevalent and mutually acceptable as on the
date of such default.
(e) That till the refund/adjustment of the entire
security deposit in the manner stated above the
Builder shall have a lien over 50% out of the
Owners' areas in the Building and the owners shall

Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.3 of 14

9.

not sell/transfer/lease or deal with the same till the
deposit is refunded to the Builder or recovered by
the Builder by making adjustment out of the
Owners' share. Delay in such refund will attract
compound interest @ 18% per annum from the date
the refund is due.”
In accordance with the afore-noted clause, Ansal Buildwell

Co. issued 30 cheques each in the sum of Rs.84,333/- in favour
of respondent No.2.
10.

Out

of

the

said

30

cheques,

6

cheques

bearing

Nos.083683 to 083688 dated 1.12.2001, 1.1.2002, 1.2.2002,
1.3.2002, 1.4.2002 and 1.5.2002 respectively were presented
for encashment by the respondent No.2. The said cheques were
dishonoured and returned unpaid to respondent No.2 with a
remark 'Exceeds Arrangements'.
11.

Respondent

No.2

issued

a

statutory

notice

dated

12.6.2002 as contemplated under Section 138 of the N.I. Act,
1881 calling upon the Ansal Buildwell Co. to pay the amount
covered under the cheques within a period of 15 days and since
the company failed to make the payment in spite of receipt of
the notice the respondent No.2 filed a complaint against the
said company as also its 5 directors including the petitioners
under Section 138 of the N.I. Act.
12.

On a prima facie consideration of the complaint and

documents

filed

along

with

the

complaint,

the

learned

Metropolitan Magistrate summoned the accused persons to
face trial for an offence under Section 138 of the N.I. Act.
Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.4 of 14

13.

During hearing of the instant petition, the learned counsel

for the petitioners submitted that the sine qua non for an action
under Section 138 of the N.I. Act is that the dishonoured
cheque has been issued towards discharge of a “debt or other
liability”. That the expression “other liability” envisaged under
Section 138 is akin to a debt or money owed. Learned counsel
elaborated that the Section 118(a) and 139 of the N.I. Act raise
a statutory presumption that the dishonoured cheque must
have been drawn/made for a consideration, meaning thereby,
that there must be some money due to the drawee from the
drawer in lieu of which cheque was drawn. That the cheques in
question cannot be taken to be issued in lieu of any money due
to the complainant for the reason amount covered by the
cheques was to be returned by the complainant to the accused
company on the due performance of the agreement.
14.

That the clause V of the agreement evidences that the

cheques in question were issued as security for the due
performance of the agreement.

That from the fact that the

amount covered by cheques in question was to be returned by
the complainant/respondent No.2 to the accused company on
the due performance of the agreement, it is clear that cheques
in question were neither issued towards discharge of a debt nor
because

accused

complainant.

company

owed

any

money

to

the

Counsel further relied upon judgment of the

Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.5 of 14

Supreme Court in the decision reported as M/s. Narayana
Menon Vs. State of Kerala AIR 2006 SC 3366 in support of his
contention that where a cheque is given only as a security, the
provisions of Section 138 of the N.I. Act are not at all attracted.
15.

Unfortunately, no assistance has been rendered to this

Court by the complainant.
16.

Relevant part of Section 138 of the N.I. Act reads as under

:“138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency,
etc., of funds in the account – Where any cheque
drawn by a person on an account maintained by him
with a banker for payment of any amount of money
to another person from out of that account for the
discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other
liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either
because of the amount of money standing to the
credit of that account is insufficient to honour the
cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to
be paid from the account by an agreement made
with the bank, such person shall be deemed to have
committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to
any other provisions of this Act, be punished with
imprisonment for [a term which may be extended to
two years], or with fine which may extend to twice
the amount of the cheque, or with both :
(a)

****

(b)

****

****

(c)

17.

****

****

****

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, “debt
or other liability” means a legally enforceable debt
or liability.
At the outset, I note that the expression “other liability”

cannot be construed as akin to the preceding word “debt”. The

Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.6 of 14

expression “other liability” can take its meaning and colour
from the preceding word “debt” only if the rule of ejusdem
generis is held to be applicable.
18.

The rule of ejusdem generis

is applicable when words

pertaining to a class, category or genus are followed by general
words. In such a case, the general words take their meaning
from the preceding particular words because the legislature by
using the particular words of a distinct genus has shown its
intention to that effect.

Thus, before the rule of ejusdem

generis is applied it is a pre-requisite that there must be a
distinct genus, which must comprise of more than one species.
Consequently, if a general word follows only one particular
word, that single particular word does not constitute a distinct
genus and therefore rule of ejusdem generis cannot be applied
in such a case.
19.

In Section 138 of the N.I. Act, the general expression

“other liability” follows only one single expression, i.e. “debt”
which is not a distinct genus. In the absence of distinct genus
the rule of ejusdem generis has no application and therefore
the expression “other liability” cannot be interpreted in the
light of the preceding word “debt”.
20.

The Supreme Court had the occasion to consider the

ambit of the expression “other liability” in the decision
reported as I.C.D.S. Ltd. Vs. Beemna Shabeer & Anr. AIR 2002
Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.7 of 14

SC 3014. In the said case, the issue under consideration was
as to the maintainability of the proceeding under Section 138
of the N.I. Act vis-a-vis a guarantor. In para 10 and 11 of the
said judgment, it was observed as under:“10. The language, however, has been rather
specific as regards the intent of the legislature. The
commencement of the Section stands with the
words "Where any cheque" The above noted three
words are of excrement significance, in particular,
by reason of the user of the word "any"--the first
three words suggest that in fact for whatever reason
if a cheque is drawn on an account maintained by
him with a banker in favour of another person for
the discharge of any debt or other liability, the
highlighted words if read with the first three words
at the commencement of Section 138, leave no
manner of doubt that for whatever reason it may be,
the liability under this provision cannot be avoided
in the event the same stands returned by the
banker unpaid. The legislature has been careful
enough to record not only discharge in whole or in
part of any debt but the same includes other liability
as well. This aspect of the matter has not been
appreciated by the High Court, neither been dealt
with or even referred to in the impugned judgment.
11. The issue as regards the co-extensive liability of
the guarantor and the principle debtor, in our view,
is totally out of the purview of Section 138 of the
Act, neither the same calls for any discussion
therein. The language of the Statute depicts the
intent of the law-makers to the effect that wherever
there is a default on the part of one in favour of
another and in the event a cheque is issued in
discharge of any debt or other liability there cannot
be any restriction or embargo in the matter of
application of the provisions of Section 138 of the
Act: 'Any cheque' and 'other liability' are the two
key expressions which stands as clarifying the
legislative intent so as to bring the factual context
within the ambit of the provisions of the Statute.
Any contra interpretation would defeat the intent of
Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.8 of 14

the legislature. The High Court, it seems, got carried
away by the issue of grantee and guarantor's
liability and thus has overlooked the true intent and
purport of Section 138 of the Act. The judgments
recorded in the order of the High Court do not have
any relevance in the contextual facts and the same
thus does not lend any assistance to the contentions
raised by the respondents.”
21.

From the afore-noted observations of the Supreme Court

in I.C.D.S case (supra), it is clear that the expression “other
liability” must be given its ordinary and grammatical meaning.
22.

Notwithstanding that Section 138 of the N.I. Act is a penal

provision, phrases used therein must be considered in the
same sense as people in the commercial world would
understand the same.
23.

Thus, if given its full meaning, the expression “other

liability” within its broad sweep would include any “liability to
pay”.
24.

Matter can be looked at from the point of view of

contractual terms which are fundamental to a contract and
terms which are not.
25.

The doctrine of fundamental terms of a contract as

enunciated in the decision reported as

Suisse Atlantique

Societe D'Armement Maritime S.A. Vs. N.V. Rotterdamche
Kolen Centrale (1967) 1 AC 361 (Pg 422) is as under:“A fundamental term of a contract is a stipulation
which the parties have agreed either expressly or by
necessary implication or which the general law
Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.9 of 14

regards as a condition which goes to the root of the
contract so that any breach of that term may at
once and without reference to the facts and
circumstances be regarded by the innocent party as
a fundamental breach and thus is conferred on him
the alternative remedies at his option.”
26.

In the decision reported as Lombard North Central PLC

Vs. Butterworth (1987) Q.B. 527 (Pg 535), it was observed as
under :“3. Certain categories of obligation, often called
conditions, have the property that any breach of
them is going to the root of the contract. Upon the
occurrence of any breach of condition, the injured
party can elect to terminate and claim damages,
whatever the gravity of the breach.”
4. It is possible by express provision in the contract
to make a term a condition, even if it would not be
so in the absence of such a provision.”
27.

Thus an obligation which is a condition, if breached, hits

at the root of the contract and by contract it is open for the
parties to make a term a condition which otherwise under
ordinary circumstances it may not be.
28.

In this regards, it is essential to note clause V(b) of the

agreement which stipulates that the payment of cheques on
due dates is the essence of the contract. It reads as under :(b) Payment of the said cheques on the due dates
is the essence of the contract. In the event any
cheque is dishonoured for any reason, the Builder
shall replace the cheque with a demand draft within
7 days of the receipt of an intimation from the
Owners failing which the Owners shall be entitled to
take recourse to any right or remedy available to or
accruing to the Owners by such dishonour.
29.

Under the agreement, the accused company had a

Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.10 of 14

liability to pay Rs.138 lakhs to the complainant and other
owner of the said property and discharge of this liability was
treated fundamental to the agreement, non-performance
thereof would entitle the complainant and the other owner to
rescind the contract.
30.

In the instant case, money in sum of Rs.126.5 lakhs was

to be paid by the accused company to the complainant and
other owner.

It is irrelevant whether such money was to be

retained and returned in future on due performance of the
agreement. What is relevant for purposes of Section 138 of the
NI Act is the fact that at the time of issuance of cheques the
accused company had a liability to pay money to the
complainant and other owner of the said property.
31.

A distinction has to be drawn between a cheque issued as

security and a cheque issued towards discharge of a liability to
pay notwithstanding that the money is by way of security for
due performance of the contract. A cheque given as security is
not to be encashed in presenti. It becomes enforceable if an
obligation is future is not enforced. It is not tendered in
discharge of a liability which has accrued.
32.

Thus where a cheque forms part of a consideration under

a contract it is paid towards a liability.
33.

Section 2(d) of the Indian Contract Act, 1972 defines

Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.11 of 14

consideration as under :“When at the desire of the promisor, the
promisee or any other person has done or
abstained from doing, or does or abstains from
doing, or promises to do or abstain from doing,
something, such act or abstinence or promise
is called a consideration for the promise.”
34.

Jural concept of consideration is as :“A valuable consideration in the sense of the
law, may consist either in some right, interest,
profit or benefit accruing to one party, or some
forbearance, detriment, loss or responsibility
given, suffered, or undertaken by the other.”

35.

The jural concept of the consideration requires that

something of value must be given, and that this can either be a
benefit to the promisor or some detriment to the promisee. In
the decisions reported as Chidambara Iyer v Renga Iyer AIR
1966 SC 193 and Sonia Bhatia v State of U.P. AIR 1981 SC
1271, the Supreme Court compared the jural concept of the
consideration and Section 2(d) of the Contract Act and held the
two as being practically the same. It was held that the word
'valuable' in civil law could be negative or positive.
36.

Thus, “consideration” is a very wide term and is not

restricted

to

monetary

benefit.

Consideration

does

not

necessarily means money in return of money or money in lieu
of goods or service. Any benefit or detriment of some value can
be a consideration.
37.

In the instant case, the complainant and the other owner

Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.12 of 14

of the said property blocked their asset (property) till the
period of completion of construction as provided in the
agreement. The promise/act of the complainant and other
owner of the said property of blocking their asset for a
considerable period can very well be held to be a consideration
within the meaning of Section 2(d) of the Indian Contract Act.
Thus all reciprocal obligations of the builder would also be a
consideration for the contract.
38.

In the decision reported as

M/s. Narayana Menon Vs.

State of Kerala AIR 2006 SC 3366 relied upon by the counsel
for the petitioners, the Supreme Court was considering the
nature and extent of statutory presumption provided under
Section 118(a) and 139 of the N.I. Act. The observations relied
upon the counsel reads as under :“57. We in the facts and circumstances of this
case need not go into the question as to whether
even if the prosecution fails to prove that a large
portion of the amount claimed to be part of debt
was not owing and due to the complainant by
the accused and only because he has issued a
cheque for a higher amount, he would be
convicted if it is held that existence of debt in
respect of large part of the said amount has not
been proved. The Appellant clearly said that
nothing is due and the cheque was issued by
way of security. The said defence has been
accepted as probable. If the defence is
acceptable as probable the cheque therfor
cannot be held to have been issued on discharge
of the debt as, for example, if a cheque is issued
for security or any other purpose the same
would not come within the purview of Section
Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.13 of 14

138 of the Act.” (Emphasis supplied)
39.

The

afore-noted

observations

are

emphasised

are

clarificatory in nature.
40.

In view of above discussion, no ground for quashing the

complaint or the summoning order dated 23.9.2002 is made
out.
41.

No Costs.

November 2, 2007
NANDRAJOG

PRADEEP

SL

JUDGE

Crl.M.C.No.4802/2003

Page No.14 of 14

