IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
C.R.P. No.365/2006
#
!

TRISTAR CONSULTANTS
.......
Petitioner
through: Mr.M.S.Ganesh, Sr. Adv. with
Ms.Sushila Ram, Mr.K.Seshachary,
Ms.Neelam S.Kujur, Advs.
VERSUS

$
^

M/s.VCUSTOMER SERVICES INDIA PVT. LTD. & ANR.
.......Respondent
through: Mr.Vikas Dhawan, Adv.

RESERVED ON : 27-02-2007
%

DATE OF DECISION:

05-03-2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
A short question arises for consideration in the present

revision petition.
2.

The question is, under what circumstances and on

what pleadings, a director of a company can be made liable in an
Page 1 of 10

action for recovery of damages alleging breach of contract by the
company.
3.

Petitioner filed a suit stating that Dinesh Mirchandani

was carrying on business as the sole proprietor of the plaintiff. It
was stated that the plaintiff is carrying on business of providing
human resources facilitation by locating right candidates suitable
for top level managerial positions. It was stated that defendant
No.1, represented through as also acting through Sanjay Kumar,
its director, (Defendant No.2) held personal meetings as also
exchanged proposals through e-mails.

It was stated that

defendant No.2 negotiated and concluded a written contract. As
per the said contract, plaintiff was to identify and recommend to
defendant No.1, after interviewing, suitable candidates. Plaintiff
did so but defendants cancelled the contract. It was stated that
post cancellation of the contract, correspondence was exchanged
between the parties to recompense an agreed sum to the plaintiff.
This correspondence was exchanged between the plaintiff and
Sanjay Kumar, the director of defendant No.1.

It was further

stated that on behalf of defendant No.1, Sanjay Kumar agreed to
pay professional fee of Rs.15 lacs, expenses incurred by the
petitioner in sum of Rs.1.1 lacs, besides paying service tax.
Alleging that the said agreement was not honoured, suit was filed
Page 2 of 10

seeking recovery of Rs.11.61 lacs stated to be due and payable
under invoices raised. Damages on account of breach of contract
in sum of Rs.6 lacs was claimed.
4.

Total suit amount is Rs.17.61 lacs.

5.

Sanjay Kumar filed an application under Order 7 Rule

11 praying that qua him, plaint be rejected.
6.

The learned Trial Judge, after hearing arguments, vide

order dated 16.11.2006 as struck off the name of Sanjay Kumar
from the array of defendants. The effect thereof is that the suit
survives only against defendant No.1.
7.

At the outset I may note that it is doubtful whether a

sole proprietory firm is entitled to maintain an action.

A sole

proprietory firm is not a juristic entity. Correct description of the
plaintiff ought to have been Dinesh Mirchandani carrying on
business as sole proprietor of Tristar Consultants.
8.

Be that as it may, it would be open to the plaintiff to

correctly describe who the plaintiff is.
9.

Another fact may be recorded. Rejection of a plaint is

a decree as per definition of a decree under section 2 sub-section
2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. But I am not relegating parties
to the remedy of appeal for the reason notwithstanding the fact
that the Court was considering an application under Order 7 Rule
Page 3 of 10

11 of the Code of Civil Procedure filed by defendant No.2 i.e.
Dinesh Kumar, the Court has struck off his name from the array of
defendants.
10.

Learned counsel for the parties treated the order being

under Order 1 Rule 10(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure i.e.
addition and deletion of parties in a suit.
11.

Order 1 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure requires

that where right to relief in respect of or arising out of the same
act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is alleged to
exist against various persons whether jointly, severally or in the
alternative and if separate suits were brought against such
persons, common questions of law or fact would arise, such
persons may to be joint in one suit as defendants.
12.

Sub rule 2 of Rule 10 of Order 1 permits a Court, at any

stage of the proceedings, either upon or without any application
of either party to strike out a person improperly joined as a
defendant.
13.

In a suit for recovery of money, only such persons can

be impleaded as defendants against whom averments are made
which on proof would entitle the plaintiff to a decree whether
jointly or severally or in the alternative against the said persons
named as defendants.
Page 4 of 10

14.

The other facet of the aforesaid proposition of law is

that there must be a cause of action disclosed against a person
impleaded as a defendant.
15.

Learned counsel for the petitioner did not dispute that

in the plaint there is no assertion against defendant No.2 that he
personally undertook or agreed to clear any liability of the
defendant outstanding against the plaintiff.

No guarantee or

indemnification has been pleaded.
16.

But, submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is

that every director acts as the agent of a company and therefore
as an agent, a director would be personally liable if he has acted
on behalf of the company.
17.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a

decision of the Supreme Court reported as (1973) 1 SCR 985 Ram
Parshad vs. Commissioner of Income Tax. Following passage has
been relied upon:“Through an agent as such is not a servant, a servant is
generally for some purposes his master's implied agent,
the extent of the agency depending upon the duties or
position of the servant. It is again true that a director of
a company is not a servant but an agent inasmuch as
the company cannot act in its own person but has only to
act through directors who qua the company have the
relationship of an agent to its capacity.
Managing
Director may have a dual capacity.”
18.

I am afraid, learned counsel for the petitioner has got it
Page 5 of 10

all wrong.
19.

It is settled law that a company is a juristic person.

Therefore, a company has to act through a living human being.
Collectively, decisions on behalf of the company, are taken by the
board of directors of a company. An individual director has no
power to act on behalf of a company of which he is a director,
unless there is a specific resolution of the board of directors of the
company giving specific power to him/her, or, where the articles
of company confer such an power.
20.

Directors of companies have been described as agents,

trustees or representatives of the company because of the fact
vis-a-vis the company they act in a fiduciary capacity.

They

perform acts and duties for the benefit of the company.

Thus,

directors are agents of the company to the extent they have been
authorized to perform certain acts on behalf of the company.
21.

But directors of a company owe no fiduciary or

contractual duties or any duty of care to third parties who deal
with the company.
22.

This distinction has been ignored by learned counsel

for the petitioner.
23.

Directors of a company are referred to as agents of the

company in the context of their fiduciary duty to the company
Page 6 of 10

and therefore if they derive any personal benefit while purporting
to act on behalf of the company, they will be liable to the
company and its shareholders.

But the directors cannot be

treated as acting as agents of the company, in the conventional
sense of an agent, vis-a-vis third parties.
24.

As conventionally understood, a person acts as an

agent for a principal and represents the principal before third
parties.

Such contracts which are concluded by the agent on

behalf of his principal with third parties would bind the principal to
the third party.
25.

Section 230 of the Indian Contract Act 1872 reads as

under:“230.
Agent cannot personally enforce,
nor be bound by, contracts on behalf of principal.In the absence of any contract to that effect an agent
cannot personally enforce contracts entered into by him
on behalf of his principal, nor is he personally bound by
them.
Presumption of contract to contrary.- Such a
contract shall be presumed to exist in the following
cases:(1) where the contract is made by an agent for the sale
or purchase of goods for a merchant resident abroad;
(2) where the agent does not disclose the name of his
principal;
(3) where the principal, though disclosed, cannot be
sued.”
Page 7 of 10

26.

A perusal of Section 230 of the Indian Contract Act

1872 shows that unless an agent personally binds himself, an
agent is not personally liable for contracts entered into by him on
behalf of his principal.
27.

I may note an exception. The exception is that where

an agent has contracted on behalf of a principal who is unnamed
and undisclosed, on properly constituted pleadings and on so
establishing, such an agent who acts on behalf of a undisclosed
principal may be personally liable for a contract entered into by
him.
28.

To interpret the law as is sought to be projected by the

petitioner would mean negation of the concept of a company
being limited by its liability as per the memorandum and articles
of association of the company. Other than where directors have
made themselves personally liable i.e. by way of guarantee,
indemnity etc. liabilities of directors of a company, under common
law, are confined to cases of malfiescence and misfiescence i.e.
where they have been guilty of tort towards those to whom they
owe

a

duty

of

care

i.e.

discharge

fiduciary

obligations.

Additionally, qua third parties, where directors have committed
tort. To the third party, they may be personally liable.
29.

For example by making false representations about a
Page 8 of 10

company, a director induces a third party to advance a loan to the
company.

On proof of fraudulent misrepresentation, a director

may be personally liable to the third party.
30.
would

But this liability would not flow from a contract but
flow

in

an

action

at

tort.

The

tort

being

of

misrepresentation of inducement and causing injury to the third
party having induced the third party to part with money.
31.

Decision cited by learned counsel for the petitioner is

clearly distinguishable.

In the said decision, article 139 of the

articles of association of the company in question enjoined that
notwithstanding anything contained in the articles, the managing
director is expressly allowed to work for and contract on behalf of
the company as an agent of the company for which remuneration
as agreed from time to time could be paid.
32.

Under an agreement, in addition to monthly salary and

other allowances, the appellant, Ram Parshad, was entitled to
receive 10% of the gross profits of the company as commission.
33.

Issue arose under the Income Tax Act as to how was

the remuneration received to be taxed.

In said context, the

observations relied upon, and as noted in para 17 above have to
be considered.
34.

I therefore find no merit in the petition. The petition is
Page 9 of 10

dismissed.
35.

No costs.

March 05, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Page 10 of 10

