IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.3/05
#

Smt. Deepa Arora
........ Appellant
through:
Mr.V.K. Singh, Advocate
VERSUS

$

Mr. Saurabh Arora & Anr.
....... Respondents
through:
Mr.Dushyant Swaroop, Advocate for R-1
RESERVED ON: 03.12.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 10.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
This appeal is directed against the order dated 06.09.04

passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi whereby
letters of administration were granted in favour of the respondent
no.1 in respect of the Will dated 15.5.91 executed by Late Sh.
Praveen Kumar Arora.
2.

Late Sh. Praveen Kumar Arora (hereinafter referred to as

the deceased) who died on 7.10.92 was survived by his wife Smt.
Deepa Arora, a minor son Saurabh Arora and mother Smt. Kamla
Arora.

FAO.3/05

Page 1 of 22

3.

The relationship between the deceased and his wife

were strained and they were living separately from each other from
3 years prior to the death of the deceased. The son Saurabh was
living under the care and guidance of the deceased. Deceased had
filed a petition under Section 13(1)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 seeking divorce on the ground of cruelty. At the time of the
death of the deceased said petition was pending trial in a
matrimonial court.
4.

On death of the deceased a petition under Section 372

of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 seeking succession certificate in
respect of the estate of the deceased was filed by the son of the
deceased through his late father's sister Smt. Preeti Sarin. On
respondent no.1 attaining majority during the pendency of the
petition, vide order dated 03.06.2000, learned Trial Court granted
permission to the respondent no.1 to sue on his own.
5.

Succession Certificate was sought on the basis of a Will

purported to have been executed by the deceased on 15th May,
1991. As per the Will, the deceased had bequeathed his entire
estate in favour of respondent no.1 to the exclusion of all including
his wife Smt. Deepa Arora and mother Smt. Kamla Arora.
6.

Wife of the deceased opposed the petition while mother

of the deceased had supported the Will dated 15.5.1991 purported
to have been executed by the deceased.

FAO.3/05

Page 2 of 22

7.

The Will in question, Ex.PW1/1, is a computer typed

document and consists of 2 sheets. It has been typed in English
language. It bears the signatures of the deceased on each page. The
signatures have been appended in English. The Will in question is an
unregistered document.
8.

The Will in question has been witnessed by one

Mr.Rajinder Pal and Mr.Akash Chanana.
9.

Rajinder Pal has been examined by the respondent no.1

as PW-1 to prove the Will. In his examination-in-chief he deposed
that father of the deceased was son of his maternal uncle. That he
knew the deceased since the birth of the deceased and that he and
the other attesting witness had attested the execution of the Will by
the deceased. That on 15.5.91 deceased told him to come to the
office of Mr. Akash Channa. That when he reached the office of
Mr.Akash Channa at about 7 P.M. deceased and Akash Channa were
already present. That the deceased expressed his desire to execute
a Will and requested him to become an attesting witness. That he
agreed to the said request. That the Will Ex.PW1/1 was already got
typed by the deceased. That deceased and other attesting witness
i.e. Mr.Akash Channa appended their signatures on the Will in his
presence. That he also signed the Will in the presence of the
deceased and Mr.Akash Channa. That since the deceased was only
38 years of age he had questioned the deceased as to why he is

FAO.3/05

Page 3 of 22

making a Will at such a young age, to which he replied that life is
uncertain and age is no consideration for making a Will.
10.

Respondent no.1 also stepped into the witness-box as

PW-2. He deposed that the deceased had told him that he had
executed a Will in his favour. That relations between his parents
were strained and that they were living separately. That he was
residing with the deceased during the lifetime of the deceased.
11.

On the other hand, objector/appellant i.e. Smt. Deepa

Arora examined his father as RW-1. He deposed that the Will
Ex.PW1/1 is a forged and fabricated document. That his daughter
had instituted various litigations against the deceased and his
family. That in order to defeat the claim of the appellant family of
the deceased has created a false Will Ex.PW1/1.
12.

To prove that the Will Ex.PW1/1 is a fabricated

document, one Mr.R.P.Singh, Handwriting Expert was examined as
RY. His report was marked as Ex.RY/1. He deposed that he had
made a comparative analysis of disputed signatures on the Will with
the admitted signatures of the deceased and came to the conclusion
that disputed signatures differ from the admitted signatures and are
not written in the hand of same person.
13.

Considering the evidence led by both the parties, vide

order dated 06.09.04, the learned Trial Court has held that the Will
dated 15.05.91 was the last legal and valid testament of the

FAO.3/05

Page 4 of 22

deceased and thus granted letters of administration in favour of the
respondent no.1 Saurabh Arora. Learned Trial Court has further held
that the respondent no.1 is not entitled to be granted succession
certificate in view of provisions of Section 370 of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925.
14.

Aggrieved by the impugned order dated 06.09.04,

objector to the petition under Section 372 of the Indian Succession
Act, 1925 filed by the respondent no.1 has filed the present appeal.
15.

In support of their objections, following grounds were

urged by the objector:- (Same grounds have also been urged in the
present appeal)
A

That the testator was a young man of 38 years of age

and suffering from no disease so the execution of Will at this young
age is by itself a suspicious circumstance.
B

Professionalism

of

the

recital

of

the

Will

is

a

circumstance casting heavy suspicion on the genuineness of the
Will.
C
relative

Since the alleged attesting witness Mr.Rajinder Pal is a
of

the

family

of

the

deceased,

not

much

importance/weightage can be attached to his testimony.
D

Opinion of the handwriting expert Mr. R.P. Singh

conclusively established that the Will dated 15.05.91 Ex.PW1/1 does
not contain the signatures of the deceased and is thus a forged and

FAO.3/05

Page 5 of 22

fabricated document.
16.

Section 2(h) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 defines a

Will to mean the legal declaration of the intention of a testator with
respect to his property which he desires to be carried into effect
after his death.
17.

In the decision reported as Smt Jaswant Kaur v Smt

Amrit Kaur AIR 1977 SC 74 the Supreme Court has described the
nature and standard of evidence required to prove a Will. In para 10
of the decision, the Supreme Court has observed as under:“10. There is a long line of decisions bearing on the
nature and standard of evidence required to prove a
will. Those decisions have been reviewed in an elaborate
judgment of this Court in R. Venkatachala Iyengar v.
B.N. Thimmajamma and Ors. [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 426.
The Court, speaking through Gajendragadkar J., laid
down in that case the following propositions:1. Stated generally, a will has to be proved
like any other document, the test to be
applied being the usual test of the
satisfaction of the prudent mind in such
matters. As in the case of proof of other
documents, so in the case of proof of wills,
one cannot insist on proof with mathematical
certainty.
2. Since Section 63 of the Succession Act
requires a will to be attested, it cannot be
used as evidence until, as required by
Section 63 of the Evidence Act, one attesting
witness at least has been called for the
purpose of proving its execution, if there be
an attesting witness alive and subject to the
process of the court and capable of giving
evidence.

FAO.3/05

Page 6 of 22

3. Unlike other documents, the will speaks
from the death of the testator and therefore
the maker of the will is never available for
deposing as to the circumstances in which
the will came to be executed. This aspect
introduces an element of solemnity in the
decision of the question whether the
document propounded is proved to be the
last will and testament of the testator.
Normally, the onus which lies on the
propounder can be taken to be discharged
on proof of the essential facts which go into
the making of the will.
4. Cases in which the execution of the will is
surrounded by suspicious circumstances
stand on a different footing. A shaky
signature, a feeble mind, an unfair and
unjust disposition of property, the propounder himself taking a leading part in the
making of the will under which he receives a
substantial
benefit
and
such
other
circumstances raise suspicion about the
execution of the will. That suspicion cannot
be removed by the mere assertion of the
pro-pounder that the will bears the signature
of the testator or that the testator was in a
sound and disposing state of mind and
memory at the time when the will was made,
or that those like the wife and children of the
testator who would normally receive their
due share in his estate were disinherited
because the testator might have had his own
reasons for excluding them. The presence of
suspicious circumstances makes the initial
onus heavier and therefore, in cases where
the circumstances attendant upon the
execution of the will excite the suspicion of
the court, the propounder must remove all
legitimate suspicions before the document
can be accepted as the last will of the
testator.
5. It is in connection with wills, the execution
of which is surrounded by suspicious
circumstance that the test of satisfaction of
FAO.3/05

Page 7 of 22

the judicial conscience has been evolved.
That test emphasies that in determining the
question as to whether an instrument
produced before the court is the last will of
the testator, the court is called upon to
decide a solemn question and by reason of
suspicious circumstances the court has to be
satisfied fully that the will has been validly
executed by the testator.
6. If a caveator alleges fraud, undue
influence, coercion etc. in regard to the
execution of the will, such pleas have to be
proved by him, but even in the absence of
such
pleas,
the
very
circumstances
surrounding the execution of the will may
raise a doubt as to whether the testator was
acting of his own free will. And then it is a
part of the initial onus of the propounder to
remove all reasonable doubts in the matter.”
In the decision reported as Smt. Indu Bala Bose v

18.

Manindra Chandra Bose AIR 1982 SC 133 the Supreme Court
defined a “suspicious circumstance” as:-

19.

“Needless to say that any and every circumstance is not
a `suspicious' circumstance. A circumstance would be
`suspicious' when it is not normal or is not normally
expected in a normal situation or is not expected of a
normal person.”
Further, in Indu Bala's case (supra) the Supreme Court

has laid down following rule relating to “suspicious circumstances”.
“We do not find any suspicious circumstance
surrounding the execution of the will. The circumstances
pointed out by learned Counsel are not only not
suspicious but normal as pointed out above. The rule, as
observed by the Privy Council, is that "where a will is
charged with suspicion, the rules enjoin a reasonable
septicism, not as obdurate persistence in disbelief. They
do not demand from the judge, even in circumstances of
grave
suspicion,
a resolute
and impenetrable
incredulity. He is never required to close his mind to the
truth." (See 500 C.W.N. 895)”
FAO.3/05

Page 8 of 22

20.

A Division Bench of the Madras High Court in the

decision reported as Corra Vedachalam Chetty & Anr v G.
Janakiraman 2001 (3) CRC 283 had an occasion to consider the duty
of a probate court. In the decision, it was observed as under:“The testamentary Court is a Court of conscience. It is
not a Court of suspicion. It is not the law that, whenever
a Will is sought to be proved in the Court, the Court
should start with the presumption that the Will is not
genuine, that it is fraudulent and that the person who
chooses to probate the Will must remove all such
suspicions even they are not unreal. The object of the
probate proceedings is not to render the testamentary
document ineffective but to make it effective and
render the terms of that Will operative. In doing so, the
Court has to take note of the fact that the testator is not
available to the Court to state as to whether the
document in fact was his or her last Will or as to
whether he or she had signed the same and whether
the attestors had signed receiving an acknowledgment
from him about the execution of the Will. It is for that
reason that the Courts should be cautious while dealing
with the evidence placed before them in relation to the
executions and attestation, of the Will as also the
disposing state of mind of the testator.
This need for caution, cannot be exploited by
unscrupulous caveators who choose to cull out
imaginary suspisions with a view to prevent the
legatees under the Will from claiming the benefit
thereunder and to render the last Will of the deceased
wholly ineffective. In this context, the conduct of the
persons who raise the alleged ground for suspision is
also to be looked at, to know as to how credible are the
grounds for suspisions sought to be raised by such
persons. In this case, the suspicion is sought to be
raised by a person who is keenly interested in making
the Will ineffective and whose conduct is far from one
which would inspire confidence in truthfulness of his
statements.”
21.

FAO.3/05

From the afore-noted judicial decisions, following legal

Page 9 of 22

principles can be culled out:I.

For proof of a Will, one need not insist on proof with

mathematical certainty and evidence of one attesting witness is
sufficient if credible.
II.

The legal burden to prove due execution always lies

upon the person propounding a Will.
III.

The onus which rests on the propounder of the Will is

treated as discharged when essential facts which go into the making
of the Will are proved.
IV.

Where suspicious circumstances exist, the onus to dispel

the said suspicion is very heavy on the propounder. In such a case,
the test which is evolved is the satisfaction of judicial conscience.
V.

Circumstances can only raise a suspicion if they are

circumstance attending, or at least relevant to the preparation and
execution of the Will itself.
VI.

Examples

of

suspicious

circumstances

are

shaky

signatures, feeble mind of the testator, propounder himself playing
an active part in the execution of the Will etc.
VII.

The law of evidence does not permit conjecture or

suspicion having the place of legal proof nor permit them to
demolish a fact otherwise proved by legal and convincing evidence.
VIII.

Well founded suspicion may be a ground for close

scrutiny of evidence but suspicion alone cannot form the foundation

FAO.3/05

Page 10 of 22

of a judicial verdict-positive or negative.
IX.

Where fraud, undue influence, coercion etc is alleged by

the person challenging the Will such plea has to be proved by that
person. In the absence of such a plea, if the circumstances
surrounding execution raise a doubt, it is for the propounder to
remove all the doubts.
22.

Keeping in mind the afore-noted judicial parameters I

will now consider the objections raised by the appellant to the Will
and evidence on record.
23.

As regards ground 'A' i.e. execution of Will by the

deceased at a young age and at the time when he was enjoying
good health is a suspicious circumstance, it is relevant to note that
the relations between the deceased and the objector were very
strained. Multifarious litigation was pending between them. It is an
admitted fact that the deceased and objector were living separately
from each other since 3 years prior to the death of the deceased.
From the afore-noted facts it could reasonably be inferred that the
deceased was disillusioned with his wife and executed the Will. That
the deceased executed a Will at a young age cannot be a suspicious
circumstance considering the circumstances of this case.
24.

It is further relevant to note that minor son of the

deceased and objector i.e. respondent no.1 was staying with the
deceased. The father of the objector in his testimony as RW-1

FAO.3/05

Page 11 of 22

admitted that the objector made no attempt during the lifetime of
the deceased to obtain the custody of respondent no.1. The
deceased might have been feeling that the objector had abandoned
respondent no.1. It is reasonable to assume that to make up for the
void created in the life of the respondent no.1 due to absence of his
mother deceased was extra-affectionate and careful towards the
well-being of the respondent no.1. It is quite possible that this love
and worry for the future of respondent no.1 prompted the deceased
to execute the Will in favour of respondent no.1.
25.

In the decision reported as Smt. Rajeshwari Rani Pathak

v Smt. Nirja Guleri AIR 1977 P&H 123 testator executed a Will
bequeathing his entire property in favour of his mother's sister Smt.
Rajeshwari Rani Pathak. As per the Will, she had brought up the
testator since the age of five years. The wife of the testator Nirja
Guleri was disinherited and the averment in this regard was to the
following effect:-

26.

"As regards Smt. Nirja, though she was married to me,
but has deserted me and I do not give her anything out
of my property as she is already given all the
ornaments, jewellery and household goods with Rs.
50,000/- cash and has, therefore, given up her claims, if
any, over my property."
The wife Nirja Guleri raised an objection to the

genuineness of the Will. One of the contentions advanced by her
was that the testator was only 34-36 years of age at the time of the
execution of the alleged Will and was not in anticipation of death,

FAO.3/05

Page 12 of 22

thus there was no reason or any occasion for him to execute any
Will. Noting the series of correspondence between the testator and
objector-wife which established that the relations between them
were far from cordial, the Punjab and Haryana High Court observed
as under:-

27.

“39. ............That the will was made when the testator
was quite young and could not anticipate his end so
soon, is also no suspicious circumstance in the peculiar
circumstances of this case. The constant and repeated
acts of misconduct of his wife are likely to have
prompted the testator to take the decision to execute
the will and disinherit her.”
In the decision reported as In the Goods of: Arun Ch.

Mitra AIR 1996 Cal 159 the testator executed a Will in favour of his
wife to the exclusion of his other two legal heirs namely 2 sons and
a daughter. The eldest son of the testator filed an objection. One of
the contentions advanced was that there was no necessity for the
testator to make a Will at an young age of 41 years. Holding that the
custody, execution and attestation of the Will have been proved, the
Calcullta High Court allowed the probate petition filed by the wife of
the testator.
28.

In the decision reported as Mrs. Murial Hyden v Mrs.

Dulcie M. Robb & Ors (1991) 1 ALT 5 the testator had died as a
bachelor. He had executed a Will in favour of his two sisters. The
other legal heirs of the deceased namely children of a deceased
sister of the testator and widow and children of a deceased brother
of the testator had challenged the Will. One of the contentions was
FAO.3/05

Page 13 of 22

that it has not been explained in the evidence by the propounder of
the Will that as to why testator thought of executing a Will at a ripe
age of 44 years. Holding that there are no suspicious circumstances
surrounding the execution of the Will the Andhra Pradesh High Court
allowed the probate petition filed by the sisters of the testator.
29.

Keeping in view the peculiar circumstances of the

instant

case

as

also

the

afore-noted three

decisions,

more

particularly, decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Smt.
Rajeshwari Rani Pathak's case (supra) I find no merit in the ground
'A' advanced by the appellant/objector.
30.

As regards ground 'B' appellant draws attention of this

Court to following recital in the Will dated 15.5.91 Ex.PW1/1 :-

31.

“That if I demise before my son Master Saurabh Arora
attains the age of maturity then I appoint my father
Mr.Ved Prakash Arora and in the event of his death
Mrs.Kamla Arora and in the event of her death
Mrs.Preeti Sarin as the legal guardian of my son Master
Saurabh Arora.”
According to the appellant/objector, the afore-noted

clause clearly suggests that the Will is a fabricated document
created by the family of the deceased with the sole aim of defeating
the rights and claims of the objectors.
32.

It is not to

be forgotten that the deceased was quite

familiar with the legal niceties as he was a party in multifarious
litigations. It is quite probable that the Will in question was got
prepared by the deceased after consulting and taking help of legal

FAO.3/05

Page 14 of 22

experts. There is nothing suspicious about the afore-noted clause.
The clause only shows that the deceased was cautious in using good
legal language and perfecting the Will.
33.

Pertaining to ground 'C' i.e. that the attesting witness

who proved the will is an interested witness, it is relevant to note
the observations of the Supreme Court in the decisions reported as
Rabindra Nath Mukherjee v Panchanan Banerjee AIR 1995 SC 1684
and Madhukar D. Shende v Tarabai Aba Shedge AIR 2002 SC 637.
34.

In the Rabindra's case (supra), the Supreme Court has

observed as under :-

35.

“6. Insofar as the third circumstance is concerned, we
may first observe that witnesses in such documents
verify whether the same had been executed voluntarily
by the concerned person knowing its contents. In case
where a will is registered and the Sub-registrar certifies
that the same had been read over to the executor who,
on doing so, admitted the contents, the fact that the
witnesses to the document are interested loses
significance. The documents at hand were registered
and it is on record that the Sub-registrar had explained
the contents to the old lady. So, we do not find the third
circumstance as suspicious on the facts of the present
case”
In the Madhukar's case (supra), the Supreme Court has

observed as under :“10. The two attesting witnesses on account of being
known to Chingubai's son, being his classmates, were
known to the family, and therefore, were natural witness
to be called to attest the execution of will. On account of
their acquaintance with the family, they could have
naturally known and identified the executant. Merely
because of being classmates they would be interested in
obliging their classmates mother so as to benefits her
and go to the extent of falsely deposing is too far
FAO.3/05

Page 15 of 22

fetched an inference to draw.....”
15. Other reasoning of the trial court and the first
appellate Court, for holding the will not proved, too to
say the least, verge on absurdity. Bhagubai died a day
after the execution and registration of the will. There is
nothing to show that Bhagubai was physically or
mentally incapacitated from executing the will. On the
one hand, the courts below have questioned the
propriety of the Sub-Registrar having come to the house
of Bhagubai for registering the will on the ground as to
why Bhagubai could not have gone to the office of
Registrar on an assumption that she was fit to do so and
yet the mental capacity of Bhagubai to execute the will
have been doubted. The two attesting witnesses have
been held to be 'interested' on the ground of their being
classfellows of Chingubai's son and on the other hand, it
has been doubted whether they would have known and
identified the executant. There is nothing to doubt the
mental and physical capacity of Bhagubai but the same
has been suspected because of "complete absence of
any medical evidence, of a doctor which would show
that the testator was in a sound and disposing stare of
mind". There is no rule of law or of evidence which
requires a doctor to be kept present when a will is
executed. In short, the courts below have allowed their
findings to be influenced by such suspicion and
conjectures as have no foundation in the evidence and
have no relevance in the facts and circumstances of the
case and unwittingly allowed their process of judicial
thinking to be vitiated by irrelevant reasoning and
considerations. The weighty factor that the factum of
execution of will by Bhagubai was being denied by a
rank trespasser without raising any specific pleadings
and the fact that no relation of Bhagubai has chosen to
lay a challenge to the will, have been simply overlooked.
In our opinion, the High Court ought not to have
sustained such a perverse finding which would result in
the property of a rightful owner being lost to a
trespasser.”
36.

From the afore-noted two decisions, the legal principle

which emerges is that if there is nothing unnatural about the will
and the evidence adduced satisfies the requirement of proving a
FAO.3/05

Page 16 of 22

will, the court would not return a finding of 'not proved' merely on
account of certain assumed suspicion or supposition.
37.

As regards ground 'D' i.e. opinion of the handwriting

expert Mr. R.P. Singh it is relevant to note the following portions of
the cross-examination of the said witness :-

38.

“It would not be correct to say that there is wide range
of natural variation/variety in the formation of different
strokes in the admitted signatures A1 to A8. It is
however, correct that there are natural variations. It is
correct that the curvatures of Staff stroke of letter 'P' of
the signature A1, A4, A6 is less curved than the
signature A2, A3, A7 and A8.”
In the decision reported as Gulzar Ali v State of H.P.

(1998) 2 SCC 192, the Supreme Court has observed as under :-

39.

“...........The High Court has observed that "there is a
natural tendency on the part of an expert witness to
support the view of the person who called him" and
preferred the opinion of PW 20 M.L. Sharma. The said
observation of the High Court cannot be downstaged,
for, many so-called experts have been shown to be
remunerated witnesses making themselves available on
hire to pledge their oath in favour of the party paying
them.”
Considering the ipsi-dixit nature of the testimony of the

handwriting expert and the fact that the handwriting expert was
produced

by

the

objector,

in

the

light

of

the

afore-noted

observations of the Supreme Court in Gulzar's case (supra) not
much importance can be attached to the testimony and report of
the handwriting expert.
40.

Even otherwise, there are catena of authorities taking a

view that the science of handwriting is not an exact science and

FAO.3/05

Page 17 of 22

that it is inadvisable to base conclusion in given case solely on the
opinion of a handwriting expert.
41.

In the decision reported as Vandavasi Karthikeya v

S.Kalamma AIR 1994 AP 102 the Andhra Pradesh has held as under:“..........We may also mention in this context that the
science of handwriting is not an exact sicence unlike the
science of fingerprints. Even experts tend to commit
errors in giving their opinions on the genuineness of the
signatures and handwriting. Even in genuine writing, at
times, the penhesitates or even stops especially when
the author is under great physical or mental strain.
Sometimes, it would be difficult for an expert to examine
even the genuineness of different writings, each having
its own individuality, but all by the same author. It
requires intelligent comparison to differentiate the
genuine signature from the forged one. As the author
Albert S. Obsborn aptly desribes it:
"As the psychologists explain it, 'likeness and
difference co-exist in all things not utterly
unlike', so that intelligent comparison for the
purpose of classification must always include
analysis and reasoning.... A writing or a
document, having in mind all the various
qualities, elements, features, tendencies,
variations and conditions in writings and in
documents that have heretofore been
discussed. A simple questioned signature
should thus be investigated with all these
varied qualities under consideration, and
until it has thus been scrutinized a signature
has not reaily been examined. "Questioned
Documents" by Albert S. Osborn Second
Edition, p. 238"
42.

While dealing with evidence of an handwriting expert in

the decision reported as Magan Bihari Lal v State of Punjab AIR
1977 SC 109, the Supreme Court opined as under:“.............It is true that B. Lal, the handwriting expert,
FAO.3/05

Page 18 of 22

deposed that the handwriting on the forged Railway
Receipt Ex. PW 10A was that of the same person who
wrote the specimen handwritings Ex. PW 27/37 to 27/57,
that is the appellant, but we think it would be extremely
harardous to condown the appellant merely on the
strength of opinion evidence of a handwriting expert. It
is now well settled that expert opinion must always be
received with great caution and perhaps none so with
more caution then the opinion of a handwriting expert.
There is a profusion of precedential authority which
holds that it is unsafe to base a conviction solely on
expert opinion without substantial corroboration. This
rule has been universally acted upon and it has almost
become a rule of law. It was held by this Court in Ram
Chandra v. State 9 AIR 1957 SC 381 that it is unsafe to
treat expert handwriting opinion as sufficient basis for
conviction but it may be relied upon when supported by
other items of internal and external evidence. This Court
again pointed out in Ishwari Prasad v. Md. Isa AIR 1963
SC 1728that expert evidence of handwriting can never
be conclusive because it is, after all, opinion evidence,
and this view was reiterated in Shashi Kumar v. Subodh
Kumar AIR 1964 SC 529 where it was pointed out by this
Court that experts evidence as to handwriting being
opinion evidence can rarely, if ever, take the place of
substantive evidence and before acting on such
evidence, it would be desirable to consider whether it is
corroborated either by clear direct evidence or by
circumstantial evidence. This Court had again occasion
to consider the evidentiary value of expert opinion in
regard to handwriting in Fakhruddin v. State AIR 1967
SC 1326 and it uttered a note of caution pointing out
that it would be found a conviction solely on the
evidence of a handwriting expert and before acting upon
such evidence, the court must always try to see whether
it is corroborated by other evidence, direct or
circumstantial. It is interesting to note that the same
view is also echoed in the judgments of English and
American courts. vide Gurney v. Langlands 1822, 5 8 &
Ald 330 & Matter of Alfead Foster's Will 34 Mich 21 . The
Supreme Court of Michan pointed out in the last
mentioned case. ''Every one knows how very unsafe it is
to rely upon any one's opinion concerning the niceties of
penmanship-Opinions are necessarily received, and may
be valuable, but at best this kind of evidence is a
necessary evil". We need not subscribe to the extreme
FAO.3/05

Page 19 of 22

view expressed by the Supreme Court of Michigan, but
there can be doubt that this type of evidence, being
opinion evidence is by its very nature, weak and infirm
and cannot of itself from the basis for a conviction. We
must, therefore, try to see whether, in the present case,
there is, apart from the evidence of the handwriting
expert B. Lal, any either evidence connecting the
appellant with the offence.”
43.

To sum up, I note the decision of the Division Bench of

the Madras High Court in O.S.A. No.124/2001 titled as 'J. Nawal
Kishore v D. Swarana Bhadran & Ors decided on 3.10.2007 wherein
it was observed as under :“In evaluating the evidence of a handwriting expert on
the question of genuineness of the signature alleged to
be that of the testator, the Court must keep in view the
following consideration:
Firstly, very few people always sign in the same manner
on all occasions;
Secondly, the opinion of an expert as to the
genuineness of a signature should be received with
great caution, especially in a case where there is
positive evidence of persons who saw the testator sign
the Will;
Thirdly, all the tests evolved by experts in the matter of
comparison of handwriting and signature are merely
tentative in character; and lastly, opinion evidence is
usually very weak evidence.”
44.

In the decision reported as Savithri & Ors v Karthayayani

& Ors 2007 AIR SCW 6787 one Sankaran Nair had executed a Will
bequeathing his entire property in favour of his sister and her
children to the exclusion of his son Madhavan Nair and his family.
The wife and children of Madhavan Nair challenged the Will. The

FAO.3/05

Page 20 of 22

Supreme Court has held that fact that the deceased disinherited his
son and family is not a suspicious circumstance for the reason
relations between the testator and his son were strained and that
testator was living with the family of the children since 7 years prior
to his death.
45.

From the above discussion, following conclusions can be

safely drawn:I.

The will dated 15.5.91 Ex. PW1/1 was executed by the

testator of his own free will and the same was signed by him and
attested by the two witnesses in each other's presence.
II.

The deceased executed the said will voluntarily having

full comprehension of the disposition and at that time he was in a
free disposing mind and did not suffer from any infirmity so as to
cast any doubt that the Will Ex. PW1/1 was not genuine or voluntary.
III.

The relations between the deceased and his wife, the

objector, at the time of the execution of the Will Ex. PW1/1 were
such that it cannot be concluded from the fact of her exclusion from
inheritance that the will was in any way unnatural, improbable or
unfair. In coming to the said conclusion, reliance has been placed
upon decision of the Supreme Court in Savithri's case (supra).
IV.

There are no suspicious circumstances surrounding the

execution of the Will Ex. PW1/1.
46.

FAO.3/05

In view of conclusions arrived at above, the appeal is

Page 21 of 22

dismissed.
47.

No costs.

December 10, 2007
sl

FAO.3/05

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
(JUDGE)

Page 22 of 22

