*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.54/2006
Union of India
through:

........ Appellant
Mr.B.S.Rajesh Agrajit, Adv.
VERSUS

M/s. Hindustan Petroleum Corp. Ltd. ........ Respondent
through: Mr.S.P.Singh, Adv.
DATE OF DECISION:
03.04.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2.

Though there is a delay of 135 days in filing the

appeal I have considered the merits of the controversy.
3.

The appeal is directed against an order dated

26.7.2005 passed by the Railway Claims Tribunal in case No.
OC-32/2001.
4.

HPCL had admittedly booked for transportation a

railway wagon No. CR1926103 for transshipment from Khari
FAO No.54/1006

Page No.1 of 4

Rohar Road to Shakur Basti. Admittedly the wagon was loaded
with Motor Spirit in the private siding of HPCL. Admittedly a
joint dip certificate at the point of destination reveal 18811
liters of motor spirit removed from the wagon.
5.

Whereas UOI i.e. the Railways urged before the

Railway Claim Tribunal that since the wagon was loaded at the
private siding of HPCL and loading thereof not supervised by
Railway Officials it could not be fastened with any liability on
account of the fact that the joint dip certificate revealed that
part fuel was missing as the valves of the wagon were found
leaking. To put it pithily, it was the case of UOI that the staff of
HPCL who loaded the wagon remained negligent in not
ensuring that the valves were properly and tightly fitted.
6.

Case of HPCL was that the wagon was entrusted in a

proper condition with seals and valves properly secured and
that tampering took place en-route.
7.

The rival versions have been duly considered by the

Railway Claim Tribunal.

The knot has been untied with

reference to the relevant provisions of the operating manual.
The same reads as under:“11016 – At a roadside station – (a) During transit
the Guard-in-charge shall examined all such wagons
at every halt, and if any of them is detected leaky
he shall have it detached at the nearest station with
a high level platform. After the wagon has been
FAO No.54/1006

Page No.2 of 4

detached and the signature of the Asstt. Station
Master has been obtained by the Guard in his Rough
Journal Book, he shall proceed with his train and
continue to exercise the same vigilance in regard to
the remaining such wagons.
11013 – Precautions by Guards – (a) Immediately on
arrival of the train, the incoming Guard shall advise
the Asstt. Yard Master/Asst. Station Master in writing
giving full particular of such wagons on his train. He
shall only go off duty after obtaining signatures of
the Asstt. Yard Master/Asstt. Station Master in his
Rough Journal book for reference and record.
(b) Before starting, the Guard must make a
thorough examination of his train to ensure that
petrol wagons have no leaks, that lead seals are on
and that, “dangerous, Not to be Loose Shunted”
labels are affixed on both sides of such wagons. He
shall fully satisfy himself that such wagons are
correctly marshaled in accordance with para 1004.
(c) The Guard shall, then, advise the driver about
the presence of Petrol wagons on the train and their
position.
(d) he should realize that smell of petrol vapour
from any wagon is a strong indication of a leak and
any wagon found smelling of petrol must be
thoroughly examined jointly by the Train Examiner
and the Railway Protection Force staff and that only
after he has received a certificate from the Asstt.
Yard Master/Asstt. Station Master that the wagons
are not leaking, he will consent to keep them on the
train.
(e) During transit, the guard will examine all
petrol wagons at every halt where time permits.”
8.

Conclusion drawn from the relevant provisions of

the manual is that tank wagons are loaded after they are
certified fit for loading by the train examiner and if the wagon

FAO No.54/1006

Page No.3 of 4

has any leakage after loading the yard staff or the station
master or the guard would not allow such a wagon to be
dispatched. The corollary thereto is that the wagon must have
been entrusted in a proper condition to the Railways.
9.

The

view

taken

by

the

Tribunal

is

not

only

reasonable but is a probable view. Suffice would it be to note
that the relevant provisions of the operating manual require
the yard staff or the station master or the guard to do what has
been found by the Tribunal in para 8 of its decision. Para 8 of
the decision of the Tribunal reads as under:“8. We are in agreement with the arguments
advanced by learned counsel for the Applicant that
the tank wagons are loaded after they are certified fit
for loading by the train examiner and if the wagon
had leakage after loading, the yard staff at the
loading station or the station master or the guard
would not have allowed the wagon to be dispatched.”
10.

I find no merits in the appeal.

11.

Dismissed.

April 03, 2008
mm

FAO No.54/1006

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Page No.4 of 4

