IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
M.A.C. APP. No.759/2005
#
The
.......Appellant
!

New

India

Assurance

Company

Ltd.

through : Mr. R.K.Tripathi, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Smt.Bhupinder Kaur & Ors. ......
Respondents
through : Mr. Zakir Hussain, Adv.
for respondents No.1 to 7
RESERVED ON : 02-02-2007

%

DATE OF DECISION : 08-02-2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Unfortunately for the claimants, victory before the

learned Tribunal is but a bubble which has been successfully
bursted by learned counsel for the appellant.
2.

10.2.1992 was an unfortunate day in the life of late

Shri Baldev Singh.
3.

The time was around 11.30 pm.

Baldev Singh,
page 1 of 10

travelling on a 2 wheeler scooter had reached outer ring road,
opposite Jahangir Puri. He was hit by a fast moving object, had
to be probably a motor vehicle. He suffered serious injuries.
On 12.2.1992, at around 12.25 am, he died at Hindu Rao
Hospital, Delhi.
4.

Baldev Singh was aged 42 years when he died. He

was carrying on business as the sole proprietor of M/s.Nishan
Tyre Soles at Karol Bagh.
5.

The claim petition was filed by the mother of the

deceased Smt. Nand Kaur, widow of the deceased Smt.
Bhupinder Kaur and his 6 children.

The said petition was

dismissed in default on 9.8.1996. Restoration application was
dismissed on 12.11.1999.
6.

Some of the children were minor when the first claim

petition was filed.
dismissed.

They continued to be minor when it was

Accordingly, in the year 2000, another claim

petition was filed by the widow and the children of the
deceased. His mother has died by then.
7.

Vide award dated 4.6.2005, learned Tribunal has

awarded Rs.2,11,712/- as compensation to the claimants.
8.

Appeal by the insurance company challenges the said

page 2 of 10

award.
9.

Since the owner and driver of the offending vehicle

had failed to contest, learned Trial Court had permitted the
insurance company to take over the defence of the owner and
the driver i.e. application of the insurance company under
Section 170 of the M.V.Act 1988 was allowed.
10.

There is thus no impediment in the insurance

company filing and prosecuting the present appeal.
11.

As per the learned Tribunal, no eye-witnesses were

produced to establish the manner in which the accident took
place.
12.

According to the claimants, when travelling on his 2

wheeler, the deceased was hit by a mini bus bearing No.DBP
2622 stated to be driven by Prakash Chand, the owner-cumdriver of the vehicle.
13.

Holding that it stood established from the evidence on

record that Prakash Chand while driving mini bus No.DBP 2622
hit the scooter, learned MACT has determined the dependency.
14.

Noting that there was no eye-witness and that mere

absence of an eye-witness was no ground to reject a claim
petition, learned Tribunal has opined as under:-

page 3 of 10

15.

“Judging in the light of the said law laid down by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court and in view of the said
statement of Sh.Surender Kumar Bhatia Ex.P-3 and in
view of the fact that R-1 was acquitted by the criminal
court after criminal trial as mentioned on the third
page of the FIR Ex.PW4/A and in view of the fact that
the name of Sh.Surender Kumar Bhatia was cited as
an eyewitness in the criminal trial as mentioned on
the fourth page of the FIR Ex.PW4/A, the involvement
of the vehicle No.DBP-2622 cannot be ruled out in the
said accident. Applying the principle of strict liability
to the present case and in view of my aforesaid
discussion, I am of the considered opinion that the
deceased Baldev Singh died in a road accident in
which the vehicle No.DBP-2622 was involved.
Accordingly, issue No.1 is disposed of in favour of the
petitioners and against the respondents.”
It is apparent that the learned Tribunal has been

influenced by the fact that Shri Surender Kumar Bhatia was
cited as an eye witness in the criminal trial and in his statement
to the police under Section 161 Cr.P.C., attested copy whereof
was exhibited as Ex.P-3, involvement of the mini bus stood
established.
16.

I am afraid, learned Tribunal has been swayed by

sympathies and thus has not appreciated the facts in the right
perspective.
17.

Surender Kumar Bhatia, maker of the statement

before the police under Section 161 Cr.P.C., attested copy
whereof was exhibited as Ex.P-3, was never examined as an
eye-witness before the Tribunal. Thus, the insurance company
page 4 of 10

could not cross examine Surender Kumar Bhatia.
18.

That is not all. The accident took place on 10.2.1992.

Surender Kumar Bhatia surfaced after more than one month.
19.

According to the claimants, in the month of March

1992, they published an advertisement declaring a reward to
the person who would inform them as to who hit the scooter of
the deceased on 10.2.1992.
20.

According to the claimants, Surender Kumar Bhatia

contacted them. He was taken to the police station where the
investigating officer recorded his statement under Section 161
Cr.P.C.
21.

Surender Kumar Bhatia surfacing after more than 1

month of the date of accident and that too pursuant to an offer
of reward shows that Surender Kumar Bhatia is not a person
who thought it to be his public duty to report an accident which
he claims to have witnessed.

He was induced by a reward.

Where is the guarantee that Surender Kumar Bhatia did not
make a false statement to the police? Where is the guarantee
that Surender Kumar Bhatia was not a planted person?
22.

This circumstance makes it all the more necessary to

have Surender Kumar Bhatia in the witness box so that he

page 5 of 10

could be subjected to a cross examination.

Only then, the

truthfulness of his statement or his credibility could have been
tested.
23.

Claimants were fully aware of the aforesaid lacuna.

Their witnesses have falsely deposed before the Tribunal.
24.

PW-1, Gurbaksh Singh, in his examination-in-chief

stated that Baldev Singh was his friend.

That he died in an

accident involving a bus in February 1992. That Baldev Singh
had gone to Rohini on his 2 wheeler to meet a relative. A bus
hit the scooter.

Being crucial for my discussion, further

testimony of PW-1 may be noted in the language of PW-1. He
deposed as under:-

25.

“The bus hit the scooter. I do not remember the bus
and the scooter as the said incident had happened
12-13 years ago. I informed the police about the
accident at 100 number and I along with brother of
the deceased registered a case at P.S. Jahangir Puri. I
along with brother of the deceased brought the dead
body of the deceased. ........ The police had read over
the FIR to me and the photocopy of the same is
marked 'A'. I was informed that the bus was driven in
a rash and negligent manner and because of the
reason, the said accident took place.”
In cross examination, PW-1 admitted that he was not

present at the accident.
26.

Obviously, PW-1 lied when he stated that the bus hit

the scooter and that he did not remember the number of the
page 6 of 10

bus as the incident had happened 12-13 years ago.
27.

FIR, Ex.P-1, has been registered on 11.2.1992 at 2.30

am. As noted above, the accident took place at around 11.40
pm on 10.12.1992.

The FIR has been registered after

approximately 3 hours. The FIR has been registered pursuant
to DD Entry No.15 recorded at the police station on the basis of
a message flashed by a PCR Van that Gurbaksh Singh had
informed them that one Baldev Singh who had left his house on
scooter No.DL-2SE 8343 had not reached home and that the
PCR Van had found him injured on the road near P.S. Jahangir
Puri. The injured was got admitted at Hindu Rao Hospital.
28.

The admission entry record of Hindu Rao Hospital,

Ex.P-4 shows that against the column name, “unknown” was
written and thereafter “within brackets” the name Baldev Singh
was written.
29.

I may note that Ex.P-4 is a printed proforma

purporting to be pertaining to Dr.R.M.L. Hospital but in hand,
Hindu Rao Hospital has been over written.
30.

PW-1 had merely informed the police that the

deceased had not come back home. He had not spoken about
the accident, much less gave information about the offending

page 7 of 10

bus.
31.

I have gone through the record of the learned MACT

with care. I could not find out any mechanical report pertaining
to the bus in question.
32.

Learned counsel for the respondents could not show

me the copy of the inspection report.
33.

The same could have thrown some light on the issue if

it was noted therein that the bus had a fresh paint or there
were traces of the bus hitting a blunt object i.e. a scooter.
34.

The position which emerges from the evidence is that

PW-1 gave a mere statement recorded by the PCR van when it
received a telephonic call from PW-1 that the deceased had left
his house on a scooter and had not returned. Thereafter, the
PCR van found the deceased lying injured on the road. He was
taken to Hindu Rao Hospital.

He was firstly admitted as an

unknown person but thereafter somebody gave the name of the
deceased. In brackets, his name was noted. Obviously, PW-1
and the family of the deceased were worried due to his not
returning home. DD entry shows that they had informed the
police about the deceased not returning home. Obviously, they
were in touch with the police.

They were informed about a

page 8 of 10

person similar in description to Baldev Singh being admitted at
Hindu Rao Hospital. PW-1 and brother of the deceased went to
Hindu

Rao

Hospital.

They

recognized

the

dead

body.

Thereafter, name of the deceased was entered in the record
within brackets after initial entry of unknown was recorded.
35.

No fact is on record where from, applying res ipsa

loquitor, a conclusion can be drawn, even in the absence of an
eye witness.

No legally admissible evidence has come on

record to establish the involvement of the bus in the accident.
Solitary evidence relied upon by the Tribunal, Ex.P-3, the
statement of Surender Kumar Bhatia recorded by the police
under Section 161 Cr.P.C., though admissible, but in the facts
and circumstances of the case noted herein above, lacked in
credibility. In the absence of Surender Kumar Bhatia entering
the witness box it would not be safe to rely upon Ex.P-3.
36.

The appeal is allowed.

37.

The impugned award dated 4.6.2005 published by

Shri Rakesh Tiwari, Judge, MACT, Delhi in suit No.367/2003 (old
No.174/2000) is set aside.
38.

However, noting that the deceased died in a hit and

run accident, offending vehicle being untraced, claimants would

page 9 of 10

be entitled to the compensation from the common pool in sum
of Rs.15,000/- pertaining to a death caused in a road accident
where the offending vehicle is untraced.
39.

Liberty is granted to the claimants to move an

appropriate application under Section 163 of the Motor Vehicles
Act 1988. Needless to state, pursuant to the said application
necessary orders would be passed.
40.

No costs.

February 08, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 10 of 10

