IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CRL.M.C.No.7474/2006
#
!

$
^

B.K.Gupta
through:

Ravinder Seth
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr. C.Mohan Rao, Adv. with
Mr. Deepak Khadaria, Adv.,
Mr. Praduman kumar Aggarwal, Adv.
VERSUS
........
Respondent
Mr. G.D.Gandhi, Advocate

CRL.M.C.No.5391/2005
#
!

Asma Mahzar
through:

$
^

Ravinder Seth
through:

%

........
Petitioner
Mr. C.Mohan Rao, Adv. with
Mr. Deepak Khadaria, Adv.,
Mr. Praduman kumar Aggarwal, Adv.
VERSUS
........
Respondent
Mr. G.D.Gandhi, Advocate

DATE OF DECISION: 07.08.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

It is an unfortunate case where a brother of a deceased

brother is predating on the assets of his deceased brother.
page 1 of 9

2.

Late Harish Chander Seth died leaving behind Vijay Laxmi

as his widow and 2 children. He had applied to DDA for allotment of
60 sq. mtrs. plot under DDA Rohini Residential Scheme and in respect
whereof he held a registration in his favour vide registration No.25799
dated 24.4.1981. He had deposited Rs.5000/- with DDA.
3.

One would have expected Ravinder Seth, brother of Harish

Chander Seth to have cared for his widowed sister-in-law and the minor
children of his late brother. But far from so doing, under cover of his
mother and using the shoulders of his mother, he picked up arms
against his widowed sister-in-law.
4.

Since the deceased was a Hindu and as per the Hindu

Succession Act, mother, wife and children of a deceased male are
Class-I legal heirs, a suit came to be filed in the name of the mother of
the deceased claiming 1/4th share in the estate of her deceased son.
Ravinder Seth acted as the attorney of his mother.
5.

Needless to state, the defendants of the suit were the

widow and the children of deceased Harish Chander Seth.
6.

Pertaining

to

the

registration

obtained

by

Harish

Chander Seth under DDA's Rohini Residential Scheme, an order dated
6.4.1992 directing

status quo to be maintained was passed in said

suit.
7.

The widow of the deceased had petitioned the court of
page 2 of 9

competent jurisdiction in Delhi praying that a succession certificate be
granted to her in respect of the movable estate of the deceased.
8.

Since DDA had yet to allot a plot to the deceased, and at

the stage when application for issuance of a succession certificate was
filed, right available was no more than to claim succession under the
registration.

Thus, widow of deceased Harish Chander Seth while

seeking a succession certificate

mentioned that she was seeking

succession to the registration vide registration No.25799 dated
24.4.1981.
9.

It is not in dispute that mother of Harish Chander Seth was

served with a notice in the application seeking issuance of a succession
certificate and that she even appeared before the court concerned.
10.

Whereas learned counsel for Ravinder Seth states that the

mother made a limited statement before the Judge concerned to the
effect that she does not oppose grant of a succession certificate in the
name of her daughter-in-law, but he claims that his mother specifically
excluded therefrom the right to succeed to the benefits of the
registration enuring in the name of the deceased pertaining to DDA
registration No.25799 dated 24.4.1981.
11.

Be that as it may, the learned Judge while granting a

succession certificate to the widow of the deceased described vide Sr.
No.4.a the following as a security to which the applicant was
page 3 of 9

entitled to succeed to the estate of the deceased:-

12.

'4.a Registration receipt of DDA No.25799
dt.24.4.1981 .....Rs.5000/-'
Armed with the aforesaid succession certificate, the widow

of the deceased moved an application with DDA requesting that her
name be mutated in the record of DDA as a successor to her husband
pertaining to the registration which was enuring in the name of the
deceased.
13.

Asma Manzar, Director (RL) DDA put up a notice on

19.10.2001. The same reads as under :-

14.

“This is a public hearing case I have called the file. The
applicant informed that she has already submitted orders of
competent court vide which she has been declared successor
in respect of registration receipt of DDA No.25799 dated
24.04.1991 as such she should not be asked to give
relinquishment deed. I have gone through the file and found
that in view of the orders we should not insist for
relinquishment deed however, the Senior Law Officer may
please examine and advise.”
Processing the note, Shri B.K.Gupta, then functioning as

Sr.Law Officer in DDA penned a note recording as under :
“Above note of director RL refers this matter succession
certificate in respect of registration receipt of DDA No.25799
dated 24.04.91 has been granted in favour of Mrs. Vijay
Laxmi Seth W/o Late Sh. Harish Chander in petition No.272
of 95 vide judgment dated 12.05.99 (placed) as page No.55
to 61/C) moreover the objector Smt. Sheela Devi mother of
deceased S h. Harish Chander Seth, compromised with
applicant (kindly see the copy of the judgment). In view of
the above there is no need for relinquishment deed from the
mother of the deceased. However, further you/action may be
taken in favour of Smt. Vijay Seth W/o Late Sh. Harish
Chander and both minors (1) Master Karan Seth (2) Master
Arjun Seth, through their natural guardian i.e. mother.
page 4 of 9

15.

However, may also see please.”
Picking on the 2 notes by the 2 officers afore-noted,

Ravinder Seth, stating that he was the constituted attorney of his
mother, filed a complaint, inter-alia, invoking Sections 193, 199, 420,
109, 114, 34 and 120-B IPC.
16.

He stated in the complaint that order passed in favour of

his mother on 6.4.1992 directing

status quo to be maintained was

violated by said officers and that the effect of the 2 notes was to
fabricate evidence in favour of the widow of the deceased, intended to
be used in civil proceedings i.e. the suit filed by his mother for partition
of the estate of her deceased son.
17.

Taking cognizance of the said complaint, vide order dated

31.1.2005, learned M.M. has proceeded to summon Azma Manzar and
B.K.Gupta.
18.

The 2 have challenged the summoning order by way of the

2 captioned petitions.
19.

At the forefront of the challenge to the summoning order is

the bar of Section 195 Cr.P.C. pressed into service be learned counsel
for the petitioner.
20.

Drawing attention of this court to Section 195(1)(b)(i)

learned counsel states that in relation to an offence under Section 193
or Section 199 of the Indian Penal Code, no court can take
page 5 of 9
cognizance thereof save and except where the complaint is in writing

by the court concerned or by such officer as the court may authorize in
writing.
21.

As a back up to the challenge it is urged that under Section

381 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 the effect of a certificate with
respect to the debts and securities specified therein has to be treated
as final and binding as against the persons owning such debts or
liabilities or such security.
22.

I have perused the original file of DDA, not because law

requires me to so do but to re-assure myself as to the bona fides of the
action taken by the 2 officers.
23.

I may note that in the reply filed by Ravinder Seth in the

present proceedings he has filed true transcripts of the notings.
24.

Thus, I may rely upon the notings as they have otherwise

been made a part of my judicial record.
25.

The 2 captioned notes which have constituted the cause of

the 2 action evidence that officers of DDA were processing an
application filed by Vijay Laxmi, widow of Harish Chander Seth and
were considering whether DDA could accede to the request of the lady
for transferring the registration in her favour based on the succession
certificate.
26.

No doubt, there was a court order requiring status quo to

be maintained, but at the same time the officers had before them
page 7 of 9

a succession certificate issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
27.

I need not go into the issue whether the 2 officers decided

rightly or wrongly for the reason what is in issue before me is their
motive.
28.

Question of their being any mala fide in the action of the 2

officers does not arise for the simple reason both officers were simply
processing the file for further orders of the concerned officer.
29.

Whereas Asma Manzar sought legal opinion as to how she

should proceed ahead, the Senior Law Officer gave his opinion as per
his understanding of the law.
30.

Whatever may have been the statement made by mother

of Ravinder Seth before the Administrative Civil Judge to whom the
petition praying for issuance of the succession certificate by wife of the
deceased was filed, the fact of the matter remains that a court of
competent jurisdiction had granted to Vijay Laxmi a succession
certificate.
31.

Right to receive benefits under a registration to immovable

property is a valuable right and is capable of being succeeded to.
32.

As long as a formal allotment was not made, right to

succeed was a right to succeed under the registration and no more.
Thus, succession certificate obtained by the widow of Harish Chander
was a complete entitlement to seek mutation of the name

page 7 of 9
as the registrant.
33.

I fail to understand as to to which substantive offence

Section 109 or Section 114 of the Indian Penal Code stand attracted in
the facts and circumstances of the instant case.
34.

As I read the complaint, and whatever meaning I can assign

thereto, the author of the complaint intends to convey that the
abetment is to the offence under Section 193 and 199 of the Indian
Penal Code.
35.

If that be so, in the teeth of Section 195 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure there was no question of the court entertaining the
complaint.
36.

Learned counsel for the respondent urges that it is settled

law that any person can put into motion the process of the criminal
law.
37.

I am afraid, the sweeping statement made by learned

counsel is in sweet ignorance of the principles of criminal law.
38.

For example, provisions relating to adultery give locus

standi only to the aggrieved spouse and to none else.
39.

In the teeth of the mandate of the legislative provision

enshrined under Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which
categorically records that no court shall take cognizance of the
offences specified in sub-clauses 'a' and 'b' thereof except on the

complaint in writing by a court or by such officer of the court as
page 8 of 9
the court may authorize, the submission made by learned counsel for
the respondents cannot be countenanced.
40.

The inevitable conclusion must follow.

41.

Summoning order dated 31.1.2005 is quashed.

August 07, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

