IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005
#

Shri Mohd. Ali Jabiullah
........ Petitioner
through: Mr.R.K.Handoo, Advocate
VERSUS

$

Shri A.K.Maurya & Ors.
through: None.

....... Respondents

RESERVED ON: 31.10.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 05.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Shri A.K.Maurya, Inspector, Customs (Preventive) had filed

a complaint against the petitioner herein under Section 135 (1)
(b) of the Customs Act, 1962.
2.

Taking cognizance of the complaint, the learned ACMM

summoned the petitioner to face trial for an offence under
Section 135 (1) (b) of the Customs Act, 1962.
3.

Petitioner filed an application before the learned ACMM

praying that the proceedings against him emanating out of the
afore-noted complaint be dropped which application has been
Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.1 of 14

dismissed by the learned ACMM vide order dated 15.3.2005.
4.

In these circumstances, the petitioner has approached

this Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 seeking quashing of the complaint as also order dated
15.03.2005.

However in view of the legal position that the

learned ACMM cannot recall the order summoning an accused
matter was heard with reference to whether in view of order
dated 23.4.2003 passed by CEGAT setting aside the penalty
levied vide order dated 29.6.2001, order of CEGAT having
attained finality, was the complaint liable to be quashed.
5.

The brief facts which emerge from the reading of the

complaint are the following:(i)

On 24.4.2000, the officers of the Customs (Preventive)

conducted a search at the premises bearing No.T-7, (Ist Floor),
DCM Road, Kishan Ganj, Delhi. At the time of the search,
petitioner and one Mr.Mohd. Sohail were present in the said
premises.
(ii)

Upon search of the said premises, three zipper

rexine carry bags were found containing 928 pieces of
computer

parts

of

foreign

origin

collectively

valued

at

Rs.40,32,000/-. The officers conducting the search seized the
said goods.
(iii)

In the statement dated 24/25.4.2000 under Section 108 of

the

Customs

Act,

Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

1962,

the

petitioner

admitted

the

Page No.2 of 14

recovery,seizure and other incriminating facts. He stated that
the seized goods were smuggled from Nepal. That he had
engaged himself in the business of smuggling at the advice of
one Mr.Hashim. That the smuggled goods used to be handed to
him by the person working on behalf of Mr.Hashim and that he
used to further deliver the goods as per the instructions of
Hashim.
(iv)

Thus, alleging that the petitioner knew or had reason to

believe that he was dealing with the goods liable to be
confiscated under Section 111 of the Customs Act 1962, the
present complaint has been filed against the petitioner.
6.

During pendency of the complaint, an adjudication order

was passed by the Commissioner of Customs (General) on
29.6.2001 whereby the goods allegedly seized from the
petitioner were confiscated and a personal penalty of Rs.10
lacs was imposed on him.
7.

The petitioner challenged the said adjudication order by

filing an appeal before the CEGAT. Vide order dated 23.4.2003,
the CEGAT set aside the adjudication order and exonerated the
petitioner. The findings of the CEGAT in so far as they are
relevant for consideration in the present case are extracted
below:“3. We have heard both sides. From the record,
we find that the impugned order has been passed
by the Commissioner by taking into consideration
Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.3 of 14

the two factors, firstly, the recovery of the goods
(computer parts) bearing foreign marking such as
Japan, and Korea and secondly, the alleged
confessional statement of the appellant himself
regarding the smuggled nature of the goods. But in
our view, the learned Commissioner was wrongly
influenced by these factors while passing the
impugned order. The goods were seized from the
residentail premises situated on the first floor, T-7,
DCM Road, Kishan Ganj, Delhi. The appellant was
admittedly at that time not the owner of the
premises. There is nothing on the record to suggest
if any attempt was made to ascertain the ownership
of that premises. At the time of raid,besides the
appellant, another person, Mohd. Sohail was also
present in that very room from where the goods
were seized. That being so, it could not be said that
the seized goods were recovered from the
possession of the appellant alone. Rather legally,
the recovery was in fact effected from the joint
possession of both of them. But strange enough,
Mohd. Sohail had been let off, after simply recording
his statement without holding any further enquiry
about his nature of the possession of the premises.
Even the nature of the possession of the appellant
in the premises from where the goods were seized
had not been enquired into. There is nothing on the
record to suggest if the possession of the appellant
of the premises was a tenant or licencee and under
whom. The ownership of the premise as observed
above, had not been ascertained during the course
of investigation.
4.
Apart from this, the seized goods (at that time)
were not prohibited goods in terms of Section 123
of Chapter IVA of the Customs Act. They were freely
marketable and available for sale and purchase in
the market. The fact that the goods carried the
name of foreign countries such as Japan and Korea
was not sufficient to raise legal presumption about
the smuggled character of the goods. The initial
burden was on the Department to prove that the
seized goods were smuggled into India. But in our
view, this burden had not been discharged by the
Department at all.
5.

The alleged confessional statement of the

Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.4 of 14

8.

appellant that one Hasim used to smuggle the
goods from Nepal and sent to him at Delhi could not
be taken to be the conclusive proof of the smuggled
nature of the goods. This fact was rather required to
be proved by positive and acceptable evidence by
the Department which it had failed to prove. More
over, the alleged confessional statement was
retracted by the appellant when he was produced
before the Court by alleging that the same was
obtained from him under duress, and torture and as
such, it did not carry much credence and value. No
attempt was made to catch hold of Hasim. No
evidence had been also collected to seek
corroboration of the confessional statement of the
appellant. The appellant in fact could not be said to
have any positive personal knowledge about the
smuggled nature of the goods as he never himself
had gone to Nepal to bring the goods. He could not
know the origin of the goods as he could hardly put
his name in Hindi script as is evident from the
panch-nama.
Therefore,
under
these
circumstances, no capital out of the alleged
confessional statement of the appellant could be
made by the Department in order to cover up its
failure to prove the smuggled character of the
seized goods, which as observed above, were
otherwise freely available in the market for sale and
purchase.
In the light of the discussion made
above, in our view, the impugned order of the
Commissioner (Appeals) cannot be legally sustained
and the same deserves to be set aside.”
As noted above, in view of the order passed by CEGAT the

petitioner filed an application for discharge.

Noting the

judgments of the Supreme Court in the decisions reported as
Asst. Collector of Customs Vs. L.R.Malwani 1999 (110) ELT 317
(SC) and Santram Paper Mills Vs. Collector of Central Excise
1997 (96) ELT 19 (SC) and the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court in the decision reported as K.Neelakantha Rao Vs.
State of Andhra Pradesh 2000 (122) ELT 7, the ACMM

Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.5 of 14

dismissed the said application vide order dated 17.3.2005
holding in para 5 as under :-

9.

“5. From the aforesaid authorities, it is clear that
the finding of adjudicating authority is not binding
on this court and that the prosecution in a criminal
case is to be determined on its own merits as per
law uninhibited by the finding of the Tribunal. Thus,
the accused cannot be discharged only because of
the reason that he has been exonerated in
departmental proceedings.”
In support of the petition, learned counsel for the

petitioner contended that the reasons given by the ACMM that
in

all

cases

irrespective

of

exoneration

in

adjudication

proceedings, the criminal proceedings would continue is not
correct. That the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Neelakantha's case (supra) which has formed the basis of the
judgment of the ACMM has been disagreed to by a learned
Single Judge of this court in the decision reported as Sunil
Gulati v R.K.Vohra 2007 (1) JCC 220. That with the exoneration
of the petitioner in adjudication proceedings, the foundation for
continuing the prosecution in the criminal complaint no longer
exists for the reason adjudication proceedings and criminal
prosecution are based on same set of facts/allegations.
Reliance was also placed upon under-noted judgements :(i)

P.S.Raja Vs. State of Bihar 1996 SCC (Crl.) 897

(ii)

Surkhi Lal Vs. UOI 2005 (85) DRJ 11

(iii)

Sadhna Jain Vs. P. Sudhir 2004 (1) JCC 71

(iv)

S.K.Sinha Vs. S.K.Singal & Anr. 1987 (30)ELT 900

Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.6 of 14

10.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the Customs

Department who did not appear at the hearing but in the
written submissions filed by him has urged that the mere fact
that the petitioner has been exonerated in the departmental or
adjudicatory proceedings will not entitle him to escape
prosecution in criminal proceedings which are independently
maintainable.

Reliance was placed upon the following

judgments :(i)

Asst. Collector of Customs Vs. L.R.Malwani

1999 (110)

ELT 317 (SC)
(ii)

Standard Chartered Bank & Ors. Vs. Directorate of

Enforcement & Ors. 2006 (1) JCC 488
(iii) Santram Paper Mills Vs. Collector of Central Excise 1997
(96) ELT 19 (SC)
11.

I need not deal with the rival judgments cited for the

reason taking note of the various judgments on the issue
including the ones noted above and especially the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the Standard Chartered Bank's case
(supra), A.K.Sikri, J. of this court in Sunil Gupta's case (supra)
has held as under :“25..........In fact, various cases of the Supreme Court,
note whereof is taken above, deal with different
situations. The principles which can be culled out from
the aforesaid judgments, when all these judgments are
read out harmoniously, would be the following:
1. On the same violation alleged against a
Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.7 of 14

person, if adjudication proceedings as well as
criminal proceedings are permissible, both
can be initiated simultaneously. For initiating
criminal proceedings one does not have to
wait for the outcome of the adjudication
proceedings as the two proceedings are
independent in nature.
2. The findings in the departmental
proceedings would not amount to res judicata
and initiation of criminal proceedings in these
circumstances can be treated as double
jeopardy as they are not in the nature of
"prosecution".
3. In case adjudication proceedings are
decided against a person who is facing
prosecution as well and the Tribunal has also
upheld
the
findings
of
the
adjudicators/assessing authority, that would
have no bearing on the criminal proceedings
and the criminal proceedings are to be
determined on its own merits in accordance
with law, uninhibited by the findings of the
Tribunal. It is because of the reason that in so
far as criminal action is concerned, it has to
be proved as per the strict standards fixed for
criminal cases before the criminal court by
producing necessary evidence.
4. In case of converse situation namely where
the accused persons are exonerated by the
competent authorities/Tribunal in adjudication
proceedings, one will have to see the reasons
for such exoneration to determine whether
these criminal proceedings could still
continue. If the exoneration in departmental
adjudication is on technical ground or by
giving benefit of doubt and not on merits or
the adjudication proceedings were on
different facts, it would have no bearing on
criminal proceedings. If, on the other hand,
the
exoneration
in
the
adjudication
proceedings is on merits and it is found that
allegations are not substantiated at all and
the concerned person(s) is/are innocent, and
the criminal prosecution is also on the same
Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.8 of 14

set of facts and circumstances, the criminal
prosecution cannot be allowed to continue.
The reason is obvious criminal complaint is
filed by the departmental authorities alleging
violation/contravention of the provisions of
the Act on the part of the accused persons.
However, if the departmental authorities
themselves, in adjudication proceedings,
record a categorical and unambiguous finding
that there is no such contravention of the
provisions of the Act, it would be unjust for
such departmental authorities to continue
with the criminal complaint and say that there
is sufficient evidence to foist the accused with
criminal liability when it is stated in the
departmental proceedings that ex-facie there
is no such violation. The yardstick would,
therefore, be to see as to whether charges in
the departmental proceedings as well as
criminal complaint are identical and the
exoneration of the concerned person in the
departmental proceedings is on merits
holding that there is no contravention of the
provisions of any act.”
12.

From a perusal of the Sunil Gupta's case (supra), it is

apparent that a distinction has been drawn where exoneration
in an adjudicating proceeding on a given set of facts and
evidence

is

on

merits

vis-a-vis

where

exoneration

in

adjudicating proceeding is either not on merits or criminal
proceeding is based upon different set of facts and evidence.
13.

Therefore, to ascertain the effect of the exoneration in the

adjudication proceedings on the criminal proceedings, in a
given case it has to be seen whether :(i)

The criminal prosecution is based on same set of

Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.9 of 14

facts/allegations

and

evidence

which

was

before

the

adjudicating authority or not; and
(ii)

Whether exoneration by the adjudicating authority is on

merits or not;
14.

In the decision reported as Kailash Chandra Vs. State of

U.P. 2005 (2) ESC 1158, the Allahabad High Court was
considering the effect of acquittal in the criminal proceedings
on the departmental/disciplinary enquiry pending against a
delinquent employee. In the said context, an issue arose as to
the nature of the acquittal in the criminal proceedings. After
considering various judgments, the Court observed as under :27.“Thus in view of law laid down by apex court and
other High Court there can be no hesitation to hold
that if the Government employee/public servant
has been punished departmentally on his
misconduct earlier which is a foundation of criminal
prosecution and later on criminal case ended in
acquittal and if the acquittal is clean and
honourable based on merit wherein accused has
been completely exonerated from the offence
alleged against him and the prosecution case found
totally false with positive finding that the accused
did not commit the offence in question and
acquitted not on account of benefit of doubt or
appreciation of evidence including lack of sufficient
evidence or lack of sanction for prosecution or on
any other technical grounds he may be reinstated
back in service with other consequential benefit
including arrears of salary or other pensionary
benefit admissible to him if retired earlier by
treating him in service but in other situation where
the acquittal is based on benefit of doubt or
appreciation of evidence including lack of sufficient
Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.10 of 14

evidence or lack of sanction for prosecution or any
other technical ground, disciplinary enquiry
pending against such Government or public servant
cannot be concluded, rather it would be appropriate
that the departmental authority may continue with
the disciplinary inquiry or hold fresh enquiry in
respect of the mis-conduct, which was foundation
of criminal case ended in acquittal against such
Government servant. If disciplinary inquiry has
already been concluded and major punishment, as
envisaged under Article 311 of the Constitution of
India or under the relevant service rules, has
already been awarded to such Government servant,
it would not be necessary and appropriate to reopen the same on account of his such acquittal
from criminal charges.
xxxxx
Thus in view of the discussions made herein before,
the respondent Government of Uttar Pradesh is
hereby restrained and directed not to apply G.O.No.
6/10/79-Karmic-1 Lucknow dated 12.10.1979,
indiscriminately in whole-sale manner, irrespective
of merit of individual case of acquittal of
Government servant in criminal prosecution
forthwith. The aforesaid G.O.is to be applied only in
cases of clean and honourable acquittal based on
merits, where competent court trying the offences
(including higher court hearing the appeal or
revision) has completely exonerated the accused
from the offence by recording positive finding to the
effect that the accused did not commit the offence
and whole prosecution story against him thrown out
and found false. The acquittal should not be based
on extension of benefits of reasonable doubts
including appreciation of evidence, lack of sufficient
evidence or want of sanction for prosecution or
other technical grounds.
XXXX

From the aforesaid finding recorded by this Court in
criminal appeal filed by the petitioner, it is clear
that petitioner has not been exonerated of the
charges by recording any positive finding in
criminal case to the effect that he did not commit
Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.11 of 14

the offence in question rather he has been
acquitted by entertaining the benefit of doubt about
the prosecution case as the prosecution has failed
to establish the guilt beyond reasonable doubt as
required under law. Therefore, it cannot be treated
to be a honourable and clean acquittal on merits
from the aforesaid criminal case and as such he
cannot be held to be entitled for reinstatement in
service with all consequential benefits of service.
.......” (Emphasis supplied)
15. In the decisions reported as Govind Chandra Sambhasingh
Mohapatra Vs. Upendra Padhi & Anr. Air 1960 Orissa 29, State
of Orissa Vs. Sailabehari Chatterjee AIR 1963 Orissa 73 and
Doaraikannu Vs. General Manager, Parry Confectionary Ltd.
1977 Lab I.C. 1471 (Madras High Court), it was held that an
acquittal by way of giving benefit of doubt is not an acquittal
on merits.
16.

From the afore-noted judgments, the legal principle which

can be culled out is that an “acquittal on merits” is an acquittal
after trial on a consideration of the facts duly proved as per
rules of evidence as distinguished from the acquittals occurring
due to technical defects such as want of sanction, fact not
proved as rule of evidence not followed, benefit of doubt etc.
To put it differently, an acquittal is said to be on merits when it
is based on a positive finding of innocence of the accused.
17.

In the backdrop of the legal position, it has to be seen in

the instant case whether exoneration of the petitioner by the
adjudicating authority passes the test of exoneration on merits.

Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.12 of 14

18.
and

It is not in dispute that both the proceedings, i.e. criminal
adjudication

are

based

upon

the

same

set

of

facts/allegations.
19.

A perusal of the order of the CEGAT shows that the

petitioner was exonerated because of following reasons:(i)

Department has not been able to establish the ownership

of the searched premises.
(ii)

The initial burden was on the department to prove the

smuggled character of the goods and department failed to
discharge the same.
(iii) Department failed to prove the alleged confessional
statement of the petitioner under Section 108 of the Customs
Act by leading positive and acceptable evidence.
20.

Thus, in essence, the CEGAT exonerated the petitioner

because of insufficiency of evidence and failure to prove the
statement of the petitioner recorded under Section 108 of the
Customs Act.
21.

In the decision in Sunil Gupta's case (supra) where

exoneration in adjudication proceedings was due to the fact
that the prosecution failed to prove the alleged confessional
statement of the accused recorded under the Section 108 of
the Customs Act, the court refused to quash the complaint and
also held that it would still be open to the criminal court to
Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.13 of 14

decide whether the statement of accused under Section 108 of
the Customs Act should be believed or not.
22.

In the instant case for lack of evidence on 3 points,

namely, proof of ownership of the searched premises, proof of
smuggled character of the goods and proof of confessional
statement of the petitioner recorded under Section 108 of the
Customs Act, the petitioner was exonerated. Needless to state,
at the criminal trial the prosecution would be entitled to prove
by leading evidence the ownership of the searched premises,
smuggled character of goods and in particular confessional
statement of the petitioner recorded under Section 108 of the
Customs Act.
23.

In view of above discussion, the petition is devoid of any

merits and is dismissed.

November 5, 2007

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG

vg

Crl.M.C.No.1757/2005

Page No.14 of 14

