IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CR No.721/2002
#
!

Sangeeta Jewels Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
........ Petitioners
through:
Mr.Sudhir Kumar Makkar, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Mr. Ajay Kumar Jain
through:

........ Respondent
Mr.Tarique Siddiqui, Adv.

RESERVED ON: 05.02.2008
%

DATE OF DECISION: 08.02.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

This

petition

is

directed against

the

order dated

14.2.2002 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi
thereby dismissing an application under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC
filed by the petitioners/defendants praying for the setting aside of
the ex-parte judgment and decree dated 10.02.1999 passed in
favour of the respondent/plaintiff in a suit filed by him under Order
XXXVII CPC.
2.

Facts necessary to dispose of the present petition are

that on 22.10.97 respondent filed a suit under Order XXXVII CPC

CR.No.721/2002

Page 1 of 11

against the petitioners for recovery of Rs.1,72,000/-. Suit was based
upon three cheques dated 21.10.94 issued under the signatures of
petitioner no.2 as director of petitioner No.1 in favour of the
respondent.
3.

Backdrop to the cheques aforesaid, as pleaded in the

plaint, was that petitioner no.1 Sangeeta Jewels Pvt. Ltd. was a
company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act and
petitioner no.2 Mr.Vipin Sehgal and petitioner no.3 Ms.Sangeeta
Sehgal were its directors. That the plaintiff Mr.Ajay Kumar Jain
agreed to advance a friendly loan in sum of Rs.80,000/- to the
petitioners. That the petitioners agreed to pay interest @ 24% p.a.
and to refund the entire amount within a period of one year. That in
lieu of same, petitioner no.2 acting on behalf of petitioner no.1
company issued the aforesaid three cheques. That when said the
cheques were presented for encashment same were returned
unpaid for want of funds.
4.

It is relevant to note that there were no averments in

the plaint filed by the respondent vis-a-vis petitioner no.3 save and
except that she is the director of petitioner no.1 company.
5.

On being served with summons in the suit, on 8.12.97,

petitioners entered appearance. In the memo of appearance filed by
the petitioners address furnished by them for the purposes of
service of summons for judgment was ‘D-10, Green Park, New
Delhi’.

CR.No.721/2002

Page 2 of 11

6.

Since

there

was

delay

in

entering

appearance

petitioners filed an application under Order XXXVII Rule 3(7) CPC for
condonation of delay which application was allowed by the learned
trial court vide order dated 5.6.98. On said date learned trial court
directed the respondent to apply for summons for judgment and
adjourned the matter to 14.9.98.
7.

On next date i.e. 14.9.98 respondent filed an application

under Order XXXVII Rule 3(4) CPC seeking fresh summons for
judgment. The petitioners were directed to be served and matter
was adjourned to 30.01.98.
8.

On 30.01.98 it was found that the summons for

judgment were returned unserved thus trial court directed that the
petitioners be served by way of affixation and matter was adjourned
to 10.02.99.
9.

Petitioners were served by way of affixation at D-10,

Green Park, New Delhi.
10.

Order dated 10.02.99 shows that the counsel for the

petitioners appeared before the learned trial court and prayed for an
adjournment, which was declined.
11.

Noting that the aforesaid three cheques were issued by

petitioner no.2 on behalf of petitioner no.1 company and that no
application for leave to defend has been filed by the petitioners,
vide judgment and decree dated 10.02.99 learned trial court
decreed the suit against petitioners nos.1 and 2. Vis-a-vis petitioner

CR.No.721/2002

Page 3 of 11

no.3 suit was dismissed on the ground that the no liability could be
fastened upon her based on the three cheques merely because she
was a director of petitioner No.1.
12.

Petitioners filed an application under Order XXXVII Rule

4 CPC seeking to set aside the ex-parte decree.
13.

Averments made in the said application were that at the

time when petitioners entered appearance, petitioner no.2 was
working as a manager in the company M/s Crystal Gold Pvt Ltd
which was carrying its business from the premises D-10, Green Park,
New Delhi and that is why petitioners furnished said address for the
purposes of service of summons for judgment. That soon thereafter
petitioner no.2 resigned from the said company but was assured by
his colleagues/associates in the said company that he would be duly
informed about the receipt of summons for judgment at the said
address. That colleagues/associates of petitioner no.2 did not inform
him about the receipt of summons for judgment. That thus
summons for judgment were not duly served upon the petitioners.
Since they had no knowledge about the summons for judgment
petitioners failed to apply for leave to defend within the stipulated
time.
14.

Vide order dated 14.02.02 learned trial court dismissed

the application under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC filed by the
petitioners.

CR.No.721/2002

Page 4 of 11

15.

In such circumstances petitioners have filed the present

revision petition.
16.

At the outset I may note that there was no occasion for

petitioner no.3 to file the present petition for the reason learned trial
court had dismissed the suit against her.
17.

Once an ex-parte decree is passed in a suit filed under

Order 37 it can be got set aside by showing the reasons that
prevented the party from entering appearance as well as by
demonstrating that there exists a triable issue. Rule 4 of Order 37
not only requires the Court to satisfy itself as to the existence of
'special circumstances' but also about the basis, for the defendant
to defend himself, which in the normal parlance is referred to as
"triable issue". The compliance with the twin requirements, under
Rule 4 of Order 37, was pointed out by the Supreme Court in the
decision reported as AIR 2003 SC 1322 Rajni Kumar v Suresh Kumar
Malhotra & Anr. After referring to relevant provisions Supreme Court
held as under:
"It is important to note here that the power under Rule 4
of Order 37 is not confined to setting aside the ex parte
decree, it extends to staying or setting aside the
execution and giving leave to appear to the summons
and to defend the suit. We may point out that as the
very purpose of Order 37 is to ensure an expeditious
hearing and disposal of the suit filed thereunder, Rule 4
empowers the Court to grant leave to the defendant to
appear to summons and defend the suit if the Court
considers it reasonable so to do, on such terms as the
Court thinks fit in addition to setting aside the decree".
Where on an application, more than one among the
specified reliefs may be granted by the Court, all such
CR.No.721/2002

Page 5 of 11

reliefs must be claimed in one application. It is not
permissible to claim such reliefs in successive petitions
as it would be contrary to the letter and spirit of the
provision. That is why where an application under Rule 4
of Order 37 is filed to set aside a decree either because
the defendant did not appear in response to summons
and limitation expired, or having appeared, did not apply
for leave to defend the suit in the prescribed period, the
Court is empowered to grant leave to the defendant to
appear to the summons and to defend the suit in the
same application. It is, therefore, not enough for the
defendant to show special circumstances which
prevented him from appearing or applying for leave to
defend, he has also to show by affidavit or otherwise,
facts which would entitle him leave to defend the suit."
18.

From the afore-noted dictum laid down by Supreme

Court it is clear that in an application filed under Rule 4 of Order 37
the defendant must not only plead the existence of "special
circumstances" that prevented him from entering appearance or
filing leave to defend within a stipulated time but also the
ingredients of triable issue. The defendant is not required to place
the entire material in his support before the Court. A particular plea
in this regard is sufficient and it is during the course of examination
of the application that the necessary particulars be supplemented.
19.

In the application filed under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC

petitioners have pleaded the reasons which prevented them from
filing leave to defend within stipulated time. But the pleas as to
existence of triable issue are missing.
20.

Prima facie the reasons given by the petitioners which

prevented them from filing leave to defend within the stipulated
time are not convincing.

CR.No.721/2002

Page 6 of 11

21.

Petitioners had themselves furnished the address where

summons for judgment were to be sent. Petitioners were fully
conscious of the pendency of the proceedings in the trial court.
From the order dated 5.6.98 of the trial court it can safely be
presumed that the petitioners were aware of the fact that on
14.9.98 respondent would apply for summons for judgment.
Petitioners should have remained vigilant and kept track of the
proceedings more so, when they claim that they were no longer
available at the address furnished by them for the purposes of
service of summons for judgment. Besides, the duty of the plaintiff
is to serve summons for judgment at the address given by the
defendants.
22.

In fact the very version set up by the petitioners they

had no knowledge about the summons for judgment is doubtful in
light of the fact that their counsel appeared before the trial court on
10.02.99. If petitioners were in dark about the summons for
judgment then how come their counsel suddenly appeared before
the trial court on the date when the trial court was most likely to
pass a decree in favour of the respondent remains a mystery?
23.

In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in

Rajni Kumar’s case (supra), absence of plea pertaining to triable
issue in the application under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC filed by the
petitioners and the fact that reasons given in the application which
prevented the petitioners from filing leave to defend within the

CR.No.721/2002

Page 7 of 11

stipulated time, the learned trial court has rightly dismissed the
application under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC.
24.

But the cause of justice is supreme in every litigation

and parties are not to suffer due to lack of legal knowledge and
negligence of counsel. Regretfully, in the instant case, there is
complete lack of duty of care as expected from a counsel. As noted
above, notwithstanding no leave to defend being filed by petitioner
no.3 learned Trial Judge did not decree suit against her. Qua her suit
was dismissed. Yet inspite thereof she was made to join as an
applicant in the application under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC and she
has been impleaded as a co-petition in the instant petition.
25.

Learned counsel for the petitioners has not even

bothered to aver in the application under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC
and in the instant petition that petitioner no.2 stood at par with
petitioner no.3 and that mere fact of his having signed cheque on
behalf of company could not have made him personally liable.
26.

The only averments in the plaint by the respondent vis-

a-vis petitioner no.2 are that he was the director of petitioner no.1
company and that while acting on the behalf of the petitioner no.1
company he issued the said three cheques in favour of the
respondent.
27.

A perusal of the record of the trial court shows that the

said three cheques were issued from the account of the petitioner
no.1 company.

CR.No.721/2002

Page 8 of 11

28.

The directors of the company cannot be fastened with

the ordinary contractual liability of the company.
29.

In the decision reported as 72 (1998) DLT 666 Space

Enterprises v M/s Srivivasa Enterprises Ltd this Court while
decreeing the suit against the defendant No. 1 company, rejected
the plaint qua defendant No. 2 (director of the company) on the
ground that there was no contract between the plaintiff and
defendant No. 2 and, therefore, no cause of action arose against
defendant No. 2. It was observed that the company is distinct from
its directors and shareholders. Neither the shareholders nor
directors can treat the company's assets as their own. Directors of a
company are liable for misappropriation of company's funds and
other misfeasance, but not for ordinary contractual liability of the
company. The doctrine of lifting of the corporate veil, though could
be applied in cases of tax evasion or circumventing of tax
obligation, or to cases of perpetuating fraud or trading with the
enemy, in the absence of such case, it would be totally improper
and inappropriate to hold that the director has lost the privilege of
limited liability, and has become directly liable to the creditor of the
company.
30.

In the decision reported as 117 (2005) DLT 655 Steel

Authority of India Ltd v Century Tubes Ltd & Ors while granting
unconditional leave to defend the suit under Order XXXVII Rule 3(5)
of the Code of Civil Procedure to defendant No. 3 a learned Single

CR.No.721/2002

Page 9 of 11

Judge of this Court after noticing that defendants No. 2 & 3,
Managing Director and Director respectively of defendant No. 1, had
held negotiations for and on behalf of defendant No. 1 and issued 22
post-dated cheques totalling to Rs. 2,7,95,253/- held that merely
because defendant No. 3 was a director of defendant No. 1 would
not make him liable for any amount due from defendant No. 1 to the
plaintiff, more so, as the defendant No. 3 had not stood as a
guarantor. It was further held that even the allegation that
defendant No. 3 had signed some of the cheques drawn on the
account of defendant No. 1 would not make him liable for any civil
action for recovery of amounts due from defendant No. 1 to the
plaintiff.
31.

In view of the aforesaid discussion, the inevitable result

is that no liability can be fastened upon petitioner no. 2 who as is
abundantly clear from the record of the trial court had issued said
cheques for and on behalf of petitioner no.1 company.
32.

In view of the fact that the plaint contains no averment

that petitioner no.2 had given any personal guarantee, no liability
can be fastened on petitioner no.2 as director of petitioner no.1
company.
33.

End result is that the impugned order is affirmed in so

far it dismisses the application under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC vis-avis petitioner no.1 company.
34.

The impugned order is set aside vis-a-vis petitioner no.2.

CR.No.721/2002

Page 10 of 11

Application under Order XXXVII Rule 4 CPC filed by the petitioner
no.2 is allowed. No useful purpose would be served in requiring a
trial vis-a-vis petitioner no.2 for the reason as noted above the suit
can never succeed against him. Thus judgment and decree dated
10.02.99 passed against petitioner no.2 is set aside.
35.

Since petition is dismissed vis-a-vis petitioner no.1

company and judgment and decree dated 10.02.99 is upheld
respondent would be entitled to receive Rs.1,00,000/- deposited in
this court pursuant to the order dated 06.08.02.
36.

No costs.

February 8, 2008
sl

CR.No.721/2002

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 11 of 11

