IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C.No.1845-48/2005
#
!

M/s. Metal Forgings Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.........
Petitioners
through: Mr. Kamal Mehta, Advocate

$
^

VERSUS
Superintendent (Preventive)
........
Respondent
Central Excise
through: Mr.Satish Aggarwala, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 06.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)
Petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 prays for quashing the complaint under
Section 9 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 read with Sections
193, 192 and 120-B of the IPC and the proceedings emanating
out of the said complaint.
2.

Briefly stated, the facts are that Sh. P.K. Khera,

Superintendent,

Preventive,

Central

Excise

had

filed

a

complaint against the company, M/s Metal Forgings (Pvt.) Ltd,

page 1 of 11

its Managing Director and 8 directors. It was inter-alia alleged
in the complaint that:i)

M/s Metal Forgings (Pvt.) Ltd is a company engaged

in the manufacture of steel ingots.
ii)

On 24.07.87, the Officers of the Central Excise

Collectorate visited the factory of the company M/s Metal
Forgings (Pvt.) Ltd situated at B-1, Maya Puri Industrial Area,
New Delhi. At the time of the visit, Sh. R.K. Shrivastav, a
director of the company was present in the said premises.
iii)

Upon search of the said premises, incrimating

documents were found which showed that the company was
engaged in the large scale production of steel ingots but was
accounting for only a fraction of total quantity produced and
that the goods which were accounted for were cleared without
payment of excise duty. The officers conducting the search
seized the said documents.
iv)

The company is guilty of clandestine manufacture

and removal of the goods and deliberate evasion of the excise
duty
3.

In proof of the allegations in the complaint, reliance

was placed upon the documents found in searched premises
namely, scrap book and scrap memo, log sheets, bill book,
page 2 of 11

chemical analysis report register, production and dispatch
books, weigh bridge register, internal gate passes, dispatch
slips and daily dispatch report.
4.

Taking cognizance of the said complaint, the

learned ACMM summoned the accused persons to face trial for
an offence under Section 9 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 read
with Sections 193, 192 and 120-B of the IPC.
5.

In addition to the afore-noted complaint, the Central

Excise Department also initiated adjudication proceedings
against the accused company. On the basis of same set of
facts/allegations as canvassed in the criminal complaint, a
show cause notice dated 8.4.88 was issued to the accused
company. In the said show cause notice, reliance was again
placed upon the documents which were referred to in the
criminal complaint.
6.

Holding that the accused company is guilty of

clandestine manufacture and removal of 4724.35 MT of MS
Ingots without payment of excise duty, vide adjudication order
dated 30.3.90, the Collector Central Excise confirmed the
demand of duty of Rs.14,55,709.80 and also imposed a
personal penalty of Rs.3.75 lakhs on the accused company.
7.

The

accused

company

challenged

the

said

page 3 of 11

adjudication order by filing an appeal before the CEGAT. After
duly considering the evidence produced, vide order dated
24.8.94 the CEGAT partly allowed the appeal. In appeal CEGAT
confirmed the demand of duty only with regard to 738.859 MT
of MS ingots and also reduced personal penalty to Rs.25,000/-.
8.

Against the order dated 24.8.94 passed by the

CEGAT in appeal, the accused company filed a rectification
application before the CEGAT. Vide order dated 19.9.95, CEGAT
set aside its earlier order dated 24.8.94 and exonerated the
accused company. The findings of the CEGAT in so far they are
relevant for consideration in the present case are extracted
below:“
In the light of the above discussion, we accept
the contention of the learned Counsel that the quantity
of 738.859 MT represents wastage occurring at the
stage of production of forgings out of ingots and set
aside the duty confirmed thereon. The penalty is also
set aside since duty demand itself was confirmed on a
quantity which was allegedly to have been
clandestinely removed which charge we have already
set aside.”
9.

Pursuant to the order dated 19.9.95 passed by the

CEGAT, vide order dated 5.1.96 the Assistant Commissioner,
Central Excise directed that the penalty deposited by the
accused company in terms of adjudication order dated 30.3.90
be returned to the accused company.
page 4 of 11

10.

In

view

of

the

order

passed

by

the

CEGAT

exonerating the accused company, accused persons filed an
application for discharge.

Noting the judgments of the

Supreme Court in the decisions reported as Asst. Collector of
Customs Vs. L.R.Malwani

1999 (110) ELT 317 (SC) and

Santram Paper Mills Vs. Collector of Central Excise 1997 (96)
ELT 19 (SC) and the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court in the decision reported as K.Neelakantha Rao Vs. State
of Andhra Pradesh 2000 (122) ELT 7, the ACMM dismissed the
said application vide order dated 18.2.2005 holding in para 7
as under :-

11.

“7. From the aforesaid authorities, it is evident
that the finding of adjudicating authority is not
binding on this court. The prosecution in a criminal
case is to be determined on its own merits as per
law uninhibited by the finding of the Tribunal........”
Feeling aggrieved by the afore-noted order passed

by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, the accused company,
its managing director and 2 directors who were impleaded as
accused nos.2, 5 and 6 respectively in the complaint have
approached this Court under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 seeking quashing of the complaint
and proceedings emanating out of the said complaint.
12.

In support of the petition, learned counsel for the

page 5 of 11

petitioner contends that the reasons given by the ACMM that in
all

cases

irrespective

of

exoneration

in

adjudication

proceedings, the criminal proceedings would continue is not
correct. That the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Neelakantha's case (supra) which has formed the basis of the
judgment of the ACMM has been disagreed to by a learned
Single Judge of this court in the decision reported as Sunil
Gulati v R.K.Vohra 2007 (1) JCC 220. That with the exoneration
of the petitioner in adjudication proceedings, the foundation for
continuing the prosecution in the criminal complaint no longer
exists for the reason adjudication proceedings and criminal
prosecution are based on same set of facts/allegations.

13.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the Central

Excise Department urges that the mere fact that the petitioner
has been exonerated in the departmental or adjudicatory
proceedings will not entitle him to escape prosecution in
criminal proceedings which are independently maintainable.
Reliance was placed upon the following judgments :(i)

Asst. Collector of Customs Vs. L.R.Malwani

1999

(110) ELT 317 (SC)
(ii)

K.Neelakantha Rao Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh
page 6 of 11

2000 (122) ELT 7
(iii)

Santram Paper Mills Vs. Collector of Central Excise

1997 (96) ELT 19 (SC)
14.

In view of the legal position that the learned ACMM

cannot recall the order summoning an accused matter was
heard with reference to whether in view of order dated 19.9.95
passed by CEGAT setting aside the penalty levied vide order
dated 30.3.90, order of CEGAT having attained finality, was the
complaint liable to be quashed.
15.

I need not deal with the rival judgments cited for the

reason taking note of the various judgments on the issue
including the ones noted above and especially the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the Standard Chartered Bank's case
(supra), A.K.Sikri, J. of this court in Sunil Gupta's case (supra)
has held as under :“25..........In fact, various cases of the Supreme Court,
note whereof is taken above, deal with different
situations. The principles which can be culled out from
the aforesaid judgments, when all these judgments
are read out harmoniously, would be the following:
1. On the same violation alleged against a
person, if adjudication proceedings as well as
criminal proceedings are permissible, both
can be initiated simultaneously. For initiating
criminal proceedings one does not have to
wait for the outcome of the adjudication
proceedings as the two proceedings are
page 7 of 11

independent in nature.
2. The findings in the departmental
proceedings would not amount to res judicata
and initiation of criminal proceedings in these
circumstances can be treated as double
jeopardy as they are not in the nature of
"prosecution".
3. In case adjudication proceedings are
decided against a person who is facing
prosecution as well and the Tribunal has also
upheld
the
findings
of
the
adjudicators/assessing authority, that would
have no bearing on the criminal proceedings
and the criminal proceedings are to be
determined on its own merits in accordance
with law, uninhibited by the findings of the
Tribunal. It is because of the reason that in so
far as criminal action is concerned, it has to
be proved as per the strict standards fixed for
criminal cases before the criminal court by
producing necessary evidence.
4. In case of converse situation namely where
the accused persons are exonerated by the
competent authorities/Tribunal in adjudication
proceedings, one will have to see the reasons
for such exoneration to determine whether
these criminal proceedings could still
continue. If the exoneration in departmental
adjudication is on technical ground or by
giving benefit of doubt and not on merits or
the adjudication proceedings were on
different facts, it would have no bearing on
criminal proceedings. If, on the other hand,
the
exoneration
in
the
adjudication
proceedings is on merits and it is found that
allegations are not substantiated at all and
the concerned person(s) is/are innocent, and
the criminal prosecution is also on the same
set of facts and circumstances, the criminal
prosecution cannot be allowed to continue.
page 8 of 11

The reason is obvious criminal complaint is
filed by the departmental authorities alleging
violation/contravention of the provisions of
the Act on the part of the accused persons.
However, if the departmental authorities
themselves, in adjudication proceedings,
record a categorical and unambiguous finding
that there is no such contravention of the
provisions of the Act, it would be unjust for
such departmental authorities to continue
with the criminal complaint and say that there
is sufficient evidence to foist the accused with
criminal liability when it is stated in the
departmental proceedings that ex-facie there
is no such violation. The yardstick would,
therefore, be to see as to whether charges in
the departmental proceedings as well as
criminal complaint are identical and the
exoneration of the concerned person in the
departmental proceedings is on merits
holding that there is no contravention of the
provisions of any act.”
16.

In the decision Mohd. Ali Jabiullah v A.K. Maurya &

Ors, Crl. M.C. No.1757/05 decided on 5.11.2007 with reference
to the same issue it was held as under :“13. Therefore, to ascertain the effect of the
exoneration in the adjudication proceedings on the
criminal proceedings, in a given case it has to be seen
whether :(i)
The criminal prosecution is based on same set of
facts/allegations and evidence which was before the
adjudicating authority or not; and

17.

(ii) Whether exoneration by the adjudicating
authority is on merits or not;”
As already noted in para 5 above, both the

proceedings i.e. adjudication and criminal are based upon
page 9 of 11

same set of facts/allegations and evidence.
18.

After due consideration of the evidence produced by

the department, the CEGAT has exonerated the accused
company by returning a positive finding that the quantity of MS
ingots alleged to be clandestinely manufactured and removed
without payment of excise duty was in fact wastage occurring
at the stage of production of forgings out of ingots. No
fabrication or manipulation was found in the documents of the
accused company. Since the Department has not challenged
the order dated 19.9.95, the finding arrived at by CEGAT has
attained finality. The order of the CEGAT exonerating the
accused company is thus clearly on merits.
19.

In view of the above discussion, the complaint under

Section 9 of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 read with
Sections 193, 192 and 120-B of the IPC (Annexure – G to the
petition) and the proceedings emanating out of the said
complaint are quashed for the reason the departmental
proceedings has resulted in the petitioners being exonerated
on merits and the criminal prosecution is based on same set of
facts and evidence.
20.

No costs.

page 10 of 11

November 6, 2007
SL

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 11 of 11

