IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM(M) No.306/2007
#
!

Smt Manjula Verma & Anr.
........ Petitioners
through:
Mr. Dev Anand Bhardwaj, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Kumari Sarla Verma.
through :

....... Respondent
Mr. Shesh Datt Sharma, Advocate

RESERVED ON: 20.11.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 3.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
The present petition

under

Article

227

of

the

Constitution of India is directed against the order dated 29.11.06
passed by the Additional District Judge, Delhi whereby the
application under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
filed by the petitioners seeking rejection of plaint filed by the
respondent was dismissed.
2.

Respondent is the plaintiff and the petitioners are the

defendants in the original suit. I shall be referring to the parties by
their nomenclature in the suit.
3.

Brief facts relevant for deciding the controversy in the
page 1 of 20

present petition are that Late Sh Vijay Kumar Sharma (hereinafter
referred to as the deceased) joined Custom, Excise and Gold
(Control) Appellate Tribunal, West Block 2, R.K. Puram, New Delhi in
the year 1977 as an Inspector. At the time of the joining the
deceased nominated his mother and unmarried sister i.e. the
plaintiff as his nominees for the purposes of Provident Fund Act,
1925 and General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules 1960. It
is to be noted that the deceased was a bachelor at the time he
joined service.
4.

Deceased got married to defendant no.1 as per Hindu

rites and ceremonies on 28.2.1987. A minor son i.e. defendant no.2
was born out of the said wedlock.
5.

Unfortunately the deceased met with an untimely death

on the intervening night of 2/3.06.02. At the time of his death the
deceased was working as a Superintendent. The mother of the
deceased had pre-deceased him.
6.

After the death of the deceased the plaintiff approached

the employer of the deceased seeking release of retirement
benefits of the deceased in her favour. To overcome a nomination
dated 06.07.1991 in favour of the defendants it was contended by
the plaintiff that the defendant no.1 who was also working with the
same employer manipulated the service record of the employer and
prepared a forged nomination dated 06.07.91 in her own favour and
in favour of defendant no.2.
7.

It is not in dispute that the retirement benefits of the
page 2 of 20

deceased consist of sum standing to the credit of the deceased in
the Provident Fund Account of the deceased.
8.

Considering

the

dispute

between

the

parties

the

employer of the deceased expressed its inability to release the
amount standing to the credit of the deceased in the Provident Fund
Account.
9.

Thereafter

the

plaintiff

approached

the

Central

Administrative Tribunal, New Delhi seeking release of the amount
standing to the credit of Provident Fund Account of the deceased.
Central Administrative Tribunal directed the plaintiff to approach an
appropriate forum for the said relief.
10.

Plaintiff filed the instant suit seeking declaration and

consequential reliefs against the defendants. Declaration sought
was that the original nomination made by the deceased in favour of
the plaintiff is valid and subsisting and that the plaintiff is entitled to
receive the amount standing to the credit of the deceased in the
Provident Fund Account of the deceased. It was also prayed that the
nomination dated 06.07.91 purportedly made by the deceased in
favour of defendants be cancelled as being null and void.
11.

Apart from the allegations that the nomination dated

06.06.91 made by the deceased in favour of the defendants is
forged the other allegations in the plaint are that the relationship
between the deceased and defendant no.1 was strained; that the
deceased intended to divorce defendant no.1 and that the death of
the deceased was a result of criminal conspiracy entered into
page 3 of 20

between the defendant no.1 and her friends.
12.

Defendants

resisted

the

suit

and

filed

a

written

statement. In said written statement defendants categorically
denied the averments made in the plaint.
13.

The defendants filed an application seeking rejection of

the plaint. Rejection was sought on the ground that the suit does
not disclose any cause of action for the reason nomination does not
confer beneficial interest upon the nominee but only a right to
receive the amount standing to the credit of the Provident Fund
Account of the deceased subscriber and that nominee who receives
such amount holds the same for the benefit of the estate of the
deceased subscriber and the amount continues to be estate of the
deceased and therefore has to be disbursed to the legal heirs of the
deceased subscriber as per personal law applicable. In support
whereof reliance was placed upon two decisions of the Supreme
Court reported as Sarbati Devi & Anr v Smt. Usha Devi AIR 1984 SC
346 and Vishin N. Khanchandani v Vidya Lachmandas Khanchandani
& Anr AIR 2000 SC 2747.
14.

It was pleaded that admittedly the deceased died

intestate and the defendants were the only class I heirs.
15.

Holding that the decisions in Sarbati and Vishin's cases

(supra) pertain to the Insurance Act, 1983 and Government Saving
Certificate Act, 1959 respectively and that provisions of said
enactments are quite different from the provisions of the Provident
Funds Act, 1925, vide order dated 29.11.06 the learned Trial Court
page 4 of 20

dismissed the application under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC filed by
the defendants.
16.

In the instant petition the petitioners reiterate the stand

taken by them in their application under Order VII Rule 11 of the
Code of Civil Procedure.
17.

Per

contra,

respondent/plaintiff

has

raised

two

contentions arising out of the language of Sections 5(1) and 2(c)
read with 3(2) and 4(1)(a) of the Provident Funds Act, 1925. The
contentions are:I.

That the expression “to the exclusion of all other

persons” occurring in Section 5(1) of the Provident Funds Act, 1925
means that the amount standing to the credit of Provident Fund
Account of the deceased subscriber becomes the absolute and
exclusive property of the nominee and that the legal heirs of the
deceased subscriber have no right or interest in the said amount. In
support whereof, reliance has been placed upon the following
judicial decisions:a)

Piare Lal & Ors v Ganpat & Anr AIR 1930 Lahore 437(2).

b)

Koruprolu Talupulu v Dasetti Narasamma AIR 1967 AP 10.

c)

M. Malati & Ors v M. Dharma AIR 1968 Ori 8.

d)

Ugra Sen Singh v Ganpat & Anr. 1995 All LJ 788.

II.

That the plaintiff is a 'dependent' within the meaning of

Section 2(c) of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, and that when the
nominee is a dependent, by virtue of the operation of Section 3(2)
read with Section 4(1)(a) and Section 5(1) of the Provident Funds
page 5 of 20

Act, 1925, the amount standing to the credit of the Provident Funds
Account of the deceased subscriber vests in the nominee and thus
becomes the property of the nominee. In support whereof, reliance
has been placed upon the following 2 judicial decisions:a)

Kadiam Kusuma & Ors v Kadiam Appachiamma & Anr
(1985) ILLJ 194 AP.

b)

Mridul Sengupta & Anr v Shipra Sengupta & Anr 2002
(2) CCC 172 (MP).

18.

To

appreciate

the

first

contention

raised

by

the

respondent/plaintiff it is important to note the legislative history of
Section 5 of the Provident Funds Act, 1925.
19.

Section 5 of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 as originally

enacted read as under:"5. Rights of nominees
(1)
Subject
to
the
provisions of this Act, but otherwise notwithstanding
anything contained in any law for the time being in
force or any disposition, whether testamentary or
otherwise, by a subscriber to, or depositor in a
Government or Railway Provident Fund of the sum
standing to his credit in the Fund, or of any, part
thereof, any nomination, duly made in accordance with
the rules of the Fund, which purports to confer upon
any person the right to receive the whole or any part of
such sum on the death of the subscriber or depositor,
shall be deemed to confer such right absolutely until
such nomination is varied by another nomination made
in like manner or is expressly cancelled by the
subscriber or depositor by notice given in such manner
and to such authority as is prescribed by those rules.
20.

There was a conflict of judicial opinion whether a

nomination made by a person is only in nature of an authority to the
nominee to receive the provident fund or in the nature of a

page 6 of 20

testamentary disposition.
21.

Noting the expression 'deem to confer such right

absolutely until such nomination is varied' occurring in Section 5(1)
of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 as also non-obstante clause
therein following decisions took a view that a nominee acquires an
absolute right to enjoy the fund:a)

Non Singh v Mothi Bai AIR 1936 Mad 477.

b)

Sitarama Swamy v Venkatarama Rao AIR 1944 Mad
370(1).

c)

Somayajulu v Somi Devi AIR 1950 Mad 210.

d)

Nayagam v Krishnaswni AIR 1944 Mad 370.

e)

Dharma Rao v Venkata Mahalakshmamma AIR 1947
Mad 96.

f)

Maung Bakin v Ma Pwa Thin AIR 1929 MP 79.

g)

Mohammad Naim v Munimunnissa AIR 1936 Oudh 32.

h)

Mabel Head v Miss Kathleen Guest & Anr AIR 1945
Bom 43.

i)

Anmad Abdul Razzak & Ors v Jamala Bint Mehdi AIR
1935 Bom 234.

22.

On the other hand the expressions 'notwithstanding

anything contained in any law for the time being in force or any
disposition, whether testamentary or otherwise' and 'confers such
absolutely' occurring in Section 5(1) of the Provident Fund Act, 1925
were construed by some High Courts as not conferring beneficial
interest upon the nominee but only a right to receive the provident
page 7 of 20

fund amount and the nominee who receives the amount would hold
for the benefit of estate of the deceased subscriber. It was held that
the fund continues to be the estate of the deceased. According to
this view, the non-obstante clause noted above is intended to take
away the impediment in the personal law of the parties to nominate
a person to receive the provident amount as a legatee if the
nomination was treated as a testamentary disposition, but no
beneficial interest is vested in the nominee except a bare right to
receive the provident fund exclusively and the said amount
continues to be the estate of the deceased subscriber. That the
word 'absolutely' was held as not conferring on the nominee a title
to the exclusive ownership of the provident fund amount. The
decisions which took aforesaid view are as under:a)

Noor Mahomed v Sardar Khatun AIR 1949 Sindh 38.

b)

Mt. Amna Khatoon v Abdul Karim AIR 1947 All 562.

c)

Hardial Devi Ditta v Janki Das AIR 1928 Lahore 773.

d)

Janki Das v Asha Bi AIR 1957 MP 79.

23.

In the year 1946, Section 5(1) of the Provident Fund Act,

1925 was amended to read as under:“5. Rights of nominees- (1)
Notwithstanding
anything contained in any law for the time being in
force or in any disposition, whether testamentary or
otherwise, by a subscriber to, or depositor in, a
Government or Railway Provident Fund of the sum
standing to his credit in the Fund or any part thereof,
where any nomination, duly made in accordance with
the rules of the Fund, purports to confer upon any
person the right to receive the whole or any part of such
sum on the death of the subscriber or depositor
occuring before the sum has become payable, has been
page 8 of 20

paid, the said person shall, on the death as aforesaid of
the subscriber or depositor, become entitled, to the
exclusion of all other persons, to receive such sum or
part thereof, as the case may be, unless (a)
such nomination is at any time varied by another
nomination made in like manner or expressly cancelled
by notice given in the manner and to the authority
prescribed by those rules, or
(b)
such nomination at any time becomes invalid by
reason of the happening of some contigency specified
therein.
And if said person predeceases the suscriber or
depositor, the nomination shall, so far as it relates to
the right conferred upon the said person, become void
and of no effect:

24.

Provided where provision has been duly made in the
nomination in accordance with the Rules of the Fund,
conferring upon some other person such right instead of
the person deceased, such right shall, upon the
deceased as aforesaid of the said person, pass to such
other person.”
The following two important changes were introduced in

the new Section:a)

The word 'absolutely' occurring in the old section was

omitted.
b)

If the nominee predeceased the subscriber the right

conferred upon the nominee became void and of no effect.
25.

Considering the afore-noted two material changes, in

the decision reported as Shaik Dawood v Mahmooda Begum AIR
1985 AP 321 the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court
observed as under:“13. Prior to the amendment of 1946, section of 5 of
the Provident Funds Act, 1925, in its material terms, and
dealing with a case of nomination provided : "Any
nomination which purports to confer upon any person
page 9 of 20

the right to receive the whole or any part of such sum
on the death of the subscriber ... shall be deemed to
confer such right absolutely" There was a conflict of
judicial opinion whether the nominee who has the
excluded right to receive payment takes the amount to
enjoyed by him absolutely or only receives the amount,
subject to the rights of the legal heirs of the deceased
subscriber. By the amendment of 1946, the word
"absolutely" occurring hitherto in section 5 was omitted.
After the amendment of 1946, section 5 of the Provident
Funds Act, 1925, read in its material terms "where any
nomination purports to confer upon any person the right
to receive the whole or any part of such sum on the
death of the subscriber occurring before the sum has
become payable or before the sum, having become
payable, has been paid, the said person other shall on
the death of the subscriber become entitled, to the
exclusion of all other persons, to receive such sum" The
amendment, in our view, sought to put an end to the
conflict of judicial opinion and to favour the view that
the nominee has, after the amendment, only the right to
receive the amount which had become payable, without
any legislative expression, that such nominee has any
right as such to enjoy the money merely on the basis of
such nomination.
17. Section 3 of the Act merely provides for protection
of compulsory deposits both during the lifetime of
subscriber or after the death, when the fund vests in the
dependent. Section 4 of the Act provides for repayments
and section 5 provides for the rights of nominees. These
various provisions have to be read together and with
the other provisions of Provident Funds Act. The Act
makes provision in the interest of certain large clause of
employees of a scheme of compulsory, and to a limited
extent voluntary, thrift. Its intention is that such people
in case of their retirements have something to live on,
and in case of death, have some thing to leave. In the
majority of cases, accumulated balance in the provident
fund represents the life savings of the employees.
Provision for a making nomination is made to facilitate
quick repayment so that the nominee gives a nation is
made to facilitate quick repayment so that the nominee
gives a valid acquittance for the amount paid to him as
such nominee. Section 5 of the Act, therefore, provided
that the nominee shall become entitled, to the exclusion
of all other persons, to receive such sum. The Act had
only provided for the exclusive right of the nominee
receive and did not provide that the same shall become
page 10 of 20

the absolute property of the nominee. Prior to the 1946
amendment, the word "absolutely" occurring in section
5 contributed to the divergence of opinions. After the
1946 amendment, the view expressed by the Madras
High Court and shared by other High Courts has become
obsolete. Malati's case, (AIR 1968 Orissa 8)(supra) in
our view, does not lay down the correct legal position.
We dissent from that view.
22.

To sum up, out conclusions are :

(1) The nominee of a provident fund has only the
exclusive right to receive the fund. His rights are the
same as that of a nominee under the section 39 of the
Insurance Act.
(2) The provident fund remains the property of the
deceased subscriber and is available for distribution
amongst his heirs in accordance with their personal law.
The Supreme Court decisions decision in Sarbati Devi's
case [1984] 55 Com Cas 214, governs nominations
made in respect of provident funds as well.
(3) Tulupulu's case, AIR 1967 AP 10 and Lalitha's case
[1975] 2 APLJ 168, do not sate the law correctly.”
26.

Turning to the decisions relied upon by the respondent,

Piare Lal's case (supra) was decided with reference to Section 5(1)
as it existed prior to the Amendment incorporated in the year 1946.
27.

The decision in Koruprolu Talupulu's case (supra) has

merely followed the decision rendered by the Calcullta High Court in
In the Goods of Stanley Austin Cardigan Martin AIR 1939 Cal 642
without any discussion. Like Piare Lal's case (supra), Stanley's case
also pertains to Section 5(1) as it existed prior to the Amendment
incorporated in the year 1946.
28.

In M. Malati's case (supra) the Division Bench of the

Orissa High Court merely adopted the view expressed by the

page 11 of 20

Madras High Court, in the decisions rendered on the basis of the
wording used in section 5 prior to the amending Act of 1946.
Section 5 of the Act, as amended, was no doubt extracted but there
is no discussion as to the effect of the amendment on the divergent
opinions expressed by different High Courts on the pre-amended
Section 5.
29.

Reliance upon the Ugra Sen's case is wholly misplaced

for the reason the said decision hold that the nominee has the right
to receive the provident fund amount on the death of the
subscriber.
30.
Shaik

The Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Dawood's

case

(supra)

has

noted

the

amendment

incorporated and has discussed the affect thereof. I concur with the
said view.
31.

Pertaining to the second contention raised by the

respondent, Sections 3(2) and 4(1)(a) of the Provident Funds Act,
1925 need to be noted.
32.

Section 3(2)(a) of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 reads

as under:“3. Protection
(1)................

of

compulsory

deposit-

(2)
Any sum standing to the credit of any subscriber
to, or depositor In any such Fund at the time of his
decease and payable under the rules of the Fund to any
dependant of the subscriber or depositor, or to such
person as may be authorized by law to receive the
payment on his behalf, shall subject to any deduction
authorized by this Act and, save where the dependant is
the widow or child of the subscriber or depositor,
page 12 of 20

33.

subject also to the rights of an assignee under an
assignment made before the commencement of the
Act, vest in the dependant, and shall, subject as
aforesaid, be free from any debt or other liability
incurred by the deceased or incurred by the dependant
before the death of the subscriber or depositor.”
Section 4(1)(a) of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 reads

as under:“4. Provisions regarding repayment (1) When under
the rules of any Government or Railway Provident Fund
the sum standing to the credit of any subscriber or
depositor, or the balance thereof after the making of
any deduction authorized by this Act has become
payable, the officer whose duty it is to make the
payment shall pay the sum, or balance as the case may
be. to the subscriber or depositor, or, if he is dead,
shall-(a) if the sum or balance, or any part thereof, vests in a
dependant or under the provisions of Section 3, pay the
same to the dependant to such person as may be
authorized by law to receive the payment on his
behalf............”
34.

In the two decisions relied upon by the respondent i.e.

Kadiam Kusuma and Mridul Sengupta's cases (supra) a view was
taken that the provident fund amount becomes the absolute
property of a nominee when the nominee is also a 'dependent'
within the meaning of Section 2(c) of the Provident Funds Act, 1925.
Gist of the reasoning was that the word 'vest' occurring in Sections
3(2) and 4(1)(a) of the Provident Fund Act, 1925 was used in the
wider sense indicating that it intended to confer rights of ownership
on the nominee-dependent as against mere right to obtain
possession of the fund on behalf of true owners. It was held that the
statute statutorily vested the beneficial interest in the nomineedependant. Reasoning could be culled out from the following
page 13 of 20

observations of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Kusuma's case
(supra):“8. A reading of these two provisions along with S.
5(1) would show that the fund would vest in the
nominee when the nominee is a dependent and the
fund is payable absolutely to the exclusion of others. S.
2(c) merely defines who is the dependent and does not
purport to confer any right upon the dependent. S. 3(2)
provides that if under the rules the fund is payable to
the dependent then it vests in him and shall be free
from any debt or other liability incurred by the
deceased-subscriber S. 4(i) contains instructions for
payment. Thus we see when the nominee is a
dependent by virtue of the operation of S. 3(2) read
with S. 4(1)(a) and S. 5(1) of the Act, the fund vests in
the nominee and is payable absolutely to the nominee
to the exclusion of others. It is difficult to hold that the
said vesting is for a limited purpose of receiving the
amount but not carrying the beneficial interest with it.
When a special provision is made under S. 3(2) vesting
the fund in the nominee-dependent and the rules
provide for payment to such nominee we must give
effect to that provision irrespective of the effect of the
nomination in general under S. 5(1).”
35.

The question which needs to be answered is; what is the

true meaning and import of the word 'vest' occurring in Sections
3(2) and 4(1)(a) of the Provident Funds Act, 1925.
36.

This question was considered in the decisions reported

as Aimai v Awabai Dhanjishaw Jamsetji & Ors 1924 Sind 57 and
Noor Mahomed v Sardar Khatun AIR 1949 Sind 38.
37.

In Aimai's case, one Dhanjishaw Master was a widower

with one daughter Aimai. Afterwards he married one Awabai. He
died leaving behind his second wife and several children. He died
intestate. He had nominated his daughter Aimai to receive the
provident fund amount. The widow Awabai claimed that the

page 14 of 20

provident fund belonged to the estate of the deceased and that she
was entitled to recover it from Aimai. Though the controversy in the
case revolved around the Provident Funds Act, 1897 but provisions
similar to Sections 3 and 4 of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 existed.
In the appeal, the Court posed the following question:-

38.

“Did he, in any way, divest himself of it during his lifetime or by an instrument to come into effect after his
death? And, secondly: is there any provision of the law
which prescribes a special method of devolution or
distribution in the case of Provident Fund amounts? It is
axiomatic that no person or body can, at his will introduce
any peculiar rule of inheritance or distribution.”
Proceeding to answer the question posed, it was held:"To take the second point first, that is, let us assume
that the amount at the credit of Master in the fund, or at
any rate the right to recover that amount from the fund,
formed part of the estate of Master during his life-time.
Has he done anything to divest himself of his right
thereto? All he did was to direct that in case of his
death the sum should be paid to Aimai. This is in itself a
mere mandate the validity of which expires with the
death of the mandator. It is true the validity is extended
by Statute beyond such death but such statutory
extension does not by itself produce any change in the
nature of the mandate. The question as to what the
recipient is to do with the fund when she has obtained it
is still for decision. The nomination paper is not a Will.
In no case could a Parsi execute a Will in that form. But
even in the case of those persons who can make a valid
informal Will the nomination paper could not be
considered as a Will and nothing more; if it were so
considered the whole object of the nomination would be
frustrated. The object of the nomination system is to
designate some person to whom the Provident Fund
may pay over the amount due to the subscriber, and
obtain a valid quittance. If the nominee were merely the
legatee under the nomination paper considered as a
Will then in so much as a Will can be revoked by a later
Will even if not communicated to the fund or by some
former instrument of revocation or in some cases by
marriage of the testator the fund could never be certain
whether the person nominated was the person entitled
to receive payment, that is, if the nominee is to be
page 15 of 20

regarded as legatee only. True it is that the fund is
made safe in respect of the payment made to the
nominee, but I am not now considering that, I am
merely ascertaining what the legal effect on Master's
rights to this fund was by his executing this nomination,
paper, and it is certain that the nomination paper
cannot operate as a Will."
39.

The Court further held:"I should hesitate, unless the words of the Statute and
of the rules framed thereunder were explicit, to suppose
that the perpetration of such unnatural injustice was
rendered obligatory on a subscriber to a Provident Fund.
Nor can I conceive why the Provident Fund should wish
to introduce so strange a law of inheritance. I do not
find in the Statutes anything which renders it obligatory
for me to take this view. The object of Section 4, as
amended by Act IV of 1903, is to render the fund
incapable of attachment in the hands of the nominee for
debts due by the subscriber. It is true that the
Legislature uses the word "vest" but that word does not
necessarily connote title. A person, in whom the
property of another vests, has the same rights of
dominion over the property as the owner would have
had, no more and no less. But no one has the right to
deal with his property so as to defeat the legal claims of
others."

40.

The effect of nomination was again considered by the

Sind High Court in Noor Mohamed's case (supra).
41.

One Moulabus son of Mato, an employee of the North

Western Railway, died in 1940, leaving property which included a
sum of Rs. 5,000/- standing to his credit in the Railway Fund. He
was survived by two widows (plaintiff and defendant 1), two
daughters (defendants 2 and 3), a mother (defendant 4), and two
sisters (defendants 5 and 6) as his heirs. The appellant, who was
defendant 7 in the suit was the son of Moulabux's sister. He was the
only near male relation of Moulabux, and Moulabux had nominated

page 16 of 20

him as his nominee to receive the Provident Fund. After the death of
Moulabux, the appellant claimed the sum as his property, while the
heirs of Moulabux claimed that they were entitled to it under the
Mohammedan Law. As a consequence of the dispute the suit was
filed by Mt. Sardarkhatun, one of the widow, for partition of the
properties left by Moulabux, including the sum of Rs.5,000/-in the
Provident Fund Account. One of the relief sought was an injunction
against the appellant, restraining him from recovering the Rs.
5,000/- from the Railway. Issue No. 2 framed in the suit was
whether the amount of Rs. 5,000/- mentioned in schedule C filed
with the plaint forms part of the property of the deceased. It was
contended by the appellant who was the nominee that the the sum
in the Provident Fund had not only to be paid to him, but became
his property on the death of Moulabux by reason of the nomination,
and that the heirs of Moulabux were, therefore, not entitled to it.
42.

While dismissing the appeal, the Court observed as

under:“In every case the right conferred by the Act upon the
nominee, whether the nominee be a dependant or not,
is the 'right to receive' the amount deposited in the
Provident Fund by the subscriber, nothing more and
nothing less, although it is enacted that the nomination
shall be deemed to confer such right absolutely,
notwithstanding anything contained in any law or any
disposition made by the subscriber.”
43.

Pertaining to the word 'vesting' the Court observed as

under:"vesting in relation to property means the acquisition of
the legal right of immediate possession and dominion
page 17 of 20

over property. It means nothing more. The words 'the
sum shall vest in the nominee' do not connote anything
more than that in law the legal right to immediate
possession of and dominion over the property shall
pass from the trustees of the fund to the nominee, and
do not mean that the full rights of ownership's,
including the right to the beneficial enjoyment of the
property, shall pass to the nominee. The nominee
becomes entitled to possession of the sum with out
having to obtain letters of administration or a
succession certificate. A property may vest in one
person, and the beneficial right of enjoying the property
as an owner may at the same time vest in another
person. The effect of the provident fund vesting in the
nominee, when the nominee is a dependant, is
therefore quire clear. It confers on the nominee the
immediate right to possession and dominion over the
amount, without in any manner affecting the beneficial
rights of the actual owners, whoever they may be,
either as "heirs or legatees".
44.

From the afore-noted two decisions, the legal principle

which emerges is that the nominee does not acquire any beneficial
interest or ownership to the sum in the Provident Fund Account. The
nominee merely gets a right to receive the fund. The Division Bench
of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Shaik Dawood's case (supra)
has taken a similar view.
45.

Before

concluding

it

is

also

relevant

to

note

a

clarificatory circular issued by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India, New Delhi and addressed to all Accountants-General. It is
circular No.1324-T ADMN. II/128-68, dated 24-7-1970. It clarifies as
under:“It has been held that Section 5 of the Provident Funds
Act, 1925, confers on the nominee merely a right to
receive the Provident Fund assets in the event of the
subscriber's death and that the nominee does not have
an absolute right of disposal of such assets. It is
always open to the heirs under the personal law
page 18 of 20

46.

applicable to the deceased subscriber to claim their
share of Provident Fund money. As such, the orders
communicated in this Office Letter, dated 19-9-1969,
will apply to all cases where a Court of Law orders
payment of Provident Fund money otherwise than in
accordance with the nomination irrespective of the fact
whether the nomination is held valid or not.”
In the light of above discussion, I hold that the

nomination under the Provident Funds Act, 1925 read with General
Provident Fund (Central Service) Rules 1960 only indicates the hand
which is authorised to receive the provident fund amount on the
payment of which the employer gets a valid discharge of its liability
under the Provident Funds Act, 1925.
47.

Turning to the facts of the instant case, even if

renomination dated 06.07.91 is proved to be forged and original
nomination is declared to be valid it would be of no consequence for
the reason ultimately the plaintiff would have to remit the provident
fund amount in favour of the defendants/petitioners.
48.

The suit thus claims a relief which would have no effect

in law. The litigation would result in no fruits accruing to the
plaintiff. The relief prayed for by the plaintiff has no consequences
in law.
49.

The rules of prudence and logic require that the suits

seeking meaningless reliefs should be nipped at the bud itself. To
achieve this end a Court can exercise inherent powers conferred
upon it under Section 151 of the Code.
50.

To the similar effect are the following observations of

the Supreme Court in the decision reported as Shipping Corporation

page 19 of 20

of India Ltd v Machado Brothers & Ors AIR 2004 SC 2093:-

51.

“31. For the reasons stated above, we are of the opinion
that continuation of a suit which has become
infructuous by disappearance of the cause of action
would amount to an abuse of the process of the court
and interest of justice requires such suit should be
disposed of as having become infructuous. The
application under Section 151 of CPC in this regard is
maintainable.'
In view of above discussion, the petition is allowed. The

suit filed by the respondent is dismissed, holding the same to be
meaningless and of no legal use.
52.

No costs.

December 3, 2007
sl

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 20 of 20

