IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No. 1533/2007
#
!

Atul Bansal
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr. B.R.Sharma, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

State

through:

%

........
Respondent
Mr. Anil Soni, Advocate

DATE OF DECISION: 09.08.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Petitioner seeks anticipatory bail in FIR No.195/2005 dated

16.5.2005 P.S. Tilak Marg under Section 468/471/420 IPC.
2.

At the outset it may be noted that the FIR in question has

been registered pursuant to an order dated 16.3.2005
learned Single Judge

passed by a

of this court sitting on the Original Side while

deciding OMP.No.337/2004.
3.

The dispute which was being dealt with by the learned

Single Judge of this Court on the Original Side pertained to the claim by
a contractor to whom Kunj Vihar Cooperative Group Housing Society

Ltd. had awarded construction work.
4.

Learned Single Judge prima facie found forgery and

fabrication of record by the society. Learned Single Judge found that
the forged documents
documents

were not only used as if they were genuine

but additionally had caused a substantial

loss

to the

society namely there was misappropriation of money.
5.

It is not in dispute that one Rakesh, brother-in-law of the

petitioner was a member of the Managing Committee of the society. It
is also not in dispute that the petitioner is a Chartered Accountant. It is
also not in dispute that all the documents

pertaining to the tender

resulting in award of work to the contractor and all financial matters
pertaining thereto were being handled by the petitioner, in his office,
for the reason there was considerable financial implications in the
transaction and petitioner being a chartered accountant was expected
to be best suited to supervise the same.
6.

Petitioner was granted anticipatory bail by and under an

order dated 25.11.2005 passed by by the learned additional Sessions
Judge. Petitioner was directed to report to the I.O. on the 1st and 15th
day of each month so that

investigation could proceed ahead

smoothly. It was cancelled as petitioner absconded.
7.

Petitioner claims that he joined the investigation till

1.4.2006. Learned counsel for the State does not dispute the said fact
but brings to the notice of this court that thereafter petitioner started

avoiding meeting the I.O. probably because he sensed that questions
being put to him by the I.O. were uncomfortable to be answered.
Further, counsel points out that by September,2006 report of an
handwriting expert from the Central Forensic Science Laboratory was
received by the police to the effect that documents propounded by the
society were forged documents. Learned counsel for the State states
that though petitioner had no direct concern as an office bearer of the
society but

had a direct concern with the issue for the reason

documents opined to be forged were prepared in his office, thus,
petitioner did not join the investigation and made himself untraceable.
8.

In view of the facts noted hereinabove, no case is made

out to grant benefit of anticipatory bail to the petitioner.
9.

The petition is dismissed.

August 09, 2007
pu

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

