IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.Appeal No. 38/1991
#
!

State

through:

........ Petitioner
Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Kaptan Singh
....... Respondent
through : Ms. Neelam Grover, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 6.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
On 11.1.1988 at around 8:10 A.M., master Anubhav

Khanna, a student of Air Force Senior Secondary School,
Subhroto Park suffered an untimely death when he was hit by a
motor vehicle. The young boy was a student of Class III and
was aged 8 years.

Prosecution alleged that the respondent

who was driving bus No. DEP – 8474 under management of
DTC and had caused the accident when, plying on route No.
773, the bus was on the road and had reached Air Force Senior
Secondary School.
page 1 of 10

2.

Learned Metropolitan Magistrate who conducted the

trial has held that offence under Section 279 and Section 304
IPC was not established against the respondent. In so holding,
learned

Trial

Judge

has

held

that

there

are

material

discrepancies in the testimony of PW-2 & PW-3 which casts a
doubt whether PW-2 had witnessed the accident.

Further,

learned Trial Judge has drawn an adverse inference against the
prosecution from the fact that vide DD Entry Ex.PW-9/A
recorded at 9:05 A.M. no particulars about bus in question were
noted. Lastly, testimony of PW-3 another eye witness has been
disbelieved.
3.

PW-2, Babu admittedly working as a chowkidar in

the school stated that he was an eye witness to the accident as
he was present at the gate No. 1 of the school. That the bus
was being driven very fast and that after the young boy was
hit, lot of people collected at the spot. He went to inform the
principal who sent two boys with him to see the injured. When
he went back to the road, the boy had been removed to the
hospital.

That he had seen the driver of the bus.

That the

accused was the driver of the bus. In cross examination, he
stated that the police recorded his statement but immediately
thereafter stated that the police did not record his statement
page 2 of 10

but noted down his name and address. He further deposed in
cross examination that the bus stopped at a distance of about
25 paces ahead of the accident and that after hitting the boy
the bus ran over the body resulting in the boy getting crushed.
4.

PW-3, P.R.Ganpathy, a student of the school stated

that 2 or 3 students of the school had informed the principal
regarding the accident.
5.

PW-4 Karuna Sharia stated that she was standing at

the bus stop and had witnessed the accident. She also stated
that the bus in question crushed the child and stopped at a
distance of about 10-15 paces from the place of impact. That
she tried to stop cars so that the child could be taken to the
hospital but nobody stopped.

That thereafter two student

arrived from the school and stopped a car which removed the
child to the hospital.

She opened the bag of the child and

found his name and address and went to the school and
informed the office of the same. That she went to the house of
the child to inform his parents. In cross examination she stated
that she saw blood oozing from the nose and mouth of the boy.
She stated that she did not see any other injury.
6.

The learned Trial Judge disbelieved the testimony of

the two aforenoted witnesses i.e. PW-2 and PW-4 primarily on
page 3 of 10

the ground that the body of Anubhav was not crushed and that
the bus had not run over the body.

Furhter, in view of

testimony of PW-3, P.R.Ganpathy, a student of the school who
stated that 2 or 3 students from the school informed the
principal about the accident, learned Judge held that the
version of PW-2 that he informed the principal was incorrect.
Further, learned Trial Judge has noted that the place where PW2 was stationed i.e. gate No. 1 was not towards the side of the
road on which the accident took place.
7.

Ms. Neelam Grover, learned counsel for the accused

urges that since accused has been acquitted, presumption of
innocence in favour of the accused has got reinforced. Learned
counsel urges that the conclusions arrived at by the learned
Trial Judge cannot be called perverse. Counsel further urges
that if on the evidence brought on record, two views are
possible and learned Trial Judge has preferred to adopt a
particular view, notwithstanding that this court has the power
to re-appreciate the evidence, view adopted by the learned
Trial Judge would not be differed from.
8.

Having considered the record of the learned Trial

Judge, in my opinion, two very vital pieces of evidence and
statement of the accused under Section 313 Cr.P.C. have been
page 4 of 10

totally ignored by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate. Firstly
is the written statement filed by the driver of the bus in the
claim petition filed by parents of the deceased under the MV
Act 1939, certified copy whereof was obtained and filed before
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, defence pleaded by the
accused was as under:-

9.

“On 11.1.1988 Bus No. DEP-8474 was plying on route
No. 773 from Bharthal village to Ambedkar Stadium.
The driver was driving the bus slowly carefully,
cautiously on the correct side of the road. At about
8.30 a.m. the bus reached near Central school
suddenly a young boy with a heavy bag came
running in front of the bus and hit against the
bumper and got the accident injurious.
It is
submitted that the accident was not caused due to
any negligence on the part of the DTC driver. The
accident was caused due to sudden emergence of
the boy in front of the bus. The accident was also
witnessed by some of the passengers who made
necessary endorsement in the complaint book which
is maintained in the ordinary course of the business.”
The second vital piece of evidence ignored by the

learned Judge is Ex. PW-9/4, the photograph showing the place
where the young boy was hit and the position where the bus
stopped.

The photograph shows that the bus has crossed

ahead by about 25 feet from the place where the school bag of
the young boy is to be seen on the road.
10.

In his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the driver

explained that he had stopped the bus as he had seen the child

page 5 of 10

lying in an injured condition on the road, a fact different from
what was pleaded by him in his written statement filed before
the MACT.
11.

Learned Trial Judge has ignored the fact that in the

written statement filed before the MACT, the driver admitted
that the bus hit the child.

Further, his explanation under

Section 313 Cr.P.C. was at variance with his pleas in the written
statement. Lastly, if indeed the child was lying injured on the
road, the bus wold have stopped before crossing over the child
and not thereafter.
12.

As regards the testimony of PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4

suffice would it be to state that when an accident takes place,
everybody runs helter skelter. Possibility of the chowkidar, PW2 and some students reaching the office of the principal and all
informing about the accident cannot be ruled out. Thus, the
fact that PW-3 stated that 2 -3 boys gave information of the
accident to the principal does not contradict the testimony of
PW-2 that he informed the principal of the school about the
accident. Further, PW-4 is an independent eye witness. She
has no reasons to falsely implicate the driver of the bus.
13.

Dealing lastly with the fact that in the daily diary

when first information of the accident was received, number of
page 6 of 10

the bus was not noted, in my opinion, no adverse inference can
be drawn on said face i.e. of not recording the number of the
bus for the reason Ex.PW-9/A, a DD Entry merely records an
information transmitted to the police station by the police post
that a child had been hit by a bus near the school in question.
14.

Under the circumstances, the appeal is allowed.

15.

Impugned judgment dated 19.9.1990 acquitting the

respondent for having committed the offence punishable under
Section 279/304 IPC is set aside. I hold the respondent guilty
of the offence of rash/negligent driving as also the offence of
causing death by a rash/negligent act.
16.

In respect of the sentence, I note that the accident

took place on 11.1.1988 i.e. nearly 19 years ago, learned
counsel for the State submits that the respondent has not been
involved in any other FIR. His conduct has been spotless, save
and except the unfortunate accident which took place on
11.1.1988.
17.

On the sentencing policy, on 31.10.2007 while

deciding Crl.Appeal No. 36/1986 Manmohan Vs. State, in paras
15 to 18 I had noted as under:“15.
Learned counsel for the appellant submits
that the incident in question relates to 20.12.1982. 25
years have gone by. Counsel further points out that the
page 7 of 10

impugned judgment is dated 24.12.1985 and for 21
years the appeal has remained pending.
Counsel
submits that the current jurisprudential thinking in the
field of criminology is laying greater emphasis on the
reformatory aspect of sentencing policy and less on the
deterrent aspect of the sentencing policy. Learned
counsel has cited the following decisions :1.
B.G. Goswami Vs. Delhi Administration AIR 1973
SC 1457
2.

Ram Narain Vs. State of U.P. AIR SC 2200

3.

Narinder Kumar Vs. The State (Delhi Admn.) 17

(1980) DLT 302
4.

Parveen Kumar Vs. The State 17 (1980) DLT 297

5.

Kathi Odhabhai Bhimabhai Vs. State of Gujarat

1993 Crl.L.J. 187
6.

Alam and Others Vs. State of Rajasthan 1981 SCC

(Crl.) 624
7.

Ved Prakash Vs. State of Haryana 1981 SCC (Crl.)

182
8.

Ashok Kumar Vs. State (Delhi Administration) 1980

SCC (Crl.) 426
9.

Vishnu

Nagnath

Deshmukh

Vs.

State

of

Maharashtra AIR 2000 SC 3677
16.
I need not copiously note the observations in
the afore-noted judgments except the observation from
the decision in B.G.Goswami's case (supra).

page 8 of 10

17.
The paragraph which is intended to be noted
highlights the purpose of sentence. It highlights 3
attributes of a sentence. The first facet is that the
accused must realise that he has committed the act
which is not only harmful to the society of which he
forms an integral part but is also harmful to his own
future both as an individual and as a member of the
society.
The second facet highlights the punitive
deterrent aspect of a sentence.
The third facet
highlights the reformatory aspect of a sentence.
18.

The Court has observed as under :“Punishment is designed to protect society by
deterring potential offenders as also by
preventing the guilty party from repeating the
offence; it is also designed to reform the
offender and re-claim him as a law abiding
citizen fo good of the society as a whole.
Reformatory, deterrent and punitive aspects of
punishment thus play their due part in judicial
thinking while determining this question. In
modern
civilized
societies,
however,
reformatory aspect is being given somewhat
greater importance. Too lenient as well as too
harsh sentences both lose their efficaciousness.
One does not deter and the other may frustrate
thereby making the offender a hardened
criminal. In the present case, after weighing the
consideration already noticed by us and the fact
that to send the appellant back to hail now after
7 years of the agony and harassment of these
proceedings when his is also going to lose his
job and to earn a living for himself and for his
family members and for those dependent on
him, we feel that it would meed the ends of
justice if we reduce the sentence of
imprisonment to that already undergone but
increase the sentence of find from Rs.200/- to
Rs.400/-. Period of imprisonment in case of
default will remain the same.”

18.

I thus impose the minimum sentence. I sentence,
page 9 of 10

the respondent to undergo simple imprisonment for 1 month
for having committed the offence punishable under Section
279 IPC.

I sentence the respondent to undergo simple

imprisonment for period of 3 months for the offence under
Section 304 A IPC.

Both sentences shall run concurrently.

However, I grant benefit of probation to the respondent under
the Probation of Offenders Act 1958.
19.

I grant 2 weeks time to the respondent to furnish

the requisite bond to the Registrar (General) of this Court as
required by law undertaking good behaviour for a period of one
year.

If the bond is filed, sentence imposed would remain

suspended for a period of one year. If respondent successfully
completes the period of probation, the sentence would not be
given effect to.
20.

LCR be returned.

21.

No costs.

November 6, 2007
MM

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 10 of 10

