IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
F.A.O. No.224/2007
#
!

Sunil Anand & Anr.
through:

.......Appellants
Mr.J.N.Aggarwal, Advocate.
VERSUS

$
^

Mr.Rajiv Anand & Ors.
.......Respondents
through: Mr.Arvind Nigam, Advocate and
Mr.Samrat Nigam, Advocate.
RESERVED ON: 03.04.2008

%

DATE OF DECISION: 07.04.2008

CORAM:
*
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Late Kishen Chand Anand was blessed with 3 sons and

a daughter named Prem Dutt Anand, Tilak Raj Anand and Mohan
Dutt Anand (sons) and Raj Suri (daughter). He was the owner of
property bearing Municipal No.53-A, Ring Road, Lajpat Nagar-III,
New Delhi.

On 17.7.1972 he executed a will Ex.OW-1/1

bequeathing the house in its entirety to his wife Smt.Durga Devi.
The dispute pertains to a registered will dated 23.8.1973, Ex.PW1/1, registered with the Sub-Registrar, Delhi vide registration
No.1167, Additional Book No.3, Vol.46 at pages 64-68 on 27th

FAO No.224/2007

Page 1 of 17

August 1973 (presented for registration on 23rd August 1973)
propounded by Tilak Raj Anand and Prem Dutt Anand which reads
as under:WILL
This last will & TESTAMENT is made at Delhi on this
23 day of August, 1973 by me Shri Kishen Chand Anand
S/o Shri Mahesh Das Resident of 53, Ring Road, Lajpat
Nagar-III, New Delhi-24 being in full possession of my
understanding and physical health without any duress or
fear from any quarter.
rd

Whereas I am owner of House bearing No.53(A),
Ring Road, Lajpat Nagar-III, New Delhi-24 by virtue of
partition deed dated 20.6.1970 and registered in the
office of Sub-Registrar III at No.3892, Addition Book No.1
Volume 2434 pages 43 to 49 on 22.6.1970 and executed
between the testator and Shri Boota Ram Suri, son of
Shri Aya Ram Suri who jointly with me purchased the
entire plot No.53 on leasehold basis from the President of
India and lease and convention deed registered at
No.136, Supplementary Book No.1, Volume 27, pages
111 to 114 on 9.6.1959 in the office of Sub-Registrar-III,
New Delhi. The site was purchased and the building
thereon was constructed with my own personal savings
and as such I am full owner of the house and the land
underneath without any restriction by any law or customs
and have full power of disposal.
I have two sons alive namely Prem Dutt Anand and
Tilak Raj Anand and my third son Shri Mohan Dutt Anand
who was in the army and lost his life in war leaving
behind 2 minor children and wife who has since remarried. I have also one daughter Dr.(Mrs.) Raj Suri who
is married. My wife Smt. Durga Devi is also alive.
I have given full consideration to the claims of my
abovesaid heirs. My daughter and the heirs of my late
son Lt.Col.M.D.Anand are very well provided for. Further
more I have full confidence that my wife Smt.Durga Devi
will be as much as very well looked after and taken care
of after me by my sons as she has been looked after uptil
now and I, therefore, do not find it relevant to provide for
her separately. I, therefore, bequeath to my eldest son
FAO No.224/2007

Page 2 of 17

Shri PREM DUTT ANAND the entire ground floor portion of
my house No.53(A), Ring Road, Lajpat Nagar-III, New
Delhi-24 who after my death will become owner like
myself. I further bequeath the first and the second floors
of the said house to my second son Shri TILAK RAJ
ANAND who after my death will become exclusive owner
of that portion like myself. The building on the first and
second floor is unerected at present. It will, however, be
in the absolute ownership of my son TILAK RAJ ANAND as
and when the portions on these floors are constructed
either by me or by my son Tilak Raj Anand, himself.
If, however, God forbid either both of my sons predeceased me, the heirs of my each son will represent
and inherit the property of their respective predessors-ininterest.
Shri Tilak Raj Anand will also inherit all movable
property whatever and wherever, which may be found as
belonging to me after my death.
I had made a will dated 17th July, 1972 and
registered at No.892, Additional Book No.3-Vol.46 pages
194 on 19.7.1972 I hereby revoke the abovesaid will
which will become inoperative and ineffective hereafter.
I further make it clear that my two sons SHRI PREM DUTT
ANAND AND TILAK RAJ ANAND will become my heirs in
the manner mentioned above to the exclusion of all
others and they will be the sole executors of this will.
In witness whereof, I, the said Kishen Chand Anand
have hereto signed at Delhi, this 23rd day of August,
1973.
Sd/(KISHEN CHAND ANAND)
TESTATOR
Signed by the said Kishen Chand Anand in the presence
of us, present at the same time, who in his presence and
in the presence of each other, sign the witnesses hereto.
Witnesses:
1.
Sd/- (J.P.Gupta).
2.
Sd/- (Kanwar Bhan).”
2.

Kishen Chand Anand died on 27.10.1987.

FAO No.224/2007

His wife

Page 3 of 17

Durga Devi died soon thereafter on 8.4.1988.
3.

Appellants who are the children of late Lt.Col.Mohan

Dutt Anand challenged the aforesaid will alleging three distinct
independent grounds of challenge. It was firstly urged that the
will does not bear the signatures of their grandfather i.e. is a
forged document. Secondly, if signatures on the will are those of
their grandfather the same were obtained on blank papers and
have been misused to create the will. Lastly, the execution of the
will was surrounded with suspicion. The suspicion cast on the will
was pleaded on 4 circumstances; namely (i) there was no change
of circumstance nor was there any reason for the deceased to
change the bequest reflected in the will dated 17.7.1972 when
the instant will was purportedly executed on 23.8.1973; (ii)
whereas the first will made a bequest in favour of the wife it was
unnatural to deprive the wife of any share in the estate of the
deceased when the second will was purportedly executed, (iii)
the attesting witnesses to the will in question are interested
witnesses because J.P.Gupta was a colleague of Tilak Raj Anand,
a beneficiary under the will and Shri Kanwar Bhan was the
Personal Assistant of Shri Tilak Raj Anand; (iv) that the will sought
to be probated cannot supersede a previous will executed by the
deceased in the year 1972 in which, recognizing that their father
had contributed to the construction of the building, 1/3rd right in
the building was bequeathed to their father.
FAO No.224/2007

Page 4 of 17

4.

Holding that the testimony of the two attesting

witnesses, Shri J.P.Gupta, PW-1 and Shri Kanwar Bhan, PW-2
inspired confidence and that the will was proved to be validly
executed and duly registered with the Sub Registrar (as per
testimony of Tilak Raj Anand, PW-3 and one Dinesh Mittal, Record
Clerk from the office of the Sub Registrar, PW-4), the learned Trial
Judge negated the three grounds of objection and held that the
will in question has been proved to be the last legal and valid
testament of the deceased namely Shri Kishen Chand Anand.
5.

Briefly summarized the findings of the learned Trial

Court are rooted in the evidence brought on record and the
admission of OW-1, Sunil Anand, that his mother remarried in
November 1972 and that after the death of his father his mother
was allotted a plot of land by the government, besides a gas
agency as also pension and free education for the children. It has
been noted by the learned trial judge that on account of the
death of Lt.Col.Mohan Dutt Anand (who attained martyrdom
during the 1971 Indo-Pak war) his widow and children receiving
adequate compensation; that the widow remarried and removed
herself and her children from the company of the testator. It has
been held that these circumstances afford good reasons to make
the bequest bequeathing the residential house to only 2 sons. It
has been held that if credible evidence establishes that the
testator was in a sound disposing mind and consciously executed
FAO No.224/2007

Page 5 of 17

the

will,

merely

because

the

attesting

witnesses

were

acquaintances of a beneficiary is no ground to disbelieve the will.
Emphasis has been laid on the proof of due registration of the
will.
6.

It may be noted at the outset that the fourth ground

predicated while challenging the will, namely a prior will
bequeathing 1/3rd share in favour of the father of the objectors
has not been discussed in the impugned judgment; probably for
the reason no evidence was brought on record to prove any will
under which the father of the objectors was a beneficiary.
7.

The challenge to the judgment and order dated

11.4.2007 is premised on:(a)

Admissions in the testimony of PW-2 Kanwar Bhan who in

cross examination stated: “It is wrong to suggest that late Shri
Kishen Chand was mentally sound at the time of executing the
will.” .......... “It is wrong to suggest that late Kishen Chand Anand
executed the will in my presence or in the presence of
Dr.J.P.Gupta”.
(b)

The fact that the two attesting witnesses of the will were

admittedly close associates of one of the beneficiary under the
will has been underplayed by the learned Trial Judge.

It was

highlighted during arguments that the will OW-1/1 was witnessed
by independent witnesses evidencing that the executor was a
man of prudence who took care to have his will witnessed by
FAO No.224/2007

Page 6 of 17

persons whose credibilty would be unimpeachable.
(c)

The execution of the will in question after about a year of

execution of the earlier will itself was sufficient to draw a
conclusion that the will in question was a result of an undue
influence or was a procured will.
(d)

The fact that the wife of the testator in whose favour

testator had made a bequest in the first will as also the children
of Late Lt. Col. M.D.Anand i.e. the objectors

with whom the

testator had special love and affection were excluded in the
second will strongly suggests that the second will was unnatural.
(e)

That the learned Trial Judge erred in ignoring the report of a

handwriting expert who could not be examined because he died
before the report could be filed; which report opines that the
signatures on the will Ex.PW-1/1 are not those of the testator.
(f)

That the learned Trial Judge placed undue emphasis on the

fact that appellant No.1 stated in cross examination that he
signed his affidavit by way of evidence in New York wheres the
fact was that appellant No.1 was in India when he deposed to the
affidavit by way of evidence; in proof of which fact photocopy of
the passport was filed evidencing that the appellant no.1 was in
India on the day he swore the affidavit.
8.

I would be failing to note that 2 technical objections

were also urged at the hearing. It was firstly urged that the will
Ex.OW-1 being a registered will could not be revoked by the will
FAO No.224/2007

Page 7 of 17

Ex.PW-1/1 as the same was not a regisered will. Secondly it was
urged that the probate was sought by Prem Dutt Anand and Tilak
Ran Anand as the stated executors of the will and on their death
their legal heirs could not be brought on record.
9.

Pertaining to the said two objections suffice would it

be to note that the will Ex.PW-1 is a registered will. Secondly,
there is no law that a registered will cannot be superseded by an
unregistered will.

A will does not operate in presenti.

operation is contingent upon the death of the executor.

Its

A will

creates no right, title or interest when it is executed. The right is
created under a will on the death of the testator. Till alive, the
testator can always revoke the will because a will is an
instrument of trust by a living person addressed in rem to be
operative after his death.

A will, be it registered or be it

unregistered can be revoked by defacing the will, destroying the
will or otherwise superseding the same. The second ground of
challenge is equally frivolous because under Section 232 of the
Indian Succession Act 1925, on proof of a will the beneficiaries
would be entitled to letters of administration with the will
annexed. The decision cited on the point by Shri J.N.Aggarwal,
learned counsel for the appellant, namely, AIR 1977 Delhi 34
Inder Chand Nayar vs. Sarvadeshik Arya Pratinadhi Sabha & Anr.
if carefully read, holds against the appellant. Paras 8 and 9 of the
said decision reveal that a beneficiary under a Will can be
FAO No.224/2007

Page 8 of 17

granted the letters of administration with will annexed. Para 11
and 12 of the decision shows that after holding that letters of
administration with will annexed can be granted to a beneficiary,
the Court further considered whether letters of administration
can be granted to an association of individuals or not.
10.

Pertaining to contention No.4 and 5 (noted in sub para

(d) and (e) of para 7 above, I may note that the 4th contention is
wholly frivolous because no report of any handwriting expert
forms part of the record of the learned Trial Judge. I may note
that an application was filed by the appellants to permit a
handwriting expert to take photographs of the will dated
17.7.1972. Vide order dated 23.10.2002 the said application was
allowed. But, no report of a handwriting expert was filed. The
argument appears to have been raised for the sake of raising
one. The 5th contention is also a contention raised for the sake of
raising one.

While noting the testimony of appellant No.1 who

appeared as RW-1 the fact that in cross-examination he stated
that he executed his affidavit by way of evidence when in the
United States of America has been simply noted by the learned
Trial Judge. Indeed, it was not pointed out to this Court as to in
which paragraph of the judgment the learned Trial Judge
adversely commented thereon.
11.

I may preface my discussion on the first 3 contentions

urged by noting the law relating to wills. Needless to state he
FAO No.224/2007

Page 9 of 17

who propounds a will has the duty to prove the same and satisfy
the conscious of the Court that the instrument propounded is the
last will of the testator. The obligation i.e. 'onus probandi' is
generally discharged by proof of the capacity and the fact of
execution from which the knowledge of an assent to the contents
of the instrument are assumed. Standard of proof to be achieved
to prove a will is no different than that required to prove other
documents except the requirement of attestation prescribed vide
Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act 1925. The proof is to be
tested on the usual satisfaction of a prudent person. As against
documents which are questioned during the lifetime of the
executant, since a debate on a will takes place after the demise
of the testator, the testator being not available to testify on the
issue, an element of solemnity enters in the proceedings relating
to a will. Notwithstanding this distinction, an inquiry pertaining to
a will has to proceed in the same manner as in respect of other
documents.
12.

The propounder of a will has to satisfy the judicial

conscience, by leading cogent evidence that (a) the will was
signed by the testator and was duly witnessed by two attesting
witnesses; (b) the testator was in a sound and disposing state of
mind; (c) the testator understood the nature and effect i.e. the
contents of the document; and (d) the testator put his signatures
to the document of his own free will.
FAO No.224/2007

Page 10 of 17

13.

Wills are frequently made by the sick and the dying.

Law does not therefore insist that the quality of the health, both
physical and mental, possessed by the testator should be proved
in the highest degree. Section 59 of the Indian Succession Act
1925 requires that the testator should have sound mind. To be in
the state of a sound mind does not mean that the mental faculty
should be in its fullest vigour. It simply means that there should
be capacity to understand the nature of one's property; memory
to remember the relations and persons normally having claim to
the bounty of the testator; and lastly ability to form a judgment.
It is sufficient to prove that the testator was capable of forming a
judgment. If the propounder of a will satisfies the conscious of
the Court, the Court has to grant a probate, even if the will,
wholly or in part, deprives near relations.
testator that is reflected in the will.

It is the will of the

Being the testator's own

property he has the liberty to deal with it absolutely. It is not for
the Court to find out justification or equity or otherwise in the
action of the testator. The Court has not to venture into surmises
or conjectures.

Further, once it is proved that the will was

executed by a person of competent understanding the burden of
proving execution under undue influence or the like is on the
challenger.
14.

It may also be noted that suspicious circumstances are

not conclusive evidence to hold against a will.

A suspicious

FAO No.224/2007

Page 11 of 17

circumstance if not satisfactory explained or dispelled by the
propounder is fatal to a will. It is trite that where the propounder
establishes that the will bears the signatures of the testator and
that the testator was in a sound state of mind and was conscious
of the document which he executed the initial onus on the
propounder stands discharged.

Where the challenger leads

evidence to establish suspicious circumstances the onus then
shifts back on the propounder who has then to clear the air
surrounding the will.
15.

I now take up for consideration the first three

contentions urged and as noted in sub-paras (a) to (d) of para 7
above.
16.

It is settled law that where the Court of original

jurisdiction considers the entire evidence brought on record and
while

doing

so

does

not

ignore

a

material

evidence

or

circumstance and does not consider irrelevant material or
irrelevant circumstance, merely because two views are possible,
the Appellate Court would not, on reappreciation of evidence hold
that the other view i.e. the one not concluded by the Court of
Original Jurisdiction would be a better view to be followed. (See
the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Vilas
Pandurang Patil v State of Maharashtra (2004) 6 SCC 158 “para
17”) Perversity in the conclusion arrived at after appreciation of
evidence would also be a ground available to challenge findings
FAO No.224/2007

Page 12 of 17

of fact recorded by the Court of Original Jurisdiction.
17.

No doubt, in cross examination PW-2 stated: “It is

wrong to suggest that late Shri Kishen Chand was mentally sound
at the time of executing the will.” .......... “It is wrong to suggest
that late Kishen Chand Anand executed the will in my presence
or in the presence of Dr.J.P.Gupta”, but it is apparent that while
answering a question put in the negative, the witness did not
realize that two negatives make a positive.

From the answers

given by the witness, the questions posed are evident.

It is

apparent that the first question put to the witness was:- I put it to
you that Shri Kishen Chand was not mentally sound when he
executed the will. The second question was:- I put it to you that
you were not present nor was Shri J.P.Gupta present when Kishen
Chand Anand executed the will. The witness did not realize that
questions put to him were in the negative and if he had to deny
the suggestion he ought to have denied in the affirmative. Be
that as it may, in his examination-in-chief PW-2 clearly deposed
that on 23.8.1973 he went to the residence of Kishen Chand
Anand where he met the other attesting witness namely Shri
J.P.Gupta. He stated that first of all Kishen Chand signed on the
will and thereafter J.P.Gupta signed the same as a witness
followed by him i.e. PW-2 who signed as the second witness. PW2 also identified the signatures of J.P.Gupta at point 'C' on the will
and that of late Shri Kishen Chand at points 'A' and 'B'.
FAO No.224/2007

Page 13 of 17

18.

It is no doubt true that PW-1, J.P.Gupta was a

colleague of Tilak Raj Anand, a beneficiary under the will Ex.PW1/1 and PW-2, Kanwar Bhan was a subordinate officer working
under Tilak Raj Anand.

But, this does not mean that the

testimony of these witnesses has to be disbelived on said count.
The

close

relationship

of

the

attesting

witnesses

with

a

beneficiary under a will only requires the Court to be more careful
and cautious while dealing with the evidenciary value of such
witnesses.

The reason is obvious, especially in India, it is not

uncommon for a beneficiary to arrange for attesting witnesses to
be present when a will is executed.

Indeed, in the decision

reported as Rabindra Nath Mukherjee vs. Panchanan Banerjee
AIR 1995 SC 1684 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that if a
will is validly proved the fact that the attesting witnesses to the
will are interested lose significance. Same ethos was reiterated
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as
Madhukar D.Shende vs. Tarabai Aba Shedage AIR 2002 SC 637
where the attesting witnesses to the will were classmates of the
beneficiary's son.
19.

Save and except the two answers given by PW-2 which

have been dealt with by the learned Trial Judge as also by me, no
infirmity whatsoever was pointed in the testimony of PW-1 and
PW-2.

Indeed, their credibility was not shaken under cross-

examination.
FAO No.224/2007

It has also be noted that the will Ex.PW-1/1 has
Page 14 of 17

been duly registered, a fact proved through the testimony of PW3 and PW-4. Though, registration of a will, by itself is no proof of
it being executed but certainly lends support, howsoever small it
may be, to the other evidence brought on record.

Though not

much, the fact of the registration of a will does slightly tilt the
scale in favour of the propounder.
20.

It is a fact that the will Ex.PW-1/1 was executed within

a year and less than a month of the earlier will Ex.OW-1/1, but
nothing turns thereon for the reason evidence on record has
established a very material circumstance which intervened
between

the

dates

of

execution

of

the

two

wills.

Lt.Col.M.D.Anand attained martyrdom during the Indo-Pak war
fought in the year 1971.

In his testimony, appellant No.1,

examined as OW-1 admitted that his mother re-married in
November 1972 and that his mother was given a plot of land and
the business of a gas agency by the government as a benefit to a
widow of an ex-soldier besides free education for the children and
a pension.

The testator was thus aware that his widowed

daughter-in-law and his two orphaned grandchildren were well
provided for by the government. The widowed daughter-in-law
had found a new spouse who was also a father to the two
orphaned children.
widowed

The social and economic insecurity of the

daughter-in-law

and

the

two

grandchildren

had

vanished. In fact this branch of the family was conferred with a
FAO No.224/2007

Page 15 of 17

wealth much greater than what remained with the testator. For
the purposes of the present decision what is relevant to note is a
material circumstance between the dates of the two wills.
21.

As regards the contention (d) i.e. exclusion of the wife

of the testator and the objectors in the second will makes it an
unnatural will suffice would it be to note it is not for the Court to
refuse the grant on account of the fact that the disposition is not
just and fair or is unnatural or improbable when the conscience of
the Court is clear about the proof of the execution of the will on
the face of the evidence, satisfactorily sufficient, to remove the
suspicious circumstances. I need not speculate or enter into
theories as to what prompted the testator to change his will
because as noted above law prohibits a Court from speculating
into the reasons which led a testator to do what he did. It would
also be useful to note that in the will Ex.PW-1/1 the testator has
recorded the factum of his widowed daughter-in-law being
remarried. Additionally, the testator has noted that the heirs of
his deceased son late Lt.Col.M.D.Anand were well provided for in
the life. Testator has further noted that he has full confidence
that his wife would be well looked after by his sons after his
death.
22.

Though not referred to by the learned Trial Judge as

reasons throwing light on genuineness and due execution of the
will it would be useful to note certain inherent features of
FAO No.224/2007

Page 16 of 17

evidence which led credence to the will.
23.

The will consists of 2 sheets bearing signatures of the

executant on each page at a place where an executant would
normally append his signatures on a document.

There is no

evidence that the will Ex.OW-1/1 was handed over by the testator
to his sons.

The will Ex.PW-1/1 specifically refers to the earlier

will and revokes the same.

This is also indicative of the

participative role of the testator when the will Ex.PW-1/1 was
executed.

Further, visual comparison of the signatures of the

testator on the two wills show complete identity of signatures on
both the wills.
24.

No evidence has been brought on record by the

objectors to establish that the testator was not in sound disposing
state of mind at the time of the execution of the will in question.
No evidence was brought on record by the objectors to establish
that the testator was under the undue influence of his sons.
25.

No case is made out to interfere.

26.

The appeal is dismissed.

27.

No costs.

28.

TCR be returned forthwith.

April 7, 2008
sl

FAO No.224/2007

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 17 of 17

