IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.1200/2003
#
!

Roshal Lal Arora
through:

........ Petitioner
Mr.Ramesh Gupta.
VERSUS

$
^

State

....... Respondent
through : Mr.U.L.Watwani for the State.
None for the complainant.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 01.10.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Roshan Lal Arora prays that FIR No.286/95 under

Section 406 IPC PS Greater Kailash Part-I and proceedings
pending pursuant thereto be quashed.
2.

Relevant facts are that Roshan Lal Arora and the

complainant, Inder Wadhwa, entered into a partnership vide deed
of partnership dated 22.1.1990 with the object of executing civil
works on contract and project basis. The partnership was to carry
on business under the name and style M/s.Oam International. As
per the partnership deed the profits and losses of the firm were to
be shared equally by the partners who were equally obliged to
contribute equally towards the capital of the firm.

3.

Gravement of the allegation against Roshan Lal Arora

in the FIR is that pertaining to a contract taken by the firm from
TCIL,

vide

cheque

No.50411

dated

8.11.1994

in

sum

of

Rs.3,45,268/- issued by TCIL, Roshan Lal Arora had opened an
account with Central Bank of India showing himself as the sole
proprietor of M/s.Oam International. The cheque in question was
credited

in

the

said

account

and

misappropriated by Roshan Lal Arora.

the

money

had

been

It was stated in the FIR

that the partnership firm was maintaining a current account
No.2035 with Punjab National Bank, Nehru Place and it was the
duty of Roshan Lal Arora to have got credited the cheque in said
account.
4.

Undisputed position is that on 20.2.1995 Roshan Lal

Arora had expressed his desire to Inder Wadhwa for dissolving the
firm. It has therefore to be noted that the FIR in question was
registered after some disputes had arisen between the two
partners.
5.

It is urged by learned counsel for Roshal Lal Arora that

M/s.Oam International was unable to fulfill its contractual
obligations and that on 17.8.1992, Inder Wadhwa addressed a
letter to Roshan Lal Arora as under:“Mr.R.L.Arora
Project Development Associates,
533/ Pocket B, Sarita Vihar,
New Delhi.
Sub : Completion of balance work of cable duct.

Dear Sir,
Please refer to our discussions regarding
completion of balance work of cable ducting of
AB-1/90. We have mutually agreed that you will
complete all the balance work with your labour
and materials, and also made payments to the
supplier, labour contractor, etc. Accordingly you
will be entitled to receive payments for this work
and be responsible for the discharging the
liabilities of this work.

6.

All liabilities for material and labour on account of
work already completed will be discharged by
Oam International you will be making all efforts to
complete the work by 31.12.1992.”
It is urged that pursuant to the letter dated 17.8.1992,

Roshan Lal Arora became liable to complete the balance work
awarded to the partnership firm by TCIL. As per the said letter he
was entitled to receive payment for the work and for said reason
Roshan Lal Arora opened a separate account and credited the
cheque received from TCIL. With reference to the statement of
the account opened by Roshan Lal Arora with Central Bank of
India in which Rs.3,45,268/- was credited, it was pointed out that
money was withdrawn in parts over a considerable period of time
and utilized for execution of the works awarded by TCIL. It has
lastly been urged that authenticity of the letter dated 17.8.1992
has been verified as true by the investigating officer as recorded
in the order dated 18.9.1995 when Roshan Lal Arora was granted
anticipatory bail by this Court.
7.

Question which arises for consideration is, whether

Roshan Lal Arora has committed criminal breach of trust. This in

turn takes me into the issue, whether the cheque in question in
sum of Rs.3,45,268/- received by Roshan Lal Arora from TCIL was
required to be deposited in the account of the partnership firm
with Punjab National Bank or not.
8.

It is true that every partner of a firm has a fiduciary

obligation to render true and faithful accounts to the other
partners and is also obliged to use the funds and properties of the
partnership for the purpose of the business of the partnership and
not for personal gain.
9.

But, nothing prevents a partner of a firm from agreeing

that a co-partner may use a particular asset of a firm for his
personal use.

After all, a

partnership

is

the

result

of

a

contract between 2 or more persons.
10.

Letter dated 17.8.1992 written by the complainant to

Roshan Lal Arora is a clear authorization in favour of Roshan Lal
Arora to receive payments from TCIL for the balance work of
cable ducting awarded to the partnership firm with obligation cast
on Roshan Lal Arora to take over liability as also to execute the
balance work by providing the necessary funds.
11.

While granting anticipatory bail to Roshan Lal Arora

and disposing of his pre-arrest bail application, order dated
18.9.1995 passed by this Court records as under:“3.
Before I deal with these aspects, it is
considered necessary to know from the
complainant if he had issued letter dated
17.8.1992 agreeing that the petitioner would be

12.

entitled to receive payment for the work, which
was to be carried out and finally to be completed
by the petitioner. IO to get this fact ascertained
and report on 25.9.1995. Till then, the petitioner
be not arrested. However, the petitioner shall join
investigation as and when desired by the
investigator. Copy of this order be given dasti to
the petitioner.
Section 405 of the Indian Penal Code defines criminal

breach of trust. It reads as under:405.
Criminal breach of trust.- Whoever,
being in any manner entrusted with property, or
with any dominion over property, dishonestly
misappropriates or converts to his own use that
property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that
property in violation of any direction of law
prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be
discharged, or of any legal contract, express or
implied, which he has made touching the discharge of
such trust, or willfully suffers any other person so to
do, commits “criminal breach of trust”.
13.

The essential ingredients of offence of criminal breach of

trust are:- Entrustment with property or with any dominion over
property; and dishonest misappropriation thereof.
14.

Letter dated 17.8.1992 written by the complainant to

Roshan Lal Arora negates any entrustment of any property of the
partnership firm pertaining to the cable ducting work awarded by the
TCIL to the firm to Roshan Lal Arora for the reason pursuant to the
letter dated 17.8.1992 Roshan Lal Arora took over the liability to
execute the balance cable ducting work awarded by TCIL and became
entitled to receive all money payable for said work by TCIL.
15.
of law.

The FIR in question is nothing but an abuse of the process
I accordingly quash the FIR.

I also quash all consequential

proceedings pending in any Court pursuant to the FIR.

16.

Copy of the order be supplied dasti to learned counsel for

the petitioner.

October 01, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

