IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
C.R.P.No.134/2005
#
!

The Punjab State
Electricity Board
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr. D.C.Khanna, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

M/s. Vee Kay General Industries ........
Respondent
through: Mr. P.K.Aggarwal, Advocate with
Mr. Noor Alam, Advocate
RESERVED ON: 11.07.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 06.08.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

On 11.7.2007, arguments were concluded in the above

captioned petition. Learned counsel for the petitioner had desired
to file brief synopsis with decisions. Two weeks' time was granted
to learned counsel for doing the needful.
2.

Neither synopsis nor relied upon judgments have been

filed.
3.

Two weeks have elapsed.

4.

A short issue arises for consideration in the instant

petition.
5.

Whether, vide order dated 8.10.2004 the rejection of

CRP No.134/05

Pg.No.1 of 7

the application filed by the petitioner under Order 7 Rule 11 of the
Code of Civil Procedure is as per law.
6.

Respondent and the petitioner had entered into a jural

relationship with each other when respondent's offer for supply of
goods in respect whereof a notice inviting tender was issued by
the petitioner was accepted by the petitioner.
7.

Terms of the agreement between the parties find

mention in a purchase order dated 21.6.1985.
8.

Inter alia, vide Clause 15 of the Purchase Order, it was

stipulated that dispute and differences between the parties
pertaining to the contract would be got adjudicated through the
medium of arbitration. The relevant part of the clause reads as
under:-

9.

“15. Arbitration:(i)
If at any time any question, dispute or difference
whatsoever shall arise between the Board and the
supplier upon or in relation to or in connection with the
contract either party may forthwith gift to the other
notice in writing of the existence of such question,
dispute or difference and the same shall be referred for
the Sole Arbitration of a nominee of the Punjab State
Electricity Board. The award of the sole arbitrator shall
be final and binding on the parties under the provisions
of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940 and of the rules
thereunder. Any statutory amendment modification or
re-enactment thereof for the time being in force shall be
deemed to apply to and be incorporated in this
contract/purchase order. It will not be objectionable if
the Sole Arbitrator is an officer of the Board and he has
expressed views on all or any of the matters in question
of dispute or difference.” (underlining emphasized)
Under the contract the goods could be supplied in

stages. It was a term of the contract that for due purpose of the
obligation to supply the goods, the respondent would furnish a

CRP No.134/05

Pg.No.2 of 7

bank guarantee being 5% of the value of the supply.
10.

The

bank

guarantee

was

furnished.

Supply

commenced. Part supply was effected. A dispute arose between
the parties.
11.

Eschewing the facts as to what happened after dispute

arose, suffice would it be to note that on 6.10.1986 the petitioner
returned the bank guarantee to the respondent. According to the
respondent, the said bank guarantee was returned due to the
reason that on 29.9.1986, at a meeting held between the
representatives of the petitioner and the respondent it was
mutually agreed that further supply be not effected and parties
would stand released from their mutual obligations under the
contract.
12.

In the year 2004 a suit came to be filed by the

respondent seeking a relief of declaration and permanent
injunction.
13.

The cause pleaded in the suit was a threat by the

petitioner to effect recoveries from the respondent on account of
stated risk purchase made by the respondent for the un-executed
quantity of the supply to be effected under the contract between
the parties.
14.

Whereas respondent pleaded in the plaint that by

virtue of the agreement dated 29.9.86 parties had mutually
rescinded the contract and this was followed by the petitioner
returning to it the bank guarantee furnished. Thus, it was stated

CRP No.134/05

Pg.No.3 of 7

that the respondent was entitled to a declaration that there was
no subsisting contract between the parties and further that it was
entitled to a decree of permanent injunction prohibiting the
petitioner from effecting any recovery pursuant to the alleged risk
purchase made.
15.

The respondent admitted that a meeting was held on

29.9.86.

It also admitted having returned the bank guarantee

which was received by it. But, it stated that the contract between
the parties was not rescinded.
16.

In the application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of

Civil Procedure, it was stated that due to the arbitration clause in
the contract between the parties, suit was not maintainable.

It

was further pleaded that since Clause 14 of the agreement
envisaged the jurisdiction of local courts at Patiala, courts at Delhi
did not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the plaint.
17.

Learned Trial Judge has held against the petitioner on

both counts.
18.

Whereas learned counsel for the petitioner urged that

the arbitration clause is very widely worded and all disputes in
relation to or connection with the contract require to be settled
through arbitration the suit was not maintainable.

Additionally,

placing reliance upon the Clause 14 of the contract it was urged
that courts at Delhi would have no jurisdiction to entertain any
claim pertaining to the contract.
19.

At the outset it may be recorded that there is no

CRP No.134/05

Pg.No.4 of 7

prohibition for a party to file a civil suit notwithstanding there
being an arbitration clause in an agreement. But, where a suit is
filed pertaining to a contract which requires dispute raised in the
suit to be decided through the process and arbitration, it would be
open to the defendant to inform the court about the arbitrable
nature of the dispute and seek appropriate orders.
20.

Under the Arbitration Act, 1940 remedy was to file an

application under Section 34 and seek a stay of the suit. Under
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 the remedy is to file an
application under Section 8 of the said Act calling upon the Court
to refer the parties to the forum of arbitration.
21.

It is all together one thing to say that the dispute as

raised in the plaint, being arbitrable, should be stayed (position
under the Old Act) or referred to arbitration (position under the
New Act) viz-a-viz to state that the suit is not maintainable.
22.

Thus, on this short count alone, application under

Order 7 Rule 11 CPC filed by the petitioner in so far it sought
rejection of the plaint predicated on the plea that the dispute was
arbitrable has to be dismissed.
23.

Even on merits, no doubt, as held by the Supreme

Court in the decision reported as AIR 1969 SC 488 UOI Vs.
Salwaan Timber & Construction Company, an arbitration clause
using the expression “arising out of the contract” or “in
connection with the contract” is wide enough to encompass all
disputes adjudication whereof would require the parties to refer to

CRP No.134/05

Pg.No.5 of 7

or rely upon terms of the contract between the parties.
24.

But, as observed by the Supreme Court in the report

published as AIR 1953 SC 182 Gaya Electric Supply Company Vs.
State of Bihar, notwithstanding the extended span of the sweep of
the arbitration agreement, where a party seeks to avoid the
contract for reason de-hors the contract, arbitration clause cannot
be resorted to as the arbitration clause perishes along with the
other terms of the contract if it is shown that de hors the contract
a party is intending to avoid the same.
25.

Thus, pleadings in the plaint assume significance.

26.

In the instant case, foundation of the suit is the stated

agreement dated 29.9.86. According to the averments made in
the plaint on said date a meeting was held between the
representatives of parties where it was mutually agreed to close
the contract i.e. discharge both parties from the obligation to
perform the contract. That pursuant to the said agreement the
bank guarantee was returned by the petitioner. That there was
no subsisting contract between the parties. Therefore, petitioner
could not enforce right under the contract to recover any money
on account of risk purchase effected for the un-executed
quantities of supply.
27.

The dispute raised in the plaint does not require either

party to rely upon the terms of the contract. The subject matter
of dispute between the parties is whether the original contract
dated 21.6.1985 was superseded by an agreement dated 29.9.86

CRP No.134/05

Pg.No.6 of 7

and pursuant to said agreement whether or not parties discharged
each other from their reciprocal obligations under the contract.
28.

Such a dispute cannot form the subject matter of an

arbitration agreement.
29.

On the issue of territorial jurisdiction, suffice it be to

note that the restriction of territorial jurisdiction would be relevant
if dispute was under the original contract or pertaining to the
original contract.
30.

As noted above, the dispute relates to the issue as to

what was agreed between the parties on 29.9.86 i.e. whether on
said date, by and under a mutual agreement, parties rescinded
the original contract. Adjudication of this dispute being unrelated
to the original contract, issue of territorial jurisdiction cannot be
decided with reference to terms of the original contract.
31.

I find no merits in the petition.

32.

Dismissed.

33.

No costs.

August 06, 2007
mm

CRP No.134/05

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Pg.No.7 of 7

