IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.339/1997
#
!

Delhi Development Authority
........ Appellants
through: Ms.Amita Singh, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Madan Construction Co.
........ Respondent
through: Mr.Raman Kapur, Adv.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 04.02.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2.

Learned counsel for the appellant has restricted

challenge to the impugned award dated 7.6.1995 which has
been upheld by the learned Trial Judge vide impugned order
dated 7.7.1997 in so far it relates to claim No.1, 4, 12, 15, 23,
25.
3.

At the outset I may note that the learned Additional

District Judge who has dealt with the objections filed by the
Page 1 of 8

appellant under Sections 30/33 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 has
noted that findings of fact recorded by the learned Arbitrator
would be immune for challenge.
4.

I may only clarify that the law is not all that wide. If

it can be shown that a material document or a clause of
contract has been ignored by the learned Arbitrator, finding
relatable thereto can be corrected.
5.

Before dealing with the objections it may be noted

that the contractor was awarded civil construction work for
constructing MIG flats in Paschim Vihar. The contract could not
be completed within the stipulated date. There was an overrun of the time.
6.

Claim No.1 of the contractor in sum of Rs.4.5 lacs

was on account of payment due under the final bill for work
done. Learned Arbitrator has awarded Rs.83,272/-.
7.

Challenging award pertaining to claim No.1 it is

urged in the instant appeal and submissions in harmony with
the same were made that learned Arbitrator has not computed
how he determined Rs.83,272/- as the amount payable.
According to the appellant the gross amount of work done by
the contractor determined by the appellant was in sum of
Rs.81,41,405/- and with respect to the previous bills no further
amount was payable.
Page 2 of 8

8.

Learned Arbitrator has dealt with this issue at page

No.2 and 3 of the award. The learned Arbitrator has noted that
DDA had been measuring the quantities while certifying for
payment the running bills but for unexplainable reasons in the
last running bill had reduced the quantities of work. Learned
Arbitrator has noted that DDA has not been able to explain as
to under what circumstances measured works as reflected in
the earlier bills got reduced.
9.

Reasons given by the learned Arbitrator are sound

and logical. As regards the challenge to the quantification of
the claim suffice would it be to note that the learned Arbitrator
was a retired Chief Engineer (CPWD). There is a presumption
in law that when parties taken recourse to an arbitration
proceeding with an expert arbitrator they accept to rely upon
his knowledge in the field.
10.

Objection to claim No.1 is accordingly repelled.

11.

Claim No.4 of the contractor was in sum of

Rs.50,000/- on account of the rebate which was deducted by
the DDA from the running bills.
12.

Learned Arbitrator has noted though claim was in

sum of Rs.50,000/-, but record showed that only Rs.26,112/was deducted as rebate under various running bills.
13.

Learned Arbitrator has noted that the security
Page 3 of 8

deposit was released on 10.12.1988.

Learned Arbitrator has

noted that DDA was not entitled to any rebate.
14.

At the first blush it may appear to be a case where

the learned Arbitrator, having not recorded the date when
running

of

bills

had

to

be

paid

and

were

paid,

has

misconducted himself. But it has been pointed out by learned
counsel for the contractor that bills were not paid in time. The
clause of the contract stipulated that if timely payment was
released by DDA only in said eventuality would DDA be entitled
to rebate.
15.

I thus find no error in the award.

16.

Claim No.12 in sum of Rs.2 lacs has been allowed in

sum of Rs.71,000/-.

The claim was on account of keeping

watch and ward after work was completed on account of the
fact that DDA delayed taking possession of the site.
17.

The finding is on a fact. I find no infirmity therein.

18.

Claim No.15 in sum of Rs.25,000/- related to

recovery made by DDA alleging that there was an excess
consumption of cement.
19.

Under the contract cement which was consumed

had to be determined as per a formula prescribed. Recovery
rate was on double the issue price if excess cement was
consumed. This was in terms of Clause-42 of the contract.
Page 4 of 8

20.

It may be noted that for the cement supplied

recovery otherwise was made from the running bills.

Thus,

DDA was recompensed for the cement supplied by it and
consumed by the contractor. The claim related to recovery at
the penal rate. Learned counsel for the contractor has shown
to me 2 decisions of this Court.

The decisions are dated

24.12.1986 in Suit No.1092-A R.S.Builders Vs. Union of India
and decision dated 23.3.1993 in Suit No.136/1991 A.K.Jain Vs.
Union of India. Both decisions hold that DDA cannot recover at
penal rate. The decisions hold that DDA has to prove the loss
occasioned to it by cement being wasted.
21.

Learned Arbitrator has noted that DDA has not

proved any additional expenditure in procuring the cement.
22.

The matter can be looked at a little differently.

Since DDA supplied the cement it recovered the price thereof.
In other words, full recovery was made at the issue price.
Excess consumption was therefore to the detriment of the
contractor.

It was all the more necessary for DDA to have,

under the circumstances, established that it procured the
cement from the market at a rate more than what was
specified in the contract for effecting recovery.
23.

In view of the afore-noted 2 decisions of this court

and my additional reasons as recorded hereinabove objection
Page 5 of 8

to the award pertaining to claim No.15 is accordingly repelled.
24.

Dealing with claim No. 23 it may be noted that

conscious of the fact that material escalation had been
recompensed

under

Clause

10

CC

learned

Arbitrator

considered the claim which was in the nature of damages for
prolongation of the contract.

Damage was with reference to

stationing graduate engineer at the site during period when
contract got extended.
25.

Learned counsel for the appellant states that in view

of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as 1997
(1) Arbitration Law Report 292 The New India Civil Erectors Pvt.
Ltd. Vs. ONGC, learned Arbitrator could not have allowed the
claim in question.
26.

Learned counsel draws attention of this court to

para 10 of afore-noted decision.
27.

A perusal of the decision shows that the Hon'ble

Supreme Court was considering the claim for escalation in the
cost of material and noted that the contract stipulated that
price quoted was not subject to any escalation whatsoever till
the contract was completed.
28.

The decision is clearly distinguishable. The Hon'ble

Supreme Court was dealing with a firm price contract and
repelled the claim of the contractor for escalation.
Page 6 of 8

29.

The claim for escalation on account of increase in

price of material is different than the claim for loss occasioned
due to work being prolonged by stationing the qualified
engineers and staff at the site.
30.

I find no infirmity in the award.

31.

It was lastly urged that the learned Arbitrator has

awarded interest @ 18% p.a.

Counsel urged that during

relevant period interest was being restricted to 12% p.a.
32.

I note that as per the award learned Arbitrator has

directed interest to be paid @ 10% p.a. Granting 2 months time
to DDA to make payment, interest has been enhanced to 18%
p.a. if payment was not made within the time granted.
33.

Learned counsel for the respondent states that the

appeal was dismissed in default and before it could be restored
the contractor has recovered full amount from DDA.

Counsel

states that this may be a factor taken into consideration by this
court.
34.

Judicial authorities are replete in this court repelling

the challenge to an award by DDA in case after case and DDA
keeps on filing objections.
35.

The learned Arbitrator has granted 2 months time to

DDA to make payment with interest @ 10% p.a.
36.

I further note that the interest has been allowed
Page 7 of 8

only on claim No.1 and on none else. I further note that the
total sum as per the entire award is Rs.2,89,484/-. Claim No. is
in sum of Rs.83,272/-.
37.

The impact of interest would therefore be minimal. I

accordingly do not tinker with the award pertaining to interest.
38.

In a nutshell the appeal is dismissed.

39.

No costs.

40.

LCR be returned forthwith.

February 04, 2008
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Page 8 of 8

