IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CRL.M.C.No.1709/2001
#
!

Vinay Mohan Sharma
........
Petitioner
through: Petitioner in person.
VERSUS

$
^

Delhi Administration
........
Respondent
through: Mr. Jaideep Malik, Adv.
for the State.
RESERVED ON : 1.11.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 5.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioner is the editor, printer and publisher of

a magazine titled “Eternica”. The magazine was found to
be publishing obscene and indecent photographs of
women. The petitioner was sought to be prosecuted for
having committed an offence under Section 292 IPC as
also

Section

4

and

Section

6

of

the

Indecent

Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act 1986.
2.

Vide order dated 25.9.2000, learned ACMM

CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 1 of 12

recorded a prima facie view that offences as aforenoted
were made out holding that the magazine contains
photographs depicting naked and semi-naked woman in
an obscene manner and that prima facie the magazine
had a depraving effect. Notice under Section 251 Cr.P.C.
was framed.
3.

Petitioner pleaded not guilty and immediately

proceeded to file a revision petition before the learned
Sessions Judge praying that the notice framing the charge
be quashed.

Vide order dated 7.2.2001, learned ASJ.

dismissed the revision petition inter alia opining as
under:“Section 292 categorizes obscenity for the
purposes of the section under the following three
heads:
(a)

Lasciviousness

(b)

appealing to the prurient interest, and

(c) tending to deprave and corrupt persons
who are likely, having regard to all relevant
circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter
contained or embodied in it. Dealing with the
question as to what is “obscene” the
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the
case of Ranjit Udesh Vs. State of Maharashtra
AIR 1965 SC page 881 quoted with approval a
passage of Cockburn, [.]. in Hicklin's case which
laid down the test of obscenity in these words:
“.... I think the test of obscenity is this
whether the tendency of the matter
charged as obscenity is to deprave and
corrupt those whose minds are open to
CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 2 of 12

such immoral influences, and into whose
hands a publication of this sort may
fall.... it is quite certain that it would
suggest to the minds of the young of
either sex, or even to persons of more
advanced years, thoughts or a most
impure and libidinous character.”
Relying upon cases of Sree Ram Saksena Vs.
Emperor 1940 (1) Calcutta, page 581 and Sada
Nand & Ors. Vs. State (Delhi Administration) Crl.
Rev. Petitions No. 16 to 17/80 decided by our
own High Court on 20.3.1986. It is submitted
that a picture of a woman in the nude is not per
se obscene.
For the purpose of deciding
whether the picture is obscene or not, one has
to consider to a great extent the surrounding
circumstances, the pose, the posture, the
suggestive element in the picture, the persons
in whose hands it is likely to fall, etc. Keeping
these aspects in mind, it cannot be said in the
present case that the Ld. Addl. Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate should not have issued
notice to the petitioner under Section 251
Cr.P.C. in respect of offence under Section 292
IPC as well as 4/6 I.R.W.Act. The Ld. Addl. Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate has taken the view that
the magazine is full of nude and semi-nude
pictures of women almost on every page without
any reference of context and the likely effects of
the contents of the magazine on the readers is
explicit and it has an effect of depraving the
minds of its readers. Reference at this stage
may be made to I.R.W.Act which was enacted to
prohibit indecent representation of women inter
alia in publication, writing figures or in any other
manner. Section 2 (c) of I.R.W.Act defines and
means the depiction in any manner of the figure
of a woman, her form or body or any part
thereof in such a way as to have the effect of
being indecent, or derogatory to, or denigrating
women, or is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure
the public morality or morals. The human body
whether male or female cannot be regarded
obscene per se without something more. That
something more is to be found in the facial
expression or pose in which it is photographed.
CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 3 of 12

4.

Considering the facial expression and the pose
of the nude, semi-nude women in this magazine
of the petitioner it is clear prima facie that there
is indecent representation of woman.”
The petitioner has approached this court under

Section

482

Cr.P.C.

praying

that

the

order

dated

25.9.2000 passed by the learned ACMM and the order
dated 7.2.2001 passed by the learned ASJ be quashed.
5.

Petitioner who appeared in person and is a

lawyer by profession urged at the hearing that the
magazine in question was not meant for the common man
but was meant for broadminded people belonging to the
elite

class

and

therefore

the

photographs/pictures

published in the magazine would neither deprave nor
affect the minds of the persons who would purchase and
read the magazine. Petitioner urged that merely because
the magazine dealt with issues regarding to sex and that
pictures of semi-nude women were published cannot
make the magazine obscene without something more.
6.

Before discussing the law on the subject, it

would be relevant to note that the cover of the magazine
has in the backdrop a close up photograph of a woman
where the bosom is prominently displayed.

A low cut

blouse has been worn by the woman. More than half of
the breast and especially the cleft between the two
breasts is displayed.
CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Further, on the cover page the
Page 4 of 12

following words are printed:-

7.

“Sex Sells
But does it pay?”
On the third page is the photograph of a nude

woman in a reclining posture with her breast prominently
thrusted forward. At the center spread is a pull out of a
woman wearing a see through gown.

The focus of the

photograph is once again on the bosom of the woman.
The nipples and the breast are prominently displayed.
The cleft is prominently shown. 1/3rd of the breast is not
even covered with the see-through dress worn by the
woman. Underneath the see-through dress worn by the
woman, complete contours of the breast are visible. On
the reverse of the said photograph is the photograph of
two women where once again the breast of two is
prominently displayed.

A similar photograph is to be

seen at page 25 of the magazine. After page 40 of the
magazine, without any page number being assigned, on
14 consecutive pages, photographs of women all scantly
dresses

in

various

poses

are

printed.

In

some

photographs the see-through material worn by the
woman is so transparent that the breast of the women
depicted in the photograph is clearly visible to the naked
eye.
8.

Articles published in the magazine are under

CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 5 of 12

the caption “Concept of virginity”; “Happy in bed” etc.
9.

Section 292 IPC reads as under:“292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.-[(1)
For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book,
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting,
representation, figure or any other object, shall
be deemed to be obscene if it is lascivious or
appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect, or
(where it comprises two or more distinct items)
the effect of any one of its items, is, if taken as a
whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt
person, who are likely, having regard to all
relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the
matter contained or embodied in it.]
[(2)] Whoever(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly
exhibits or in any manner puts into circulation, or
for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public
exhibition or circulation, makes, produces or has
in his possession any obscene book, pamphlet,
paper, drawing, painting, representation, or
figure or any other obscene object whatsoever,
or
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene
object for any of the purposes aforesaid, or
knowing or having reason to believe that such
object will be sold, let to hire, distributed or
publicly exhibited or in any manner put into
circulation, or
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any
business in the course of which he knows or has
reason to believe that any such obscene objects
are for any of the purposes aforesaid, made,
produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported,
conveyed, publicly exhibited or in any manner
put into circulation, or
(d) advertises or makes known by any means
whatsoever that any person is engaged or is
ready to engage in any act which is an offence
under this section, or that any such obscene

CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 6 of 12

object can be procured from or through any
person,
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an
offence under this section, shall be punished [on
first conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two
years, and with fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees, and, in the event of a second or
subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to
five years, and also with fine which may extend o
five thousand rupees].
[Exception.- This section does not extend to(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing,
drawing, painting, representation or figure(i)
the publication of which is proved to be
justified as being for the public good on the
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing,
drawing, painting, representation or figure is in
the interest of science, literature, art or learning
or other objects of general concern,
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious
purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved,
painted or otherwise represented on or in(i)
any ancient monument within the meaning
of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 if 1958), or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the
conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any
religious purpose.]]”
10.
Section 4 of the Indecent Representation of the
Women (Prohibition) Act 1986 reads as under:“4. Prohibition of publication or sending
by post of books, pamphlets, etc.,
containing indecent representation of
women – No person shall produce or cause to be
CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 7 of 12

produced, sell, let to hire, distribute, circulate or
send by post any book, pamphlet, paper, slide,
film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
representation or figure which contains indecent
representation of women in any form:
Provided that nothing in this section shall
apply to (a) any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film,
writing,
drawing,
painting,
photograph,
representation of figure (i)
the publication of which is proved to
be justified as being for the public good on the
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, slide,
film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph,
representation or figure is in the interest of
science, literature, art, or learning or other
objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for
religious purposes;
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved,
painted or otherwise represented on or in (i)
any ancient monument within the
meaning of the Ancient Monument and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24
of 1958); or
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for
the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any
religious purpose.
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions
of Part II of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of
1952(, will be applicable.”
11. It is true that a picture of a woman in nude/seminude is not per-se obscene unless there is something in it
which would offend the taste of a ordinary decent minded
person.

CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 8 of 12

12.

Unless the picture of a nude/semi-nude female

is an incentive to sensuality or impure or excite the
thoughts in the mind of an ordinary persons of normal
temperament, the

pictures

cannot

be

regarded

as

obscene within the meaning of Section 292 IPC.
13.

No doubt, no hard or fast rule cannot be laid

down for determination of the issue whether the picture is
obscene or not but broadly speaking focus has to be on
viewing the picture in the context of the surrounding
circumstances, the pose, the posture, the suggestive
element in the picture etc.
14.

Where issue of obscenity relates to the script

(viz-a-viz a photograph), issue has to be considered
differently for the reason in the celebrated decision of the
Supreme Court reported as AIR 1965 SC 881 Ranjit
D.Udeshi Vs. State of Maharashtra the realities of popular
permissiveness was reflected by the Constitution Bench
of the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court spoke of “new
literary standards” and noticed that the world had moved
away from the times when even “Mill On The Floss” was
considered immodest.
15.

But where repetitive photographs without any

backdrop content are published in a magazine and nearly
1/4th of the magazine consists of nothing but repetitive
CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 9 of 12

photographs of semi-nude women, prominence being to
display their breast, there being hardly any literary
contents in the magazine, the matter loses any literary
content and therefore the broad social outlook penned in
Ranjit Udeshi's case may not be available as a defence.
16.

Webster third new international dictionary

defines “obscene” as what is repulsive by reason of
malignancy, hypocrisy, cynicism, irresponsibility, gross
disregard of moral or ethical principles.
17.

I would view the issue with reference to

“pornography” for the reason where a writing or a picture
leans towards pornography it would certainly be obscene
for the reason pornography is the more aggravated form
of obscenity.
18.

Prima facie, pictures which are only intended

to arouse sexual desire would be pornographic. Certainly,
such pictures would offend and would be against public
decency and morals, hence obscene.

In Queen Vs.

Hicklin 1868 LR 3 QB 360, the test of obscenity was
defined as under:“......I think the test of obscenity is this,
whether the tendency of the matter charged
as obscenity is to deprave and corrupt those
whose minds are open to such immoral
influences, and into whose hands a
publication of this sort may fall ...... it is quite
certain that it would suggest to the minds of
CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 10 of 12

19.

the young of either sex, or even to persons of
more advanced years, thoughts of a most
impure and libidinous character.”
In the decision reported as AIR 1970 SC 1390

Chandrakant

Kalyandas

Kakodkar

Vs.

State

of

Maharashtra & Ors. it was inter alia emphasized as
under:-

20.

“The concept of obscenity would differ from
country to country depending on the
standards of morals of contemporary society.
What is considered as a piece of literature in
France may be obscene in England and what
is considered in both countries as not harmful
to public order and morals may be obscene in
our country .................. The standards of
contemporary society in India are also fast
changing. The adults and adolescents have
available to them a large number of classics,
novels, stories and pieces of literature which
have a content of sex, love and romance. As
observed in Udeshi's case, if a reference to
sex by itself is considered obscene, no books
can be sold except those which are purely
religious. In the field of art and cinema also
the adolescent is shown situations which even
a quarter of a century ago would be
considered derogatory to public morality, but
having regard to changed conditions are more
taken for granted without in anyway tending
to debase or debauch the mind. What we
have to see is that whether a class, not an
isolated case, into whose hands the book,
article or story falls suffer in their moral
outlook or become depraved by reading it or
might have impure and lecherous thoughts
aroused in their minds.
The charge of
obscenity must, therefore, be judged from this
aspect.”
It is a recognized principle of law that the

concept of obscenity is molded to a great extent by the
social outlook of the people who are generally expected
CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

Page 11 of 12

to read the book or an article and hence, in relation to
nude/semi-nude pictures of a woman it would depend on
a particular posture and the background in which the
woman is shown.
21.

Prima facie, a look at the impugned pictures in

the magazine would show that there is hardly anything
aesthetic or artistic about them.

Rather the pictures

seem to have taken and published with the sole purpose
of attracting readers who have a prurient mind.
22.

I

refrain

from

expressing

any

conclusive

opinion for the reason this may prejudice the accused.
23.

Issue which has to be decided by me is

whether there is prima facie sufficient material to frame
the charge against the petitioner.

I find that there is

sufficient material to frame the charge against the
petitioner.
24.

I do not find that the learned court below have

not kept the relevant legal principles in mind. I do not
find that the learned courts below have prima facie
committed any illegality or irregularity.
25.

The petition is dismissed.

26.

LCR be returned.

November 5, 2007
mm

CRL.M.C.No. 1709/2001

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page 12 of 12

