IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Bail Application No. 494/2007
#
!

Krishan Lochan Anand
....... Petitioner
through: Mr.K.B.Andley, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.M.L.Yadav, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

State of Delhi
through:

%

....... Respondent
Mr.Jaideep Malik, Adv.

DATE OF DECISION: 08-10-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

FIR No.1173/2005 dated 20.11.2005
U/S. 498-A/304-B/34 IPC
P.S. Saraswati Vihar
Petitioner Krishan Lochan Anand is the father-in-law of

Daljeet Kaur who was married to his son Karan Anand on
22.1.2004. Daljeet died on 20.11.2005. FIR was registered on the
basis of statement of Gursharan Singh, brother of Daljeet, who
informed that his sister was married with Karan Anand on
22.1.2004 and that soon after the marriage her mother-in-law,
father-in-law and husband started troubling his sister on account
of bringing less dowry. That his sister wrote 3 letters on 2.3.2004,
page 1 of 11

23.4.2004 and 2.5.2004 to his other sister mentioning cruelty and
misbehaviour of her in laws.

He further stated that yesterday

night, at around 8 PM his deceased sister had a telephonic
conversation with his other sister. That his deceased sister was
weeping and informed her sister that her mother-in-law was
saying that the Indica car which was given at the time of
marriage was below the status of their family.

They wanted a

Honda City car. That when his sister was married, a fridge was
not given to her. Whenever his sister used the family fridge she
was taunted to bring a new fridge. That in the morning, at 7 AM,
he received a telephone call informing that his sister was injured
and was removed to Jaipur Golden Hospital.

He reached the

hospital and learnt that his sister was brought dead.
2.

I may refer to the 3 letters dated 2.3.2004, 23.4.2004

and 2.5.2004 written by the deceased to her sister. They read as
under :'Hello Didi,
How are you, I am fine here. Didi, do not discuss
about this letter with mummy or brother. I was trying
to state to you something since many days, Didi I
could not even talk with you on phone because
Karan's mother used to sit in front of me whenever I
tried to make call to you and used to make quarry
why are you calling and what are you willing to talk.
Didi, Karan's mummy used to taunt me since last
several days, sometimes she used to say that your
parents has given less dowries. All this reduction has
been done in giving gold tops and that the tops given
are of less weight. Sometimes says that your suits
page 2 of 11

are not good or that your parents had given Kara of
less weight to Karan. When I told her that my parents
have given everything according to their status only
then she kept quite. But Didi, now-a-days she used to
scold me on each and every petty matters. That day it
crossed all limits soaps of my bathroom misplaced
and my mother in law, in the presence of all the
family members treated me like a thief and asked my
scolding where the soap is. Didi really I don't know
where-about the soap has gone my younger brotherin-law (Devar) also used to visit my bathroom. My
mother-in-law asked her sons as a formality but kept
on treating me like a thief for 4-5 days.
Didi, I was not willing to tell all these things but nowa-days it has become un-tolerable. My mother-in-law
used to mentally torture me on same matter. Now-adays she used to keep away Karan from me. Until
and unless his mother does not allow him, he did not
take me out. Didi about two months of my marriage
has been completed and they have changed. Now
they did not talk to me properly as earlier. My Fatherin-law always remains cold towards me and my
mother-in-law used to scold me on every issue.
Your younger sister
Sd/Daljeet
xxxx
'Didi, I am very tense today, I do not know, I will be
alive or not when you will receive this letter. Didi in
the month of February, Kaan had applied for Qatar
Airways and had shown himself unmarried in the said
form. At that time I did not object but yesterday
Karan received offer for job. In that there is a specific
condition that Karan will not return prior to expiry of a
period of one year. I asked him what will happen to
me. On this my mother-in-law stated that after one
year Karan will perform court marriage with me and
took me there. When I objected for the same, my
Father-in-law scolded me very loudly and further
stated that they will send him at any cost. My fatherin-law further stated that your parents had given car
on finance, from where we will arrange installments
page 3 of 11

that either your parents should give installments or
Karan will go abroad and I will remain here. My
Father-in-law insulted and threatened me and stated
that your mother-father had not given anything to us,
at the time of Saga we had asked for 21000/- from
your parents but your parents had given only
Rs.5100/-. My Father-in-law asked me to ask my
family to pay monthly installments of car when I
refused to ask to my parents, my Father-in-law
threatened me for throwing me out of the matrimonial
home.
Didi, Karan is showing everywhere himself as
Unmarried. Initially I could not understand but now I
came to know that my Father-in-law had stated that
when all the installments of the car will be completed
only then Karan will perform court marriage with me.
I do not want to demand anything more from you as I
know that you have fulfilled the demands of after
taking loans.
Didi, now I cannot tolerate all these, I do not know I
can tolerate all these any longer or not. I think that all
these tensions will stop itself if, I will do something to
my self. I think all of them are willing for the same so
that they may re-marry Karan.
Your Younger Sister
Sd/Hello Didi,

xxxx

How are you, Did any how I have convinced Karan in
respect of Qatar Airlines that first he should perform
court marriage with me only then he should go. Did
they have taken my consent forcibly for sending out
Karan. If I had not consented for it, my Father-in-law
had threatened that they will do something wrong
with my brother. Didi please do not tell these things to
brother, I do not want to persuade that matter any
longer. Whenever I try to visit parental home my
mother-in-law either refuses flatly or stop me on one
pretext or the other. I was even not permitted to go
outside the house. I could not even talk with the
women of neighbours. She never allowed me to go
page 4 of 11

outside house with Karan. Used to send either Kubar
or herself accompanied me. They do not allow me to
discuss with doctors only used to give normal check
up. She used to get all household work done from me
and always kept on scolding me.
Whenever I sit to take meal, she intentionally scold
me so that I could not take meal properly. Didi, I do
not know why she used to scold me despite the fact
that I have given my consent for sending Karan
abroad.

3.

Yours younger sister
Sd/Perusal of the letter dated 2.3.2004 shows that the

grievance of the deceased was against her mother-in-law.

A

passing reference is made to the father-in-law in the concluding
sentence of the letter where the deceased wrote that her fatherin-law always remained cold towards her.
4.

Letter dated 23.4.2004 evidences that the grievance of

the deceased was that her husband who had applied for a job at
Qatar Airways had shown his status as unmarried. That she learnt
about Karan receiving a job offer containing a specific condition
that he will not return till after 1 year.

That she asked her

mother-in-law as to what would happen to her. Her mother-inlaw informed her that after 1 year, Karan will perform court
marriage and take her along.

That when she protested, her

father-in-law scolded her and told her that if she did not want her
husband to go abroad, she should bring finances from her
parents.

That her father-in-law demanded that her parents

page 5 of 11

should pay the monthly installments for the car.

Further

grievance was that her husband was not accepting in public that
they were married.
5.

The third letter dated 2.5.2004 evidences that the

deceased informed her sister that she had convinced her husband
and get the marriage registered and only then go abroad. That
she was not being allowed to leave the house.

That she was

being made to do household chores.
6.

No letter has been addressed by the deceased to her

sister after 2.5.2004.
7.

It may be noted that Karan i.e. husband of the

deceased did not go abroad.
8.

From the letters written by the deceased to her sister,

it is apparent that she was disturbed on account of her husband
likely to take up a job at Qatar and not returning back for one
year and she being left in the house of the in-laws where
everybody was either hostile or cold towards her. Further, she
sorted out the issue with her husband pertaining to registration of
the marriage, but was still apprehensive of her future.
9.

The issue of registration of the marriage assumed

significance for only then could the deceased proceed along with
her husband to Qatar.
10.

The whole issue would have become a non-issue for

page 6 of 11

the reason the husband did not proceed to Qatar.
11.

What

happened

between

May,

2004

and

20th

November, 2005, i.e. one year and six months is not documented.
12.

During this period, the deceased gave birth to a baby

boy.
13.

It was urged by learned counsel for the petitioner that

the young bride was apprehensive of the departure of her
husband and was probably feeling unwanted in the house of the
in-laws, but this was only during the initial months of the
marriage.

With the husband not going abroad, the issue died

down. With reference to the MLC of the deceased and the post
mortem report counsel urged that greater and probable cause of
the death was an accidental fall from the roof of the house and
not a suicidal jump.
14.

With reference to the post mortem report, counsel

pointed out that there were fractures on the occipital region
vertebral bone at C4 and C5 Level, Lumber Vertebral disc at L2,
L3 and L5 level, and 2nd 3rd 4th and 5th ribs were fractured.
15.

Learned counsel submitted that the nature of injuries

show that the deceased hit the ground on the posterior side
which was possible only in case of an accidental fall. Further,
there were bruises all over the body indicating that when the
deceased fell, her body brushed past the wall. Counsel submitted

page 7 of 11

that in case of a suicide, the deceased would have jumped from
the parapet of the roof and the trajectory would have taken the
body away from the wall of the building, meaning thereby, there
would be absence of bruise marks on the body. Counsel pointed
out that in the post mortem report, it was recorded that there
were bruises all over the body.
16.

Learned counsel for the State opposed the application

for bail and stated that if not first, the second and the third letters
written by the deceased clearly inculpated the father-in-law.
Counsel further submitted that the brother of the deceased
categorically

informed

the

police

in

his

contemporaneous

statement recorded on the day when the deceased died, that the
night before his deceased sister had rung up his other sister and
told her that her mother-in-law had again taunted her with
reference to not bringing in dowry a Honda City car and that the
said taunt was repeated by the father-in-law.
17.

Before considering the rival submissions it may be

noted that husband of Daljeet Kaur i.e. the deceased has been
admitted to bail vide order dated 6.11.2006 with a specific finding
that the 3 letters do not ascribe incidents of cruelty or
harassment qua the husband and that the allegations pertained
to the mother-in-law and father-in-law.
18.

Thus, petitioner cannot draw comfort from the order

page 8 of 11

releasing his son on bail. On the contrary, said order prima facie
records that the mother-in-law and father-in-law of the deceased
appeared to be the main culprits.
19.

Petitioner is in judicial custody since 20.11.2005. He

has been in judicial custody for nearly 1 year and 10 months.
20.

In the treaties on 'Forensic Medicine and Toxicology'

by J.B.Mukherjee, with reference to spinal injuries, at page 371
learned author has opined as under :-

21.

“Injuries to the spine and spinal cord are usually
accidental, occasionally homicidal and rarely suicidal.
These injuries have medico legal significance in both
criminal and civil cases.”
Spinal injuries suffered by Daljeet Kaur have been

noted by me with reference to the submissions made by learned
counsel for the petitioner in para 14 above.
22.

As per forensic science, spinal injuries are usually

accidental, occasionally they may be homicidal and rarely
suicidal.
23.

Though spinal injuries may result even in a suicidal

jump but falling in the category of being rare it assumes
significance that the deceased had bruise marks over the body.
This means that when the deceased was having a free fall, the
body brushed against an object.
24.

Prima facie, when a person commits suicide by

jumping from the roof of a building, the jump would give a

page 9 of 11

trajectory to the body which would take it away from the wall of
the building, meaning thereby, there would be no bruise marks.
But where a person accidentally falls over the roof, the body
tumbles down perpendicular along the wall and there is greater
likelihood of the body brushing against the wall resulting in the
body suffering bruises.
25.

I do not intend to discuss the issue any further lest trial

is prejudiced. I note that expert evidence has yet to be led by the
prosecution.
26.

I find the following circumstances which in my opinion

lean in favour of granting bail to the petitioner.

Firstly, the role

assigned in the letters written by the deceased to her sister qua
the petitioner is more in the nature of being a passive spectator
and not an active participant. The second circumstance I find is
that after May, 2004 no letter has been written by the deceased.
The trauma which is evidencing in the letters is of the husband
proceeding to Qatar for one year and not taking along with him
the young bride; the young bride being troubled by the mother-inlaw for dowry; the young bride being apprehensive of her future.
The principal apprehension dissipated as the husband did not
proceed to Qatar.

The next circumstance which I find are the

prima facie nature of injuries which if not ruling out suicide are
equally likely to be the result of an accidental fall. Therefore the

page 10 of 11

issue is not free from doubt. The last circumstance I find is of
continued judicial custody of the petitioner for nearly 1 year and
10 months and the trial not likely to conclude in the near future.
27.

I dispose of the petition directing learned Trial Judge to

release the petitioner on bail in afore-noted FIR on the petitioner
furnishing a personal bond in sum of Rs.25,000/- with one surety
in the like amount to the satisfaction of the learned Trial Judge.
28.

Copy of this order be supplied dasti to learned counsel

for the petitioner on payment of usual charges.

October 08, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

page 11 of 11

