IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C.No.3309/2005
#
!

Rajeev Gupta

.......

Petitioner

VERSUS
$
^

State & Ors.

.......

Respondents

Crl.M.C.No.3310/2005
#
!

Rajeev Gupta

.......

Petitioner

VERSUS
$
^

State & Ors.

.......

Respondents

Crl.M.C.No.3311/2005
#
!

Rajeev Gupta

.......

Petitioner

VERSUS
$
^

State & Ors.

.......

Respondents

Crl.M.C.No.3318/2005
#
!

Rajeev Gupta

.......

Petitioner

VERSUS
$
^

State & Ors.

.......

Respondents

Crl.M.C.No.3321/2005
#
!

Rajeev Gupta

.......

Petitioner

Page No.1 of 11

VERSUS
$
^

State & Ors.
Through:

%

.......

Respondents

Mr.Rajat Aneja, Advocate for petitioner
Mr.Rakesh Makhija, Adv. for R-2
Mr.U.L.Watwani, Adv. for State
RESERVED ON : 11.09.2007
DATE OF DECISION: 1.10.2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
The question which falls for consideration in the present

petition is: when the proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act
against a company is dropped, can it continue against the directors
of that company.
2.

All the above captioned 5 petitions have been filed by

the Rajeev Gupta a director of the company M/s Sakura Seimitsu
India Ltd.
3.

Vide above captioned 5 petitions under Section 482 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a challenge is laid to the
common order dated 18.7.2005 passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge whereby revision petitions filed by the petitioner

Page No.2 of 11

against the order dated 18.1.05 passed by the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate refusing to drop proceedings under Section 138 of the NI
Act against the petitioner were dismissed.
4.

Briefly noted, relevant facts are that the respondent

no.2, M/s Fortis Financial Ltd, filed 5 complaints under Section 138
of the NI Act against the company M/s Sakura Seimitsu India Ltd. In
the said complaints, petitioner was impleaded as a co-accused on
the ground that he is the director of the accused company and incharge and responsible for the conduct of the business of the
accused company.
5.

The complaints contained the allegations that various

cheques were issued on behalf of the accused

company towards

part discharge of its liability in favour of the complainant company
and that said cheques were dishonoured by the drawee Bank on the
ground of insufficiency of funds in the account. That the statutory
notices of demand contemplated under Section 138 of the NI Act
were issued to the accused company as well as to the petitioner
demanding payment of the amounts covered by the cheques, but no
amount was paid. Hence the complainant company alleged that
both the accused are liable to be punished for the offence under
Section 138 of the NI Act in respect of each of the cheques.
6.

Taking cognizance of the said complaints, learned

Metropolitan Magistrate summoned the accused company as also its

Page No.3 of 11

director i.e. the petitioner herein to face trial for an offence under
Section 138 of the NI Act.
7.

Meanwhile during pendency of the said complaints,

pursuant to an order passed by the Allahabad High Court the
accused company was wound up and an Official Liquidator was
appointed to take charge of all the assets and properties of the
accused company.
8.

Thereafter an application was filed by the Official

Liquidator before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate stating that in
view of the provisions of Section 446 of the Indian Companies Act,
1956, the proceedings under Section 138 of the NI Act against the
accused company cannot be continued without taking permission
from the company court.
9.

Vide order dated 3.11.2004, holding that the Section

446 of the Indian Companies Act, 1956 applies only to civil
proceedings,

learned

Metropolitan

Magistrate

dismissed

the

application filed by the Official Liquidator.
10.

The Official Liquidator chose not to appear before the

learned Metropolitan Magistrate. An application was filed by the
petitioner praying that the proceedings in question cannot be
continued against him in the absence of the accused company. Vide
order dated 18.1.05, the said application of the petitioner was
dismissed.

Page No.4 of 11

11.

Against the said order of the learned Metropolitan

Magistrate, revision petitions were filed by the petitioner. Vide
impugned order dated 18.7.05, the learned Additional Judge
dismissed the said revision petitions.
12.

Aggrieved by the said dismissal of the revision petition,

present petitions have been preferred by the petitioners.
13.

A two-fold submission has been urged in the petition.

(i)

That the effect of order dated 18.7.05 passed by the

learned Metropolitan Magistrate was that the proceedings against
accused company were dropped. That this amounted to review of an
earlier dated 18.1.05 wherein the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
had directed the Official Liquidator to appear on behalf of the
accused company. That in passing the order dated 18.7.95, the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate has committed an illegality in view
of the law declared by the Supreme Court in the decision reported
as Adalat Prasad v Roop Lal Jindal & Ors, 2004 (4) RCR (Crl) 1 that
the Magistrate has no power to review its order.
(ii)

That if the complaint under Section 138 of the NI Act

against the company has been dropped, the

proceedings in the

complaint cannot be continued qua its director i.e. the petitioner.
14.

When matters came up for hearing on 11.09.2007,

learned counsel for the complainant submitted that the complaint
against the accused company be dropped on account of it being

Page No.5 of 11

ordered to be wound up. Order dated 11.09.07 reads as under:“Present:

Mr. Rajat Aneja, Adv. for the
petitioner.
Mr. Rakesh Mukhija, Adv. for
respondent No.2.
Mr. U.L.Watwani, Adv. for the
State.

+Crl.M.C.Nos. 3309/05, 3310/05, 3311/05,
3318/05 & 3321/05
1.
Learned counsel for respondent
No.2 states that the complainant is no
longer interested in prosecuting the
company impleaded as accused No.1 for the
reason the company has been ordered to be
wound up.
2.
In view of the statement made by
learned counsel for the complainant only
submission urged by learned counsel for the
petitioner is that having impleaded the
company
as
an
accused
and
once
summoning orders are issued, it is not open
to the complainant to withdraw the
complaint against the company.
3.
It is urged that as per law laid
down by the Supreme Court in the decision
reported as Anil Handa Vs. Indian Acrylic Ltd.
2000 (1) JCC 1 SC, sine qua non for holding a
director of a company guilty would be to
establish that the company had committed
the offence and if the company is dropped
as an accused it means that the company is
discharged of the offence under Section 138
N.I.Act, meaning thereby that the director
cannot be held liable for said offence.
4.
15.

Heard.

5.
Reserved for judgment.”
Thus the matter has to be considered in light of the

order dated 11.09.07.
Page No.6 of 11

16.

A co-accused has no locus standi to challenge the

dropping of proceedings against the other co-accused. In the instant
case, the party aggrieved by the order of the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate of dropping against the accused company is the
complainant company.
17.

If the complaint is filed prior to the winding up orders

passed against the company, and is withdrawn against the company
after a winding up order is passed, such criminal proceedings can
continue against the Directors. This legal position is settled by the
Supreme Court in the decision reported as Anil Hada v. Indian
Acrylic Ltd. 2000 Crl.L.J. 373.
18.

In Anil Hada's case, five complaints under Section 138 of

the NI Act were filed against the accused company as also its 11
directors. Backdrop facts were noted in para 4 and 5 of the decision
which reads as under:“4. The magistrate took cognizance of the
offence on each of the complaints and issued
process against the accused. Objections
were raised by the accused company on the
premise that winding up proceedings have
been ordered by the court on the accused
company
and
hence
no
prosecution
proceedings could be continued against the
accused company. It appears that the
magistrate had accepted the said contention
and in respect of three complaints the
magistrate ordered the complaint to remain
in suspense against the accused company
until leave is obtained from the Court
concerned to continue with the prosecution
proceedings. In respect of the remaining two
Page No.7 of 11

complaints learned magistrate dropped
further proceedings as against the accused
company on the same premise.
5. It was in the aforesaid background that
the present appellant, who is arraigned as
second accused in all the complaints, moved
the trial court for dropping the criminal
prosecution against him also. The trial
magistrate dismissed the petitions holding
that prosecution against the directors of the
company, who were in charge of the
business of the company, could be
maintained even without prosecuting the
company itself. Revision petitions filed by the
appellant in challenge of the aforesaid orders
of the magistrate were dismissed by the
learned single judge of the High Court as per
the order, which is under challenge now.”
19.

It was held by the Supreme Court that an offender under

Section 138 of the NI Act is the drawer of the cheque which alone
would have been the offender thereunder, if the Act did not contain
other provisions. Therefore, normally, in the case of a company
incorporated under the Companies Act it is the company which
would be the offender. However, by virtue of Section 141 of the NI
Act, penal liability under Section 138 is cast upon other persons
connected with the company. Therefore, those persons also become
liable for penal action in addition to the company. It was further held
that if the offence is committed by a company it can be punished
only if the company is prosecuted. However, if instead of
prosecuting the company, a payee opts to prosecute other persons
falling within the description of Section 141 it is permissible for him
to do so.
Page No.8 of 11

20.

It is one thing to say that the sine qua non for conviction

of the director of a company under Section 138 of the NI Act is to
establish that the company had committed the offence and it is an
altogether different thing to say that sine qua non for prosecution of
the director of a company under Section 138 of the NI Act is to
establish that the company had committed the offence. The
Supreme Court in the Anil Hada's decision (supra) has also made a
distinction between these two as is evident from para 13 of the
decision which reads as under:“13. If the offence was committed by a
Company it can be punished only if the
company is prosecuted. But instead of
prosecuting the company if a payee opts to
prosecute only the persons falling within the
second or third category the payee can
succeed in the case only if he succeeds in
showing that the offence was actually
committed by the Company. In such a
prosecution the accused can show that the
company has not committed the offence,
though such company is not made an
accused, and hence the prosecuted accused
is not liable to be punished. The provisions
do not contain a condition that prosecution
of the company is sine qua non for
prosecution of the other persons who fall
within the second and the third categories
mentioned above. No doubt a finding that
offence was committed by the Company is
sine qua non for convicting those other
persons. But if a company is not prosecuted
due to any legal snag or otherwise, the other
prosecuted persons cannot, on that score
alone, escape from the penal liability created
through the legal fiction envisaged in Section
141 of the Act.”

Page No.9 of 11

21.

The Supreme Court also noted the provisions of Section

139 of the NI Act which draws a legal presumption in favour of
holder, namely, to the effect that the holder of a cheque received
the cheque of the nature referred under Section 138 of the NI Act in
discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or any other liability and
held that such a presumption mentioned in this Section would
operate not only against the drawer but against other persons who
can be roped in by virtue of Section 141 of the Act. The liability of
the company as well as Directors under Sections 138 and 141 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act would remain if the cheque is presented
after the winding up petition is filed and is pending but the orders of
winding up have not been passed.
22.

Supreme Court in para 21 of the decision summed up

the discussion as under:“We, therefore, hold that even if the
prosecution
proceedings
against
the
company were not taken or could not be
continued, it is no bar for proceeding against
the other persons falling within the purview
of Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 141 of
the Act. In the light of the aforesaid view we
do not consider it necessary to deal with the
remaining question whether winding up
order of a company would render the
company non-existent.”

23.

In the decision reported as Bimal Kumar Nopani v State

Page No.10 of 11

of UP 2006 Cri LJ 2611, the Allahabad High Court was considering a
complaint

under

Section

Chairman/Managing

138

Director

of
of

the

NI

the

Act

against

company.

the
The

Chairman/Managing Director sought quashing on the ground that in
the said complaint company was not made an accused. Noting the
law laid down by the Supreme Court in Anil Hada's case, the High
Court observed as under:“Thus it is clear that the person responsible
for conduct and in -charge of the business of
the company can be prosecuted without
prosecution of the company itself. It is the
choice of the complainant against whom he
wants to proceed.”
24.

Taking note of law laid down by the Supreme Court in

Anil Hada's case, above captioned 5 petitions are dismissed.
25.

No costs.

October 01 , 2007

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Page No.11 of 11

