IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Bail Application No.2053/2005
#
!

Surender Nath
.......Petitioner
through: Mr. Lalit Gupta, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

State & Ors.
.......Respondents
through: Mr. Harsh Dev Shastri, Advocate for
respondent with respondent in person
Mr. Anil Soni, Advocate for State

%

DATE OF DECISION: 17-08-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

FIR No.274/05 dated 24.3.2005
U/s. 506 IPC
P.S. Saraswati Vihar
Complainant at whose instance FIR is registered is a

safai karamchari in a complex of flats constructed by a cooperative group housing society. Petitioner is a resident of Flat
Page 1 of 5

No.107 in said complex.
2.

Gravement of the allegation against the petitioner as

per FIR is as follows :-

3.

“Shri Surender Nath Singh, resident of Flat No.107 is
harassing us because I do not lift and remove garbage
from his flat and he has not paid any money since the
past 3 years for working in his flat and now every day
he is threatening me that he will get killed my wife
and my child. He is a very big tantrik and throws the
garbage of his flat here and there because of which all
the residents of the society are troubled.”
According to the petitioner who is aged 67 years as of

today, having retired as a Professor from the National Council of
Educational Research and Training, his desire of living a peaceful
life was jettisoned by one Jagdish who had an evil eye on the flat
of the petitioner. That Jagdish got petitioner entangled in various
criminal proceedings pertaining to breach of peace resulting in
registration of as many as 3 kalandaras, details whereof have
been set out in para 11, 12 and 13 of the petition.
4.

According to the petitioner, complainant has been used

by said Jagdish who at an earlier occasion, apart from getting
petitioner involved in 3 proceedings pertaining to breach of peace
got the petitioner falsely implicated in a Complaint Case
No.760/1/2004 under Sections 406, 420, 452, 506, 34 IPC
Page 2 of 5
at the instance of one Gurdeep Singh.

5.

Since petitioner seeks quashing of the FIR I am not

dealing with the issue of false implication or mala fide for the
reason said issue may require appreciation of evidence and since
evidence has yet to be recorded, any discussion on said issue
would be pre-mature.
6.

Section 506 of the Indian Penal Code provides for

punishment for 'Criminal Intimidation'. Section 503 of the Indian
Penal Code defines 'Criminal Intimidation' as follows :-

7.

“503.
Criminal intimidation.- Whoever threatens
another with any injury on his person, reputation or
property, or to the person or reputation of any one in
whom that person is interested, with intent to cause
alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any
act which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do
any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the
means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits
criminal intimidation.”
But, Section 95 of the IPC has also to be kept in mind.

The same reads as under :-

8.

'95. Act causing slight harm.- Nothing is an offence
by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to cause,
or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm , if that
harm is so slight that no person of ordinary sense and
temper would complain of such harm.'
Section 95 of the Indian Penal Code is the statutory

recognition of the maxim 'De Minimis Non Curat Lex'.
9.

The mandate of Section 95 of the Indian Penal Code
Page 3 of 5

is to ignore trivial acts. By virtue of Section 95 of the Indian Penal

Code offences which may fall within the strict letter of the law but
not within its spirit would be non-actionable.
10.

A trivial act is excused as no reasonable man

complains of trifles.
trifles.

Indeed, law does not concern itself with

Trivial acts are not crimes.

They are only negligible

wrongs.
11.

Momentary annoyances would not be treated as

offences by virtue of Section 95 of the Indian Penal Code.
12.

To constitute the offence punishable under Section 506

of the Indian Penal Code, in the decision report as 2001 IV AD
(Delhi) 495 Kanshi Ram Vs. State, a learned Single Judge of this
Court has held that the threat, i.e. intimidation must achieve the
level of causing alarm.
13.

Noting the contents of the FIR against the petitioner,

his age and his avocation, in my opinion, in view of Section 95 of
the Indian Penal Code, assuming that such a threat emanated,
case is made out to quash the FIR.
14.

Petition is allowed.

15.

Above captioned FIR is quashed.

16.

Needless to state, any proceedings initiated pursuant

Page 4 of 5

to the FIR shall also be quashed.

August 17, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

