IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM(M) No.1151/2007
#
!

Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanama & Anr.
through: Mr.R.C.Bhalla, Adv.

......Petitioners

VERSUS
$
^

Titech Engineers Pvt. Ltd.
through: None.

........ Respondent

CM(M) No.1152/2007
#
!

Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanama & Anr.
through: Mr.R.C.Bhalla, Adv.

......Petitioners

VERSUS
$
^
%

Titech Engineers Pvt. Ltd.
through: None.

........ Respondent

DATE OF DECISION: 13.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Admittedly, the works in question which are subject

matter of dispute between the parties and as awarded to the
respondent have to be executed at Delhi.

The works are
page 1 of 5

pertaining to civil construction works at Delhi.
2.

The only issue which needs to be decided is,

whether in view of clause 2.15 of the agreement between the
parties, courts at Delhi cannot entertain the suit, for the reason
it is alleged by the petitioner that contract(s) were executed at
Tirupati.
3.

Clause 2.15 reads as under :“2.15. JURISDICTION

4.

For the purpose of this agreement all the
transactions shall be deemed to have taken place
within the state of ANDHRA PRADESH and the courts
in ANDHRA PRADESH shall have jurisdiction over the
matters arising under or out of this agreement.”
It is settled law that where a cause of action has

accrued to a party within the territorial jurisdiction of more than
one court, suit can be filed in any court where part of cause of
action has accrued.

It is equally settled that by consent,

parties can exclude jurisdiction of a particular court and confer
exclusive jurisdiction on a particular court.

It is equally well

settled that by consent, no jurisdiction can be conferred on the
court if it does not inherently possess one.
5.

A perusal of Clause 2.15 of the agreement shows

that the author of the document recorded that for the purposes
of agreement all transactions shall be deemed to have taken
page 2 of 5

place within the State of Andhra Pradesh and that Courts in
Andhra Pradesh shall have jurisdiction over the matters arising
under or out of the agreement.
6.

Andhra Pradesh is not a contiguous territorial

jurisdiction relating to the territorial jurisdiction of courts.

I

have put a poster to the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Could the suit in question have been filed in the city of
Hyderabad? The answer is no. The reason is that no part of
cause of action has accrued in the city of Hyderabad. Neither
party has its place of business or residence in the city of
Hyderabad. Agreement was not executed at Hyderabad. No
part of work has to be executed at Hyderabad.
7.

What I intend to bring out is that if it was intended

that courts only at Tirupati would have jurisdiction for the
reason agreement was executed there, the author of the
agreement ought to have recorded that for the purposes of the
agreement all transactions would be deemed to have taken
place within the territorial limits of the city of Tirupati and that
courts in Tirupati alone and no other court shall have
jurisdiction to take cognizance of any suit.
8.

I need not note the catena of decisions on the point

which have highlighted that where more than one courts have
page 3 of 5

jurisdiction over the subject matter of a dispute on account of
cause of action accruing in different jurisdictions and it is
intended to limit jurisdiction, only then one can oust jurisdiction
of others, but intention has to be expressed with clarity. The
decisions note that the words like 'alone', 'only', 'exclusive'
have to exist in the ouster clause for the reason only when such
expressions are to be found could it can be inferred that the
intention of the parties was to limit jurisdiction.
9.

I clarify that the 3 words noted here-in-above are

not exhaustive but are merely illustrative of the language to be
used while ousting jurisdiction and exclusively vesting the
same in a a particular court.
10.

Broadly stated, intention of the parties has to be

gathered with respect to the language used in the agreement
between the parties.
11.

In the instant case, since civil construction works

have to be executed at Delhi, indisputably, part of cause of
action would accrue in the city of Delhi. Since agreement in
question was executed at Tirupati, part of cause of action
would also accrue in the city of Tirupati.
Tirupati

as

also

Delhi

would

have

Thus, courts at

jurisdiction

to

take

cognizance of suits filed pertaining to the agreement.
page 4 of 5

12.

Clause 2.15 relied upon, as noted here-in-above, is

too broadly worded.

It does not even state that courts at

Tirupati would have jurisdiction. The clause states that courts
all over Andhra Pradesh would have jurisdiction.

The clause

cannot confer jurisdiction on all civil courts in Andhra Pradesh
for the reason in the State of Andhra Pradesh only place where
part of cause of action accrued is the city of Tirupati.
Additionally, the clause does not state that only courts at a
particular place and no other court would have jurisdiction over
the subject matter of a dispute arising under or out of the
agreement.
13.

Thus, I find no infirmity in the impugned order which

has held against the petitioners, resulting in a dismissal of
application filed by the petitioners praying that the plaint be
returned on the plea that courts at Tirupati alone have
jurisdiction to entertain the claim.
14.

The petitions are dismissed.

15.

No costs.

November 13, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 5 of 5

