IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No. 250/1987
#
!

E.S.I.C.

........
Appellant
through: Mr. N.S.Bajwa, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Hotel Corporation of Delhi........
Respondent
through: Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Krishan Kumar, Advocate
FAO No. 38/1988

#
!

E.S.I.C.

........
Appellant
through: Mr. N.S.Bajwa, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

M/s. Asian Hotels Ltd. & Anr......... Respondents
through: Mr. Amit Shukla, Advocate for R-1
Mr. Rakesh K.Garg, Advocate for R-2
RESERVED ON: 4.01.2008

%

DATE OF DECISION: 15.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The above captioned appeals raise a common question

of law and hence are being decided together.
2.

Facts relevant to FAO No. 250/1987 are that the first

FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 1 of 13

respondent, Hotel Corporation of India, intended to set up a five
star hotel near the International Airport at Delhi called Centaur
Hotel. On 1.2.1981 it awarded the work of constructing the hotel
to the second respondent M/s. Tirath Ram Ahuja Pvt. Ltd.

The

hotel building was stipulated to be completed by December 1983.
3.

When the work was in progress, a wing consisting of 200

rooms was completed.

It be noted that 400 rooms were to be

constructed under the original contract. Due to the ensuing Asian
Games to be held in the month of November-December 1982,
first respondent decided to commence partial operations

from

the building by putting to use the 200 rooms which were
constructed.

Appellant learnt that partial operations had

commenced from the building. It demanded ESI dues with effect
from 1.6.1982. It demanded from the second respondent the list
of workmen engaged and wage register.

Appellant did so by

treating first respondent as the principal employer and the
second respondent as the immediate employer. According to the
appellant since the establishment had come into being when
business commenced, the remaining construction work pertaining
to 200 rooms was akin to the extension work of an existing
establishment. According to the appellant the ratio of law as per
decisions of the Supreme Court reported as Vol. 69 FJR 77
Regional Director ESI Corporation Vs. South India Flour Mills and
AIR 1978 SC 1478 Royal Talkies Vs. ESIC stood squarely
FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 2 of 13

attracted.
4.

Though appellant proceeded to determine liability under

the ESIC Act with effect from 1.6.1982 but on understanding that
partial operations commenced in November 1982 restricted its
enquiry to post November 1982.
5.

The second respondent took resort to an action under

Section 75 of the ESIC Act.

It urged that the issue had to be

looked at with reference to the factual situation when it
undertook the work of constructing the hotel building. In other
words, it was urged that an employee would be a person who was
employed in or in connection with the work of a factory or
establishment i.e the existence of a factory or establishment was
a sine qua non when a person was engaged as an employee.
6.

The plea of the second respondent was accepted by the

learned Judge who vide order dated 25.5.1987, absolved the
respondents from any liability to contribute to the appellant any
money under the ESIC Act pertaining to the workmen engaged in
construction of Centaur Hotel and who remained at site after
November 1982.
7.

The reasoning of the learned Judge is as under:“In the present case the work has been undertaken
by
the
petitioner
before
the
factory
or
establishment has come into existence.
The
petitioner therefore, cannot be an immediate
employer qua the respondent No.2 and if the
petitioner is not the immediate employer there
cannot be any liability of the petitioner for the

FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 3 of 13

purpose of contribution. The construction which
has been raised by the petitioner from November,
1982 to December, 1983 cannot be said to be
additional
construction
or
a
factory
or
establishment.”
8.

The decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as

Vol. 69 FJR 77 Regional Director ESI Corporation Vs. South India
Flour Mills which was cited before the learned Judge has been
distinguished with the following observations:“All the parties have relied upon the authority as
reported in 1986 Indian Factories Journal page 77
Regional Director, E.S.I.C. Vs. South India Flour Mills.
The said Authority has no application to the facts
and circumstances of the present case. The said
authority deals with the case where a factory was
already
in
existence
and
the
additional
constructions were sought to be raised from the
contractors. Once the factory is in existence any
construction which is made for making additional
construction in the factory can be covered under
Sec. 2 (13). It is not the case where the additional
constructions were being raised by the petitioner.
Instead it is the original construction which was
agreed upon about two years prior to the coming
existence of the hotel were being raised. In this
view of the matter no benefit can be given of the
said authorities to either parties as the construction
herein involved are not the additional constructions
agreed upon to be raised after the factory has come
into existence.”
9.

Pertaining to FAO 38/1988 relevant facts are that Asian

Hotels Ltd., respondent No.1., awarded a contract to M/s. Tirath
Ram Ahuja Pvt. Ltd. for construction of Hotel Hayat Regency. The
contract was awarded in the year 1981.
completed by 1984.

The hotel was to be

Some rooms which were completed by

November 1982 were put to use due to ensuing Asian Games. As
FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 4 of 13

in the case of Centaur Hotel, appellant demanded contribution
under the ESIC Act pertaining to the workers engaged by M/s.
Tirath Ram Ahuja Pvt. Ltd. for completion of the hotel building
post November 1982.
10.

This action has been quashed vide impugned order

dated 21.12.1987 in an action initiated by respondent No.1 under
Section 75 of the ESIC Act.
11.

The reasoning is the same as is the reasoning in the

order dated 25.5.1987 which is a subject matter of challenge in
FAO No. 250/1987.
12.

Contention urged by learned counsel for the appellant in

both the appeals is the same which was urged by the appellants
before the learned Judge, ESIC Court, i.e. its reason for holding
that in respect of the workman engaged by M/s.Tirath Ram Ahuja
Pvt. Ltd. for completion of the balance work liability to pay had
accrued under the ESIC Act. It was urged by learned counsel for
the appellant that with operations commencing, though partially,
the establishment had come into being and therefore law as laid
down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision in South India
Flour Mills' case (supra) and Royal Talkies' case (supra) stood
squarely attracted.
13.

Per contra, Mr.Sandeep Sethi, learned senior counsel

appearing for Hotel Corporation of India urged that the sine qua
non for liability to be fastened was the existence of an
FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 5 of 13

establishment

when

additional

construction

work

was

undertaken. Mr.Amit Shukla, learned counsel appearing for Asian
Hotels Ltd. adopted the submissions made by Mr.Sandeep Sethi,
learned senior counsel appearing for Hotel Corporation of India.
14.

To appreciate the contentions of learned counsel for the

parties

the

definition

of

the

word 'employee',

'immediate

employer' and 'principal employer' as defined in sub-sections 9,
13 and 17 of Section 2 of the ESIC Act may be noted. The same
are defined as under:A.

'Employee' is defined as under :(9)“Employee” means any person employed for
wages in or in connection with the work of a
factory or establishment to which this Act applies
and (i)
who is directly employed by the
principal employer, on any work of, or incidental
or preliminary to or connected with the work of,
the factory or establishment, whether such work
is done by the employee in the factory or
establishment or elsewhere; or
(ii)
who is employed by or through an
immediate employer, on the premises of the
factory or establishment or under the supervision
of the principal employer or his agent on work
which is ordinarily part of the work of the factory
or establishment or which is preliminary to the
work carried on in or incidental to the purpose of
the factory or establishment; or
(iii)
whose services are temporarily lent or
let on hire to the principal employer by the
person with whom the person whose services are
so lent or let on hire has entered into a contract
of service;

FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 6 of 13

[and includes any person employed for wages on
any work connected with the administration of
the factory or establishment or any part,
department or branch thereof or with the
purchase of raw materials for, or the distribution
or sale of the products of, the factory or
establishment] [or any person engaged as
apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged
under the Apprentices Act, 1961 (52 of 1961), or
under the standing orders of the establishment;
but does not include](a)
any member of the [the Indian] naval,
military or air forces; or
(b)
any person so employed whose wages
(excluding remuneration for overtime work:
exceed [such wages as may be prescribed by the
Central Government] a month:
Provided that an employee whose wages
(excluding remuneration for overtime work)
exceed [such wages as may be prescribed by the
Central Government at any time after (and not
before) the beginning of the contribution period,
shall continue to be an employee until the end of
that period;]
B.

“Immediate employer” is defined as under :(13)
“immediate employer', in relation to
employees employed by or through him, means
a person who has undertaken the execution, on
the premises of a factory or an establishment to
which this Act applies or under the supervision of
the principal employer or his agent, of the whole
or any part of any work which is ordinarily part of
the work of the factory or establishment of the
principal employer or is preliminary to the wok
carried on in, or incidental to the purpose of, any
such factory or establishment, and includes a
person by whom the services of an employee
who has entered into a contract of service with
him are temporarily lent or let on hire to the
principal employer [and includes a contractor];

C.

“Principal employer” is defined as under :-

FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 7 of 13

(17)

“principal employer” means-

(i)
in a factory, the owner or occupier of
the factory and includes the managing agent of
such owner of occupier, the legal representative
of a deceased owner or occupier, and where a
person has been named as the manager of the
factory under [the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of
1948), the person so named;
(ii)
in any establishment under the control
of any department of any Government in India,
the authority appointed by such Government in
this behalf or where no authority is so appointed,
the head of the Department;
(iii)
in any other establishment, any person
responsible for the supervision and control of the
establishment;
15.

It is not in dispute that ESIC dues have to be deducted

and paid to the authority in respect of the employees, subject of
course to other provisions of the statute being attracted vis-a-vis
the employer.
16.

I need not analyze in detail the three limbs of sub-

section 9 of Section 2 for the reason the first two limbs thereof
have been pithly analyzed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
decision in Royal Talkies' case (supra).

The same reads as

under:“14.
Now here is a break-up of Sec.2(9). The clause
contains two substantive parts.
Unless the person
employed qualifies under both he is not an 'employee'.
Firstly, he must be employed “in or in connection with'
the work of an establishment.
The expression in
connection with the work of an establishment” ropes in a
wide variety of workmen who may not be employed in
the establishment but may be engaged only in
FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 8 of 13

connection with the work of the establishment. Some
nexus must exist between the establishment and the
work of the employee but it may be a loose connection.
'In connection with the work of an establishment' only
postulates some connection between what the employee
does and the work of the establishment. He may not do
anything directly for the establishment; he may not do
anything statutorily obligatory in the establishment; he
may not even do anything which is primary or necessary
for the survival or smooth running of the establishment
or integral to the adventure.
It is enough if the
employee does some work which is ancillary, incidental
or has relevance to or link with the object of the
establishment. Surely, an amenity or facility for the
customers who frequent the establishment has
connection with the work of the establishment. The
question is not whether without that amenity or facility
the establishment cannot be carried on but whether
such amenity or facility, even peripheral may be, has not
a link with the establishment. Illustrations may not be
exhaustive but may be informative. Taking the present
case, an establishment like a cinema theatre is not
bound to run a canteen or keep a cycle stand (in Andhra
Pradesh) but no one will deny that a canteen service, a
toilet service, a car park or a cycle stand, a booth for
sale of catchy film literature on actors, song hits and the
like, surely have connection with the cinema theatre and
even further the venture. On the other hand, a bookstall where scientific works or tools are sold or a stall
where religious propaganda is done, may not have
anything to do with the cinema establishment and may,
therefore, be excluded on the score that the employees
do not do any work in connection with the
establishment, that is, the theatre. In the case of a five
star hotel, for instance a barber shop or an arcade
massage parlour, foreign exchange counter or tourist
assistance counter may be run by some one other than
the owner of the establishment but the employees so
engaged do work in connection with the establishment
or the hotel even though there is no obligation for a
hotel to maintain such an ancillary attraction.
By
contrast, not a lawyer's chamber or architect
consultancy. Nor, indeed, is it a legal ingredient that
such
adjunct
should
be
exclusively
for
the
establishment, if it is mainly the ancillary.”
17.

In respect of the third limb, the language is clear.

FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

A

Page 9 of 13

person whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to the
principal employer by the person with whom the person whose
services are so lent or let on hire would also be an employee.
18.

The underlined phrases in para 14 of the decision in

Royal Talkies case (supra) emphasizes the connectivity required
by law between the person employed and the establishment.
That is to say, employment has to be in connection with an
establishment, the being of which is in existence.
19.

In South India Flour Mills' case (supra), their Lordships of

the Supreme Court were considering the status of employees
engaged by a contractor to whom an existing establishment had
awarded work for erecting buildings required for expansion of the
factory.
20.

Noting the earlier decision in Royal Talkies' case (supra),

their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court opined as under:“In our opinion, the work of construction of additional
buildings required for the expansion of a factory must be
held to be ancillary, incidental or having some relevance
to or link with the object of the factory. It is not correct
to say that such work must always have some direct
connection with the manufacturing process that is
carried on in the factory. The expression “work of the
factory” should also be understood in the sense of any
work necessary for the expansion of the factory or
establishment or for augmenting or increasing the work
of the factory or establishment. Such work is incidental
or preliminary to or connected with the work of the
factory or establishment.”
21.

A plain reading of sub-section 9 of Section 2 of the Act

shows that a person would be an employee if he is employed for
FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

Page 10 of 13

wages in or in connection with the work of a factory or
establishment and the employment is additionally attracting
clause (i), (ii) or (iii) thereof.
22.

Ex facie, the being of the factory or establishment when

employment commences is the principal requisite.

In other

words, issue of relationship has to be considered with reference
to the date of employment and with reference to no other date.
23.

When the construction work of the two hotel buildings

was awarded to M/s.Tirath Ram Ahuja Pvt. Ltd., admittedly, the
establishment had not come into being. Till the hotel buildings
were constructed, operations pertaining to the establishment of
the hotels could not commence.

It is for this reason the

authorities under the Act themselves did not require any
contribution to be paid under the ESIC Act when M/s.Tirath Ram
Ahuja Pvt. Ltd. deployed workman to commence construction of
the two hotel buildings.

Both contracts awarded the complete

work of construction of the buildings and merely because, due to
the ensuing Asian Games to be held in the month of November
and December 1982, partial hotel operations commenced from
the partly constructed buildings would not mean that the
remaining construction work was akin to the expansion work of
an existing establishment.
24.

The view taken by the learned Judge ESIC is a

reasonable and a plausible view.
FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

I see no reasons to differ
Page 11 of 13

therefrom.
25.

I find no merits in the appeals. The same are dismissed.

26.

No costs.

January 15, 2008
mm/dk

FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 12 of 13

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No. 38/1988
#
!

E.S.I.C.

........
Appellant
through: Mr. N.S.Bajwa, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

M/s. Asian Hotels Ltd. & Anr......... Respondents
through: Mr. Amit Shukla, Advocate for R-1
Mr. Rakesh K.Garg, Advocate for R-2
RESERVED ON: 4.01.2008

%

DATE OF DECISION: 15.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
For orders see FAO No.250/1987.

January 15, 2008
mm/dk

FAO Nos. 250/1987 & 38/1988

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 13 of 13

