IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Bail Application No.90/2007
#
!

Vijay Kumar
through:

.......Petitioner
Mr. K.B.Andley, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. K.K.Datta, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

State

through:

%

.......Respondent
Mr. Jaideep Malik, Advocate

DATE OF DECISION: 11-10-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

FIR No.423/06 dated 03.08.2006
under Section 20 of the NDPS Act
PS Patel Nagar.
Petitioner Vijay Kumar who is in judicial custody since

3.8.2006 and is facing trial for the charge that on 3.8.2006 at
about 6.45 pm he was found in unlawful possession of 15.7 Kg of
ganja, thereby committing an offence under Section 20 of the
NDPS Act seeks bail in the instant case.
2.

It is urged by learned counsel for the petitioner that

the quantity recovered is less than commercial quantity. As per
page 1 of 5

the statute the commercial quantity is 20 Kg.

It is urged that

there is a difference in the weight of the samples as stated to be
sealed at the time of seizure and the quantity received by CFSL.
It is urged that the seizure is dated 3.8.2006 but samples were
sent for analysis on 28.9.2006.

Therefrom, it is urged that the

samples have been tampered with. It is further urged that the
stated recovery is from a public place near Patel Nagar Railway
Station and no public witness has been involved. This is stated to
be casting a doubt on the case of the prosecution.

Lastly it is

urged that in the malkhana register, Ex.PW-2/A, deposit of the FSL
Form in the malkhana has not been recorded. Further, in the road
certificate, Ex.PW-2/D, while showing the dispatch of the sealed
samples marked A-1 to A-4, dispatch of the FSL Form is not
recorded. It is further urged that as per the testimony of PW-2,
HC Yogesh Kumar, the person posted at the malkhana when
samples and seized material was deposited, all articles were
sealed with the seals of 'JT' & 'AJS' but the report of the FSL
records that the 4 parcels which were received i.e. Ex.A-1 to Ex.A4 as per road certificate had seals embossed 'JT' & 'AJT' thereon.
In this connection it is further pointed out that in the malkhana
register in relation to the deposits, name of police personnel
effecting the seizure was not recorded save and except the entry
pertaining to deposit of the seized material in the instant case.
page 2 of 5

Taking this argument a little further, it has been pointed out that
PW-2 has admitted in cross-examination that entry in circle in
mark X in Ex.PW-2/A recording deposit by Inspector A.S.Bajwa
appears to be in a different ink vis-a-vis rest of the entry in Ex.PW2/A.
3.

Opposing the application learned counsel for the State

explains that difference in quantity of the weight in the samples
which were noted by the FSL vis-a-vis the measurement recorded
at the time of seizure and separation for purposes of preparing
the sample at the time of seizure is 1 gram, 12 grams, 16 grams
and 18 grams respectively in the 4 samples. It is explained that
ganja being a vegetable product has moisture and moisture
content deceases with passage of time.

In respect of delay in

sending the samples for FSL analysis it is explained that due to
paucity of place the laboratory indicated the date on which the
samples have to be sent. Based on priroritization these dates are
intimated. In the instant case when the green signal was received
from the FSL, samples were sent. In respect of not associating
any public witness, learned counsel for the State explains that
public apathy towards involvement in an criminal investigation is
the facet of modern day of life.

But that does not mean that

police officers cannot and should not believed. In respect of the
discrepancy in the official record pertaining to FSL Form being or
page 3 of 5

not being deposited in the malkhana, learned counsel points out
that in the FSL report it has been mentioned that the 4 samples
were received along with the FSL Form. Counsel urges that this
discrepancy could be explained by the investigating officer. Thus,
counsel states that at this stage it cannot be said that the case of
the prosecution has fallen and counsel closes the application for
bail.
4.

In my opinion what is relevant to be noted at this stage

is that in the FSL Form reference to the seals on the sealed
parcels sent for FSL analysis is 'JT' & 'AJT' whereas as per the
testimony of PW-2 and as recorded in Ex.PW-2/A the material
deposited in the malkhana bore the seal 'JT' & 'AJS'.

Further,

admission of PW-2, the malkhana in-charge, that in the malkhana
register entry Ex.PW-2/A, portion Mark X appear to be in a
different ink vis-a-vis the rest of the entry creates a prima facie
suspicion of something being amiss. It is in this context the issue
of non-deposit of the FSL Form in the malkhana and no mention
thereof in

the road certificate Ex.PW-2/D cannot be brushed

aside lightly.
5.

Noting that trial has yet to conclude and investigating

officer has yet to be examined, in my opinion case is made out for
release of the petitioner on bail.
6.

I dispose of the petition directing that the petitioner be
page 4 of 5

released on bail by the learned Trial Judge on the petitioner
furnishing a personal bond in sum of Rs.25,000/- with one surety
in the like amount to the satisfaction of the learned Trial Judge in
the afore-noted FIR.
7.

Dasti.

October 11, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 5 of 5

