IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C.5638-44/2005
#
!

Sushila Devi
through:

.......Petitioners
Mr.Mr. Vijay Sharma, Adv.
VERSUS

$

Securities and Exchange Board of
India
.......Respondents
through: Mr.Atul Sharma, Adv.

%

RESERVED ON : 06.08.2007
DATE OF DECISION: 13-08-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) filed a

complaint against the petitioners under Section 200 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 read with Section 24(1) and 27 of
the Securities and Exchange Board of India, 1992. Inter alia, it
was stated that Section 11 of the Act casts upon SEBI the duty
to protect the interest of investors in securities and that SEBI
was enjoined upon to promote the development of and to
regulate the securities market through appropriate measures.
Crl.M.C.No.5638-44/2005

Page No.1 of 7

2.

It was stated that the last decade had witnessed initiative

by private entrepreneurs to undergo plantation activities on a
commercial scale.

It was noted that promoters would invest

minimal amounts in such ventures.

They would raise funds

from

absence

ordinary

mechanisms.

investors

in

the

of

regulatory

It was stated that the high returns promised

under the schemes were questionable. It was stated that in the
year 1997 certain guidelines were framed pertaining to
plantation companies.
3.

Listing out various regulations which require to be

complied with in the year 1997 and alleging that the same were
not complied with, complaint was filed alleging violation of
Section 27 of the Act as also the regulations framed.
4.

Pertaining to petitioners 1 to 7 who were impleaded as

respondents 2 to 9 following averments were made in para 7 of
the complaint :-

5.

“7. The accused No.1 is a company registered
under the provisions of the Companies Act and the
accused No.2 to 9 are the directors of the accused
No.1 company. The accused No.2 to 9 are the
persons incharge and responsible for the day to day
affairs of the company and all of the were actively
connived with each other for the commission of the
offences.”
At the hearing, learned counsel for the petitioners urged a

limited submission being that the averment that petitioners
were the directors and person in charge and responsible for the
Crl.M.C.No.5638-44/2005

Page No.2 of 7

day-today affairs of the company was insufficient to proceed
against the petitioners.

Thus, counsel urged that the order

dated 15.12.2003 summoning the petitioners to answer the
charges was liable to be quashed.
6.

I need not discuss a plethora of authorities on the issue as

to what constitutes sufficient averments in a complaint to make
it actionable vis-a-vis the directors of a company.
7.

Officers responsible for the conduct of the affairs of a

company are generally referred to as directors, managers,
secretaries etc. With reference to Sections 291 to 293 of the
Companies Act, 1956 it would be evident that what a board of
directors of a company is empowered to do depends upon the
roles and functions assigned to the directors as per the
memorandum and articles of association of a company.
8.

It would be sufficient for me to state that the question as

to what is the role of a director in a company is a question of
fact.
9.

Since criminal liability is foisted upon a director not

merely on account of his or her being a director but on account
of a conduct, act or omission, there must be a averment in a
complaint relatable to the said act or omission.
10.

What would be said sufficient averment?

11.

The answer is found in a 3 member bench decision of the

Crl.M.C.No.5638-44/2005

Page No.3 of 7

Supreme Court reported as SMS Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs. Neeta
Bhalla & Ors. 2005 8 SCC 89 wherein it was observed that a
clear, unambiguous and specific allegation against a person
impleaded as an accused that he was in charge of and
responsible to the company in the conduct of its business at the
material time when the offence was committed is sufficient.
12.

Decision in SMS Pharmaceuticals Ltd.'s case has been a

subject matter of consideration by the Supreme Court in the
latest pronouncement reported as N.Rangachari Vs. BSNL
(2007) 5 SCC 108 in para 19, 21 and 23 following was observed
by the Supreme Court:“19. Therefore, a person in the commercial world having a
transaction with a company is entitled to presume that the
Directors of the company are in charge of the affairs of the
company. If any restrictions on their powers are placed by
the memorandum or articles of the company, it is for the
Directors to establish it at the trial. It is in that context
that Section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act
provides that when the offender is a company, every
person, who at the time when the offence was committed
was in charge of and was responsible to the company for
the conduct of the business of the company, shall also be
deemed to be guilty of the offence along with the
company. It appears to us that an allegation in the
complaint that the named accused are Directors of the
company itself would usher in the element of their acting
for an on behalf of the company and of their being in
charge of the company. In Gower and Davies Principles of
Modern Company Law (17th Edn.), the theory behind the
idea of identification is traced as follows:
“It is possible to find in the cases varying
formulations of the underlying principle, and
the most recent definitions suggest that the
Crl.M.C.No.5638-44/2005

Page No.4 of 7

courts are prepared today to give the rule of
attribution based on identification a somewhat
broader scope. In the original formulation in
Lennard's Carrying Company case Lord
Haldane based identification on a person 'who
is really the directing mind and will of the
corporation, the very ego and centre of the
personality of the corporation'.
Recently,
however, such an approach has been
castigated by the Privy Council through Lord
Hoffmann in Maridian Global case as a
misleading
'general
metaphysic
of
companies'. The true question in each case
was who as a matter of construction of the
statute in question, or presumably other rule
of law, is to be regarded as the controller of
the company for the purpose of the
identification rule.”
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
21. A person normally having business or commercial
dealings with a company, would satisfy himself about
its creditworthiness and reliability by looking at its
promoters and Board of Directors and the nature and
extent of its business and its memorandum or articles
of association. Other than that, he may not be aware of
the arrangements within the company in regard to its
management, daily routine, etc. Therefore, when a
cheque issued to him by the company is dishonoured,
he is expected only to be aware generally of who are in
charge of the affairs of the company.
It is not
reasonable to expect him to know whether the person
who signed the cheque was instructed to do so or
whether he has been deprived of his authority to do so
when he actually signed the cheque. Those are matters
peculiarly within the knowledge of the company and
those in charge of it. So, all that a payee of a cheque
that is dishonoured can be expected to allege is that
the persons named in the complaint are in charge of its
affairs. The Directors are prima facie in that position.
xxxxxxxxxxxx
23.

In the light of the ratio in S.M.S Pharmaceuticals

Crl.M.C.No.5638-44/2005

Page No.5 of 7

Ltd. what is to be looked into is whether in the
complaint, in addition to asserting that the appellant
and another are the Directors of the company, it is
further alleged that they are in charge of and
responsible to the company for the conduct of the
business of the company.
We find that such an
allegation is clearly made in the complaint which we
have quoted above. Learned Senior Counsel for he
appellant argued that in Saroj Kumar Poddar case this
court had found the complaint unsustainable only for
the reason that there was no specific averment that at
the time of issuance of the cheuqe that was
dishonoured, the persons named in the complaint were
in charge of the affairs of the company. With great
respect, we see no warrant for assuming such a
position in the context of the binding ratio in S.M.S
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. and in view of the position of the
Directors in a company as explained above.”
13. Thus, I hold that the complaint makes material averments
sufficient to attract cognizance of the complaint and issuance of
the summons to answer the charge.
14.

The second submission made by learned counsel for the

petitioners and for which board resolutions were relied was to
urge that petitioners 1, 2 , 4 and 6 were mere investors. That
they merely signed the proposal form of directorship. That they
never attended any board meeting. That in September, 1997
they were removed from the directorship of the company.
15.

Relevance of said submission is that as per the complaint

accused No.1 company had acted contrary to directions issued
on 18.11.1997.
16.

It was thus urged that by November 1997, petitioners 1,

2, 4 and 6 had ceased to be the directors of accused No.1.
Crl.M.C.No.5638-44/2005

Page No.6 of 7

17.

I am afraid, said plea cannot be taken into account as it

relates to a defence which has to be proved after leading
evidence.
18.

However, I would be failing if I do not note that the

respondent has placed on record a letter dated 13.1.1998
written by accused No.1, i.e. the company enclosing therewith
certain information.

Balance sheet of the company as of

31.12.1997 has been submitted under cover of said letter.
Petitioner No.1 and 2 have signed the balance sheet of the
company as on 31.12.1997.

Further, letter dated 13.1.1998

informs SEBI that all 8 persons impleaded as accused were the
directors of the company.
19.

Qua petitioner No.1, Sushila Devi, I note it was informed

that she was the Managing Director.
20.

As clarified in SMS Pharmaceuticals Ltd. case, by its very

nomenclature, a person who holds the post of managing
director would be presumed to be managing and controlling the
affairs of a company.
21.

I find no merits in the petition.

22.

Dismissed.

August 13, 2007
vg

Crl.M.C.No.5638-44/2005

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page No.7 of 7

