IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CONT.CAS(C) NO.564/2007
#
!

National Agricultural Co-op.
Marketing Federation of India
........ Petitioner
through: Mr.T.K.Ganju, Senior Advocate with
Mr.A.K.Thakur, Mr.R.K.Mishra and
Mr.Bharat Gupta, Advocate.
VERSUS

$
^

Shri Lalit Mohan
through:

%

........ Respondent
Mr.Ravinder Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Raman Kapur, Mr.Dhiraj and
Mr.Rajiv, Advocates with
respondent in person.

DATE OF DECISION: 13.05.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioner seek action to be taken against the

respondent for having committed contempt of this court.
2.

The petitioner has not made any specific reference

in the prayer clause to any order, contempt in relation whereto

Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 1 of 17

is alleged to have been committed by

the respondent.

However, in para 18 of the petition it is pleaded as under :“18.
The Petitioner herein and being the
Respondent in the aforesaid OMP is filing the
present
petition
to
initiate
contempt
proceedings against the Respondent herein, as
the Respondent is guilty of willfully disobeying
the order and direction passed by the Division
Bench of this Hon'ble Court on 27.04.2007 in
FAO(OS) No.384/2006 reaffirming and restoring
the order dated 30.03.2006 of the learned
Single Judge of this Court in the said OMP.”
3.

Indeed, during arguments Shri T.K.Ganju, Senior

Advocate who represented the cause of the petitioner alleged
that the contempt committed by the respondent is of willful
disobedience to the order dated 30.3.2006 passed by a learned
Single Judge of this court in OMP.No.118/2006 as also the order
passed by the Division Bench on 27.4.2007 in FAO(OS)
No.384/2006, effect whereof was the modification of an earlier
order dated 2.6.2006 passed by the Division Bench and as a
consequence

operation of the order passed by the learned

Single Judge on 30.3.2006 was restored.
4.

Briefly stated, case of the petitioner is that the firm

M/s Roshan Lal Lalit Mohan of which the respondent is a sole
proprietor owed approximately Rs.50 crores to the petitioner as
business dues and the matter was referred to arbitration since
respondent disputed its liability. Two cheques in sum of Rs.30

Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 2 of 17

crores and Rs.11 crores respectively had been issued by the
respondent drawn on the account of his sole proprietory firm in
favour of the petitioner. That the respondent filed a petition
under Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act,1996
which was

registered as OMP.No.118/2006.

Prayer made in

the said OMP was to restrain the petitioner from encashing the
two cheques in sum of Rs.30 crores and Rs.11 crores
respectively.

That taking cognizance of the said petition, a

learned Single Judge of this Court directed the respondent to
deposit a sum of Rs.15 crores with the petitioner by means of
a pay order

within 4 weeks as a condition to injunct the

petitioner from not only encashing the two cheques in question
but even proceeding ahead to sell the

stocks by way of

auction.
5.

That the respondent filed an appeal against the

order dated 30.3.2006 which was registered as FAO(OS)
No.384/2006 in which, treating the order dated 30.3.2006
passed by the learned Single Judge as a consent order, the
Division Bench recorded the offer of the respondent that his
property bearing No.6, Alipur Road, Civil Lines, Delhi be sold.
6.

According to the petitioner, the Division Bench was

mislead into passing the order dated 2.6.2007

since the

respondent made the court to understand that the property at
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 3 of 17

Alipur Road would fetch Rs.15 crores.

That when put to

auction, the property did not receive a bid in excess of Rs.2
crores. That on an application filed before the Division Bench,
vide order dated 27.4.2007, the Division Bench restored the
order passed by the learned Single Judge, meaning thereby,
the respondent was obliged to pay Rs.15 crores.
7.

With reference to the conduct of the respondent it

was pointed out that the order dated 27.4.2007 passed by the
Division Bench was challenged by way of a Petition for Special
Leave to Appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein
vide order dated 18.5.2007 the respondent was granted a stay
but on a condition requiring the respondent to deposit Rs.4
crores with the Registration (Judicial) of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court by 10.7.2007. That the respondent failed to deposit Rs.4
crores resulting in the interim order granted by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in favour of the respondent being vacated vide
order dated 21.9.2007.
8.
order

It was brought to the notice of this court that vide
dated

continuance

2.5.2008,

Hon'ble

of

present

the

Supreme

Court

contempt

directed

proceedings

notwithstanding the Hon'ble Supreme Court being seized of the
leave sought to challenge the order passed by the Division
Bench on 27.4.2007 in FAO(OS) No.384/2006.
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 4 of 17

9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the

order dated 30.3.2006 passed by the learned Single Judge of
this Court in OMP.No.118/2006 was a consent order as held by
the Division Bench vide order dated 2.6.2006 in FAO(OS)
No.384/2006 and that on the Division Bench passing order
dated 27.4.2007, stay granted to the respondent on 2.6.2006
being vacated, respondent has to comply with the consent
requiring the respondent to pay Rs.15 crores to the petitioner.
This not having been done the respondent is in willful breach
of his undertaking to the court. To bring home the above, the
learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the decision of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as AIR 2008 (SC) 309, M/s
Maruti Udyog Ltd. Vs. Mahinder C.Mehta & Ors.
10.

It is settled law that a decree or an order which is

akin to a decree and is executable, for satisfaction, needs to be
executed as per law relating to the execution of a decree.
Even a decree of injunction, be it mandatory or prohibitory is
executable under Order 21 Rule 32 CPC and on proving that
the judgment debtor had an opportunity to obey the decree
but has willfully failed to do so, the decree can be enforced by
the detention in civil prison or attachment of the property of
the judgment debtor.
11.

Thus, a mere order, direction or a decree under

Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 5 of 17

which a party is obliged in law to pay money to the opposite
party would require execution thereof and enforcement cannot
be under the contempt jurisdiction of the court.
12.

But, where a party gives an undertaking to pay

money to the opposite party and obtains benefit pursuant to
the said undertaking more so where the undertaking is to the
court and accepted by the court, breach of said undertaking,
subject to it being proved to be willful, would attract the
contempt jurisdiction of a court.
13.

Further, where a party misleads a court into passing

an order, the party concerned would be liable for action under
the contempt jurisdiction of the court for the reason such a
party is guilty of polluting the stream of justice.
14.

With the afore-noted legal position, which to my

mind is well crystalized and for which I need not waste my time
citing decision, I proceed to consider the nature of the orders
passed by the learned Single Judge of this

court and the

Division Bench. But, before that a word on the decision of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Maruti Udyog's case relied upon by
the petitioner.
15.

The said case also relates to an action commenced

under the arbitration law.
Mahender

C.Mehta

Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

and

Mahalaxmi Motors Ltd. of which
others

(respondents

before

the

page 6 of 17

Supreme Court)

were Directors were selling motor

manufactured by Maruti Udyog.

vehicles

There was a dispute with

respect to money payable by Mahalaxmi Motors Ltd. to Maruti
Udyog Ltd.

Mahalaxmi Motors Ltd. admitted liability to the

extent of RS.7.63 crores. Pertaining to the appointment of an
arbitrator, the matter reached the Supreme Hon'ble Court
wherein, by consent, it was agreed between the parties that
the dispute would be referred to arbitrator, inter alia, on the
condition that the respondents shall deposit the amounts or
furnish security or comply with directions which may be issued
by the arbitrator. One of the term of the consent order reads
as under:“4. All the parties to this S.L.P. Shall by way of
affidavit give undertaking to this Hon'ble Court
to furnish the security and/or comply with the
directions of learned arbitrator in case the
learned arbitrator directs any of the parties to
furnish the security and/or comply with any
other interim order of the learned arbitrator.”
16.
arbitrator

Thereafter, vide order dated 6.9.2002 the learned
directed

the

respondents

to

furnish

a

bank

guarantee in the sum of Rs.763.22 lakhs within four weeks.
The said

order was sought to be undone by filing interim

applications before the Hon'ble Supreme Court which were
withdrawn; followed by unsuccessful attempts before the
learned arbitrator and the High Court to have the order dated
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 7 of 17

6.9.2002 got vacated.

Maruti Udyog Ltd. filed a contempt

petition before the Hon'ble Supreme Court alleging that by not
complying with the undertaking given to the Hon'ble Supreme
Court the respondents were in contempt. It was urged that the
undertaking given to the Hon'ble Supreme Court was to comply
with the interim orders to be passed by the learned arbitrator.
17.

In the contempt proceedings initiated before the

Hon'ble Supreme Court, as noted by their Lordships, a proposal
for settlement was made by the respondents which inter alia
included a proposal to sell certain immovable properties in
respect whereof a price was disclosed to the Hon'ble Supreme
Court. During pendency of the proceedings before the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, since settlement proposal emanated from the
respondents, various interim orders were passed by their
Lordships. Finally, no money flowed to the coffers of Maruti
Udyog Ltd.

In said scenario, their Lordships of the

Hon'ble

Supreme Court held that the respondents were guilty on two
counts. Firstly, by misleading the Hon'ble Supreme Court with
respect to the value of their assets and secondly by not
complying with the undertaking given by them to the Hon'ble
Supreme Court.
18.

Their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court noted

the law crystallized in the decision reported as R.N.Dey & Ors.
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 8 of 17

Vs. Bhagyabati Pramanik & Ors. (2000) 4 SCC 400 to the effect
that the weapon of contempt is not to be used in abundance or
misused. That normally it cannot be used for execution of the
decree or implementation of an order for which alternative
remedy in law is provided for.
19.

The order passed by the learned Single Judge of this

court on 30.3.2006 in OMP.No.118/2006 reads as under :“Let the petition be registered.
It is alleged by learned counsel for the plaintiff
that the plaintiff had issued cheques in question
worth Rs.41 crores to the respondent under
duress and coercion. Nonetheless, counsel has
made an offer to pay a sum of Rs.7 crores to
the respondent by way of a demand draft or a
pay order in lieu of the two cheques.
Learned counsel for the respondent is not
agreeable to this offer, as according to him, the
cheques in question were issued with open eyes
and the plaintiff is now estopped from alleging
that these cheques were issued under duress or
coercion. This statement is disputed by the
counsel appearing for the plaintiff who states
that the respondent is having stocks worth
Rs.26 crores and there is therefore no question
of the plaintiff owing a sum of Rs.52 crores.
Counsel however has no objection if these
stocks are disposed of by the respondents
under open auction.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I
am prima facie of the view that it will be just
and fair if the plaintiff is directed to deposit/pay
with the respondent a sum of Rs.15 crores by
way of a pay order within four weeks from
today. It will be open to the respondent to sell
the stocks in auction but subject to the
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 9 of 17

respondent associating the plaintiff in the
process of auction. The respondent will not get
the two cheques in question encashed, if not
already deposited.
The above order has been passed without
prejudice to the respective claims of the parties
which they may lay before the Arbitrator or any
other Forum which is available to them.
With the consent of both the counsel, the
petition stands disposed of.
A copy of this order be given DASTI to the
counsel for the parties.”
20.

The order passed by the Division Bench on 2.2.2006

in FAO(OS) No.384/2006 reads as under :Caveat No.130/2006
Counsel for the caveator is present in Court.
The caveator shall be heard at the time of
hearing of the stay application. Caveat stands
disposed of in terms of the aforesaid order.
CM No.8202-03/2006 (for exemption)
Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
FAO (OS) No.384/2006 & CM 8204/2006 (Stay)
Heard learned counsel appearing for the parties
on this appeal which is filed by the appellant as
against the order dated 30.3.2006 passed by
the learned Single Judge disposing of OMP
No.118/2006.
A perusal of the said order indicates that the
order was passed with the consent of the
parties as also their counsel. It is, however,
now pointed out by the counsel appearing for
the appellant that the appellant is not in a
position to deposit with the respondent a sum of
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 10 of 17

Rs.15,00,00,000/- (Rupees fifteen crore only) by
way of pay order in terms of the order passed
by the learned Single Judge. Instead,an offer is
being given by the appellant for selling the
property belonging to the appellant being
property No.6, Alipur, Civil Lines, Delhi in a
public auction and the sale proceeds therefrom
to be retained by the respondent till further
orders to be passed during the arbitration
proceedings.
The aforesaid prayer is not
opposed by the counsel appearing for the
respondent.
In view of the aforesaid position and particularly
in view of the fact that all the documents
relating to the said property are already in the
custody and possession of the respondent, we
allow the prayer of the appellant for selling the
aforesaid property in a public auction by the
respondent in association with the appellant.
An affidavit shall be filed by the appellant in this
regard particularly stating that the property is
not encumbered in any manner, within two
weeks from today, and it shall be kept on the
record.
Subject to the aforesaid condition, it is directed
that the respondent is permitted to sell the
property in question in a public auction and the
entire sale proceeds shall be retained by the
respondent till further orders are passed in this
regard by the appropriate tribunal/court.
Ms.Pratibha M. Singh, Advocate is appointed as
the Local Commissioner for the purpose of
selling the property in a public auction. Her
remuneration is fixed as Rs.25,000/- (Rupees
twenty five thousand only).
Liberty is also granted to the parties to file
appropriate
application(s),
if
any,
for
modification of this order.
In terms of the aforesaid order, the appeal
stands disposed of.

Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 11 of 17

Copy of this order be given dasti to the parties.”
21.

The order dated 27.4.2004 passed by the Division

Bench in FAO(OS) No.384/2006 reads as under :CM No.970/2007 in FAO(OS) No.384/2006
This application is filed by the respondent
praying for modification of the order dated 2nd
June, 2006, as the order passed by this court
could not be given effect to.
The present
appeal arises out of the order dated 30th March,
2006 passed by the learned Single Judge in OMP
No.118/2006 whereby she had directed that the
appellant/plaintiff should deposit/pay to the
respondent a sum of Rs.15 crores by way of pay
order within four weeks and that it would also
be open to the respondent to sell the stocks in
auction in association with the plaintiff.
In terms of the aforesaid order, the learned
Single Judge restrained the respondent from
encashing the two cheque, if the same were not
already deposited. It was also observed by the
learned Single Judge that the aforesaid order
would be without prejudice to the rights and the
claims of the parties, which they may lay before
the Arbitrator or any other Forum which is
available to them. The petition was disposed of
with the aforesaid observations and with the
consent of the counsel for the parties.
The appellant herein, who was the petitioner in
the said OMP No.118/2006, filed this appeal.
We have also heard the learned counsel for the
respondent. It is stated by the counsel for the
appellant/petitioner
that
the
petitioner/
appellant is not in a position to deposit with the
respondent a sum of Rs.15 crore by way of pay
order in terms of the order passed by the
learned Single Judge and instead an offer was
given for selling the property belonging to the
appellant being property No.6, Alipur, Civil
Lines, Delhi in a public auction.
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 12 of 17

In terms of the aforesaid prayer made, we
allowed the said property to be sold in a public
auction by the respondent in association with
the appellant. We also directed that an affidavit
should be filed by the appellant in that regard
particularly stating that the property is not
encumbered in any manner. Pursuant to the
same, an affidavit was filed by the appellant
sworn by Mr.Lalit Mohan, stating, inter alia, that
there are five tenants in the said premises for
the last about 40 years and that area of about
387 sq.yds. is in their occupation.
We also appointed a Local Commissioner to
take steps and to sell the property in a public
auction and fixed the reserved price of the
property at Rs.10 crores and earnest money at
Rupees one crore.
But the said Local
Commissioner has now submitted a report that
none of the parties, who were present at the
time of the auction, was willing to bid above the
reserve price and that none of them also carried
the earnest money of Rupees one crore. Not a
single party was willing to pay above Rs.10
crore. Therefore, the aforesaid auction was not
executed.
The Local Commissioner made another attempt
to put the property to auction on 2nd December,
2006. The said auction again failed as nobody
was willing to pay more than Rs.2.02 crores.
It is, therefore, established from the records and
the efforts made by the Local Commissioner
that the said property, which was offered by the
appellant for sale and to realise the amount
payable in terms of the order of the learned
Single Judge, would not be able to satisfy the
amount which is required to be deposited.
In this view of the matter, we modify our order
passed on 2nd June, 2006 and hold that in the
light of the observations made by the Local
Commissioner the property cannot be sold in
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 13 of 17

public auction. Consequently the order passed
by the learned Single Judge dated 2.6.2006,
giving direction to the appellant to deposit
Rs.15 crores by way of pay order be now given
effect to. The said amount shall be deposited
by the appellant in terms of the order of the
learned Single Judge within four weeks from
today, failing which, the aggrieved party will be
at liberty to take appropriate action in
accordance with law.
In terms of the aforesaid order the application
stands disposed of.”
22.

A perusal of the order dated 30.3.2006 reveals that

the respondent offered to pay

Rs.7 crores as a condition to

injunct the petitioner from encashing the two cheques totalling
Rs.41 crores which were in possession of the petitioner and
were issued by the respondent. This offer was not accepted by
the petitioner. The learned Single Judge noted the stand of the
respondent that the petitioner was having stocks worth Rs.26
crores and there was thus no occasion for the respondent to
be a debtor in sum of Rs.52 crores as alleged by the petitioner.
After noting the rival submissions

the learned Single Judge

directed the respondent to pay Rs.15 crores to the petitioner
as a condition for an interim injunction.
23.

It is no doubt true that the Division Bench, prima

facie, construed the order of the learned Single Judge

as a

consent order and so observed in its order dated 2.6.2006, but
a perusal of the order dated 2.6.2007 reveals that there was
Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 14 of 17

not much discussion on the said point and the observations
pertaining to the

order passed by the learned Single Judge

came by way of a passing reference. For if this was not to be
so, I do not see as to how the Division Bench could have yet
proceeded to entertain the challenge in the appeal and pass
the directions putting into abeyance the orders passed by the
learned Single Judge and substituting it with the direction that
as offered by the respondent, his immovable property bearing
No.6, Alipur Road, Civil Lines, Delhi be sold.
24.

Submission made by the learned counsel for the

petitioner that the respondent misled the Division Bench

in

believing that his property was worth Rs.15 crores cannot be
read by this Court as the foundation of the order dated
2.6.2006, for the reason the Division Bench has not so stated.
There is no independent material shown to this court of any
representation by the respondent that his property at 6 Alipur
Road, Civil Lines, Delhi would fetch Rs.15 crores in the market.
25.

The

order

passed

by

27.4.2007 does no further, other

the

Division

Bench

on

than to note that the

property at Alipur Road did not fetch the expected sum of
Rs.15 crores with a consequential direction restoring the order
passed by the learned Single Judge.
26.

It would be interesting to note that the Division

Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 15 of 17

Bench concluded its order by recording that if the respondent
failed to comply with the order passed by the learned Single
Judge within four weeks the aggrieved party i.e. the petitioner
will be at liberty to take appropriate action in accordance with
law.
27.

The action of the respondent from a commercial

angle may appear to be demeaning. But, this would fall short
of contumacious action as contemplated by law.
28.

Even otherwise, to succeed in contempt, petitioner

would have to prove a deliberate and an intentional violation of
the order passed by the learned Single Judge in
Rs.15 crores.

This precisely

not paying

would be the inquiry

would be conducted under Order 21 Rule 32 CPC

which
for the

reason before a person can be detained in a civil prison or his
property attached it would

have to be proved that the

respondent had an opportunity of obeying the order and has
willfully failed to obey it.

Meaning thereby, in any case, an

inquiry would have to be conducted pertaining to the means of
the respondent.
29.

Contempt jurisdiction being a summary jurisdiction I

am of the opinion that the battle would be better debated
between the parties under Order 21 Rule 32 CPC.
30.

The notice of contempt is discharged.

Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

page 16 of 17

31.

The petition is dismissed.

32.

No costs.

May 13, 2008
pu

Cont.Cas(C) 564/07

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 17 of 17

