IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA 12/2001
#
!

Kanshi Ram (Deceased)
........ Appellant
through his LR's.
through:
Ms.Kum Kum Jain, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Delhi Development Authority
........ Respondent
through:
Ms.Sangeeta Chandra, Adv.
RESERVED ON: 07.01.2008

%

DATE OF DECISION: 18.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Following substantial question of law is framed for

consideration in the present appeal:“Whether on the pleadings of the parties and
evidence on record the view taken by the Courts
below is legal and valid?”
2.

The present appeal is directed against the judgment and

decree dated 3.11.2000 passed by the learned Additional District
Judge whereby the judgment and decree dated 22.8.1996 passed
by the learned Civil Judge dismissing the suit filed by the appellant
was affirmed.
3.

Very briefly, admitted facts as culled out from the

RSA No.12/2001

Page No.1 of 34

impugned judgment as also from the records before this Court are
that on 6.5.1961 appellant Kanshi Ram was admitted as a member
of Panch Shila Cooperative House Building Society (hereinafter
referred to as the Society), a Society registered under the Bombay
Cooperative Societies Act, 1925 as extended to Delhi.
4.

The Society acquired land in Village Shahpur Jat and

developed the same into a residential colony 'Panch Shila Park'. A
formal lease deed in respect of the said land was executed by the
Delhi Development Authority (respondent herein) in favour of the
Society.
5.

On 19.7.1964 a draw of lots for the allotment of plots to

the members of the Society was held. The appellant was declared
successful for the allotment of the plot bearing municipal No.N-77,
Panch Shila Park, Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the suit property).
Intimation in said regard was sent by the Society to DDA.
6.

On 3.12.1966 a perpetual sub-lease deed in respect of

the suit property was executed by the DDA and the Society in
favour of the appellant. Pursuant to the execution of said sub-lease
possession of the suit property was handed over to the appellant.
7.

After obtaining necessary sanctions from the authorities

the appellant raised construction over the suit property.
8.

On 31.1.1981 appellant received a letter, Ex.DW-1/4,

dated 21.1.1981 issued by DDA informing him that the perpetual
sub-lease deed dated 3.12.1966 executed in respect of the suit
property has been cancelled. Said notice reads as under :RSA No.12/2001

Page No.2 of 34

“To,
Shri Kanshi Ram,
C/o M/s. Jai Bharat
Merchant,
4025, Naya Bazar, Delhi.

Trading

Co-Machinery

Sub: Cancellation of sub-lease due to misstatements to get plot No.N-77, Panch Shila
C.H.B.Society.
Sir,
I am directed to inform you that the Lt. Governor
(Lessor) has cancelled the sub-lease of the Plot
No.N-77 in Panch Shila Coop. House Bldg. Society
for breach under Clause III of the perpetual sublease deed. You are therefore requested to hand
over the possession of the plot to our Asstt.
Engineer on 30/1/1981 at 10.30 A.M.
Yours faithfully,
sd/DY.DIRECTOR (CS)
9.

Relevant portion of Clause-III of the perpetual sub-lease

deed dated 3.12.1966 referred to in the letter Ex. DW1/4 dated
21.1.1981 reads as under :“III. If the sum or sums payable towards the
premium or the yearly rent hereby reserved or
any part thereof shall at any time being arrear
and unpaid for one calender month next after any
of the days whereon the same shall have become
due, whether the same shall have been demanded
or not, or if it is discovered that this Sub-Lease has
been obtained by suppression of any fact or by any
mis-statement, misrepresentation or fraud or if
there shall have been, in the opinion of the Lessee
or the Lessor, and the decision of the Lessor shall be
final, any breach by the Sub-Lessee or by any
person claiming through or under him of any of the
covenants or conditions contained herein and in the
Lease and on his part to be observed or
performed, then and in any such case, it shall be
lawful for the Lessor or the Lessee with the prior
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.3 of 34

consent in writing of the Lessor, notwithstanding
the waiver of any previous cause or right of reentry upon the residential plot hereby sub-leased
and the buildings thereon, to re-enter upon and
take possession of the residential plot and the
buildings and fixtures thereon, and thereupon this
Sub-Lease and everything herein contained shall
cease and determine in respect of the residential
plot so re-entered upon, and the Sub-Lessee shall
not be entitled to any compensation whatsoever
nor to the return of any premium paid by him.”
10.

From a perusal of the letter Ex. DW1/4 it is apparent that

the perpetual sub-lease deed dated 3.12.1966 was cancelled for the
reason

appellant

allegedly

made

a

mis-statement

and

thus

committed a breach in terms of Clause-III of the Sub-lease deed.
11.

Appellant thereafter filed a suit against the respondent

DDA inter alia praying for :A.

A

decree

of

declaration

that

the

cancellation

of

perpetual sub-lease deed dated 3.12.1966 by DDA is null and void.
B.

A decree of permanent injunction restraining DDA from

taking the possession of the suit property.
12.

Material averments in the plaint filed by the appellant

are being noted here-in-under:“9.
That on 31.1.1981, the plaintiff
received a notice No.F.2(214)78/CB/DDA dated
21.1.1981 from the Deputy Director (CS) of Delhi
Development Authority (Co.operative Societies
Cell) intimating him that the Lt.Governor (Lessor)
has cancelled the Sub-Lease of the plot No.N-77
in Panchsheela Co.operative House Building
Society for breach under Clause III of the
Perpetual Sub-Lease and further called upon the
plaintiff to hand over the possession of the plot to
the Asstt. Engineer on 30.1.1981 at 10.30 a.m.
10.
RSA No.12/2001

The plaintiff submits that he has not
Page No.4 of 34

committed any breach of the Perpetual Sub-Lease
or of any Clause thereof and the defendant have
no right or title to cancel the Sub-lease or to claim
possession of the said plot from the plaintiff.
11.
In any case, the plaintiff submits that
according to Clause IV of the said Perpetual SubLease, no forfeiture or re-entry shall be affected
until the lessor or lessee have served on the Sublessee a notice in writing specifying the particular
breach complained of and if the breach is capable
of remedying requiring the sub-lessee to remedy
the breach.
13.
That no show cause Notice or notice
cancelling the sub-lease was over served on the
plaintiff as alleged by the DDA in the notice dated
21.1.1981. The plaintiff had not opportunity to
put all the facts before the Officer concerned and
no opportunity of being heard had been granted
to him and no order of cancellation of Sub-Lease
or forfeiture and re-entry thereof could be
effected.”
13.

Relevant portion of Clause-IV of the perpetual Sub-Lease

Deed dated 3.12.1966 relied upon by the appellant reads as under :“IV.
No forfeiture or re-entry shall be
effected until the Lessor or the Lessee has served
on the Sub-Lessee a notice in writing
(a)
specifying
complained of, and

the

particular

breach

(b)
if the breach is capable of remedy,
requiring the Sub-Lessee to remedy the breach,
and the Sub-Lessee fails within such reasonable
time as may be mentioned in the notice to remedy
the breach if it is capable of remedy; and in the
event of forfeiture or re-entry the Lessor in his
discretion or the Lessee, with the prior consent in
writing of the Lessor, may relieve against
forfeiture on such terms and conditions as the
Lessor thinks proper.”
14.

Case thus projected by the appellant in the plaint was

RSA No.12/2001

Page No.5 of 34

that the cancellation of the perpetual Sub-Lease Deed dated
3.12.1966 by the DDA is null and void because of the following 2
reasons:A.

Appellant has not committed any breach in terms of

Clause-III of the perpetual Sub-Lease Deed or of any other clause.
B.

Clause-IV of the perpetual Sub-Lease Deed mandated

that before determination of the Sub-Lease the lessor DDA must
serve a show cause notice upon the sub-lessee i.e. the appellant.
That no show cause notice as required under Clause-IV of the
perpetual Sub-Lease Deed was served upon the appellant.
15.

In response to the case set up by the appellant

respondent DDA filed its written statement relevant averments
whereof are being noted hereinbelow:Preliminary Objections:
1.
That the sub-lease in favour of the plaintiff
was obtained on the basis of mis-representation of
facts and so the sub lease has been cancelled
after the serving of show cause notice on the
plaintiff.
Replies on Facts:
10. That para 10 of the plaint is denied. The
plaintiff has committed the breach of the
perpetual sub-lease deed. In fact the plaintiff has
sworn an affidavit stating that “he does own either
in full or in part any lease hold/free hold plot/
house in Delhi/New Delhi/Delhi Cantt nor that his
wife including unmarried minor children and
dependent relations own any plot/house/flat in
Delhi/New Delhi/Delhi Cantt”. Subsequently it
came to the notice to the defendant that the
plaintiff owned a portion of plot no.25/41 in
Punjabi Bagh. In this way he has sworn a falls
affidavit on the basis of which he obtained the
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.6 of 34

allotment of plot no.N-77 in Panch Shila Park.
Besides the criminal action against the plaintiff for
sworn falls affidavit plaintiff's sub lease became
liable for cancellation and hence sub lease of the
plot in dispute was rightly cancelled under clause
III of the perpetual sub lease deed for misstatement of the facts.
11. Para 11 of the plaint is denied. The plaintiff
was sent a show cause notice on 26.3.80 requiring
to show cause why the sub lease of the plot may
not be determined. The show cause notice was
received back undelivered with the remarks
“refused to receive”.
Since the plaintiff
intentionally refused to receive the notice. For all
intents and purposes the notice is legal and
supposed to be served and action for
determination of the sub lease taken is just legal
and proper.”
16.

In the written statement filed no particulars of false

affidavit allegedly sworn by the appellant were specified. However,
the false affidavit allegedly sworn by the appellant was filed on
record. The said affidavit Ex. PW2/D1 is dated 11.6.1966 and reads
as under :AFFIDAVIT
I, KANSHI RAM son of L. Badlu Ram aged 60 years,
resident of C/o Jai Bharat Trading Co., Naya Bazar,
Delhi and a member of the Panch Shila
Cooperative House Building Society Ltd., New
Delhi-17 do hereby affirm and declare as under :1.
That neither I nor my wife nor any of my
dependent
relations
(including
unmarried
children) is a member of any other house building
Cooperative Society functioning in Delhi/New
Delhi/Delhi Cantt.
2.
That I do not own, either in full or in part, on
leasehold or freehold basis, any plot of land or a
house in Delhi/New Delhi/Delhi Cantt nor does my
wife or any of my dependent relations including
unmarried children, own either in full or in part on
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.7 of 34

leasehold or free-hold basis, any plot of land or a
house in Delhi/New Delhi/Delhi Cantt.
3.
That I have noted the conditions in the bye
laws of the house building Cooperative Society of
which I am a member that I am required to inform
the said society as well as the Chief Commissioner
within one month if any plot of land or house is
acquired by me or by my wife or my dependent
relations, including unmarried children, during the
period of my membership of the Society.
17.

The show cause notice Ex. DW1/2 dated 26.3.1980

allegedly sent to the appellant reads as under :SHOW CAUSE NOTICE
To,
Sh. Kanshi Ram,
C/O M/s Jai Bharat Trading Co.
Machinery Merchant, 4025, Naya Bazar,
DELHI.
WHEREAS you were allotted plot No.N-77 in Panch
Shila Park Cooperative House Building Society, the
sub lease of which was executed on 3.12.1966;
AND whereas you had filed an affidavit to the effect
that you did not own, either in full or in part on lease
hold basis any plot of land or a house in Delhi/New
Delhi/Delhi Cantt. nor does your wife or any of your
dependent relations including unmarried children
own either in full or part on lease hold/free hold
basis any plot of land or a house in Delhi/New
Delhi/Delhi Cantt. which was a pre-requisite
condition for the allotment of a plot;
AND whereas it has come to notice that you hold
the ½ share in another property 25/41, Punjabi
Bagh.
THUS you obtained the allotment of plot No.N-77,
Panch Shila Park
Cooperative House Building
Society after concealing the facts.
You are hereby required to show cause within 30
days from the date of issue of this notice as to

RSA No.12/2001

Page No.8 of 34

why the Sub-Lease of the plot in question may not
be cancelled & possession be resumed for misstatement of facts.
sd/Deputy Director (Coop.)”
18.

From a cumulative reading of the letter Ex. DW1/4 dated

21.1.1981, show cause notice Ex.DW-1/2 dated 26.3.1980 issued by
the DDA and the written statement filed by the DDA defence set up
by DDA can be culled out as under:A.

Appellant has obtained allotment of the suit property and

got executed the perpetual Sub-Lease Deed in respect of the suit
property on basis of mis-representation of facts. That by making
mis-representation of facts appellant has committed a breach in
terms of Clause-III of the perpetual Sub-Lease Deed.
B.

Mis-representation of facts alleged to be made by the

appellant was that the appellant has sworn a false affidavit by
deposing that neither he, his wife or his dependents owned a
residential plot/house/flat in Delhi. While an enquiry conducted by
DDA revealed that he was co-owner of the plot bearing municipal
No.25/41, Punjabi Bagh, Delhi.
C.

A show cause notice Ex. DW-1/2 dated 26.3.1980 was

duly sent to the appellant and that the same was returned by the
postal authorities with an endorsement 'refused to receive'.
19.

In the replication filed to the written statement of the

DDA appellant averred as under :“Statements made in para 1 of the preliminary
objections are not admitted. It is denied that the
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.9 of 34

plaintiff made any mis representation of facts to
obtain the sub lease as alleged. It is denied that
the defendant can cancel the sub lease as alleged.
Para 2 of the preliminary objections is not
admitted. It is denied that the defendant can
cancel the sub lease or that the action of the
defendant is just, legal or proper as alleged or that
the plaintiff has no cause of action to file this suit.
Para 10 of the written statement in so far as it is
inconsistent with para 10 of the plaint is traversed
and para 10 of the plaint is reaffirmed. It is
denied that the plaintiff committed any breach of
the perpetual Sub-Lease as alleged.
It is
submitted that the defendant have not disclosed
as to how the plaintiff has committed breach of
the Perpetual Sub-Lease and of which clauses of
the said Lease after its execution. It is further
denied that the plaintiff sworn any affidavit after
the execution of the Perpetual Sub-Lease which
could amount to committing breach thereof.
It is further denied that the Perpetual Sub-Lease
was granted on the basis of any affidavit or any
other representation which can amount to breach
of the Perpetual Sub Lease and no mention of any
such particular affidavit finds mention in the said
Perpetual Sub Lease.
The plaintiff further submits that at that time the
Bye-Laws of the Panchsheela Co-operative House
Building Society Ltd, did not contain restrictions
on members to own any other land or house and
on 3.12.1966 the Perpetual Sub Lease was
executed in favour of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff does not recollect execution of any
affidavit. Several papers were got signed from
him on and before the perpetual sub lease was
executed but it is submitted that no such
restrictions were conveyed to the plaintiff.
It was only on 1969 when the Bye-Laws of the
Society were amended as to incorporate clause
(d) (e) & (f) to Clause (5) but it is submitted that
the said clauses could not bind the plaintiff as the
Perpetual Sub-lease in his favour had been
executed on 3.12.1966.
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.10 of 34

As regards the Punjabi Bagh Plot No.25/41, it is
submitted that the same was in fact purchased in
1964 for the benefit of the five sons of the plaintiff
ostensibly in the name of the plaintiff and his
sons, Jagdish Rai Aggarwal and Shri Ved Perkash
by Sale Deed dated 22.10.1964. Initially, the
plaintiff became a member of that Society but
subsequently,
the
membership/share
was
transferred by the plaintiff to the name of Shri Ved
Perkash, one of the sons, on 24.12.1965, and the
said property is now held by Shri Jagdish Rai
Aggarwal and Shri Ved Perkash for themselves
and their other brothers, who are all married with
their families and are all independent. The plaintiff
ceased to be a member in 1965 of the said
Society.”
20.

Perusal of the replication shows that the appellant

reiterated the stand taken by him in his plaint and additionally
stated that :A.

In the year 1966, i.e. at the time when the perpetual

Sub-Lease was executed there were no restrictions on the members
of the Society from holding any other property in Delhi apart from
the plot allotted to them by the Society.
B.

He has never sworn a false affidavit as alleged by the

DDA.
C.

He was a benami owner of the plot in Punjabi Bagh and

in any case in the year 1965 he transferred the ownership of the
said plot in favour of his son Ved Prakash i.e. before the execution of
the perpetual Sub-Lease Deed dated 3.12.1966.
21.

On the basis of pleadings of parties under-noted 5 issues

were framed by the Trial Court:“1. Whether
RSA No.12/2001

the

action

of

the

defendant

in

Page No.11 of 34

cancelling the
vires? OPP

lease

is

illegal

and

ultra

2.
3.

Whether the plaintiff has any right, title or
interest in the suit property? OPP

4.

Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief
claimed? OPP

5.
22.

Whether the suit is barred for want of notice
u/s 53-B, DD Act? OPD

Relief.”

In support of his case appellant examined himself as PW-

2 and one Mr.A.B.Gupta, Office Assistant, Panch Shila Cooperative
House Building Society as PW-1.
23.

A.B.Gupta in his testimony as PW-1 deposed that on

6.5.1961 appellant was admitted as a member of the society. That
on 19.7.1964 suit property was allotted to the appellant by the
Society. In order to establish the membership of the appellant in the
Society PW-1 duly proved application filed by the appellant for
membership in the Society as PW-1/1, members register of the
Society as Ex.PW-1/2, share allotment register of the Society as Ex.
PW-1/3 and counter foil of the share certificates issued to the
appellant by the Society as Ex.PW-1/4.
24.

Appellant in his testimony as PW-2 deposed on the lines

of the pleadings filed by him.
25.

As

regards

affidavit

Ex.PW2/D1

dated

11.6.1966

allegedly executed by him appellant deposed as under:“I do not know English and cannot read and write. I
can only sign in English. Several lease deeds wee
presented for registration on that day and the
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.12 of 34

person representing the society asked me to sign
as a witness in the perpetual sub-leases of other
members. I signed as a witness in several
perpetual sub-lease. I do not know what was
written on the papers which I signed...........I have
seen paper mark-X, I cannot say who got the same
typed. I cannot read its contents. I never went to
any Oath Commissioner. I do not know if this is
the affidavit claimed by DDA to be executed by
me. I never violated any terms and conditions of
the bye-laws of Punchsheel Housing Society.
XXXXXX by Shri A.K. Goel for DDA
Ex. PW2/D1 bears my signatures. I did not file this
to DDA. DDA never asked me to submit any
affidavit to the effect that I have no other
property. (Vol. There was no such rule in 1964
when the plot was alloted to me). There was no
occasion for me to file the copy of sale deed of
Punjabi Bagh plot with DDA. It is correct that lease
of plot no.77 was sought to be cancelled by
DDA..........It is incorrect that I filed Ex.PW2/D1 with
DDA.”
26.

As regards ownership of the plot in Punjabi Bagh

appellant deposed as under:“My son Shri Ved Parkash is the member of
Punjabi Bagh Refugee Housing Society. He
purchased plot No.25 Punjabi Bagh colony, Rohtak
Road from Shri Sarabjit Singh. He got the sale
deed executed in favour of himself, my other son
Shri Jagdish Rai Aggarwal and myself. The sale
deed was executed on 22.10.64 and was
presented for registration on 23.10.64. The plot in
Punchsheel had already been alloted to me on
19.7.1964. There was not restriction on my part to
become a member of the said society or to the
allotment of the plot in my favour Ex.P-2 is the
certified copy of the sale deed of the Punjabi Bagh
Society. On a part of the said plot NO.25, Punjabi
Bagh, I and my sons jointly constructed the small
house. My elder son and the other son have filed a
suit against me and the two sons mentioned in the
sale deed claiming ownership of the said land and
property on the ground that it belongs to HUF. The
said suit is still pending in the Court of Ms. Rekha
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.13 of 34

Rani CJ, Delhi.........My sons were not dependent
on me. They use to carry on their own business
and have their independent income.”
27.

It is relevant to note that in his examination-in-chief

appellant has not deposed to the effect he had transferred
ownership of the plot in Punjabi Bagh in favour of his son Ved
Prakash before the execution of the perpetual sub-lease deed
Ex.DW1/1 whereas in the replication appellant has emphatically
averred to said effect.
28.

As

regards

show

cause

notice

Ex.DW1/2

dated

26.3.1980 allegedly served upon him appellant deposed as under:“I cannot say whether I received letter date 26.3.80
from DDA. The address on the notice dated 26.3.80
has been correctly mentioned. (Vol. This firm was
closed about 15-16 years ago). I do not remember
the date when it was closed. No letter was received
by me at the address of the shop during the period
is lying closed.”
29.

On behalf of DDA Durga Dass, Superintendent, CS Cell,

DDA was examined as DW-1. DW-1 proved the perpetual Sub-Lease
Deed dated 3.12.1966 as Ex.DW1/1, show cause notice dated
26.3.1980 allegedly served upon the appellant as Ex. DW1/2,
envelope bearing endorsement 'refused to receive' as Ex.DW-1/3
and cancellation letter dated 21.1.1981 as Ex.DW-1/4.
30.

After noting the provisions of Clause-III of the perpetual

Sub-Lease Deed dated 3.12.1966 learned Trial Court has held that
the appellant obtained allotment of the suit property and got
executed perpetual Sub-Lease Deed dated 3.12.1966 in respect of
the suit property on the basis of mis-representation of facts and thus
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.14 of 34

committed a breach in terms of Clause-III of the perpetual SubLease. In this regard decision of the Trial Court reads as under :“11. .........Ex.P-1 was the copy of the perpetual
sub-lease executed between the defendant,
Punchsheel Coop. House Bldg. Society and the
plaintiff dated 3rd December, 1966 in respect of
plot No.N.77, Punchsheel Coop. House Building
Society. As per clause-III if it was provided that it
was discovered that the sub-lease had been
obtained by suppression of fact or a misstatement, misrepresentation or fraud in the
opinion of the lessor or the lessee and the
decision of the lessor shall be final. Any breach by
the sub-lessee or any person claiming through or
under him then it shall be lawful for the lesssor or
the lessee (with the prior consent in writing of the
lessor) to re-enter upon and take possession of
the residential plot and the building and fixtures
thereon and there upon the sub-lease and every
thing herein contained shall cease and determine
in respect of the residential plot so re-entered
upon. The expressed terms of this clause says it
in no uncertain words that the lessor had the right
to determine the sub-lease in case it discovered
subsequently that the sub-lese had been obtained
by suppression of any factor mis-statement,
misrepresentation or fraud. The defendant has
alleged that the Plaintiff had misrepresented to
the defendant in as much as it had given an
affidavit that he or his wife or any dependent
relation did not own any other plot/flat or house or
portion thereof in Delhi.
Ex. PW2/D1 is the
affidavit of the plaintiff dated 16.6.1966 duly
sworn before the Oath Commissioner wherein the
plaintiff has sworn to this effect that he or his wife
or any dependent relation was not the member of
any other society nor did they own any other
flat/plot or house in Delhi. Rather in clause-III of
the affidavit, the plaintiff has specifically deposed
that he had noted the conditions and the bye-laws
of the Cooperative House Building Society that he
was required to inform the society as well as the
Chief Commissioner within one month if any plot
or land or house was acquired by him or his wife
or any department relation during the period of
his membership in the society. The contents of
the affidavit go to show that the plaintiff was very
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.15 of 34

much in the knowledge of the fact that his
allotment of the said plot was restricted and was
made on the basis of his declaration that he or his
wife or dependent relations did not own any plot
or land or house on free hold or lease hold basis in
Delhi/New Delhi/Delhi Cantt. The affidavit is dated
11.6.1966- whereas the sub-lease is dated 3rd
December, 1966, that means that the plaintiff was
required to give this affidavit prior to the
execution of the sub-lease by the defendant.
12. It is, thus, seen that the lease hold rights in
the said plot were transferred to the plaintiff only
on his filing the said affidavit i.e. only on his giving
declaration that he or his wife or dependent
relations did not own any other property in Delhi
or lease hold rights or free hold rights in Delhi.”
31.

As

regards

the

contention

of

the

appellant

that

consideration for the plot in Punjabi Bagh was paid by his son Ved
Parkash and thus he was only a benami owner of the said plot and
that he transferred the ownership of the said plot in favour of his
son Ved Parkash before the execution of the perpetual sub-lease
Ex.DW1/1 dated 3.12.1966 the learned Trial Court has held as
under:“12. .......Admittedly, the plaintiff was owner of
half share of property no.25/41, Punjabi Bagh,
Delhi measuring 2209 sq. yds vide registered sale
deed dated 22.10.1964. Thus, the plaintiff was
holding approximately 1100 sq. yds. of property
no.25/41, in Punjabi Bagh, Delhi when he swore
this affidavit dated 11.6.1966. The plaintiff had
alleged that he had subsequently transferred his
share in the said property in Punjabi Bagh in
favour of his one son. However, the plaintiff has
failed to prove any valid document on record to
establish this fact. He is holder of ½ share in
property no.25/41, Punjabi Bagh, Delhi by virtue
of a registered sale deed and the share in the
same cannot be transferred unless by written and
valid registered document. It is, thus, seen that
when the plaintiff filed this affidavit, he was
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.16 of 34

holding shares in property no.25/41, Punjabi Bagh,
Delhi, and thus, had sworn in a false affidavit
which was submitted to the DDA by the society.
The plaintiff had, thus, obtained the allotment of
plot No.77, Panchseel Coo. House Bldg. Society on
the basis of misrepresentation of facts and as per
terms of Clause-III of the perpetual sub-lease Ex.
P-1, the defendant/DDA had a right to cancel the
sub-lease on this ground.”
32.

As regards the next contention of the appellant, i.e. he

was not given a show cause notice as required under Clause-IV of
the perpetual Sub-Lease Deed the learned Trial Judge has held as
under :“The plaintiff has also challenged the cancellation
on the ground that the said cancellation was done
without offering him an opportunity of hearing or
of remedying the breach. In my opinion, the
breach was not capable of being remedied. The
breach committed by the plaintiff was receiving
the allotment of the plot No.77 on the basis of a
false affidavit. In any case, as per deposition of
DW-1, the show cause notice was sent to the
plaintiff which was received back with the remarks
“refused”. The envelope of the same is Ex.DW1/3
which is an envelope from DDA to the plaintiff at
the address given by him in the sub-lease deed. It
bears the postal stamp dated 2.4.1980 and also
remarks “refused”. Letter dispatched is in the
usual course of the business of the defendant/DDA
and the remarks of the postal authorities amount
to a sufficient service of its contents of the
addresses.
It, thus, cannot be said that the
plaintiff was denied the opportunity of bearing
before the sub-lease was determined vide letter
dated 21.1.1981 communicated to him.
14.
I, thus, hold that the action of the DDA
in cancellation of the sub-lease of the plaintiff was
just, illegal and proper and as per procedure laid
down by the law. This issue is accordingly decided
against the plaintiff and in favour of the
defendant/DDA.”
33.

On

RSA No.12/2001

the

basis

of

the

afore-noted

discussion

vide

Page No.17 of 34

judgment and decree dated 22.8.1996 the learned Trial Court has
dismissed the suit filed by the appellant.
34.

Aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 22.8.1996

appellant preferred an appeal before the court of Additional District
Judge.
35.

Learned Appellate Court agreed with the decision of the

Trial Court and vide impugned judgment and decree dated
3.11.2000 affirmed the judgment and decree dated 22.8.1996
passed by the learned Trial Court dismissing the suit filed by the
appellant. Reasoning given by the Appellate Court reads as under :“First of all, I shall deal with the contention of the
appellant that no Show Cause Notice was served
upon him. According to DDA it had sent a ShowCause Notice dated 26.3.1980 which is Ex.DW.1/2
to the appellant calling upon him to show cause as
to why the sub lease be not cancelled and
possession be not resumed. According to the
appellant, the notice was sent to his shop which
was lying closed from many years. However, he
admits receipt of final notice of cancellation dated
21.1.1981, which is Ex.DW.1/4. Appellant had
claimed that the initial Show Cause Notice dated
26.3.1980 was sent at his shop which was lying
closed from many years. If we take a look at the
envelope in which the said notice was sent, we
find that it was endorsed by postal authorities that
the appellant had refused to accept. If a person
refuses to accept the registered envelope then he
is deemed to have knowledge of its contents. In
this regard, I am supported by the judgment
delivered by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
which is reported in AIR 1981 SC, 1284, Harcharan
Singh Vs. Shiv Rani. Their lordships had held as
under :“When a registered envelope is
tendered by a postman to the
addressee but he refused to accept it,
there is due service effected upon the
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.18 of 34

addressee by refusal, the addressee
must, therefore, be imputed with the
knowledge of the contents thereof.”
The contention of the appellant that Show Cause
Notice was never served upon him is false on the
fact of it for another reason.
Appellant had
admitted that final notice Ex.DW.1/4 had been
served upon him. The said notice is dated
21.1.1981. It was to the effect that Lieutenant
Governor has cancelled the sub lease of plot no.
N-77, Panch Shila Park, New Delhi.
But the
notices were sent at the same address. If the
shop had been lying closed for many years then
how did it mysteriously got re-opened when final
notice Ex. DW.1/4 was sent by DDA. Thus it is
clear that notice asking the appellant to show
cause indeed was served upon him and he chose
not to respond to it. He is thus liable for all the
consequences which emerged thereafter.
Now I shall take up the next plea of appellant that
he never signed the affidavit and he did not know
how to read and write English. The said affidavit
was sworn on 11.6.1966. It was to the effect that
he did not own any other property. The perpetual
sub-lease deed of the plot at Panch Shila Park was
executed on 17.8.1966. If we take a look at the
copy of Sale Deed regarding property no.25/41,
Punjabi Bagh, New Delhi, we find that the sale
deed was executed on 22.10.1964.
It was
regarding the property measuring 2219.26 sq. yds
half of it was in the name of appellant Kanshi Ram
and remaining half was in the name of his two
sons. Thus it is clear that on the day appellant had
sworn the affidavit, he already possessed
plot/house at Punjabi Bagh, New Delhi. Then the
present appeal has been signed by him in Hindi
language. Needless to add the Vakalatnama of
his earlier counsel Shri D.P.Jain and Vakalatnama
of his later counsel Shri R.K.Verma were again
signed by appellant in Hindi language. The plaint
filed before the ld trial court was also signed in
Hindi but the perpetual sub lease deed by virtue
of which he became owner of property no.N-77,
Panch Shila Park, New Delhi was signed by him in
English language at many places. He had also
signed the site plan in English as is evident from
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.19 of 34

the perusal of the said documents which are on
the trial court record. Probably he was not aware
of the consequences, otherwise he would have
signed the perpetual sub lease deed and the site
plan in Hindi but unfortunately for him, he did not
do so.
Thus it is apparent that he has been blowing hot
and cold according to his own convenience. He
had sought discretionary relief of injunction from
the learned trial court. No discretionary relief of
injunction is to be granted to an individual who
approaches to the court with un-cleaned hands.
In this regard, I am supported with the judgment
delivered by my lord Mr.Justice Sultan Singh which
is reported in 1979 RLR Note 40. He had held as
under :“A plaintiff who suppresses material
facts from court is not entitled to
interim relief as for discretionary relief
one must come to court with clean
hands.”
In this background, he was rightly declined relief
by the learned trial court. The appeal deserves
dismissal and I dismiss it with costs.”
36.

In these circumstances, appellant has filed the present

appeal directed against the judgment and decree dated 3.11.2000
passed by the learned Additional District Judge.
37.

The core issue on which parties were litigating was

whether appellant had obtained allotment of the suit property by
misrepresenting facts.
38.

Alleged misrepresentation was the declaration in the

affidavit Ex.PW2/D1 allegedly submitted by the appellant deposing
that he did not own any land in Delhi. Whereas DDA asserted the
same to be false, appellant asserted that he did not submit the
affidavit.
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.20 of 34

39.

Misrepresentation means a false representation of facts

made by a party in relation to an essential or incidental term to a
contract. (See Section 18, Indian Contract Act, 1872, 'Law of
Contract' by Cheshire, Fifoot & Furmston (XIIIth Edition) and 'Law of
Contract' by Anson (XXVIthe Edition).
40.

Burden of proof of proving the misrepresentation is upon

the person who alleges the same.
41.

To establish that the said false representation allegedly

made by the appellant amounts to 'misrepresentation of facts' it
was essential for DDA to first establish that there were restrictions
on the members of the Society, their spouses and dependents from
owning any residential property in Delhi apart from plots alloted to
them by the Society.
42.

It was urged by learned counsel for the appellant that in

the written statement filed by DDA there is no averment to the
effect that there were restrictions on the members of the Society,
their spouses and dependents from owning any residential property
in Delhi apart from plots alloted to them by the Society.

Thus

counsel urged that the very foundation of the defence was missing.
43.

It is well settled that a party can be permitted to adduce

evidence on the basis of the case pleaded by him in his pleadings.
As in the decision reported as (1995) 5 SCC 612 Abubakar v Harun
the Supreme Court observed as under:“No amount of proof can substitute pleadings which are
the claim of a litigating party”.

RSA No.12/2001

Page No.21 of 34

44.

The purpose of this principle is two-fold:- (i) to appraise

the opposite party, distinctly and specifically, of the case he is
called upon to answer so that he may properly prepare his defence
and is not taken by surprise; (ii) to maintain an accurate record of
the cause of action as a protection against a second or subsequent
proceeding founded upon the same allegations.
45.

However each and every variance between the pleading

and proof is not fatal. Where parties are aware of the controversy
and go to trial with full knowledge that a particular question is at
issue, absence of specific pleading is a mere irregularity.
46.

In the decision reported as AIR 1966 SC 735 Bhagwati

Prasad v Chandramaul the Supreme Court observed as under:“There can be no doubt that if a party asks for a relief on a
clear and specific ground, and in the issues or at the trial,
no other ground is covered either directly or by necessary
implication, it would not be open to the said party to
attempt to sustain the same claim on a ground which is
entirely new. The same principle was laid down by this
Court is Sheodhar Rai & Others v. Suraj Prasad Singh &
Others AIR 1954 SC 758. In that case, it was held that
where the defendant in his written statement sets up a
title to the disputed lands as the nearest reversioner, the
Court cannot, on his failure to prove the said case, permit
him to make out a new case which is not only made in the
written statement, but which is wholly inconsistent with
the title set up by the defendant in the written statement.
The new plea on which the defendant sought to rely in
that case was that he was holding the suit property under
a shikmi settlement from the nearest reversioner. It would
be noticed that this new plea was in fact not made in the
written statement, had not been included in any issue
and, therefore, no evidence was or could have been led
about it. In such a case clearly a party cannot be
permitted to justify its claim on a ground which is entirely
new and which is inconsistent with the ground made by in
its pleadings.

RSA No.12/2001

Page No.22 of 34

But in considering the application of this doctrine to the
facts of the present case, it is necessary to bear in mind
the other principle that considerations of form cannot
over-ride the legitimate considerations of substance. If a
plea is not specifically made and yet it is covered by an
issue by implication, and the parties knew that the said
plea was involved in the trial, then the mere fact that the
plea was not expressly taken in the pleadings would not
necessarily disentitle a party from relying upon it if it is
satisfactorily proved by evidence. The general rule no
doubt is that the relief should be founded on pleadings
made by the parties. But where the substantial matters
relating to the title of both parties to the suit are touched,
though indirectly or even obscurely in the issue, and
evidence has been led about them, then the argument
that a particular matter was not expressly taken in the
pleadings would be purely formal and technical and
cannot succeed in every case. What the Court has to
consider in dealing with such an objection is : did the
parties know that the matter in question was involved in
the trial, and did they lead evidence about it ? If it appears
that the parties did not know that the matter was in issue
at the trial and one of them has had no opportunity to
lead evidence in respect of it, that undoubtedly would be
a different matter. To allow one party to rely upon a
matter in respect of which the other party did not lead
evidence and had had no opportunity to lead evidence,
would introduce considerations of prejudice, and in doing
justice to one party, the Court cannot do injustice to
another.”
47.

In the decision reported as AIR 1989 SC 1531 Kali

Prasad Agarwalla (Dead) by LR's & Ors. v Bharat Cooking Coal Ltd.
& Ors. the Supreme Court observed as under:“It was, however, urged for the appellants that there is no
proper pleading or issue for determination of the aforesaid
question and the evidence let in should not be looked into.
It is too late to raise this contention. The parties went to
trial knowing fully well what they were required to prove.
They have adduced evidence of their choice in support of
the respective claims. That evidence has been considered
by both courts below. They cannot now turn round and say
that the evidence should not be looked into. This is a well
accepted principle.”

RSA No.12/2001

Page No.23 of 34

48.

In

the

decision

reported

as

AIR

1969

MP

110

J.B.Mangharam & Co. & Anr. v ESI Corporation Division Bench of the
Madhya Pradesh High Court observed as under:“So far as the instant case is concerned, the question,
therefore, is whether the die of the power press is a
dangerous part of the machinery within the meaning of
the aforesaid provision. We have to look to the substance
and not the form of the pleading. Even if a plea is not
properly worded, it would make no difference if the
substance is clear and the other side is not likely to be
misled thereby. The whole object of the pleadings is to
bring the parties to an issue and if a pleading fulfils this
object no objection can be entertained merely on the
ground that it is not expressed in particular terms. We
may here quote the following observations of their
Lordships of the Supreme Court regarding the
construction of pleadings in Kedar Lal v. Hari Lal, AIR 1952
SC 47:
"The Court would be slow to throw out a claim
on a mere technicality of pleading when the
substance of the thing is there and no
prejudice is caused to the other side, however
clumsily or inartistically the plaint may be
worded."”
49.

In the decision reported as AIR 1969 MP 241 Smt.

Hirabai Chauhan v Mst. Bhagirathibai Madhya Pradesh High Court
observed as under:“There was, it will be seen no specific plea that the
plaintiff's predecessors had, at some time in the past,
migrated from any State or region where the Bombay
School of Hindu Law was in force or that they had carried
with them their personal law. No issue was, therefore,
framed on this particular aspect of the matter. Even so, it
may well be regarded as covered by the general issue
whether the parties are governed by the Bombay School
of Hindu Law. The point is that both parties fully knew and
understood what the real issue was and also led evidence
in support of their contentions. That being so, none of
them could be regarded as having been taken by surprise
or prejudiced in any manner. In this situation, there was,
even in the absence of a specific issue on the point no
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.24 of 34

mis-trial such as might vitiate the decision: Nagubhai v. B.
Shama Rao, AIR 1956 SC 593, Kame-sharamma v. Subba
Rao, AIR 1963 SC 884 and Kunju Kesavan v. M. M. Philip,
AIR 1964 SC 164. Indeed even when there is no specific
plea but the matter is covered by an issue by implication
and the parties go to trial with full knowledge that the plea
is involved in the trial and adduce evidence thereon, the
absence of the plea is a mere irregularity which did not
cause any prejudice to the parties, AIR 1956 S C 593 and
Bhagwati Prasad v. Chandramaul, (1967) 1 SCJ 666: (AIR
1966 SC .735).........”
50.

In the instant case appellant was fully conscious of the

fact that whether

there were restrictions on the members of the

Society their spouses and dependents from owning any residential
property in Delhi apart from plots alloted to them by the Society or
not was a 'question involved in the suit' as evident from the fact
that the appellant in his replication averred to the effect that at the
time when the perpetual sub-lease Ex.DW1/1 dated 3.12.66 was
executed there were no restrictions on the members of the Society
or their dependents from owning any residential property in Delhi
apart from plots alloted to them by the Society (portion underlined
in 19 above). Not only this, appellant also led evidence in support of
said averment by deposing in his examination-in-chief that

there

were no restrictions on the members of the Society and their
dependents from owning any residential property in Delhi apart
from plots alloted to them by the Society (portion underlined in para
26 above).
51.

In view of the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in

Bhagwati Prasad and Kali Prasad's cases (supra), the absence of the
averment that
RSA No.12/2001

there were restrictions on the members of the
Page No.25 of 34

Society or their dependents from owning any residential property in
Delhi apart from plots alloted to them by the Society in the written
statement of DDA is of no effect for the reason appellant was fully
aware that the said question was at issue in the suit.
52.

Thus in order to decide whether the appellant obtained

the allotment of the suit property by misrepresenting facts and thus
committed a breach in terms of Clause-III of the perpetual sub-lease
deed Ex.DW1/1 dated 3.12.66 the learned Trial Court was required
to consider following 5 questions:A.

Whether there were restrictions on the members of the

Society, their spouses and dependents from owning any residential
property in Delhi apart from plots alloted to them by the Society?
B.

Whether the appellant was a benami/ostensible owner

of the plot bearing No.25/41, Punjabi Bagh, Delhi?
C.

Whether the appellant transferred the ownership of the

plot in Punjabi Bagh in favour of his son Ved Prakash before the
execution of perpetual sub-lease ex.DW1/1 dated 3.12.66?
D.

Whether the appellant has sworn a false affidavit

Ex.PW2/D1 dated 11.6.1966 as alleged by DDA?
E.

Whether

the

show-cause

notice

Ex.DW-2

dated

26.3.1980 was duly sent to the appellant as claimed by DDA?
53.

As regards question 'A' suffice would it be to note the

'Large Scale Acquisition and Development and Disposal of Land in
Delhi Policy, 1961' (hereinafter referred to as the Policy) notified by
the Government of India on 2.5.1961. Clause 10(a) of the said policy
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.26 of 34

reads as under:“No plot should be alloted to any person, who whose
wife/husband or any his/her dependent relations including
unmarried children owns a house or residential plot of
land in Delhi, New Delhi or Delhi Cantonment. The
question of making an exception in the case of persons
living in a congested locality or whose family has outgrown should be considered after some experience has
been gained in the working of the scheme.”
54.

Though said policy was not filed by DDA before the trial

court yet this court can take judicial notice of the said policy in view
of Section 57(1) of the Indian Evidence Act which provides that the
Court can take judicial notice of the laws in India.
55.

The said policy has been noted in number of judicial

pronouncements. For instance, in the decision reported as 66 (1997)
DLT 713 Rashmi Nagrath v M/s Sarva Priya Cooperative House
Building Society Ltd Division Bench of this Court noted Clause 10(a)
of the Policy by observing as under:“Apart from that, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of
India vide its circular dated 2.5.1961 regarding allotment
of land had directed that no plots should be alloted to any
person, whose wife/husband or any of his/her dependent
relation including unmarried children own a house or
residential plot of land in Delhi/New Delhi/Delhi Cantt."
56.

At this stage, it is necessary to note following three

dates:a)

6.5.1961

..........

Admission of the appellant as a

19.7.1964 ..........

Allotment of the suit property by

member of the Society
b)

the Society in favour of the appellant.
c)

3.12.66

RSA No.12/2001

..........

Execution of perpetual sub-lease
Page No.27 of 34

deed Ex.DW1/1.
The Policy was notified on 2.5.1961. Thus, on all the
afore-noted three dates there were restrictions on the members of
the Society, their spouses and dependents from owning any
residential property in Delhi apart from the plots alloted to them by
the Society.
57.

Appellant has merely raised a bald averment that at the

time of the allotment of the suit property and execution of
perpetual sub-lease deed Ex.DW1/1 there were no restrictions on
the members of the Society, their spouses and dependents from
owning any residential property in Delhi apart from the plots alloted
to them by the Society. No material has been placed on record by
the appellant in support of this contention.
58.

In view of Clause 10(a) of the Policy I hold that at the

time of admission of appellant as a member of the Society,
allotment of the suit property in favour of the appellant and
execution of the perpetual sub-lease deed Ex.DW1/1

there were

restrictions on the members of the Society, their spouses and
dependents from owning any residential property in Delhi apart
from plots alloted to them by the Society.
59.

Before proceeding to consider questions 'B', 'C', 'D' and

'E' I would like to note following judicial pronouncements:I

Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation V

Cork Manufacturing Company (2007) 8 SCC 120:- In said decision,
the Supreme Court observed as under:RSA No.12/2001

Page No.28 of 34

“Let us now consider whether the three courts below were
justified in decreeing the suit of the respondent. Before
we consider the findings of the courts below, it may be
kept on record that in the second appeal, the High Court
held that no question of law much less any substantial
question of law arose in the same. On a perusal of the,
judgment of the High Court in the second appeal, we also
do not find that any substantial question of law, as
enumerated in Section 100 of the CPC was in fact raised
before the High Court. So far as the trial court is
concerned, it came to a finding of fact that the respondent
was found to be in possession of the suit plot in spite of
resumption notice having been issued by the appellant.
The trial court also came to a finding of fact that it was
due to inaction on the part of appellant to remove the
electric wires and poles from the suit plot and the
explanation given by the respondent for not being able to
take any step to raise construction in compliance with
Clause 8 of the agreement must be accepted and
therefore a decree for permanent injunction should be
granted in favour of the respondent. These findings of fact
were echoed by the appellate court as well. It is well
settled that in a second appeal High Court is not
permitted to set aside the findings of fact arrived at by
the two courts below until and unless it is shown that such
findings of fact are either perverse or arbitrary in nature.
Mr. Mohan learned Additional Solicitor General, however,
could nor satisfy us that the findings of the courts below
which were also accepted by the High Court in the second
appeal were either perverse or arbitrary. Accepting this
position, the High Court in second appeal found that the
appellant bad failed to satisfy it that the findings recorded
by the courts below suffered from any infirmity or that
they were contrary to the record. The High Court also
concluded that there was no question of law much less
any substantial question of law which arose in the second
appeal. Before we part with this judgment, we keep on
record that Mr. Mohan appearing for the appellant
substantially argued before us on the issue that the High
Court was not justified in rejecting the application for
acceptance of additional evidence. We have already
discussed this aspect of the matter herein before and
after such discussion, we have already held that there
was no infirmity in that part of the judgment by which the
High Court had rejected the application for acceptance of
additional evidence.(underlining emphasised).
II

G. Mahalingappa v G.M. Savitha (2005) 6 SCC 441:- In

RSA No.12/2001

Page No.29 of 34

said decision the Supreme Court observed as under:“As held herein earlier the High Court had set aside the
concurrent findings of fact not on consideration of the
evidence adduced by the parties but set aside the
concurrent findings of fact on the basis of findings
contrary to the evidence on record and without
considering the findings of fact arrived at by the
appellate court and the trial court. From the judgment of
the High Court we further find that the concurrent
findings of fact were set aside not on consideration of the
findings of fact arrived at by the courts below but only on
the basis of the arguments of the learned Advocate of the
respondent. This was also not permissible to the High
Court in Second Appeal to come to a contrary findings of
its own only on the basis of the arguments of the learned
counsel for the respondent without considering the
findings of the trial court as well as the appellate court.
(See 2002 (9) SCC 73, Gangajal Kunwar (Smt.) and Ors. v.
Sarju Pandey (Dead) by LRs and Ors.]). It is equally
settled that High Court in second appeal is not entitled to
interfere with the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by
the courts below until and unless it is found that the
concurrent findings of fact were perverse and not based
on sound reasoning. We ourselves considered the
evidence on record as well as the findings of fact arrived
at by the two courts below. From such consideration we
do not find that the concurrent findings of fact arrived at
by the appellate court as well as the trial court were
either perverse or without any reason or based on nonconsideration of important piece of evidence or admission
of some of the parties. We are therefore of the view that
the High Court was not justified in interfering with the
concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the appellate
court as well as the trial court which findings were
rendered on consideration of the pleadings as well as the
material (oral and documentary) evidence on record.”
III

Hero Vinoth (minor) v Seshammali AIR 2006 SC 2234:- In

said decision, the Supreme Court summarized the scope of the
power of the High Court under Section 100 of the Code of Civil
Procedure as under:“The principles relating to Section 100 CPC, relevant for
this case, may be summarised thus:-

RSA No.12/2001

Page No.30 of 34

(i)............
(ii).............
(iii) The general rule is that High Court will not interfere
with concurrent findings of the Courts below. But it is not
an absolute rule. Some of the well recognized exceptions
are where (i) the courts below have ignored material
evidence or acted on no evidence; (ii) the courts have
drawn wrong inferences from proved facts by applying
the law erroneously; or (iii) the courts have wrongly cast
the burden of proof. When we refer to 'decision based on
no evidence', it not only refers to cases where there is a
total dearth of evidence, but also refers to any case,
where the evidence, taken as a whole, is not reasonably
capable of supporting the finding.”
60.

Keeping in mind the afore-noted law I shall now

determine the correctness of the decision of the courts below on the
questions 'B', 'C', 'D' and 'E'.
61.

Pertaining to questions 'B' and 'C' the Courts below have

noted that no evidence was led by the appellant to establish that he
was a benamidar/ostensible owner of the plot in Punjabi Bagh and
that he had transferred ownership of the said plot in favour of his
son before the execution of the perpetual sub-lease deed Ex.DW1/1.
On said reasoning the courts below have answered in negative on
the questions 'B' and 'C'.
62.

A perusal of the trial court record shows that the courts

below have rightly held that no evidence was led by the appellant to
establish that he was a benamidar/ostensible owner of the plot in
Punjabi Bagh and that he had transferred ownership of the said plot
in favour of his son before the execution of the perpetual sub-lease
deed Ex.DW1/1.
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.31 of 34

63.

The version of the appellant receives a further setback

in light of the fact that appellant in his testimony as PW-2 did not
depose to the effect that he transferred the ownership of the plot in
Punjabi Bagh in favour of his son Ved Prakash before the execution
of the perpetual sub-lease Ex.DW1/1.
64.

Pertaining to question 'D' version of the appellant was

that he never executed affidavit Ex.PW2/D1 dated 11.6.66. That he
could not read or write English and could sign in English. That
officials of Society obtained his signatures on certain papers. That
he signed the said papers without reading or understanding the
contents of the same.
65.

Noting

that

the

date

of

affidavit

Ex.PW2/D1

is

antecedent to the execution of the perpetual sub-lease Ex.DW1/1
the learned Trial Court has held that there is a strong presumption
that a condition precedent of allotment of the plots of the Society
was that members of the Society were required to submit an
affidavit

declaring

that

neither

they

nor

their

spouses

and

dependents own any residential property in Delhi and that in
fulfillment

of

said

condition

appellant

submitted

affidavit

Ex.PW2/D1.
66.

The version of the appellant that he could not read or

write English was noted and disbelieved by the appellate court.
67.

Last contention advanced by the appellant that he did

not receive show cause notice Ex.DW1/2 dated 26.3.1980 for the
reason the shop to which show cause notice was sent was lying
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.32 of 34

closed since last 15-16 years was rejected by the Trial Court on the
reasoning that there was no occasion for the postman to falsely
endorse 'refused to receive' on the envelope Ex.DW1/3.
68.

The learned Appellate Court went a step further and had

noted that show cause notice Ex.DW1/2 dated 26.3.1980 and
cancellation letter Ex.DW1/4 dated 21.1.1981 were sent

to the

same address 'M/s Jai Bharat Trading Co, Machinery Merchant,
4025, Naya Bazaar, Delhi' and that appellant admitted in his
testimony that the cancellation letter dated 21.1.1981 was received
by him at said address. After noting the said facts the learned Trial
Court has held that version set up by appellant that shop M/s Jai
Bharat Trading Co was lying closed since last 15-16 years cannot be
believed in the teeth of the fact that the cancellation letter
Ex.DW1/4 dated 21.1.1981 was received by him at the said shop Jai
Bharat Trading Co.
69.

On the basis of their decisions on questions 'B', 'C', 'D'

and 'E' both the courts below have concurrently held that the
appellant

had

obtained

allotment

of

the

suit

property

by

misrepresenting facts and thus committed a breach in terms of
Clause III of the perpetual sub-lease Ex.DW1/1 dated 3.12.66. These
are findings of facts.
70.

In view of judicial pronouncements noted in para 58

above it can safely be held that this Court has no power to interfere
with the findings of the fact unless there is an error of law vitiating
the findings of the fact. It has no power to reappraise the evidence
RSA No.12/2001

Page No.33 of 34

or to find out what is the weight attached to a particular evidence.
72.

No error of law or perversity has been pointed out by

the appellant in the reasoning or in the appreciation of evidence by
the courts below in the arriving at the said findings of facts.
73.

Circumstances of the case and evidence on record

probablizes the view taken by the Courts below. Reasoning adopted
by the courts below is sound.
74.

In view of above discussion I do not find any merits in

the present appeal.
75.

The same is dismissed.

76.

No costs.

January 18, 2008
vg

RSA No.12/2001

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.34 of 34

