*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.217/2005
Union of India
through:

........
Appellant
Mr. P.K.Dey, Advocate with
Mr. Kaushik Dey, Advocate
VERSUS

Krishan Lal & Ors.
........ Respondent
through: Mr. J.P.Sekka, Advocate
DATE OF DECISION
17.03.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)

CM No.11410/2005 in FAO No.217/2005
There is a delay of 52 days in filing the appeal.
Notwithstanding the fact that delay has not been satisfactorily
explained I condone the delay.
The CM is allowed.
FAO No.217/2005
1.

Shakuntala Devi admittedly suffered injuries and

died on account of being crushed by the train from which she
FAO No.217/05

page 1 of 6

fell. Her husband and children filed a claim under the Railways
Act, 1989 and sought compensation payable under the
applicable Rules.

Needless to state, 2 issues of substance

were framed by the Railways Claim Tribunal. Firstly, whether
the deceased was a bona fide passenger in the train in which
the alleged accident took place and secondly whether the
deceased died as a result of an untoward incident entitling the
applicants to the statutory compensation.
2.

The deceased, her husband and children were

passengers in the train as per claim made by them. Railway
tickets purchased were proved as Ex.AW-1/3 to Ex. AW-1/8.
3.

Thus, finding returned by the Tribunal is that it has

been successfully established that the deceased was a bona
fide passenger in the train.
4.

On the issue of the death of the deceased, in view of

the testimony of AW-1 and AW-2 that when the deceased was
in the process of boarding the train at the platform, her foot
being on the foot board, the train suddenly commenced
journey with a jolt and as a consequence, deceased fell down
and got crushed by the train, the Tribunal has held in favour of
the applicants.
5.

2 points have been urged in the appeal. Firstly, the

train tickets did not specify the train number nor the time of
FAO No.217/05

page 2 of 6

the journey. It is thus urged that the Railway tickets Ex.AW-1/3
to Ex.AW-1/8 do not connect the valid authorization to travel in
the train in question. It is secondly urged that it has come on
record that the bogey was already over crowded and hence the
deceased assumed self imposed risk by attempting to board
the over crowded bogey and hence contributed to her death.
It is urged that under the circumstances the death cannot be
attributed to an untoward incident.
6.

On the first issue, suffice would it be to record that

AW-1, husband of the deceased, as also

AW-2 one Kamal

Chhabra a co-passenger deposed that the deceased was a
bona fide passenger. Krishan Lal deposed that he purchased
the tickets AW-1/3 to AW-1/8 to undertake the journey from
Daya Basti Station to Rohtak. Kamal Chhabra also deposed
that Krishan Lal had purchased the tickets when he too was
engaged in similar activity.
7.

I note that in cross-examination no question has

been put to AW-1 that the tickets were meant for some other
train or some other journey. Thus the appellant is prohibited
from making any submissions that the tickets in question did
not connect the authorization of the deceased to undertake the
journey in the train in question.
8.

But I have more fundamental reasons to sustain the

FAO No.217/05

page 3 of 6

finding.
9.

It is matter of common knowledge that when a short

journey is intended in a passenger train, a short distance travel
ticket akin to a token is issued recording the fare received by
the cashier and the station where from the ticket is issued.
The fare is commensurate to the distance of the journey. As
noted above, the deceased along with her family was
undertaking a short journey from Daya Basti to Rohtak, a
distance of about 70 kms.

Thus AW-1/3 to AW-1/8 establish

that the entire family were bona fide passengers.
10.

I uphold the finding of the Tribunal on the first issue.

11.

Pertaining to the second issue, it is to be noted that

Section 123 of the Railways Act, 1989 defines, vide clause 'c',
an “untoward incident” as follows:“(c) “untoward incident” means(1)(i) the
within the
section 3
Activities
1987); or
(ii)
the

commission of a terrorist act
meaning of sub-section(1) of
of the Terrorist and Disruptive
(Prevention) Act, 1987 (28 of

the making of a violent attack or
commission of robbery or dacoity; or

(iii)
or arson.

the indulging in rioting, shoot-out

by any person in or any train carrying
passengers, or in a waiting hall, cloak room or
reservation or booking office or on any
FAO No.217/05

page 4 of 6

platform or in any other place within the
precincts of a railway station; or
(2) the accidental falling of any passenger
from a train carrying passengers.”
12.

Limb 2 to sub-clause 'C' states that the accidental

falling of any passenger from a train carrying passengers
would be an untoward incident.
13.

It is obvious that where a passenger accidentally

falls from a train carrying passengers it would be an untoward
incident giving rise to a cause for receiving compensation
under Section 124(A) which provides for compensation on
account of an untoward incident.
14.

Reverting to the evidence, suffice would it be to

note that AW-1 and AW-2 have categorically deposed that the
train was stationary on the platform when the entire family
boarded and when deceased was boarding as the last member
of the family, while she was in the process of boarding the train
the same commenced journey by accelerating with a sudden
jerk.
15.

I find that said testimony of AW-1 and AW-2 has not

even been challenged in cross-examination.
16.

The contention of the learned counsel for the

appellant that the train was already over-booked and hence by
attempting to board the train which was full of passengers, the
FAO No.217/05

page 5 of 6

deceased assumed self imposed risk and contributed to what
had happened, I repel the same on account of the fact that the
Railway authorities have no business to issue tickets in excess
of the carrying capacity of a train. Each and every person to
whom a ticket is issued would be entitled to believe the the
Railway authorities has assured him or her of a safe journey by
having a berth inside a bogey of the train.
17.

Be that as it may, the guard of the train could not

have given the requisite signal to the driver to move the train
till all passengers were safely inside the bogey.
18.

I find no merits in the appeal.

19.

The appeal is dismissed.

20.

Costs shall follow.

21.

TCR be returned forthwith.

March 17, 2008

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

vg

FAO No.217/05

page 6 of 6

