*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO.No.352/2006
Gian Singh
through:

........ Appellant
Ms. S.Janani, Advocate
VERSUS

Central Ordinance Depot & Anr.
........ Respondents
through: Mr. Jaswinder Singh, Advocate
DATE OF DECISION
18.03.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2.

Appellant, an employee of the Central Ordinance

Depot, in relation to his work, suffered an accidental injury
resulting in the patella bone of the left knee being fractured
and consequently removed.

As we all know, he or she who

looses the patella bone, suffers a handicap in mobility for the
reason the movement of the knee is restricted.
3.

Admittedly, appellant was working as a storekeeper

FAO.No.352/06

page 1 of 8

at the Central Ordinance Depot.

He sought compensation

under the Workmen's Compensation Act.
4.

At the direction of the Commissioner Workmen's

Compenstion the appellant got himself examined at DDU
Hospital. Vide report dated 10.8.2004 the doctor opined that
the disability suffered was permanent and in relation to the
whole body was 7.5%.
5.
place.

Appellant was aged 57 years when the accident took
In relation to his wages and the maximum monthly

wage at which recompense had to be effected, treating
disability to be 7.5%, Commissioner Workmen's Compensation
worked out Rs.11,500/- as the sum payable to the appellant.
Interest @ 12% per annum on the compensation assessed has
been awarded with effect from the date of the accident.
Interest has been awarded under Section 4A (3)(a) of the
Workmen's Compensation Act 1923.
6.

It is urged by learned counsel for the appellant that

the compensation payable in case of injury has to be assessed
under Section 4 of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923 and
vide clause 'c' thereof, where a permanent partial disablement
results from the injury, compensation has to be determined, if
injury is specified in para II of Schedule I on such percentage as
is enumerated in the schedule. If injury sustained or suffered
FAO.No.352/06

page 2 of 8

is not specified in Schedule I then the compensation has to be
assessed on such percentage of the disability as affects the
income. However, counsel urges that in the later situation, by
virtue of explanation II, in assessing the loss of earning
capacity the qualified medical practitioner has to have regards
to the percentage of loss of earning capacity in relation to
different injuries specified in Schedule I.
7.

To appreciate the argument of learned counsel for

the appellant Clause 'c' of Sub Section 1 of Section 4 of the
Workmen's Compensation Act 1923 needs to be noted.

It

reads as under:“(c)

Where permanent
partial disablement
result from the injury

(i)

in the case of an injury
specified in Part II of
Schedule I, such percentage
of the compensation which
would have been payable in
the case of permanent total
disablement as is specified
therein as being the
percentage of the loss of
earning capacity caused by
that injury; and

(ii)

in the case of an injury not
specified in Schedule I, such
percentage of the
compensation payable in the
case of permanent total
disablement as is
proportionate to the loss of
earning capacity (as
assessed by the qualified
medical practitioner)1

1 The words “(as assessed by the qualified medical practitioner)” were inserted in Section 4 (1) (c)
(ii) by Act 22 of 1984

FAO.No.352/06

page 3 of 8

permanently caused by the
injury;
Explanation I.Where more injuries than one are caused by the
same accident, the amount of compensation payable under this head
shall be aggregated but not so in any case as to exceed the amount
which would have been payable if permanent total disablement had
resulted from the injuries.
Explanation II.In assessing the loss of earning capacity for the
purpose of sub-clause (ii), the qualified medical practitioner shall have
due regard to the percentages of loss of earning capacity in relation to
different injuries specified in Schedule I;”

8.

As noted hereinabove, the injury i.e. loss of patella

bone of the knee of the left leg has been conceded by learned
counsel for the appellant as the injury not specified in the
schedule. Thus, the compensation has to be worked out with
reference to Clause ii of Clause 'c' of Sub Section 1 of Section 4
of the Act.
9.

Suffice would it be to state that this compensation

has to be a percentage of the permanent disability as assessed
by a qualified medical practitioner.
10.

The argument that the assessment, by virtue of

explanation II, has to be with reference to an injury specified
under Schedule I is neither here nor there, in the facts and
circumstances of the instant case, for the reason it was the
appellant who himself produced the report from a qualified
medical practitioner. The appellant relied upon the report. If
the appellant had wanted any clarificatory questions to be put

FAO.No.352/06

page 4 of 8

to the author of the report, the appellant ought to have
examined the doctor concerned.
11.

Further, if I look to entries at serial No.27 to 48 of

part II to Schedule I, I note that disablement thereto relate to
loss of phalanges, loss of bone, injury to metatarso-phalangeal
joint etc. They would be akin to loss of a patella. I note that
under entries 27 to 48 the percentage disability varies from 1%
(being minimum) to a maximum of 14%.
12.

Under

the

circumstances

7.5%

disability

in

proportion to the whole body being assessed as a result of loss
of patella cannot be said to be an unreasonable opinion.
13.

It has also to be noted that in the instant case, as a

matter of fact, the appellant has suffered no loss of wages for
the reason being an employee of the Central Ordinance Factory
and working as a storekeeper he continued to work under the
employer till retirement at full wages.
14.

No case is made out to enhance the compensation.

15.

On the second point urged that the Commissioner

Workmen's Compensation has illegally denied benefit of
penalty to the appellant, counsel urges that notwithstanding all
factors available with the employer namely the age of the
insured, his monthly wages and percentage of disability, the
compensation ought to have been paid by the employer.
FAO.No.352/06

page 5 of 8

16.

The submission made by learned counsel for the

appellant requires this court to consider Section 4A of the
Workmen's

Compensation

Act

1923

which

provides

for

payment of penalty vide Clause b of Sub Section 3 thereof.
17.

Section 4A of the Workmen's Compensation Act

1923 reads as under:“4A. Compensation to be paid when due and
penalty for default.-(1) Compensation under Section
4 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept the
liability for compensation to the extent claimed, he
shall be bound to make provisional payment based on
the extent of liability which he accepts, and, such
payment shall be deposited with the Commissioner or
made to the workman, as the case may be, without
prejudice to the right of the workman to make any
further claim.
(3) where any employer is in default in paying the
compensation due under this Act within one month
from the date it fell due, the Commissioner shall(a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to
the amount of the arrears, pay simple interest
thereon at the rate of twelve per cent per annum
or at such higher rate not exceeding the
maximum of the lending rates of any scheduled
bank as may be specified by the Central
Government, by notification in the Official
Gazette, on the amount due; and
(b) if, in his opinion, there is no justification for
the delay, direct that the employer shall, in
addition to the amount of the arrears and
interest thereon, pay a further sum not
exceeding fifty per cent of such amount by way
of penalty:

FAO.No.352/06

page 6 of 8

PROVIDED that an order for the payment of penalty
shall not be passed under Clause (b) without giving a
reasonable opportunity to the employer to show cause
why it should not be passed.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section,
"scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being
included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).
(3A) The interest and the penalty payable under subsection (3) shall be paid to the workman or his
dependant, as the case may be.”
18.
arise.

A perusal of Section 4A shows that 3 situation may
Firstly where the employer accepts complete liability.

Secondly where employer accepts partial liability and thirdly
where the liability needs to be computed. In circumstance one,
the employer after accepting liability if does not pay would be
liable to be visited with penalty. In the second situation, where
having accepted partial liability at least that amount requiring
to be paid, on not being paid, the Commissioner Workmen's
Compensation would be justified in levying penalty on the
admitted partial amount.

But in the third scenario, where

compensation has to be quantified and assessed the exercise
of discretion by the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation
has to be a reasoned exercise of discretion.
19.

As in the instant case, where computation of the

compensation on a partial permanent disability requires an

FAO.No.352/06

page 7 of 8

adjudicatory process to be completed in relation to the opinion
of a medical practitioner, suffice would it be to state that the
compensation payable would become due when assessed.
20.

In the decision reported as 2007 (2) SCALE 455

National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Mubasir Ahmad & Anr. the view
taken by me hereinabove pertaining to a permanent partial
disability requiring an opinion of a medical practitioner as the
sine qua non was considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
viz-a-viz the issue of levy of penalty. It was held that in cases
covered by Section 4(1)(c)(ii) the compensation is payable i.e.
due only when determined by the Commissioner Workmen's
Compensation.
21.

The facts and circumstances of the instant case do

not justify levy of penalty.

The Commissioner Workmen's

Compensation has correctly declined the levy of penalty.
22.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

23.

No costs.

24.

TCR be returned forthwith.

March 18, 2008
mm

FAO.No.352/06

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 8 of 8

