*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.357/2007
Smt.Dharambiri Devi & Ors.
........Appellant
through: Mr.U.S.Chaudhary, Advocate
VERSUS
The Ministry of Railway & Anr.
........ Respondents
through: Mr. V.S.R.Krishna, Advocate.
DATE OF DECISION
13.03.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)

CM.No.12714/2007
Allowed subject to all just exception.
FAO.No.357/2007
1.

Learned Counsel for the parties state that the

appeal can be disposed of without summoning the record but
with reference to the annexures filed along with the instant
appeal because the annexures are true copies of the relevant

FAO.No.357/07

page 1 of 7

record of the Railway Claim Tribunal.
2.

Vide impugned order dated 4.6.2007 the Railway

Claim Tribunal has dismissed a claim petition filed by the
appellants holding that the evidence on record establishes that
the deceased

Yogender Kumar, son of appellant No.1 and

brother of appellants 2 and 3 did not die

in an untoward

incident.
3.

In reaching the view afore-noted, the Tribunal has

disbelieved the testimony of one Balkishan examined as AW-2
and has referred to the record of investigation conducted by
RW-1, Officer In-charge of the Police Post Railway GRP
Shahdara, proved as Ex.RW-1/1.

Needless to state the

appellant examined as AW-1 was admittedly not an eye
witness to the death of her son.
4.

The Tribunal has observed that the procedure

prescribed under the Railway Act is a summary procedure and
strict Rules of Evidence are not applicable.
5.

AW-2, Balkishan, who claimed to be an eye witness

stated that the deceased a co-passenger was standing near
the exit of the bogey which was over crowded and fell down
from

the

train

due

to

a sudden and violent jerk. He

stated that immediately after the accident which took place
near B-cabin, railway police reached
FAO.No.357/07

and he i.e. Balkishan
page 2 of 7

gave his name and address to the police official.
6.

The Tribunal has noted that the names of eye

witnesses were noted by the investigating officer and were a
part of Ex.RW-1/1.

That Balkishan's name was not in the list

of persons listed by the investigating officer as the ones who
volunteered as the eye witness immediately after the accident.
7.

The

second reason

given

by

the Tribunal

to

disbelieve the testimony of AW-2 is the postmortem report of
the deceased; the place at which the body was recovered; and
the nature of injuries on the body.
8.

To quote from the impugned order, the Tribunal has

recorded as under :“The entire investigation file proved though
RW-1 and exhibited without any objection
from the applicants as per Ex.RW-1/1 does not
disclose or indicate that AW-2 was an
eyewitness to the incident. If really, AW-2,
was an eyewitness to the incident, can it not
be expected that he would have disclosed the
incident to the Investigating Officer and his
statement in this regard would have been
recorded by the Investigating Officer. It was
not even suggested to the Investigating
Officer, RW-1, that AW-2 was an eyewitness to
the incident. The entire investigation file,
Ex.RW-1/1, as well as the relevant records
produced by the applicants themselves would
show that the body of the deceased was cut
into two halves and one half of the body was
lying inside the railway track whereas the
other half of the body was lying outside the
track. This would clearly indicate that the
deceased must have been run over by the
FAO.No.357/07

page 3 of 7

train as otherwise the body of the deceased
could not have been cut into two halves, one
of which lying inside the railway track and the
other lying outside the track. The nature of
injuries sustained by the deceased and the
manner in which the two pieces of the dead
body of the deceased were lying will not be
suggestive of the fact that he would have
fallen down from the running train. On the
other hand, they will be clearly suggestive fact
that the deceased must have been run over
by the train. This is exactly what has been
elicited in the cross-examination of RW-1 by
the applicants.”
9.

The Tribunal has further observed as under :“The said manner of incident disclosed from
the investigation file Ex.RW-1/1 and proved
through the Investigating Officer, RW-1 stands
probablised from the fact that the body of the
deceased was cut into two halves and ½ of
the body was lying inside the railway track
whereas the other ½ of the body was lying
outside the railway track. Such injuries are
possible only when the entire body of the
victim comes under the wheels of the train. In
other words, he was actually run over by the
train and not otherwise. The facts and the
surrounding circumstances of this case would
clearly indicate that the incident in question
did not occur in the manner, as stated by AW2 and he could not be eyewitness to the
incident. The material placed on record would
clearly indicate that the deceased while
travelling on the joint of the train tried to get
down from the train when it slowed down and
in the process, he fell down from the train and
was run over by the train. The proviso to
Section 124-A of the Railways Act is entitled to
make explicit that the expression”accident
falling” excludes the fall of a passenger as a
consequence of his own fault, carelessness
etc. The liability of the respondent railway
administration to pay compensation under

FAO.No.357/07

page 4 of 7

Section 124-A of the Railways Act is not so
wide as to constitute an absolute liability to
pay compensation to the passenger, who had
been injured or died as a consequence of his
own imprudent conduct and negligent act. The
expression 'self-inflicted injury' in clause (b) of
the proviso to Section 124-A of the Act
denotes and includes an injury suffered as a
direct result or consequence of the wrongful
and negligent act on the part of the victim. In
the instant case, the material placed on
record would clearly indicate that the
causative factor for the death of the deceased
was the negligent and wrongful act on the
part of the deceased, who besides found
travelling on the joint of the train had tried or
attempted to alight from the moving train.
This was the causative factor for the
happening of the incident in question. It is,
thus, clear from the conduct of the victim that
he had endangered his own safety due to his
negligence. It is on account of such wrongful
and negligent act on the part of the deceased,
he sustained injuries and died. Hence injuries
sustained by the deceased were self-inflicted
injuries, in the sense they were caused due to
his own wrongful and negligent act.”
10.

Indeed, the learned counsel for the appellants very

fairly concedes that on the evidence on record the view taken
by the Tribunal is a possible view but urges that the contra
view projected by the appellants is more plausible.
11.

But, the submission made by learned counsel for the

appellants looses significance if AW-2 is to be disbelieved.
12.

The manner in which deceased is stated to have

suffered the fall injury as per testimony of AW-2 would be
acceptable only if this court is satisfied that AW-2 was an eye
FAO.No.357/07

page 5 of 7

witness.
13.

If AW-2 was an eye witness

and was a socially

conscious person as would logically flow from his volunteering
to give evidence in favour of the appellants, I would have
expected his participative presence being recorded by the
investigating officer who reached the spot immediately after
the accident. His not being available at the spot casts a doubt
on his presence when the unfortunate incident took place.
14.

I may further note that the body of the deceased

being cut into two halves is not possible if the deceased fell out
of the boggie through the exit if the train received a sudden
jerk. A person falling of a boggie from the exit would have a
trajectory which would drop him, if not a feet or two away from
the train, at least 6 to 8 inches from the train and the forward
motion would throw the person forward and not laterally.
Meaning thereby the body could not be cut into two by the
train running over.
15.

There is no evidence on record that the railway line

had a curvature at the place where body of the deceased was
found.

I could have appreciated if the railway line had a

curvature. In such a situation, it could have been plausible to
consider the body being cut into two as a result of the fall and
the momentum of the body viz-a-viz the motion of the train.
FAO.No.357/07

page 6 of 7

16.

I clarify; the situation could have been akin to a

person falling from a moving bus towards left and coming
under the rear wheel of a bus. When a bus cuts towards the
left, a person jerked out from the front gate may come under
the rear wheel of the bus for the reason it is well known that
the rear wheel of the bus passes over the spot towards the left
of the spot where the front wheel passed over.
17.

Be that as it may, the settled law is that where on

the given evidence view taken by the court or tribunal of
plenary jurisdiction is plausible,

the Appellate Court

not take a contrary view, merely because

would

another view is

possible.
18.

The appeal is dismissed.

19.

No costs.

March 13, 2008
pu

FAO.No.357/07

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 7 of 7

