*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.273/1999
Sh. K.C.Bajaj & Ors.
....... Appellants
through: Mr.Prashant Bushan, Advocate with
Mr.Mayank Mishra, Advocate
VERSUS
Smt. Sudershan Kumari & Anr.
........ Respondents
through: Mr.S.K.Taneja, Advocate with
Mr.Puneet Taneja, Advocate
RESERVED ON:
01.04.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
11.04.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The dispute in the above captioned appeal is between

the family members/legal heirs of Late Smt.Krishna Devi Ahuja
(hereinafter referred to as the testatrix).
2.

The genealogy tree of the family of Late Smt.Krishna

Devi Ahuja is as under:-

FAO No.273/99

page 1 of 42

Krishna Devi Ahuja (Testatrix)
I
I
--------------------------------------------------------------------I
I
I
Krishan Kumar Ahuja Ashok Kumar Ahuja
Usha Bajaj
(Son, non-objector)
(Son, objector)
(Daughter)
I
-------------------------I
I
Anil Bajaj
Ameeta Bajaj
(Son)
(Daughter)

3.

Testatrix left the world of the living on 22.07.1982. Her

husband had pre-deceased her, having died somewhere in the year
1967 or 1968.
4.

On 21.09.1987, Smt. Usha Bajaj (hereinafter referred to

as the propounder) filed a petition under Section 276 of the Indian
Succession Act 1925 seeking probate of a will dated 02.11.1977
purportedly executed by the testatrix. Inter alia, to establish that
the will was validly executed by the testatrix attention of the court
was drawn to the contemporaneous conduct of the testatrix vis-a-vis
the contents of the will. It was pleaded that during her lifetime the
testatrix had already implemented a substantial part of the bequest
by transferring to the named beneficiaries what was intended to be
transferred after her death. It was pleaded that the property at
Bombay which was bequeathed in favour of the propounder was
transferred by the testatrix during her lifetime in name of the
propounder. Likewise, in her lifetime the testatrix gifted the gold
ornaments which were bequeathed in favour of the daughter of the
propounder Ms.Ameeta Bajaj to her.
5.

Ashok Kumar Ahuja the son of the testatrix filed

FAO No.273/99

page 2 of 42

objections to the will. The will was challenged on the ground that it
was a forged and a fabricated document created by the propounder
and her husband Dr.K.C. Bajaj by either one of the following three
methods namely, (i) signatures of the testatrix on the will were
forged; (ii) signatures of the testatrix were obtained on the will
without her knowledge or consent; (iii) signatures of the testatrix on
the will were obtained by exercising undue influence upon her.
6.

Additionally it was pleaded that a will dated 28.09.1968

was the last legal and valid testament of the testatrix. That between
the years 1967 to 1982 (the period between the death of the
husband of the testatrix till her death) the testatrix mostly resided
with the objector and occasionally used to visit the propounder and
that on one such occasional visit the propounder and her husband
took advantage of the ill-health of the testatrix and without her
knowledge or consent or by exercising undue influence upon her
obtained her signatures on the will. It was pleaded that will being a
forged and fabricated document is strengthened by the fact that the
so-called attesting witnesses to the will were colleagues of the
husband of the propounder and were not known to the testatrix.
That the testatrix never preferred to stay with the propounder even
for a single day for the reason she was suspicious of the husband of
the propounder who was a shrewd and money-minded person.
7.

Regarding the pleadings of contemporaneous

conduct

of the testatrix, it was denied that the property in Bombay was
transferred by the testatrix in name of the propounder. It was

FAO No.273/99

page 3 of 42

pleaded that the husband of the propounder Dr.K.C.Bajaj who was a
government employee was the owner of the property at Bombay. It
was pleaded that to avoid vacating the government accommodation
Dr.K.C.Bajaj transferred the said property in name of the testatrix
without her knowledge or consent. That when the testatrix had no
knowledge about the transfer of the property in her name, then how
could she transfer the same in name of the propounder. However it
was admitted that the testatrix had during her life time gifted her
gold ornaments to the daughter of the propounder Ms.Ameeta Bajaj.
8.

The will in question, which is penned in English language

on 2 sheets of paper, is an unregistered document. The will reads as
under: “WILL
I, Shrimati Krishna Devi Ahuja, widow of Shri Ganga Ram
Ahuja, aged about 70 years, resident of E-D/139/2
Tagore Garden, New Delhi, declare this to be my first
Will which I make this the 2nd day of November 1977.
WHEREAS I am the owner of Flat No.26(Twenty six)
“Sree Gurukrupa” Building No.22, Sree Gurunagar Four
Bunglow Road, Andheri (West) of Amar Jyoti Cooperative Housing Society Limited, Registered No.296 of
1963, and by this Will I hereby bequeath and devise my
said Flat to my daughter Shrimati Usha Bajaj, wife of
Dr.K.C. Bajaj for her benefit absolutely and for subject to
the proviso, however, that the income derived by way of
rent from the aforesaid property shall for a period of
seven years from the date of my death or upto the time
of completion of education of my grandson Anil Bajaj –
whichever is earlier – be utilized wholly for the
maintenance, education and other incidental expenses
of my grandson Anil Bajaj.
WHEREAS I am also the owner of Flat No.E-D/139/2
Tagore Garden, New Delhi, and by this Will I hereby
bequeath and devise my said Flat to my daughter

FAO No.273/99

page 4 of 42

Shrimati Usha Bajaj subject to the condition that she
would pay an amount of RS.11,000/- (Rupees Eleven
Thousand only) each to my two sons Shri Krishan Kumar
Ahuja and Ashok Kumar Ahuja.
I further bequeath and devise my gold ornaments in my
possession at the time of my death to my grand
daughter to Ameeta Bajaj.
I further bequeath and devise all my movable property
excluding the gold ornaments referred to above
whatever and wherever I possess at the time of my
death to my two sons viz. Krishan Kumar Ahuja and
Ashok Kumar Ahuja and my daughter Shrimati Usha
Bajaj in equal shares. Movable property includes my
investment in the Banks in the form of Savings Bank
and Fixed Deposit account.
That I am making this Will out of my affection, in full
senses and without any coercion or pressure from any
side.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF I have signed this Will hereunder
on this day the 2nd Day of November One thousand nine
hundred seventy seven first above written.
(Sd/-)(Hindi)
(Shrimati KRISHNA DEVI)
Signed by the abovenamed testator with her mark as
her first Will after the same had first been read over and
explained to her in our presence and has appeared to
be perfectly understood and approved by her in our
presence at the same time and each of us.
Witness No.1 (sd/-)
Dr.D.K. Wadhwani
Witness No.2 (sd/-)
Rajendra Behari Lal”
9.

Besides examining herself as PW-1, the propounder

examined two other witnesses namely, Mr.Rajendra Behari Lal, PW-2
and one Ms.R.K.Vij, PW-3.
10.

In her testimony as PW-1, the propounder deposed that

FAO No.273/99

page 5 of 42

after the death of the testatrix’s husband, the testatrix mostly
resided with her and intermittently resided with the objector and her
other son for a period of 4-6 months and sometimes for a period of
2-3 months. She deposed that her mother used to reside with her
sons only when due to some unavoidable problems such as transfer
of her husband, she i.e. PW-1 was unable to keep her mother. That
the membership of the Gurukrupa Society was initially in the name
of her husband. That to avoid shifting from the government
accommodation her husband transferred the said membership in
the name of the testatrix. That after the retirement of her husband
the testatrix transferred the said membership in her name. That the
testatrix expired at the residence of the objector. That the will was
given to her by the testatrix on 02.11.1977 itself. That she did not
know whether the testatrix had executed any will prior to the
execution of the will in question. That at the time of the execution of
the will the testatrix was able to append her signatures on the
documents. That the testatrix was hale and hearty in the year 1977.
11.

Mr.Rajendra Behari Lal, PW-2, deposed that he was an

attesting witness to the will. That he knew the testatrix as she was
residing with his neighbour Dr.K.C.Bajaj. That on 02.11.1977
Dr.K.C.Bajaj called him to his residence. That when he reached the
residence of Dr.K.C.Bajaj, Dr.K.C.Bajaj, his wife, the testatrix and
Dr.Wadhwani were already present. That the testatrix asked
Dr.K.C.Bajaj and his wife to go out of the room. That the testatrix
was in possession of an envelope. That the testatrix expressed her

FAO No.273/99

page 6 of 42

desire to execute a will and requested him to become an attesting
witness to the will. That the testatrix appended her signatures on
the will in his presence as also in the presence of Dr.Wadhwani. That
thereafter Dr.Wadhwani appended his signatures on the will as an
attesting witness in his presence as also in the presence of the
testatrix. That he thereafter signed as an attesting witness. That the
testatrix also had a copy of the will, which was also signed by them.
That the original will and its copy was retained by the testatrix. That
the testatrix was physically and mentally sound at the time of the
execution of the will. That he, Dr.Wadhwani and Dr.K.C.Bajaj were
employed in Railways. In cross examination he admitted that
Dr.K.C.Bajaj was senior to him and Dr.Wadhwani. That he and
Dr.Wadhwani were having family relations with Dr.K.C.Bajaj. That he
has no knowledge about the preparation of the will. That he knew
the testatrix only through Dr.K.C.Bajaj.
12.

Ms.R.K.Vij, PW-3 who was a handwriting expert deposed

that the will bore the genuine signatures of the testatrix.
13.

Besides

examining

himself

as

RW-3,

the

objector

examined two other witnesses namely Sh.Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW1 and Sh.R.P.Singh, RW-2.
14.

Mr.Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW-1 who was the eldest son

of the testatrix in his examination-in-chief stated that after the
death of the testatrix’s husband in the year 1967 the testatrix
mostly resided with him and the objector and occasionally used to
visit/stay with the propounder. Duration of stay of the testatrix with

FAO No.273/99

page 7 of 42

the parties as stated by the witness may be noted in a tabular form
as under:S.
No

Place of Stay of the Person with whom Period of Stay
Testatrix
the testatrix
was residing

1.

Delhi

Krishan

Kumar 1960-70

Ahuja
2.

Bombay

Usha Bajaj

3.

Bombay

Krishan

2-3 months (starting
from early January, 70)
Kumar 1970-May, 73

Ahuja
4.

Delhi

Ashok Kumar Ahuja

5.

Calcutta

Krishan

May, 73 – July, 74

Kumar July, 74 – End of 74

Ahuja
6.

Bombay

Usha Bajaj

End of 74 – May, 77

7.

Delhi

Ashok Kumar Ahuja

May, 77 – Sept/Oct, 77

8.

Bombay

Krishan

Kumar Sept/Oct, 77 – 79

Ahuja
9.

15.

Hyderabad, Delhi

Ashok Kumar Ahuja

1979 – 82 i.e. till her
death

Mr.Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW-1 further deposed that the

testatrix was almost blind since her eyes were damaged due to
black cataract. That because of the blindness the testatrix could
neither read nor write. That the testatrix was able to append her
signatures on a document only when someone would hold her hand
at the point where she was supposed to sign. That the testatrix was
physically so weak that she was unable to move without being
escorted by someone. That the will Ex.RW-1/1 dated 28.09.1968
was penned by him and bears the signatures of the testatrix at
three places. He stated that this will was the last legal and valid

FAO No.273/99

page 8 of 42

testament executed by the testatrix. That the testatrix had studied
up to class IV and had no knowledge of English language. That the
testatrix always used to ask him to write a document. That the flat
situated at Tagore Garden was in possession of a tenant between
the years 1971 and 1982. That he became aware about the
existence of the will in question only after filing of the present
probate petition.
16.

During cross-examination Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW-1

admitted that the testatrix was having a joint bank account with the
propounder. Initially he stated that he can neither admit nor deny
the suggestion that during the period 1971- 1979 the testatrix used
to deposit the rent received by her in respect of the flat situated at
Tagore Garden in her bank account at Bombay, but later admitted
that during the period 1971- 1979 the testatrix used to deposit the
rent received by her in respect of the flat situated at Tagore Garden
in the bank account at Bombay which was in the joint name of the
testatrix and propounder. He admitted that the amount deposited
in the joint bank account of the testatrix at Bombay used to be
withdrawn by the propounder but added that the testatrix also used
to sign the cheques for withdrawing the amount and that the
amount used to be withdrawn under the directions of the testatrix.
He admitted that in the year 1980 an eviction petition was filed by
the testatrix against the tenant in the flat situated at Tagore Garden
on the ground that she bona fide required the premises for herself
and the family of the propounder. He admitted that in the said

FAO No.273/99

page 9 of 42

eviction petition the testatrix filed an affidavit wherein she deposed
that the she was living with the propounder, but stated that the said
affidavit was filed by the testatrix after consulting him. He further
stated that in the year 1979 the propounder along with her husband
left Bombay and settled in Delhi. That on 25.12.1981 while staying
with the objector the testatrix suffered a hip fracture. He admitted
that he is employed with M/s Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. Queried on
a fixed deposit receipt in the name of the testatrix pertaining to a
deposit made by the testatrix with M/s. Indian Oil Corporation he
admitted that he had no knowledge of any such deposit till the
probate petition was filed. He admitted that the deposit in question
was in the joint name of the testatrix and the propounder.

He

stated that the testatrix used to tell him everything and always used
to consult him before taking any major decision. That the testatrix
was almost blind at the time of the execution of the will

dated

28.09.1968. He admitted that the husband of the propounder made
arrangements for the funeral of his mother but justified the same by
stating that this was done because the propounder and her husband
were at Delhi.
17.

Ashok Kumar Ahuja, RW-3 (objector) in his examination-

in-chief deposed on the lines of the examination-in-chief of Krishan
Kumar Ahuja, RW-1. Additionally he deposed that his wife was
having two joint bank accounts with the testatrix.
18.

During cross-examination Ashok Kumar Ahuja, RW-3

stated that in the year 1971 the testatrix and the propounder had

FAO No.273/99

page 10 of 42

opened a joint bank account in Bombay. He denied that the testatrix
used to deposit the rent received by her in respect of the flat
situated in Tagore Garden in her bank account at Bombay. He
admitted that the rental income of the testatrix was never less than
Rs.335/- per month. He maintained that since the year 1950 the
testatrix was suffering from black cataract of both eyes. He state
that in the year 1960-61 the testatrix became almost blind.

He

admitted that the testatrix had accompanied her husband on a visit
to Kashmir in the year 1960. He admitted that during the stay at
Kashmir the testatrix used to prepare meals for herself and her
husband.
19.

Mr.R.B.Lal, RW-2 who was a handwriting expert deposed

that the will did not bore the signatures of the testatrix.
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE LED BY THE PARTIES
S.
No

Document

Exhibit
No.

1.

Will
02.11.1977

2.

Death Certificate of P-2
the testatrix

Records that the testatrix expired on
22.07.1982

3.

Letter
dated PW1/D1
29.07.82 consisting
of two pages and
addressed to Krishan
Kumar Ahuja.

i. In the front page propounder has
written usual pleasentaries.
ii. In the rear page Dr.K.C.Bajaj has
written that Krishan Kumar Ahuja while
making proposal to sell the house
has not considered that the house can
only be sold by an owner and that as of
today there is no one legally authorized
to call himself/herself as the owner of
the property in question.

dated P-1

Front page of the
letter is written by
the propounder and
rear page is written
by
her
husband
Dr.K.C.Bajaj and
addressed to Krishan
KumarAhuja.

FAO No.273/99

Contents in brief
Will has already been reproduced in
Para 8 above

page 11 of 42

4.

Letter
dated RW3/1
15.10.1980 written
by Dr.K.C.Bajaj to
Krishan Kumar Ahuja

i. Records that the tenant in the flat
situated at Tagore Garden be intimated
that the rent be sent to the testatrix at
Kidwai
Nagar
(residence of
the
propounder)
ii.
Records that the file regarding
allotment of flat has been entrusted by
the testatrix to him.
iii.
Records that certain documents
such as site plan etc are required for
the purposes of filing a suit for vacation
of the flat.
iv. Rest of the contents shall be noted
at the relevant stage.

5.

Prescription
dated RW3/2
01.03.82 written by
Dr.K.C.Bajaj

Records that the testatrix suffered a
pelvis fracture on 25.12.81 and the
medical condition of the testatrix

6.

Letters written by
Mr.K.L.Sehgal(tenant
in the flat at Tagore
Garden)
and
addressed to the
testatrix

Records that the rent of the flat has
been sent to the testatrix at the
following address:-

RW3/PX1
to
RW3/PX5
and
RW3/PX12
to
RW3/PX14

“Mrs. Krishna Devi,
c/o Dr.K.C.Bajaj,
D-II/38, Kidwai Nagar East, New Delhi”

7.

Letter
dated RW3/PX6 Records that the testatrix is living in
29.10.1980 written
Delhi and future correspondence
by Krishan Kumar
be mailed to her at the following
Ahuja and addressed
address:to K.L.Sehgal
“Smt. Krishna Devi,
c/o Dr.K.C.Bajaj,
D-II/38, Kidwai Nagar (East),
New Delhi-110 025”

8.

Letter
dated RW3/PX7 Records that he has received the letter
22.10.1980 written
dated 15.12.80 written by Dr.K.C.Bajaj
by Krishan Kumar
and has informed the tenant that the
Ahuja and addressed
rent be sent to the testatrix at Kidwai
to Dr.K.C.Bajaj.
Nagar (residence of the propounder)
He has also put following question:
“How is respected Mata Ji?”

FAO No.273/99

page 12 of 42

9.

Letter
dated RW3/PX8 Records that Ms.Usha Bajaj is already in
03.09.79
Delhi and testatrix is to
written by Krishan
finalize her programme for coming to
Kumar Ahuja and
Delhi.
addressed
to
Mr.K.L.Sehgal

10. Letter
dated RW3/PX9 Records that Dr.K.C.Bajaj has been
10.05.79written by
transferred to Delhi and that the
Krishan Kumar
testatrix is also coming to Delhi
Ahuja and addressed
to Mr.K.L.Sehgal
11. Letter
dated RW3/PX1 Krishan Kumar Ahuja has put the
25.12.79written by 1
following question:
Krishan Kumar Ahuja
and addressed to
“How are respected Mata Ji and ----Dr.K.C.Bajaj.
(illegible)”
12. Will
28.09.1968

dated RW1/1

Two sons are the major beneficiary
under the will

13. Letter dated22.10.80 RW1/PX
written by Krishan
Kumar Ahuja and
addressed
to
Dr.K.C.Bajaj

Records that the testatrix is in Delhi
and residing at the following
address:-

14. Pass book of two RW3/P1
joint bank accounts and
of the testatrix with RW3/P2
the wife of the
objector

------

15. Service record of the RW3/P3
Objector.

Testatrix has been shown
dependent of the objector.

20.

“Smt. Krishna Devi,
c/o Dr.K.C.Bajaj,
D-II/38, Kidwai Nagar (East),
New Delhi-110 025”

as

a

After noting the respective pleadings, the contentions

and the evidence led by the parties, vide impugned order dated
27.01.1999 the learned Trial Court has held that the will in question
bears the genuine signatures of the testatrix but it is not a result of
the free will of the testatrix for the reason execution of the will is
surrounded by suspicious circumstances which the propounder has

FAO No.273/99

page 13 of 42

failed to dispel. The probate petition filed by the propounder was
thus dismissed.
21.

The

suspicious

circumstances

enumerated

by

the

learned trial court are as under: A

Evidence led by the parties heavily tilts in favour of the

case projected by the objector that after the death of the husband
of the testatrix, she was mostly staying with her sons and
occasionally used to visit/stay with the propounder. Under-noted
findings has led the learned trial court to come to the said
conclusion: i.

That the testimonies of Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW-1 and

Ashok Kumar Ahuja, RW-3 corroborate the period and place of stay
of the testatrix after the death of her husband with them. Learned
Judge has noted that there is no effective cross-examination from
the side of the propounder on this aspect of the testimonies of said
witnesses.
ii.

Letter dated 15.02.1980 Ex.RW3/1 shows that at the

time of the writing of said letter the testatrix was staying with the
objector.
iii.

Letter dated 15.02.1980 Ex.RW3/1 brings out the

displeasure and resentment of Dr.K.C.Bajaj in keeping the testatrix
in his house.
iv.

Suggestion given to Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW-1 in his

cross-examination that on 25.12.1981 while staying with the
objector, the testatrix suffered a pelvic fracture.

FAO No.273/99

page 14 of 42

v.

Letter dated 01.03.82 Ex.RW3/2 shows that at the time

of writing of said letter the testatrix was staying with the objector.
vi.

Death of the testatrix had taken place at the residence

of the objector.
vii.

In her testimony, the propounder stated that the

testatrix used to stay with her sons sometimes for a period of 2-3
months and sometimes for a period of 4-6 months.
(Note: The relevance of the place of residence of the testatrix has
been discussed by the learned Trial Judge with reference to the
conduct of an ordinary person taking major decisions and acting
thereunder at the ordinary place of residence and not on a casual
visit to the residence of a near relation.)
B.

The will in question makes an inequitable distribution of

the assets of the testatrix between her heirs. No reasons for making
such an inequitable bequest have been stated in the will. No
evidence has been led by the propounder regarding the reasons
which prompted the testatrix to make such an inequitable bequest.
C.

The will being propounded 5 years after the death of the

testatrix.
D.

Though there were talks in the family regarding the sale

of the property of the testatrix yet the existence of the will was kept
secret from the other legal heirs of the testatrix for a period of 5
years after the death of the testatrix.
E.

Testimonies of the parties shows that the testatrix was

having feeble mind and very weak eyesight at the time of the
execution of the will.
F.

Dr.Wadhwani who was the second attesting witness to

FAO No.273/99

page 15 of 42

the will was not examined by the propounder.
G.

In his testimony, PW-2, an attesting witness to the will

deposed that along with the original will its copy was also kept by
the testatrix.

It has been held that no evidence was led by the

propounder as to what happened to the copy of the will.
H.

Deposition of the attesting witness that at the time of

the execution of the will the testatrix had asked the propounder and
her husband to go out of the room is difficult to believe. It has been
opined that it is highly improbable that the testatrix who was an old
and illiterate lady, having a feeble mind and weak eyesight, would
ask her daughter and son-in-law to go out of the house particularly
when her daughter was to be made a major beneficiary under the
will.
I.

That Shri Rajender Bihari Lal, PW-2 is an interested

witness evidenced by the following : i.

Admission of Mr.Rajender Bihari Lal that he was having

family relations with Dr.K.C.Bajaj.
ii.

Propounder making a case in her pleadings that the

testatrix was known to the attesting witnesses whereas in his
testimony the witness deposed to the contrary.
iii.

On the date of the execution of the will Rajender Behari

Lal was not called by the testatrix but by Dr.K.C.Bajaj i.e. Dr. K.C.
Bajaj taking an active role in the execution of the will.
J

That no evidence was led by the propounder regarding

the preparation of the will in question.

FAO No.273/99

page 16 of 42

K

Testatrix had executed a will dated 28.09.1968 prior to

the execution of the will in question, yet it was stated in the will in
question that it is the first will of the testatrix.
LAW RELATING TO WILLS
22.

In my decision dated 21.11.2007, in FAO No. 874/2003,

Jagdish Lal Bhatia & Ors v Madan Lal Bhatia & Anr, I had extensively
dealt with the legal burden of proof when a will is propounded. What
would constitute suspicious circumstances and what form of
affirmative proof should be sought by the court to satisfy the judicial
conscience that the document propounded is the last legal and valid
testament. I need not repeat. Principles culled out in para 15 of the
said decision are as under:
“I
The legal burden to prove due execution always
lies upon the person propounding a will. The propounder
must satisfy the judicial conscience of the court that the
instrument so propounded is last will of a free and
capable testator.
II
The onus is discharged by the propounder
adducing prima facie evidence proving the competence
of the testator and execution of the will in the manner
contemplated by the law. The contestant opposing the
will may bring material on record meeting such prima
facie in which event the onus would shift back on the
propounder to satisfy the Court affirmatively that the
testator did know well the contents of the will and in
sound disposing capacity executed the same. (see the
decision of the Supreme Court in Madhukar D. Shende v
Tarabai Aba Shedge AIR 2002 SC 637)
III
No specific standard of proof can be enunciated
which must be applicable to all the cases. Every case
depends upon its circumstances. Apart from other proof,
conduct of parties is very material and has considerable
bearing on evidence as to the genuineness of will which
is propounded. Courts have to be vigilant and zealous in
examining evidence. Rules relating to proof of wills are

FAO No.273/99

page 17 of 42

not rules of laws but are rules of prudence.
IV
Expanding on the care and caution to be adopted
by the courts, and presumptions to be raised, in the
decision reported as (1864) 3 Sw & Tr. 431 In The Goods
of Geale, it was opined that where a person is illiterate
or semi literate or the will is in a language not spoken or
understood by the executor, the court would require
evidence to affirmatively establish that the testator
understood and approved all the contents of the will.
V.
One form of affirmative proof is to establish that
the will was read over by, or to, the testator when he
executed it. If a testator merely casts his eye over the
will, this may not be sufficient.
VI
Courts have to evaluate evidence pertaining to the
circumstances under which the will was prepared. If a
will is prepared and executed under circumstances
which raise a well grounded suspicion that the executor
did not express his mind under the will, probate would
not be granted unless that suspicion is removed.
VII
A word of caution. Circumstances can only raise a
suspicion if they are circumstance attending, or at least
relevant to the preparation and execution of the will
itself.
VIII Another point that has to be considered is about
the improbability in the manner in which the instrument
is scripted. Instance of suspicious circumstances would
be alleged signatures of testator being shaky and
doubtful, condition of the testator's mind being feeble
and debilitated, bequest being unnatural, improbable
and unfair.
IX
Suspicious circumstances are a presumption to
hold against the will. Greater is the suspicion more
heavy would be the onus to be discharged by he who
propounds the will.
X
A will is normally executed by a person where he
intends to alter the rule of succession or where he
desires a particular form of inheritance and to that
extent, nature of bequest is not of much substance to
invalidate a will, but consistent view taken by the courts
is that this could be treated as a suspicious
circumstance. What weightage has to be attached to
this suspicion would depend upon case to case.

FAO No.273/99

page 18 of 42

XI
Suspicion being a presumptive evidence, is a weak
evidence and can be dispelled.”
23.

Any

and

every

circumstance

is

not

a

suspicious

circumstance. A circumstance would be suspicious when it is not
normal or is not normally expected in a normal situation or is not
expected of a normal person.
24.

If evidence adduced by the propounder is legal and

convincing and satisfies the conscience of the court, mere
conjecture or unfounded suspicion should not be permitted to sway
the verdict that the will has not been proved. The law of evidence
does not permit conjecture or suspicion having the place of legal
proof nor permit them to demolish a fact otherwise proved by legal
and convincing evidence. Well founded suspicion may be a ground
for closer scrutiny of the evidence but suspicion alone cannot form
the foundation of a judicial verdict – positive or negative.
25.

In another decision dated 1.4.2008, FAO No.289/1998

K.L.Malhotra (through Lrs) Vs. Smt. Sudershan Kumari & Anr.,
further law pertaining to wills was noted as under:“25.
'Will' as defined under Section 2(h) f the
Indian Succession Act means 'the legal declaration of the
testator with respect to his property which he desires to
be carried into effect after his death'. The essential
characteristic of a will, as is well known, is that it is a
mere declaration of an intention so long as the testator is
alive, a declaration which may be revoked or varied by
the testator during his lifetime; it is a disposition that
requires the testator's death for its consummation and is
but ambulatory or without fixed effect until the happening
of this event. The document is a will if it contains specific
words of bequest to come into effect after the death of
the testator.

FAO No.273/99

page 19 of 42

26.
A will is a solemn document. By it, a dead man
entrusts to the living to carry out his wishes and since it is
impossible that he can be called either to admit or deny
his signatures or to explain the circumstances in which it
was executed, duty of care is cast on the shoulders of the
court while considering a probate case.
27.
The rules governing the propounding of a will
are two. First, the onus probandi lies in every case upon
the party propounding the will and he must satisfy the
conscience of the Court that the instrument so
propounded is the last will of the testator. Second, if a
party actively participates in the execution of a will under
which he takes a benefit, it is a circumstance to excite the
suspicion of the Court and calls upon the court to be
vigilant and zealous in examining the evidence on record.
28.
The strict meaning of the term 'onus probandi'
is this, that if no evidence is given by the party on whom
the burden is cast, the issue must be found against him.
In all cases the onus is imposed on the party propounding
the will. It is in general discharge by proof of capacity and
the fact of execution from which the knowledge of and
assent to the contents of the instrument are assumed.
29.
The nature of proof required to prove a will is
not different from those required to prove other
documents except the requirement of attestation
prescribed under Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act.
The proof is to be tested on the usual satisfaction of a
prudent mind. What distinguishes a will from other
document is that the testator would not be available to
testify the same as his last will. This introduces an
element of solemnity in the decision. Even then the Court
has to proceed with the enquiry in the same manner as is
done in respect of any other document. The propounder is
called upon to show by satisfactory evidence that (1) the
will was signed by the testator in the presence of two
attesting witnesses; (2) at the relevant time he was in
sound and disposing state of mind; (3) he understood the
nature and effect i.e., the content of the disposition; (4)
he put the signature to the document of his own free will.
The onus of the propounder can be said to be discharged
on proof of the above essential facts.
30.
However, in a case surrounded by suspicious
circumstances viz.: the disposition may appear to be
unnatural, improbable or unfair in the light of the relevant

FAO No.273/99

page 20 of 42

circumstances; or there may be indications that the
disposition was not the result of the testator's free will
and mind, such suspicious circumstances make the initial
onus very heavy; and unless satisfactorily discharged, the
Court would be reluctant to treat the document as the last
will of the testator. Where the propounder takes a
prominent part in the execution of the will conferring
benefit upon him, that is a suspicious circumstance
attending the execution of the will; the propounder is
required to remove the doubt by clear and satisfactory
evidence. In other words the propounder must satisfy the
conscience of the Court that the document is the last will
and testament of the testator.
31.
Where the caveator alleges undue influence,
fraud and coercion, the onus is on him to prove the same.
Even if there is no such plea but the circumstances give
rise to doubts, it is for the propounder to satisfy the
conscience of the Court. If the propounder is able to
satisfy the conscience of the Court, the Court shall grant
the probate, even if the will cuts off, wholly or in part,
near relations. It is the will of the testator that is reflected
in the will. Being the testator's own property, he has the
liberty to deal with it absolutely. It is not for the Court to
find out justification or equity or otherwise in the action of
the testator. It is not for the Court to make it fair or to
sermonize. It is not for the Court to refuse the grant on
account of the fact that the disposition is not just and fair
or is unnatural or improbable when the conscience of the
Court is clear about the proof of the execution of the will
on the face of the evidence, satisfactorily sufficient, to
remove the suspicious circumstances.
32.
As the wills are too frequently made by the
sick and dying, the degree of understanding and memory
which the law requires is such as may be reasonably
expected from persons in that condition. Therefore, it is
wrong to suppose that those qualities of mind should be
possessed by the testator in the highest degree, position
or to the same extent as before the illness in order to
enable him to validly make his will. Section 59 of the
Indian Succession Act requires that the testator should
have a sound mind. The sound mind referred to does not
mean that the testator should have his mental faculty in
their fullest vigour, but means that he should have the
capacity to understand the nature of his property;
memory to remember the relations and persons normally
having claims on his bounty and has also a judgment. As
observed by their Lordships of Privy Council in the

FAO No.273/99

page 21 of 42

decision reported as Judah v. Isolyne AIR 1945 PC 174, the
fact that the testator was unwell when he executed the
will is a long way from saying that he had no
testamentary capacity. The testator does not have to be
found in perfect state of health to have his will declared
valid. It is sufficient to prove that he was able to outline
the manner in which his estate was to be disposed of.
33.
The
general
principles
governing
the
presumption of due execution and attestation are, if a will
appears on the face of it to have been duly executed and
attested in accordance with the requirements of the Act,
the maxim 'omnia presumuntur rite esse acta' applies,
unless it is clearly proved that the will in fact, was not
duly executed. The Court of probate has long being
accustomed to give great weight to the presumption of
due execution arising from the regularity ex facie of the
testamentary paper produced where no suspicion of fraud
has occurred.
34.
Where once it has been proved that a will has
been executed by a person of competent understanding,
the burden of proving that it was executed under undue
influence is on the party who alleges it. The Privy Council
laid it down in the decision reported as Mst. Gomtibai v.
Kanchhedilal AIR 1949 PC 272 that undue influence in
order to invalidate a will must amount to coercion or
fraud. Its extents must be established and it must also
appear that it was actually exercised on the testator.
35.
The burden of proving undue influence is not
discharge by merely establishing that the person had
power unduly to overbear the will of the testator. It must
be shown that in any particular case that power was, in
fact, exercised and that it was by means of exercise of
that power that the will was obtained. This was observed
by the Calcutta High Court in the decision reported as
Chandra Majumdar v. Akhil Chandra Majumdar AIR 1960
Cal 551. Relying upon the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the decision reported as Naresh Charan
Das Gupta v. Paresh Charan Das Gupta and Anr. AIR 1955
SC 363 it was observed that it is elementary that law does
not regard or charactize every interest which is brought to
bear upon a testator as undue. It is open to a person to
plead his case before the testator and to persuade him to
make a disposition in his favour and if the testator retains
his mental capacity and there is no element of fraud or
coercion, the will cannot be attacked on the ground of
undue influence. Not all importunities are undue

FAO No.273/99

page 22 of 42

influence. While making said observation, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Naresh Charan Das Gupta's case
(supra) quoted the observation of Lord Penzance in the
decision reported as Hall v. Hall 1868 (1) P & D 481 "but
all influences are not unlawful. Persuasion, appeals to the
affections or ties of kindred, to a sentiment of gratitude
for past services, or pity for future destitution, or the like these are all legitimate and may be fairly pressed on a
testator. On the other hand, pressure of whatever
character, whether acting on the fears or the hopes, if so
exerted as to overpower the volition without convincing
the judgment, is a species of restraint under which no
valid will can be made. ......... In a word, a testator may be
led, but not driven; and his will must be the offspring of
his own volition, and not the record of some one else's".
36.
The golden rule in interpreting a will is to give
effect to the testator's intention as ascertained from the
language, which he has used. The overriding duty of a
Court is to construe the language which the testator has
in fact employed giving due weight to all the words and
rejecting none to which a meaning can reasonably be
assigned. The Court is entitled to put itself into the
testator's arm chair to construe a will and to form an
opinion apart from the decided cases and then, to see
whether those decisions require any modification of that
opinion and not to beckon by considering as to how far
the will in question resemble other will upon which the
decisions have been given. The proposition that the will
has to be read as a whole cannot be disputed. Whether
there is a will on the basis of the document, the probate
Court certainly will not proceed to consider as to whether
or not the disposition of the property was good or bad.
The primary duty of the probate Court is to see first
whether prima facie, the document constituted a will.”
APPEAL
26.

Appellants challenge the impugned order on two broad

counts; namely, (i) that the learned trial court ought to have
appreciated the evidence keeping in mind the principle that a will is
generally made by the testator to alter the natural line of
succession; and (ii) material circumstances/evidence which had a
bearing on the case of the propounder have been ignored by the

FAO No.273/99

page 23 of 42

learned trial court.
27.

Per contra, respondents support the findings arrived at

by the learned trial court. Emphasis was placed upon the suspicious
circumstances enumerated by the trial court. Additionally, counsel
for the respondent urged (i) that the finding of the learned trial
court that the will contains the genuine signatures of the testatrix is
incorrect; and (ii) that the learned trial court failed to note a letter
written by the testatrix to one of her sons asking the son to vet a
contract drafted by the husband of the propounder and that the said
letter established that the testatrix used to consult her sons before
taking any major decision.
28.

Pertaining to the documentary evidence listed in tabular

form in para 19 above, at the very outset, I may note that the
documents at serial nos. 4 to 13 in the table have been cursorily
looked into by the learned trial court. Believing the word of the
objector that the said documents do not present a true picture, the
learned trial court has not attached much importance to them. The
learned trial court has been swayed by the explanation furnished by
the objector that the tenant was told to tender the rent at the
residence of the propounder.
29.

The documents at serial nos. 4 to 13 in the table in para

19 above were filed by the parties to establish their respective
versions pertaining to the stay of the testatrix with them.
30.

From a cumulative consideration of the pleadings and

evidence of the parties it is evident that the case projected by the

FAO No.273/99

page 24 of 42

propounder was that between the years 1971-1979 the testatrix
was living with her at Bombay and that in the year 1979 the
husband of the propounder got transferred to Delhi and thereafter
between the years 1979-1982 the testatrix was living with her at
Delhi and that in between she occasionally used to stay with her
sons. Whereas case projected by the objector was that between the
years 1971-79 the testatrix was staying with her two sons at various
places and that between the years 1979-82 the testatrix was
staying with the objector in Delhi and that in between she
occasionally used to stay with the propounder.
31.

It is trite that parties would depose in harmony with the

case pleaded by them and occasionally would even over state their
case. Contemporaneous documents and letters throw best light on
the current existing affairs when the documents or letters were
exchanged. The first document i.e. the letter dated 03.09.1979
Ex.RW3/PX7 is admittedly written by Mr.Krishan Kumar Ahuja
informing Mr.K.L.Sehgal who was the tenant in the flat at Tagore
Garden that the propounder is in Delhi and that the testatrix is
finalizing her programme for coming to Delhi. The

letter

dated

10.05.70 Ex.RW3/PX9 admittedly written by Mr.Krishan Kumar Ahuja
informs Mr.K.L.Sehgal that Dr.K.C.Bajaj has been transferred to Delhi
and that the testatrix is also coming to Delhi. It establishes that the
testatrix was residing with the propounder at Mumbai.

The

letter dated 25.12.79 Ex.RW3/PX11 admittedly written by Mr.Krishan
Kumar Ahuja inquires from the husband of the propounder about the

FAO No.273/99

page 25 of 42

well-being of the testatrix.

The afore-noted letter establishes that

the testatrix indeed came to Delhi in December, 1979 and was
residing with the propounder. The letter dated 15.10.80 Ex.RW3/1
admittedly written by Dr.K.C.Bajaj makes a request to Mr.Krishan
Kumar Ahuja to inform the tenant that the rent of the flat at Tagore
Garden be sent to the testatrix at Kidwai Nagar address (residence
of the propounder in Delhi). It establishes that when the propounder
and her husband shifted to Delhi, the testatrix was residing with
them.The letter dated 22.10.1980 Ex.RW3/PX7 admittedly written
by Mr.Krishan Kumar Ahuja informs Dr.K.C.Bajaj that he has
received the letter dated 15.10.80 and that he has informed the
tenant that rent be sent to the testatrix at Kidwai Nagar address and
has also inquired about the well-being of the testatrix further
establishes that the testatrix was residing with the propounder and
her son-in-law. The letter dated 22.10.80 Ex.RW1/PX admittedly
written by Mr.Krishan Kumar Ahuja informs the tenant Mr.K.L.Sehgal
that the testatrix is residing in Delhi at the following address
'Smt.Krishna Devi, c/o Dr.K.C.Bajaj, D-II/38, Kidwai Nagar (east),
New Delhi-110 025' (residence of the propounder in Delhi).

The

letter dated 29.10.80 Ex.RW3/PX6 admittedly written by Mr.Krishan
Kumar Ahuja again informs the tenant that the testatrix is residing
at Delhi at the following address 'Smt.Krishna Devi, c/o Dr.K.C.Bajaj,
D-II/38, Kidwai Nagar (east), New Delhi-110 025' (residence of the
propounder in Delhi)

The

last

7

documents

are

the

letters

Ex.RW3/PX1 to RW3/PX5 and RW3/PX12 to RW3/PX14 written by the

FAO No.273/99

page 26 of 42

tenant Mr.K.L.Sehgal and posted at the Kidwai Nagar address under
which he tendered rent to the testatrix for the months of February
81, March, 81 and June-October 81 by means of cheque.
32.

The learned Trial Judge has trivialized the aforesaid

letters by believing the explanation of learned counsel for the
objector that the tenant was requested to tender rent to the
testatrix at the residence of the propounder because a ground of
eviction was intended to be created to evict the tenant i.e. the bona
fide requirement of the testatrix and her daughter. The learned Trial
Judge failed to note a material circumstance.

The same being

letters addressed to Dr. K.C.Bajaj at Kidwai Nagar residence
inquiring about the health of the testatrix. The natural flavour of
the

letters

has

been

ignored

by

the

learned

Trial

Judge.

Cumulatively read the letters show that the testatrix was residing
with the propounder.

The version of the propounder that the

testatrix would occasionally visit her sons is thus established from
the evidence on record.
33.

It is most important to note that in the year 1980 the

testatrix filed an eviction petition against the tenant on the ground
that she requires the premises for bona fide requirement of herself
and family of the propounder. In said eviction petition she filed an
affidavit deposing that she has been living with the propounder and
her husband i.e. husband of the propounder.
34.

This stand of the testatrix during her life time is a

material circumstance ignored by the learned Trial Judge.

FAO No.273/99

page 27 of 42

35.

As already noted above, the case of the propounder was

that between the years 1971-79 the testatrix was staying with her
at Bombay and occasionally used to stay with her sons, whereas
case of the objector was that the testatrix used to stay with him and
his brother Mr.Krishan Kumar Ahuja and occasionally used to stay
with the propounder.
36.

The propounder has sought to establish that the

testatrix was staying with her between the years 1971-1979 by
attempting to prove that the testatrix had opened a joint bank
account with her in UCO Bank at Bombay in the year 1971 and that
the rent received by the testatrix was deposited by her in the said
bank account between the years 1971-1979.
37.

As noted above while briefly noting the testimony of

Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW-1 he admitted that the testatrix had a
joint account with the propounder. However, he pleaded ignorance
of the date when the account was opened. But Ashok Kumar Ahuja,
RW-3 admitted that the testatrix had a joint bank account with the
propounder with UCO Bank, Bombay which was opened in the year
1971.
38.

It would be relevant to note that Krishan Kumar Ahuja,

RW-1 firstly stated that he can neither admit nor deny the
suggestion that the rent received by the testatrix was always
deposited by her in her joint account in UCO Bank, Bombay between
the years 1971-1979. However, he later admitted that the rent
received by the testatrix was always deposited by her in her joint

FAO No.273/99

page 28 of 42

account in UCO Bank, Bombay between the years 1971-1979.
39.

It is apparent that the testatrix was residing with the

propounder at Mumbai between the years 1971-1979 and that the
tenant was tendering rent to the testatrix at Mumbai which rent was
being deposited in a joint account maintained by the testatrix jointly
with the propounder. This fact additionally explodes the theory that
the tenant was asked to tender rent to the testatrix at the residence
of the propounder to create evidence regarding the bona fide
requirement of the testatrix.
40.

As noted hereinabove the first and foremost suspicious

circumstance noted by the learned Trial Judge is that the testatrix
was residing with her sons and it would be un-natural for her to take
major decisions and execute the same when on a casual visit to
meet her daughter. The evidence on record completely belies the
said fact. The testatrix had continuously resided with her daughter
and her son-in-law firstly at Bombay and thereafter at Delhi. Not
only was she residing with her daughter but was even maintaining a
joint account with her. Thus, it is natural for the testatrix to have
carried out her affairs while residing with her daughter.
41.

Evidence on record shows cordial relationship of the

testatrix with her daughter.

Her trust and confidence in the

propounder and her husband has come on record. As noted above,
the testatrix was maintaining a joint account in a bank with the
propounder in which the rental income was being credited. She had
deposited money with Indian Oil Corporation and her son Krishan

FAO No.273/99

page 29 of 42

Kumar Ahuja, RW-1 was not even aware of the said deposit.

It

assumes significance that Krishan Kumar Ahuja was an employee of
the Indian Oil Corporation. That his mother made a deposit with his
employer and did not inform her son shows lack of trust of the
mother vis-a-vis her son.
42.

I do not understand as to wherefrom the learned Trial

Judge has concluded that neither RW-1 nor RW-3, the two sons of
the testatrix were cross-examined on the issue of residence of their
mother.

Cross-examination of Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW-1 on the

issue is as under:“It is wrong to suggest that my mother stayed at
Bombay all along the period from 71 to 79 with the
petitioner. It is further wrong to suggest that my mother
used to visit me only occasionally during the period from
71 to 82......It is wrong to suggest that my mother had
stayed with the petitioner from 79 till April, 82.”
43.

Cross-examination of Ashok Kumar Ahuja, RW-3 is as

under:“It is incorrect to suggest that my mother stayed
primarily with her daughter Usha Bajaj during the period
1970-78 and from 1979 to till April, 1982.”
44.

Both sons have been cross-examined on the issue and

clear suggestions have been given to them that they had deposed
falsely.
45.

Learned Trial Judge has found that the letter dated

15.02.1980 Ex.RW3/1 brings out the displeasure and resentment of
Dr.K.C.Bajaj in keeping the testatrix in his house wherefrom it has
been opined that the relationship between the testatrix and the

FAO No.273/99

page 30 of 42

propounder were not cordial. Relevant portion of the letter dated
15.02.1980 Ex.RW3/1 written by Dr.K.C.Bajaj and addressed to
Krishan Kumar Ahuja reads as under:“Your mother is supposed to come to stay with us today
since Shri Bangia was to return to Delhi on 12th night
and Ashok is planning to stay on with them until
December. We do not know of Shri Bangia has returned.
Usha has gone to Rajouri Garden to see her mother and
to bring her to Kidwai Nagar if Shri Bangia has returned.
It will naturally impede our movements within Delhi and
outside of Delhi. Unfortunately these movements are
unavoidable because of number of my ailing relatives in
different parts of Delhi. The necessity of my off and on
staying with my father who is convulsing from operation
and the nature of my official duties. There does not
appear to be any satisfactory solution to it at the
moment....”
46.

Learned Trial Court has opined that the words “It will

naturally impede our movements within Delhi and outside of Delhi”
written in the letter suggest that Dr.K.C.Bajaj was not happy in
keeping the testatrix in his house.
47.

Learned Trial Court has read too much into the letter.

Dr.K.C.Bajaj is merely stating a fact that stay of the testatrix in his
residence would restrict their movements as the testatrix was not in
best of the health. The relevant portion of the letter quoted
hereinabove only shows that the testatrix was to reside with the
propounder and that Dr.K.C.Bajaj was worried about the well-being
of his other ailing relatives.
48.

In deciding whether there is a will on the basis of the

document, the probate Court certainly will not proceed to consider
as to whether or not the disposition of the property was good or

FAO No.273/99

page 31 of 42

bad. The primary duty of the probate Court is to see firstly whether
prima facie, the document constituted a will. If the propounder is
able to satisfy the conscience of the Court, the Court shall grant the
probate, even if the will cuts off, wholly or in part, near relations. It
is the will of the testator that is reflected in the will. Being the
testator's own property, he has the liberty to deal with it absolutely.
It is not for the Court to find out justification or equity or otherwise
in the action of the testator. It is not for the Court to make it fair or
to sermonize. It is not for the Court to refuse the grant on account of
the fact that the disposition is not just and fair or is unnatural or
improbable when the conscience of the Court is clear about the
proof of the execution of the will on the face of the evidence,
satisfactorily sufficient, to remove the suspicious circumstances. As
observed by Privy Council in the decision reported as Motibai
Hormusjee Kanga v Jamsetjee Hormusjee Kanga AIR 1924 PC 28
that 'A man may act foolishly and even heartlessly; if he acts with
full comprehension of what he is doing the court will not interfere
with the exercise of his volition'.
49.

In a recent decision in Civil Appeal No.2277/2008

Krishan Kumar Birla & Rajendra Singh Lodha & Ors decided on
31.03.2008 the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:“......Why an owner of the property executes a Will in
favour of another is a matter of his/her choice. One may
by a Will deprive his close family members including his
sons and daughters. She had a right to do so. The court
is concerned with the genuineness of the Will. If it is
found to be valid, no further question as to why did she
do so would be completely out of its domain. A Will may

FAO No.273/99

page 32 of 42

be executed even for the benefit of others including
animals.....”
50.

Thus the fact that the testatrix made an inequitable

bequest is not a 'suspicious circumstance' particularly when the
evidence on record shows that the testatrix had special love and
affection towards her daughter i.e. the propounder. The evidence
also establishes that during her old age it was the propounder and
her husband who had looked after and cared for the testatrix.
51.

It is no doubt true that the will in question was

propounded 5 years after the death of the testatrix. But, this would
be a circumstance only to raise the eye brows and if otherwise
evidence on record establishes due execution of a will, the raised
eye-brows should fall. Further, it is relevant to note that all other
assets bequeathed in the will reached the hands of the beneficiaries
during the life time of the testatrix. Even the flat at Tagore Garden
came to be beneficially enjoyed by the beneficiary under the will
during the life time of the testatrix, for the reason rent accruing
therefrom was reaching a joint account and money being withdrawn
by the propounder.

As noted above, the sons of the testatrix

admitted that the physical operations at the bank were done by the
propounder. No doubt the brothers sought to introduce an element
of subjectivity by stating that their mother used to sign the cheques
and money was withdrawn under instructions of their mother.
52.

It has come on evidence that during her life time the

FAO No.273/99

page 33 of 42

testatrix lent her name for eviction of the tenant by pleading bona
fide requirement for herself, her daughter i.e. the propounder and
her son-in-law. She handed over charge of prosecuting the litigation
to her son-in-law and excluded her sons. It would also be not out of
place to note that after the tenant was evicted possession of the flat
was taken over and retained by the propounder and her husband.
53.

The learned Trial Court has noted a letter dated

29.07.1982 Ex.PW1/D1 admittedly written by Dr.K.C.Bajaj and
addressed to Mr.Krishan Kumar Ahuja wherein he has stated that 'As
of today there is no one legally authorized to call himself/herself as
the owner of the property of the will in question.' According to the
learned Trial Court the fact that Dr.K.C.Bajaj did not disclose the
existence of the will in question in the said letter strongly suggests
that no such will was in existence at the time of the writing of the
letter and the will in question was subsequently fabricated by him.
54.

The afore-noted letter was written within just 7 days of the

death of the testatrix.

The testatrix died on 22.7.1982.

I find it

strange that within less than a week of her death her sons started
demanding partition of the property.
55.

Shri Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel for the appellants

explained that the propounder and her husband with whom the
testatrix was residing after her husband died were extremely
depressed and did not want to discuss the issue of inheritance
during the 13 day mourning period.

FAO No.273/99

The letter in question has 2

page 34 of 42

parts. Part one consists of the writing of the propounder. Part two
is the writing of her husband Dr. Dr.K.C.Bajaj. The propounder has
informed her brother that she and her husband were proceeding to
Haridwar by the evening train. Being Hindus, the daughter and her
husband were visiting Haridwar to pray for the peace of the soul of
the testatrix.

It not only brings out the extreme emotional and

sentimental bond between the mother and the daughter, it
additionally affords a justification for the propounder and her
husband not precipitating an issue of succession.

Nothing much

therefore turns on the letter Ex. PW-1/D1.
56.

The next suspicious circumstance namely the feeble

mind, frail health and weak eye sight of the testatrix, to my mind
needs to be considered with reference to the law relating to a will.
As noted in para 25 above, (refer para 32 quoted therein from the
decision dated 1.4.2008 in FAO No.289/1998 Shri K.L.Malhotra Vs.
Sudershan Kumari). As the wills are too frequently made by the sick
and dying, the degree of understanding and memory which the law
requires is such as may be reasonably expected from persons in
that condition. Therefore, it is wrong to suppose that those qualities
of mind should be possessed by the testator in the highest degree,
position or to the same extent as before the illness in order to
enable him to validly make his will. Section 59 of the Indian
Succession Act requires that the testator should have a sound mind.
The sound mind referred to does not mean that the testator should
have his mental faculty in their fullest vigour, but means that he

FAO No.273/99

page 35 of 42

should have the capacity to understand the nature of his property;
memory to remember the relations and persons normally having
claims on his bounty and has also a judgment. As observed by their
Lordships of Privy Council in the decision reported as Judah v.
Isolyne AIR 1945 PC 174, the fact that the testator was unwell when
he executed the will is a long way from saying that he had no
testamentary capacity. The testator does not have to be found in
perfect state of health to have his will declared valid. It is sufficient
to prove that he was able to outline the manner in which his estate
was to be disposed of.
57.

There is no evidence which suggests that the testatrix

was a lady of feeble mind. On the contrary, there is evidence to
show that the testatrix had her mental faculties intact. There is
deposition of the son of the testatrix Krishan Kumar Ahuja, RW-1
that the testatrix herself used to decide as to how much amount she
wanted to withdraw from her bank account, whom she wanted to
give the amount withdrawn by her and for what purpose. It would
not be out of place to mention that the sons of the testatrix tried to
project a case that their mother had turned nearly blind in the year
1960, evidenced by the deposition of Ashok Kumar Ahuja, RW-3 that
when his mother went to Srinagar with her husband she was nearly
blind. But under sustained cross-examination he admitted that his
mother used to cook the food for his father. Obviously, the mother
was not blind. Further, the alleged will propounded by the objector
being Ex.RW-1/1 though not proved as duly executed in as much as

FAO No.273/99

page 36 of 42

the same has not been witnessed by a witness, as per the claim of
the objector was signed by his mother in the year 1968.
objector

The

has himself brought on record evidence that his mother

was absolutely fit if not later at least in the year 1968.

I am

conscious of the fact that the instant will has been executed in the
year 1977 but the fact remains that the objector did not take a
stand that his mother's eye sight started deteriorating after 1968.
His case was that his mother had turned nearly blind in the year
1960, a fact belied by the admissions and evidence led by the
objector. In the absence of any evidence that the mother became
nearly blind after 1968, the whole version of the objector has to be
put in the dustbin.
58.

In the decision reported as Ramabai Padmakar Patil v

Rukminibai Vishnu Vekhande AIR 2003 SC 3109 the testatrix was
hard of hearing and could not walk properly. Objectors to the will
sought to contend that the testatrix was not in a state of sound
disposing mind at the time of the execution of the will. Negating the
contention of the objectors the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed
that the fact the testatrix was hard of hearing or that she was
unable to walk does not lead to an inference that her mental
faculties had been impaired or that she did not understand the
contents of the document she was executing. The Hon'ble Supreme
Court further held that evidence should have been adduced by the
objectors to show that at the time of the execution of the will she
had been suffering from any such ailment which had impaired her

FAO No.273/99

page 37 of 42

mental faculties to such an extent that she was unable to
understand the real nature of the document which was executing.
59.

Learned Trial Judge has found it a circumstance to hold

against the propounder that she did not examine the second
attesting witness.

Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872

provides that a document required by law to be attested can be
proved by the evidence of one attesting witness to the document.
Therefore non-examination of the second attesting witness is of no
relevance.
60.

The fact that no evidence was led by the propounder

regarding the copy of the will is of no relevance. In taking this view,
I am supported by the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
reported as Indu Bala Bose v Manindra Chandra Bose & Ors AIR
1982 SC 133. In said decision, the objector to a will had contended
that the fact that the draft of the will was not produced and no
explanation had come forth as to what happened to the draft is a
'suspicious' circumstance. The Court after noting that it is not
necessary that the draft of will is to be preserved held that the
circumstance pointed out by the objector is not a suspicious
circumstance.
61.

Learned Trial Judge has laid too much emphasis by

treating it to be unnatural conduct when the attesting witness to the
will Rajender Behari Lal deposed that when the testatrix executed
the will, the propounder and her husband were made to go out of
the house.

Witnesses exaggerating or incorrectly deposing on

FAO No.273/99

page 38 of 42

minor facts is documented in various decisions. The will in question
has been executed on 2.11.1977.

The witness deposed on

20.3.1995. Memory could have faded with the passage of time.
62.

It is no doubt true that both the attesting witnesses were

friends/colleagues of the husband of the propounder. But, this does
not mean that the testimony of these witnesses has to be
disbelieved on said count.

The close relationship of the attesting

witnesses with a beneficiary under a will only requires the Court to
be more careful and cautious while dealing with the evidenciary
value of such witnesses. The reason is obvious, especially in India,
it is not uncommon for a beneficiary to arrange for attesting
witnesses to be present when a will is executed.
63.

Indeed, in the decision reported as Rabindra Nath

Mukherjee vs. Panchanan Banerjee AIR 1995 SC 1684 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that if a will is validly proved the fact that
the attesting witnesses to the will are interested lose significance.
64.

Same ethos was reiterated by the Hon'ble Supreme

Court in the decision reported as Madhukar D.Shende vs. Tarabai
Aba Shedage AIR 2002 SC 637. In the said decision, the two
witnesses were classmates of the beneficiary's son. The Court
observed that the two attesting witnesses on account of being
known to beneficiary's son, being his classmates, were known to the
family, and therefore, were natural witness to be called to attest the
execution of will. On account of their acquaintance with the family,
they could have naturally known and identified the executant.

FAO No.273/99

page 39 of 42

Merely because of being classmates they would be interested in
obliging their classmates mother so as to benefits her and go to the
extent of falsely deposing is too far fetched an inference to draw.
65.

The learned Trial Judge has held that by not adducing

evidence on the preparation of the will a doubt was cast on the
genuineness of the will. In this regards, suffice would it be to note
that no evidence regarding the preparation of the will is not fatal to
the genuineness of the will. Said view was taken by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in its decision in Ramabai's case (supra).
66.

The learned Trial Judge has found it to be a suspicious

circumstance that the instant will records that this is the first will
executed by the testatrix but evidence on record establishes that on
28.9.1968 the testatrix had executed the will Ex. RW-1/1.

The

learned Trial Judge forgot that Ex.RW-1/1 was not a will at all for the
reason there were no attesting witnesses thereto. Ex.RW-1/1 is an
incohate document not achieving the status of a will and thus the
recital in the will Ex.P-2 that it was the first will executed by the
testatrix was a correct recital. What is fatal to the impugned order
is non-consideration of 2 very material circumstances which have
not even been noted by the learned Trial Judge.
67.

A perusal of the will Ex.P-2 shows that the testatrix had

bequeathed her jewellery to her grand daughter Amita Bajaj.
Admittedly, in her life time itself the testatrix gifted her gold
ornaments to Amita Bajaj.

Secondly, she bequeathed the flat at

Mumbai to her daughter Usha Bajaj and in her life time conveyed

FAO No.273/99

page 40 of 42

title thereto in favour of her daughter.

If the propounder had to

fabricate the will in question or had to use pre-signed pages to
create a will what was the need of making a bequest of what had
already been implemented by the testatrix during her life time?
68.

The question answers itself by responding that the will

was indeed the last valid and legal testament of the testatrix. Since
the testatrix lived a couple of years after executing the document,
part bequest was implemented during her life time. The conduct of
the testatrix lends credence and assurance to the execution of the
will.
69.

It would not be out of place to record that the

submission made by learned counsel for the respondents that a
letter was written by the testatrix to one of her son asking him to
vet a contract drafted by the husband of the propounder appears to
be a figment of the imagination of the learned counsel inasmuch as
no such letter exists in the record of the learned Trial Judge. Indeed,
none was filed or proved. The theory sought to be projected on this
plea was that the testatrix did not have confidence in her son in law
and had confidence in her sons. In the absence of any such letter,
the theory propounded on the letter gets exploded.
70.

To conclude, it appears to be a case where the learned

Trial Judge has been swayed by the fact that in India people
generally do not make a bequest in favour of the daughters and that
the bequest was disproportionate.

The learned Trial Judge forgot

that the flat at Mumbai was conveyed to the testatrix by the

FAO No.273/99

page 41 of 42

husband of the propounder to get over a government rule then in
force requiring government servants owning residential properties
to vacate government accommodation and thus the testatrix reconveyed to her daughter what she had got from her son-in-law.
The flat at Tagore Garden would not be valued more than Rs.2 lacs
in the year 1977.

The daughter who had served the mother

faithfully in the old age of mother, if gets a flat worth Rs.2 lacs to
the exclusion of her brothers would not render the bequest
disproportionate or unnatural. It is not out of place to record that
the daughter was charged with the duty of paying Rs.11,000/- to
each of her 2 brothers.
71.

The appeal is allowed. Impugned order dated 27.1.1999

is set aside. Letters of administration with will dated 2.11.1977 are
granted in favour of the legal heirs of late Smt. Usha Bajaj. Needful
would be done by the learned Trial Judge as required by law to issue
the necessary certificate.
72.

Trial Court Record may be returned forthwith.

73.

No costs.

April 11, 2008
sl

FAO No.273/99

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 42 of 42

