IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.180/2006
#
!

Mr.Rama Shankar Sharma
........
Appellant
through:
Mr.S.P.Singh and Mr.R.K.Relan, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Union of India
through:

........
Respondent
Mr.S.R.Narayan, Adv.

RESERVED ON: 13.11.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 15.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment dated

24.04.06 of the Railway Claims Tribunal, Principal Bench, Delhi
dismissing the claim application of the appellant.
2.

Appellant had filed a claim application under Section

124-A of the Railways Act, 1989 claiming compensation in sum of
Rs.10 lakhs on account of the injuries sustained by him in a train
accident.
3.

It was averred in the claim application that on 22.3.00

at about 2.15 p.m. the appellant had boarded Sachkhand Express
from platform no.6, New Delhi Railway Station, Delhi for a journey
from New Delhi to Panipat. That the appellant was washing his face

FAO No.180/06

Page No.1 of 9

at the wash basin near the gate of the compartment when the train
halted at Sadar Bazaar Railway Station at Delhi and he was in the
process of washing his face the train suddenly started with a jolt as
a result of which he accidentally fell from the train on the track.
That because of the fall, the appellant sustained injuries and was
removed to Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Delhi. That as a result of
the injuries, right leg of the appellant was amputated.
4.

The railway defended by pleading that the appellant is

not entitled to any compensation as the injury sustained by him was
not accidental. That the appellant was not a bona fide passenger in
the train and that the appellant was responsible for what had
happened. That he tried to board the train when it was in motion
and had gathered momentum, in the process he fell down on the
track and suffered the injury.
5.

In support of the claim the appellant examined himself

as AW-1 and one Mr.Durgesh Kumar as AW-2 who claimed to be an
eyewitness to the purchase of the ticket by the appellant and was a
co-passenger in the train.

Durgesh Kumar in his testimony as AW-2 had

6.

deposed that :i.

He knew appellant as they belong to the same village.

ii.

On 22.3.00 at about 7.00 A.M. he met appellant at the
Achner Railway Station.

iii.

Both of them were going to Panipat.

iv.

From Achner Railway Station they boarded a train for
Mathura and from Mathura boarded a train for Delhi.

FAO No.180/06

Page No.2 of 9

v.

At New Delhi Railway Station, they bought tickets of the
train Sachkhand Express and boarded the train at about
2.15 p.m.

vi.

The train halted at Sadar Bazaar Station and the
appellant went to the lavatory.

vii.

The train started suddenly with a jolt.

viii.

When the appellant did not return, he got anxious and
went to the gate and learnt that the appellant had
accidentally fallen from the train when the train had
started suddenly with a jolt.

ix.

On learning about the accident, he pulled the chain of
the train.

x.

After receiving assurance from the Railway Police
Personnel that they will take the appellant to the
hospital, he again boarded the train and left for Panipat.

7.

However, in his cross-examination, Durgesh Kumar, AW-

2 contradicted himself by deposing as under :-

8.

“Rama Shankar Sharma had boarded Sachkhand
Express train at New Delhi station. After alighting
from the train at New Delhi station, I had
proceeded to my home. It is incorrect to suggest
that I have given a false affidavit”
In support of its stand, the Railway examined Govind

Singh, Head Constable as DW-1. The said witness was posted at the
concerned police station on the date of the accident and had
investigated the accident. He deposed that DD entry, Ex.AW1/2 was
prepared by him on the basis of the statement of the appellant
recorded at the time when the appellant was removed to Ram

FAO No.180/06

Page No.3 of 9

Manohar

Hospital

immediately

after

the

accident.

The

said

statement is Ex.DW2/1 wherein the appellant had stated that the
accident had occurred when he was trying to board the running
train. He also proved search memo (fard jamatalashi), Ex.DW1/4
which records that an old Airbag was found with the appellant.
9.

It is also relevant to note that no ticket was found with

the appellant.
10.

Disbelieving the testimony of DW-2 and noting the DD

Entry Ex.AW1/2, the Tribunal has held that the appellant was not a
bona fide passenger as there is no evidence to establish that he had
purchased the ticket and that the injury sustained by him was not
accidental and thus dismissed the claim application of the
appellant.
11.

In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the

appellant has urged following two grounds :A.

That merely because no ticket was found with the
appellant, the Tribunal ought not to have come to the
conclusion that the appellant was not a bona fide
passenger particularly when the testimony of Durgesh
Kumar, AW-2 had established that the appellant had
bought the ticket.

B.

That the testimony of Govind Singh, DW-1 and DD
Entry, Ex.AW1/2 contradicts the stand taken by the
Railway

in

their

written

statement

wherein

it

is

submitted that the accident had occurred when the
appellant was trying to alight from the running train.
FAO No.180/06

Page No.4 of 9

12.

Learned counsel for the appellant also placed reliance

upon the following judgments :i.

Dasari Laxmi v Union of India AIR 2003 AP 56.

ii.

Gullipalli Lakshmikanthamma v General Manager, South
Central Railway 2003 ACJ 1582 (AP)

iii.

Joji C. John v Union of India 2003 ACJ 52 (Ker).

iv.

Union of India v Uggina Srinivasa Rao and Ors 2003 ACJ
402.

13.

It be noted that in cross-examination, AW-2, admitted

having parted company with the appellant at New Delhi Railway
Station.
14.

Another circumstance, which discredits the testimony of

AW-2, is his conduct of leaving the appellant in lurch even after
witnessing that he is seriously injured. The ordinary human conduct
would require that he would have accompanied appellant to the
hospital who was a co-villager.
15.

In view of the material contradiction in the testimony of

DW-2 and his abnormal conduct, his testimony does not inspire any
confidence.
16.

Another evidence which belies the version of the

appellant is the search memo (fard jamatalashi), Ex.Ex.DW1/4. The
said search memo was prepared by Govind Singh, DW-1 at the time
when the appellant was removed to the hospital immediately after
the accident records that an old Airbag was found with the
appellant. The fact that the luggage of the appellant was found with
him even after the accident also points to the fact that the accident
FAO No.180/06

Page No.5 of 9

in question occurred when he was trying to board the running train.
Had appellant accidentally fallen from the train as averred by him,
his luggage would have remained in the train and not found with
him. It is highly improbable that the appellant was carrying the
airbag at the time when he was washing his face and accidentally
fell down from the train.
17.

In light of the fact that the testimony of Durgesh Kumar,

AW-2 suffers from material contradiction and other evidence viz. DD
Entry, Ex.DW1/2, statement of the appellant, Ex.DW1/1 and search
memo Ex.DW1/4, the view taken by the Tribunal that the appellant
was not a passenger and that accident in question occurred when
he was trying to board the running train is more probable.
18.

In so far as contradiction between the written statement

filed by the railways and the testimony of Govind Singh, DW-2 is
concerned, I note that in para 4 of the written statement originally
filed it was pleaded that the accident in question had occurred while
the appellant was alighting from the running train. But an
application for amendment of written statement was moved by the
Railway on the plea that

due to a typographical error, word

'boarding' has been written as 'alighting'. Vide order dated 16.7.03,
the Tribunal allowed the application for amendment of the written
statement filed by the Railways. Thus plea taken was that appellant
fell while attempting to board a moving train.
19.

In the Dasari Laxmi’s case (supra), the deceased died

when he was trying to board the train ‘Vishaka Express’. His wife
filed a claim application claiming compensation in sum of Rs.2 lakhs
FAO No.180/06

Page No.6 of 9

in respect of death of the deceased. No ticket was found with the
deceased. PW-2 claimed to be an eyewitness to the purchase of the
ticket by the deceased. PW2 categorically stated that the deceased
tendered Rs. 100/- note at the Railway Booking counter and as the
booking clerk informed the deceased that he does not have the
change; the deceased borrowed Rs. 20/- from PW2 and purchased
the ticket. RW-2, who was the Assistant Station Master at the
relevant point of time had deposed that the crowd told him that the
injured was having a season ticket and when he wanted to see the
said season ticket, the crowd had pressurized him to issue Memo
informing

that

the

injured

was

having

professed

bleeding.

Therefore, he issued a Memo incorporating the said fact. The
Tribunal based on the above version of RW2, rejected the claim of
the claimant on the ground that the claimant failed to prove that
the deceased was a passenger as defined in the Act. Appellate
Court noted that RW-2 in his cross-examination denied the
suggestion that he mentioned about the season ticket because of
the pressure of the crowd and also deposed in the crossexamination that he could not recollect any particular face in the
crowd and cannot identify any one. Appellate Court further noted
that in the cross-examination of PW-2, not even a suggestion was
made disputing his version that he advanced Rs. 20/- to the
deceased for purchasing the ticket and the purchase of ticket by the
deceased. Keeping in view the above circumstances, the appellate
court held that the Tribunal was not justified in giving much

FAO No.180/06

Page No.7 of 9

importance to the evidence of RW2 rather than the evidence of PW2
and allowed the appeal.
20.

In Joji’s case (supra), the appellant/injured had failed to

produce the ticket before the Railway Claims Tribunal. Holding that
the burden to prove that the appellant was not a bona fide
passenger was on the Railways and that Railways failed to
discharge the same, appellate court allowed the claim of the
appellant.
21.

In Union of India’s case (supra), it was proved before the

Claims Tribunal that the injured persons were in possession of valid
tickets. The appellate court negatived the contention advanced by
the appellant that the person who is trying to board a train is not a
passenger. (This case is clearly distinguishable as in this case the
factum of purchase of valid ticket by the injured persons was duly
proved while in the instant case it is not proved that the appellant
had purchased a valid ticket).
22.

In Gullipalli’s case (supra), the Railways Claims Tribunal

dismissed the claim of the appellant on the sole ground that no
ticket was found with the appellant. Allowing the appeal of the
appellant, the appellate court observed as under :“After considering the same, I am of the opinion
that an inference can be drawn to the effect that
the deceased is a bona fide passenger having
regard to the realities and realistic and pragmatic
approach of the question involved. It cannot
invariably, be conceived or comprehended that
always ticket should be traced. One has to
imagine the circumstances that will prevail at the
relevant time and whether keeping of the ticket
should be given that much of importance at the
crucial time when the deceased was suffering
FAO No.180/06

Page No.8 of 9

23.

from fatal injuries and died; the ticket could have
been missing. So from the material on record it
must be found that the deceased is a bona fide
passenger.”
The afore-noted judgments cited by the learned counsel

for the appellant is of no assistance as facts of the instant case are
entirely different from the facts of the afore-noted judgments. The
legal principle that can be culled out from the afore-noted
judgments is that the onus is on the railways to prove that the
claimant was not the bona fide passenger. In the instant case,
evidence, particularly DD Entry, Ex.AW1/2 and statement of the
appellant, Ex.DW1/2 and search memo, Ex.DW1/4 points to the fact
that the deceased was not a bona fide passenger and that the
accident occurred when he was trying to board the train which was
in motion.
24.

In view of the above discussion the appeal is held

devoid of merits and is dismissed.
25.

No costs.

November 15, 2007
dk

FAO No.180/06

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.9 of 9

