*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.8/1998
Sh.Ved Prakash & Ors.
........ Appellants
through: Mr.A.P.Aggarwal, Advocate.
VERSUS
Smt.Natho Devi & Ors.
........ Respondents
through: Ms.Maninder Acharya
for respondents 1 and 2.
FAO No.47/1998
Sh.Sat Prakash & Ors.
........ Appellants
through: Mr.Tirpat Singh, Advocate.
VERSUS
Smt.Natho Devi & Ors.
........ Respondents
through: Ms.Maninder Acharya
for respondents 1 and 2.
RESERVED ON:
08.05.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
13.05.2008

%

CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The two captioned appeals challenge an order dated

4.10.1997 allowing Probate Case No.346/1988 holding that the
propounders of the will Ex.PW-1/1 having successfully established
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 1 of 18

that the will was the last legal and valid testament of late Chelu
Ram were entitled to obtain letter of administration with a copy of
the will annexed thereto.
2.

The appellants of FAO No.8/1998 are the children of

late Smt.Govindi Devi. The appellants of FAO No.47/1998 are the
sons of late Smt.Angoori Devi. The 2 ladies were 2 out of the 6
daughters of late Shri Chelu Ram.
3.

Late Chelu Ram died on 4.1.1986. His wife had pre-

deceased him. He was blessed with 6 daughters and 2 sons.
4.

His sons were Rattan Chand and Ramesh Chand,

husbands of Natho Devi and Rajeshwari Devi respectively.

His

daughters were named Gobindo Devi, Gianwati, Bharto, Bharpai
Devi, Angoori Devi and Chameli. His daughters Angoori Devi and
Chameli had predeceased him.
5.

Natho Devi and Rajeshwari Devi, the 2 daughters-in-

law propounded a will dated 25.9.1985 and claimed that the
same was executed by Chelu Ram in full senses and that the
immovable property referred to in the will i.e. 2 bigha land
comprised in Khasra No.123 and 125 in the revenue estate of
village Tajpul, New Delhi having constructed thereon 35 rooms
were bequeathed to them in equal share. They claimed that the
will in question was registered on 27.9.1985 in the office of the
Sub-Registrar, New Delhi.
6.

The will was opposed by Govindi Devi and the children

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 2 of 18

of Smt.Angoori Devi. They alleged that the will in question was a
forged and a fabricated document.

Its genuineness and

execution was denied. It was further pleaded that for more than
2 years before his death Chelu Ram was not mentally fit and that
he was a patient of chronic asthma and had weak eye-sight.
7.

Parties thus debated on the issue whether the will

dated 25.9.1985 propounded by the daughters-in-law of the
deceased was the last valid and legal testament of late
Smt.Chelu Ram.
8.

The will in question purports to be witnessed by 2

witnesses. Shri Moti Lal Jain, an advocate by profession who was
examined as PW-1 and one Bhagwan Das, son of Ram Karan. The
propounders of the will examined 3 witnesses namely Shri Moti
Lal Jain, the stated attesting witness to the will as PW-1. Shri Anil
Kumar, an officer from the office of the Sub-Registrar, Asaf Ali
Road, New Delhi as PW-2 and Natho Devi as PW-3.
9.

The objectors also examined 3 witnesses namely Ved

Prakash as RW-1 who is the son of Govindi Devi and Satya
Prakash and Jai Prakash, RW-2 and RW-3 who are the sons of late
Smt.Angoori Devi.
10.

Considering the testimony of PW-1 and PW-2, a finding

has been returned by the learned Trial Judge that Natho Devi and
Rajeshwari Devi had successfully established due execution of
the will Ex.PW-1/1.
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

The objections filed by the objectors have
page 3 of 18

been held to be not proved.
11.

The contentions noted by the learned Trial Judge as

urged by the objectors are:(a)

A discrepancy in the age of the deceased as recorded
in the will Ex.PW-1/1 and the death certificate Ex.PW3/A where from it was sought to be urged that either
the maker of the will being not aware of the actual age
of the deceased was a person other than the deceased
or alternatively it shows the weak mental status of the
deceased.

(b)

The fact of non-mentioning of Chameli Devi, the
daughter of the deceased in the will and the argument
predicated thereon that even this reveals that the
deceased was not the maker of the will.

(c)

That testimony of PW-1, Shri Moti Lal Jain did not
establish due execution of the will Ex.PW-1/1 for the
reason testimony of said witness failed to prove that
the will was witnessed by 2 persons who signed as
attesting witnesses.

12.

The learned Trial Judge has held that the testimony of

Moti Lal Jain, PW-1 who was a disinterested person established
due execution of the will.

The discrepancy in the age of the

deceased as recorded in the will and the death certificate has
been explained by observing that age in the death certificate is
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 4 of 18

recorded with reference to the information sent from the
cremation ground and that to the authorities at the cremation
ground information pertaining to the particulars of the dead
person is given by the relatives who may not be in the exact
knowledge of the age of the deceased. Learned Trial Judge has
further noted that the 3 witnesses of the objectors namely RW-1,
RW-2 and RW-3 have also given different versions regarding the
age of the deceased at the time of his death.
13.

Noting that the will refers, by name, to the sons and

daughters as also the daughters-in-law of the testator and that
Chameli Devi, admittedly was one of the six daughters born to
the deceased has not been mentioned in the will, dealing with the
argument that the same casts suspicion on the will, learned Trial
Judge has noted that Chameli Devi was a pre-deceased daughter
and probably for said reason no reference to her was made in the
will. In other words, learned Trial Judge did not find exclusion of
name of Chameli Devi in the will; not even a reference to her, as
a suspicious circumstance.
14.

The issue of non-proof of due execution of the will with

reference to the testimony of PW-1 has been dealt with by the
learned Trial Judge as urged and with reference to the testimony
of Moti Lal Jain.

It has been observed that Moti Lal Jain gave

testimony qua the will on 30.9.1996 i.e. after more than 11 years
of execution of the will and that trivial discrepancies were
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 5 of 18

inconsequential.
15.

At the hearing held on 8.5.2008 Shri A.P.Aggarwal and

Shri Tirpat Singh, learned counsel for the appellants reiterated
the submissions made before the learned Trial Judge and
additionally added 4 other submissions which counsel urged were
advanced before the learned Trial Judge but were not considered
while passing the impugned order.
16.

With respect to the contentions urged before the

learned Trial Judge, picking on the discrepancy in the age of the
deceased as recorded in the will and the death certificate Ex.PW3/A as also omission to note even name of Chameli Devi, the
daughter of the deceased, it was urged that wrong recitals in a
will casts suspicion thereon. With reference to the testimony of
PW-1 it was sought to be urged that PW-1 ostensibly pointed out
the signatures of Bhagwan Das as an attesting witness at point
'C' on the will and that no signature existed at point 'C', much
less of Bhagwan Das. It was thus urged that since, as against
other documents, vide Section 63(c) of the Indian Succession Act
1925, the sine qua non for due execution of a will is attestation
by 2 or more witnesses, the will Ex.PW-1/1 was witnessed by only
one witness it was no will in the eyes of law.
17.

It was further urged that the testimony of RW-1

established that relationship between the deceased and his sons
were strained.

Learned counsel for the appellants urged that

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 6 of 18

both RW-2 and RW-3, in their examination-in-chief deposed that
the relationship of the deceased with his sons were strained and
that the deceased was staying with them. Referring to the crossexamination of the 2 witnesses, learned counsel urged that the
testimony

of

RW-2

and

RW-3

on

said

point

remained

unchallenged.
18.

Secondly, it was urged that the will was scribed in

English, a language which was alien to the deceased who had
apparently executed the will by putting his thumb impression as
also signatures in Urdu.
19.

Thirdly it was urged that no positive evidence was

brought on record to establish that the deceased was aware of
the contents of the document.
20.

Lastly it was also urged that it was against human

conduct for the deceased to have deprived all his children under
the bequest and solely bequeath the property to his daughters-inlaw.
21.

PW-1, Moti Lal Jain is the star witness of the

propounders of the will.

His testimony is important and being

short, I intend to reproduce the same. It reads as under:“Shri Moti Lal Jain Advocate, Chamber No.45, Patiala
House Courts, New Delhi on SA:
I do not know anything about the will of late Shri
Lachhu Ram again said Chelu Ram. I am Advocate by
profession. I used to attest the will of a person who
used to come me for getting his will drafted. During
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 7 of 18

my entire practice as an advocate till today, I might
have drafted 3/4 will in all and have also attested the
same as one of the attesting witness. As far as I
recollect I had drafted and attested the last will of a
person who was resident of Ram Nagar, Pahar Ganj,
New Delhi. That person was my neighbour. I do not
remember the name and particulars of the other
persons whose wills I might have drafted or attested
but I can tell the same after seeing the Will. (At this
stage the witness wants to refresh his memory by
seeing the will of late Sh.Chelu Ram referred hereto
above.)
Order
Before the witness is shown the will in question let
him reply to the following court questions:
CC1 Who else besides you had attested the will of
Chelu Ram.
Ans. One Shri Bhagwan Dass had also attested his will?
CC2 Whether the will of Chelu Ram was got registered
by you and also tell the place where it was written and
executed.
Ans. The will was drafted by me at my chamber No.45,
Patiala House Courts and I got it registered also, at the
office of the Sub-Registrar, Delhi.
(The witness is allowed to see the will in question.)
I have seen the will and now I can depose about the
facts of the case.
Shri Chelu Ram had come to me in my chamber
for drafting the will. I knew him previously also as I
have dealt one of his cases before the SDM, at
Parliament Street, New Delhi, under Delhi Land
Reforms Act. I drafted the will at the instructions of
Sh.Chelu Ram. When Chelu Ram visited me for drafting
this will from his physical appearance, he did not seem
to be ill, and he was of sound mind. I had drafted the
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 8 of 18

will in my chamber. Chelu Ram has put his signatures
in Urdu and also put his left thumb impression as well
on the will at points A and B respectively. After he had
put his signatures and thumb impression Bhagwan
Dass, the other attesting witness and myself put
signatures at points C and D respectively on the will. I
also put my signatures under the words drafted by me
at point E. The will was drafted by me on 25.9.1985
and I accompanied Chelu Ram and other witness to the
office of Sub-Registrar, Asaf Ali Road, on 27.9.1985
(27.985) to get the same registered. I was also present
in the office of Sub-Registrar, Asaf Ali Road, at the time
of the registration of the will. At that time, Bhagwan
Dass and myself were the witnesses. I do not know
whether Bhagwan Dass is alive or not at present. The
will is Ex.PW-1/1 (objected to as to mode of proof).
xxxxx by Sh.Sanjay Aggarwal for (objector No.3) LRs
Ved Prakash, Jaswant Singh, Pooran Chand, Biro Devi
and Vijay LRs of Govindi Devi.
The case was under Section 86A DLRs Acts in
which he was served with a notice. I do not remember
the exact date but it was prior to 1978. I might have
noted his case in my diary of the relevant year. At
present I am unable to trace my diary of that year since
a long time has elapsed. I have to search that diary. It
may be traceable and may not be traceable. I have
never searched the diary regarding this case under DLR
Act as I had no occasion to do. It is incorrect to suggest
that I had never dealt with any case i.e. DLRs Act of
late Sh.Chelu Ram.
I cannot tell the age of Chelu Ram of my own
when I drafted his will Ex.PW-1/1 but he stated his age
to be 75 years. I have not seen his date of birth or his
birth certificate issued by Municipal authorities. By
heart I do not remember the name of the father of
Chelu Ram. I do not know about the date when Chelu
Ram had expired. It is not in my knowledge whether
late Sh.Chelu Ram was an Asthma patient. After his
case was finished before the SDM court prior to 1978
he never met me. Therefore, I cannot say whether he
was ill or not. Since 1984 or whether he was confined
to bed, again said he could not be confined to bed since
1984 because he came to my chamber in the year
1985 without any sign of illness. It is incorrect that he
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 9 of 18

was not in a position to identify the objects due to his
old age.
As to my understanding, his eye sight was not
weak. He has signed the will in Urdu and also his
thumb impression on the will. I have not enquired from
him whether he was conversant with English language
or not. I have not noted the date of the drafting of this
will separately anywhere. The date is itself mentioned
on the will. Personally I do not know Bhagwan Dass but
I have seen him twice or thrice in the company of Chelu
Ram when he used to come to me in connection with
his case under the Delhi Land Reforms Acts. The
writing encircled in portion C of the will is in my hand.
It is incorrect to suggest that the signatures of Chelu
Ram at point A and his thumb impression at point B are
not that of Chelu Ram. It is incorrect to suggest that
Chelu Ram had not accompanied me to the office of
Registrar, Asaf Ali Road, for the registration of the will.
It is wrong to suggest that Ex.PW-1/1 is a forged
document.
xxxx by Shri Deepak Kumar Advocate for Objector 7 –
LRs of Smt.Angoori Devi.
It is correct that the will was prepared and signed
on the same very day in my chamber No.45, Patiala
House Courts, New Delhi. Except registration, the will
was completed in all respect in my chamber on
25.9.1985. It is incorrect to suggest that the testator
had not come to my chamber or that I had gone to his
house. I did not get verified from a medical officer
about his mental condition, at the time of the thumb
impression and signature which were obtained in my
chamber on the will are forged.”
22.

To appreciate the testimony of PW-1, Mr.Moti Lal Jain

and the submissions urged thereon by learned counsel for the
appellants it would be necessary to reproduce the will and the
places marked as points 'A', 'B', 'C', 'D' and 'E' during testimony
of PW-1. The same is as under:-

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 10 of 18

WILL
I, Challu Ram son of Shri Molhar Ram, aged
about 75 years, resident of House No.310,
Mathura Road, Badar Pur, New Delhi, declare
this to be my last Will which I make this 25th
day of September 1985, hereby revoking all
other wills and codicils heretofore and made by
me.
I am aged about 75 years, and I am in my
full senses and not under pressure of any kind
from any quarter. I am the absolute owner of
two Bighas of land comprised in Khasra No.123
and 125 of revenue estate of Village Tajpul,
New Delhi which I have purchased from Shri
Nihal vide a registered sale deed dated
26.8.57, Registered on 18.10.1957 with my
own money and I had constructed 35 rooms
and two rooms on the Ist Floor and 5 Shops
over a part of this land with my self earned
money. The entire property is my self acquired
property. The vacant space is in my actual
physical possession, while the constructed
portion is partly self occupied and partly rented
out. I have got two sons Rattan Chand and
Ramesh Chand who are married and alive, and
four daughters namely Gobindo Devi, who is
now a widow, Gian Wati, Bharto, Bharpai Devi
all married and are alive one of my daughter
Angoori Devi had died after her marriage.
Natho Devi w/o Rattan Chand my son and
Rajeshwari w/o Ramesh Chand my second son
have been looking after me very properly
during my old age.
L.T.I. of
Sh.Challu
Ram

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

I bequeath and devise all my money
movable
and
immovable
property
wheresoever
and
whatsoever
including
the mentioned above, which I possess
at present or which I may acquire during the
period of my remaining life to my daughtersin – law Smt. Natho Devi and Rajeshwari Devi

page 11 of 18

in equal share, absolutely to the exclusion of
my sons and daughters and all the other
persons. After my death Shrimati Natho Devi
and Rajeshwari Devi will become full and
absolute owners of all my moveable and
immovable property which I may possess at
the time of my death and they will be entitled
to use and deal with such property as they will
wish without any interference from any person
whosoever he or she may be.
In witness whereof I the said Chelu Ramput
my signatures to this my Will and to each sheet
of this my will contained in this and in the
preceding one sheet of paper the day and the
year first above written.
Point “B”

Point “A”
LTI of
Sh.Chelu Ram

Sd/Testator
(Chelu Ram)

Signed by the abovenamed Chelu Ram in our
presence at the same time and each of us has
in the presence of the testator signed in his
name hereunder as attesting witnesses.
Witnesses:LTI of
Bhagwan
Dass

“C”

Drafted by
Sd/Advocate

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

Bhagwan Dass S/o
Sh.Ram Karan
r/o H.No.342 Badarpur, New Delhi.

2.
“D”

1.

Sd/MOTI LAL JAIN
ADVOCATE, NEW DELHI.
“E”

page 12 of 18

23.

Pertaining

to

the

submissions

made

by

learned

counsel for the appellants predicated on the discrepancy in the
age of the deceased as recorded in the will and the death
certificate Ex.PW-3/A as also the omission of any reference to
Chameli Devi in the will, suffice would it be to note that the
reasons given by the learned Trial Judge are reasonable and the
reasons of a prudent person. After all, the deceased came from a
rural background where people are not very meticulous in
keeping a track of their age. Further, it does happen that at the
cremation ground any near relative gets recorded the age of the
deceased which may be on the basis of a rough recollection by
the relative who gave the information. It is true that apart from
Chameli Devi, another daughter of the deceased, Angoori Devi
had pre-deceased him and that the will notes the existence of
Angoori Devi and not of Chameli Devi; but, the material
difference between the two daughters is that Chameli Devi had
pre-deceased Chelu Ram by about 25 years and Angoori Devi had
pre-deceased him just a few years prior to the date when Chelu
Ram executed the will. Hazy memories of a daughter who was
no longer in the world of living for 25 years could be a reason for
Chelu Ram not to mention about Chameli's existence.
24.

Pertaining to the testimony of PW-1, Mr.Moti Lal Jain,

from his testimony, as noted in para 21, it is obvious that Mr.Moti
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 13 of 18

Lal Jain was attempting to be not honest to the cause which he
was

representing

evidenced

by

the

fact

his

introductory

testimony is wayward. It is important to note that only when he
was put searching questions by the Court did he uttered the
truth.
25.

The introductory testimony of Mr.Moti Lal Jain shows

that he was attempting to feign ignorance about any will of Chelu
Ram.

This is evidenced by the fact that he remained evasive

about Chelu Ram or his will. He wanted to refresh his memory by
perusing the will.

Before he could refresh the memory, 2

questions were put to him by the Court. How well he answered
the same with reference to the will has left me wondering as to
how the witness, who did not even remember Chelu Ram or his
will, without looking at the will, answered that besides him one
Bhagwan Dass had attested the will. He also remembered that
he was the draftman of the will.

He remembered that he had

drafted the will at his chamber in Patiala House Courts. He also
remembered that he had got the will registered.
26.

The identification of the signatures of the executant

and the witnesses on the will has thus to be appreciated in light
of the fact that Mr.Moti Lal Jain, the advocate who was the
draftsman of the will was attempting to be not straight forward in
his testimony.

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 14 of 18

27.

I have not only noted the contents of the will in para

22 above but have also recorded the place where the thumb
impression of Chelu Ram were found affixed as also the points
where Chelu Ram had appended his signatures as also the place
where Bhagwan Dass had affixed is thumb impression as also the
points where Mr.Moti Lal Jain had appended his signatures on the
will.
28.

Obviously, there are no signatures of Bhagwan Dass at

point 'C', the place identified by the lawyer where Bhagwan Dass
ostensibly appended his signatures as an attesting witness. This
is evident to the naked eye and needs no elaboration.

But a

thumb impression is to be found adjacent to the place on the will
where name, parentage and address of Bhagwan Dass is scribed.
29.

As noted above, in his examination-in-chief Mr.Moti Lal

Jain, in response to the Court question had stated that Bhagwan
Dass had signed as an attesting witness to the will.
30.

I agree with the view taken by the learned Trial Judge

that the testimony of PW-1 establishes due execution of the will,
more so, for the reason the witness stated that the testator was
his old client and that he i.e. PW-1 had drafted the will under the
instructions of his client.
31.

The contention that there is evidence to establish

strained relationship between the deceased and his sons on
account of RW-2 and RW-3 not being cross examined pertaining
FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 15 of 18

to their statements in the examination-in-chief where they stated
that the relationship between the deceased and his sons were
strained, to my mind is picking on straws of no substance.
Merely because a particular statement of a witness has not been
subjected to cross examination does not ex post facto lead to the
conclusion that the said statement is truthful.

What better

evidence can exist of no strained relation other than the fact that
the deceased was living in the same house in which, along with
him, his sons, his daughters-in-law and 2 daughters were
residing.
32.

The fact that the will was scribed in English, a

language unknown to the testator is neither here nor there for
the reason PW-1, the lawyer who had drafted the will has
categorically stated that he drafted the will under instructions of
his client who had come to him not for the first time but was a
previous client for whom he was representing a cause pertaining
to a litigation under the Delhi Land Reforms Act. It would also be
important to note that the will in question is a registered will and
at the rear appears the endorsement of the Registrar before
whom the will was registered to the effect that the executant had
acknowledged before the Registrar that the contents of the
document were explained and understood by the executant.

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 16 of 18

33.

The plea that there is no positive evidence on record

to establish that the deceased was aware of the contents of the
will runs in the teeth of the testimony of PW-1, who has
categorically deposed that the deceased, Chelu Ram, had visited
PW-1 for purposes of getting the will drafted and that from his
physical appearance he seemed to be in good mental and
physical health. The witness categorically stated that he drafted
the will at the instructions of Chelu Ram who put his signatures
as also his left thumb impression at point 'A' and 'B' respectively
in token of execution of the will. Since everything happened in
the office of the counsel it is obvious that the lawyer drafted what
was told to him by the client.
34.

The last submission that the will is unnatural needs to

be dealt with.
35.

The unnatural nature of the will alleged is the

exclusion of the sons from the bequest.

But, the argument

ignores that the bequest is in favour of the 2 wives of the 2 sons.
It is obvious that the deceased made a bequest in favour of the
branches of his 2 sons. Why did he do so? It is irrelevant and
need not be answered for the reason law is clear.

As long as

there exists sufficient evidence to sustain a will, it is not for the
Court to probablize the reasons as to why the testator did, what
he did.
36.

I find no merits in the appeals.

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

page 17 of 18

37.

The appeals are dismissed.

38.

No costs.

39.

LCR be returned forthwith.

May 13, 2008
dk

FAO Nos.8/98 & 47/98

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 18 of 18

