IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) No.1896/2006
#
!

R.N.Sharma
through:

....... Petitioner
Mr.K.B.Rohtagi, Ms.Aparna Rohtagi,
Mr.S.K.Dhingra and Mr.Mahesh Kasana,
Advocates
VERSUS

$
^

Mrs.Mukesh Goel
........ Respondent
through: Mr.Ravi Gupta and Mr.Ankit Jain,
Advocates
RESERVED ON : 02-04-2007

%

*
1.

DATE OF DECISION:

17-04-2007

CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioner was the defendant in the original suit.

The respondent was the plaintiff.

I shall be referring to the

parties as the plaintiff and the defendant.
2.

Case of the plaintiff was that he was the owner of

rear portion of the first floor of property bearing No.14, Satya
Niketan, New Delhi. That plaintiff purchased the property from
CM(M) No.1896/06

page 1 of 10

the erstwhile owner M/s.Delta Construction by means of an
agreement to sell dated 30.10.1996. That as per clause 17 of
the

said

agreement,

plaintiff

was

allowed

to

place

a

board/hoarding on half of the front wall starting from the side
staircase up to the middle of the wall. Remaining half of the
front wall was to be used by the owner of the front portion of
the first floor.

That plaintiff was running a computer centre

from the rear half flat of the first floor. She had displayed her
hoarding/board on the front wall as per the right vested in her
under the agreement to sell. That in the 3rd week of March
1999, defendant purchased the property and on 18.4.1999
asked the plaintiff to remove the board/hoarding displayed by
the plaintiff on the front wall.

That the plaintiff lodged a

complaint with the police informing that the defendant was
illegally trying to remove her board. That on 26.4.1999 when
husband of the plaintiff and her son went to the property they
found that the defendant had removed their board and had
installed his board on the entire front wall. So alleging, decree
for mandatory injunction was prayed for in favour of the
plaintiff and against the defendant praying that defendant be
directed to remove his board from half portion of the front wall.
Along with the plaint, an application under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2
CM(M) No.1896/06

page 2 of 10

CPC was filed praying for grant of an interim mandatory
injunction.
3.

Defendant contested the suit stating that the front

portion of the first floor was purchased by him.

In his

agreement to sell there was no reference that his entitlement
to use outer portion of the front wall of the first floor was
restricted. That, being the owner of the front portion of the first
floor outer wall of the first floor on the front side was his
property and that he was entitled to use the same in any
manner he wished.
4.

In view of the fact that plaintiff and defendant were

claiming a right under agreement to sell in their favour, learned
Trial Judge considered the language of the 2 agreements to sell
relied upon and held in favour of the plaintiff. Vide order dated
1.9.2001 learned Trial Judge directed defendant to remove his
board from half portion of the front wall towards the staircase
side and permitted plaintiff to install his board.
5.

Defendant filed an appeal against the order passed

by the learned Trial Judge.

Vide order dated 5.11.2001, the

Appellate Court concurred with the view taken by the Trial
Judge.
6.

Same issue has been re-agitated before me.

CM(M) No.1896/06

page 3 of 10

7.

Before adverting to the admitted facts it would be

relevant to pen down that the instant petition invokes a remedy
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. Defendant would
thus have to show that the Trial Court and the First Appellate
Court have either failed to exercise jurisdiction vested in law or
have exercised jurisdiction in law with material irregularity
causing injustice to the petitioner. It would be impermissible
for the defendant to question the 2 decisions on facts by
attempting to show that the decisions are wrong. Under Article
227 of the Constitution of India I cannot decide the issue with
respect to the correctness or otherwise of the impugned
decisions by reappreciating the factual matrix, save and except
if it is shown that a material document has been ignored.
8.

Secondly, the principle of mandatory ad interim

injunction need to be noted.

As against the normal rule of

interim injunction, that it is intended to secure status quo being
maintained, the rule of a mandatory ad-interim injunction is to
restore the parties to the same position in which they were
immediately prior to the doing of the wrongful act alleged. In
other words, a mandatory ad-interim injunction restores status
quo ante. The difference in the 2 kinds of interim injunctions is
that a mandatory ad interim injunction would require a stronger
CM(M) No.1896/06

page 4 of 10

prima facie case to be shown as also to be established that the
act of the defendant which altered the status was a wrongful
act. Additionally it has to be shown that the said wrongful act
has violated a legal right of the plaintiff and if not restored
would cause irreparable loss and injury to the plaintiff.
9.

It is not in dispute that both parties claim right from

the same recorded owner. It is also not in dispute that both
parties claim a right under agreements to sell.
10.

Whereas plaintiff claims a direct right under the

original owner, namely, M/s.Delta Construction.

Defendant

claims a right through one Sanjay Batra, who in turn purchased
front half of the first floor from M/s.Delta Constrcution.
11.

Thus, in all 3 agreements to sell have to be seen.

12.

Agreement to sell in favour of the plaintiff is dated

30.10.1996.

Clause 17 of the said agreement to sell is

relevant. It reads as under:-

13.

"17. The half of the front wall starting from
staircase side of the said flat shall belong to second
party for placing board/hoarding etc.
(The
remaining half portion of the said wall shall belong
to the owner of front portion of the first floor of the
said flat for placing boards/hoarding etc.)."
Sanjay
Batra, predecessor-in-interest of the

defendant purchased the front half of the first floor under an
agreement to sell dated 9.9.1996.
CM(M) No.1896/06

Clause 17 of the said
page 5 of 10

agreement to sell in his favour executed by M/s.Delta
Constructions reads as under:-

14.

"17.
The half of the front wall of the said
portion shall belong to the purchaser for placing
board/hoarding etc. (half of the front wall starting
from staircase side shall belong to the owner of
rear portion of the first floor).
Defendant purchased front half of the first floor from

Sanjay Batra vide agreement to sell dated _ March 1999.
Clause 15 of the said agreement to sell recorded as under:-

15.

"15.
That the front wall of the said portion
shall belong to the purchaser for placing
board/hoarding etc."
View taken by the Courts below is that Sanjay Batra

could not have sold or transferred a right more than what was
vested in him. View taken is that while selling front half of the
first floor to Sanjay Batra M/s Delta Constructions clearly
limited his right to use only half of the front wall for placing a
board/hoarding, clearly recording that the remaining half
towards the staircase side shall belong to the owner of the rear
portion of the first floor.

Thus, a prima facie view has been

taken that defendant could not claim right to use the entire
front wall (outer portion) by virtue of clause 15 of his
agreement to sell executed by Sanjay Batra in his favour.
16.

It is settled law that a person cannot create a right

in favour of a third party more than what he had. Thus, Sanjay
CM(M) No.1896/06

page 6 of 10

Batra could not have created a right, title or an interest in
favour of the defendant which exceeded his right, title or
interest in the front wall of the first floor in question.
17.

It would be relevant to note that not only did the

registered owner create a right in favour of the plaintiff to
display a board/hoarding on half portion of the front wall but
while selling the front half portion of the first floor to Sanjay
Batra clearly incorporated the said transfer of right in favour of
the plaintiff.

In other words, while selling the front half first

floor to Sanjay Batra, in respect of the right to display a
hoarding on the front wall, it was clearly mentioned that Sanjay
Batra would have right to use only half the wall.
18.

Defendant being an assignee of the right from

Sanjay Batra could not and cannot claim a right more than
what was transferred by the owner to Sanjay Batra.
19.

Thus, the view taken by the Courts below pertaining

to the rights of the plaintiff and the defendant is correct.
20.

A submission was made by Shri K.B.Rohtagi, learned

counsel for the defendant that by virtue of Section 11 of the
Transfer of Property Act 1882, the restriction on the right of
Sanjay Batra was unenforceable.

Contention urged was that

since front half of the first floor was sold to Sanjay Batra and
CM(M) No.1896/06

page 7 of 10

rear half of the flat was sold to the plaintiff, plaintiff had no
concern with the front half of the flat and Sanjay Batra had full
right on the front portion of the first floor. This was an absolute
right which could not be curtailed by a restrictive covenant.
21.

Section 11 of the Transfer of Property Act 1882

reads as under:"11.
Restriction repugnant to interest
created.- Where, on a transfer of property, an
interest therein is created absolutely in favour of
any person, but the terms of the transfer direct that
such interest shall be applied or enjoyed by him in
a particular manner, he shall be entitled to receive
and dispose of such interest as if there were no
such direction.

22.

Where any such direction has been made in
respect of one piece of immoveable property for the
purpose of securing the beneficial enjoyment of
another piece of such property, nothing in this
section shall be deemed to affect any right which
the transferor may have to enforce such direction
or any remedy which he may have in respect of a
breach thereof.
Prima facie, Section 11 of the Transfer of Property

Act 1882 is attracted where an instrument creates an absolute
interest on transfer but terms of the transfer direct such
interest to be applied or enjoyed in a particular manner. Only
then would the restriction be held to be invalid save insofar it is
saved by the proviso to the section. Prima facie, Section 11
would not be attracted where there is no absolute transfer of

CM(M) No.1896/06

page 8 of 10

an interest in a property.
23.

A perusal of clause 17 of the agreement to sell

between M/s.Delta Constructions and Sanjay Batra shows that
the owner transferred only a limited right to Sanjay Batra in
respect of the front wall of the first floor, in that, transfered a
right in favour of Sanjay Batra to display a board only on half of
the front wall, clearly recording that the right to display a board
on the remaining half wall would be that of the owner of the
rear portion of the flat. Thus, prima facie, defendant cannot
place reliance upon Section 11 of the Transfer of Property Act
1882.
24.

On

the

issue

whether

mandatory

ad

interim

injunction was rightly or wrongly granted, suffice would it be to
note that case of the plaintiff was that ever since she had
purchased the rear portion of the flat, she had displayed her
board on the front half wall towards the staircase side.

She

asserted that the defendant invaded the said right after he
purchased the front portion of the first floor from Sanjay Batra.
She categorically pleaded that the offending act of the
defendant, i.e. removing her sign board took place on the night
preceding 26.4.1999.
25.

Learned First Appellate Court has noted the decision

CM(M) No.1896/06

page 9 of 10

of the Supreme Court reported as AIR 1990 SC 867, Dorab
Cawasji Warden vs. Coomi Sorab Warden & Ors. as to when a
mandatory ad interim injunction can be granted.
26.

I find that the learned Courts below have correctly

understood the law as declared by the Supreme Court.

The

Courts below have culled out the relevant and necessary facts
to be taken cognizance of for deciding the application for
interim relief.
27.

I find neither an infirmity nor perversity in the

approach of the Courts below. I find no perversity in the orders
impugned. I do not find it to be a case of improper exercise of
jurisdiction, much less with material irregularity, much less a
case of injustice to the defendant.
28.

The petition is dismissed.

29.

Costs to follow.

April 17, 2007
dk

CM(M) No.1896/06

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 10 of 10

