IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
R.S.A. No.286/2007
#
!

Shri Ramesh Kumar Handoo & Anr.
........ Appellants
through: Mr.Sanjiv Bahl, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Shri Binay Kumar Basu
through: Nemo.

%

........

Respondent

DATE OF DECISION: 19.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Appellants who were impleaded as defendants in a suit

filed by Binay Kumar Basu have suffered 2 concurrent finding
against them.

They have approached this court by way of a second

appeal.
2.

It is not an ordinary litigation.

the father of appellant No.2.

The plaintiff of the suit is

Appellant No.2

is the wife of

appellant No.1. Meaning thereby father-in-law of appellant No.1 and
father of appellant No.2 instituted the suit.
3.

The admitted case of the parties is that the father is the

perpetual lessee of the suit land on

which a building stands
page 1 of 9

constructed.
4.

Alleging that the plaintiff had allowed his daughter and

his son-in-law

to reside in the suit property in which even the

plaintiff, as owner, was residing and that in November,2000 he had
determined the right of his daughter and son-in-law to continue to
reside in the suit property and inspite thereof they were not vacating
the same, suit was filed on 14.11.2002 praying for a decree of
mandatory injunction requiring defendants to

leave the suit

property.
5.

In the written statement filed, a preliminary objection was

raised that since the defendants were admittedly in possession of
the suit property suit for mandatory injunction was not maintainable.
That a suit for possession ought to be filed.

On merits it was

pleaded that even mother of appellant No.2 had contributed from
her istridhan when

construction was effected and for said reason

even mother of defendant No.2 was the co-owner of the property.
Additionally

it

was

pleaded

that

even

defendant

No.2

had

contributed in the construction of the property and on said account
was a co-owner of the property. Lastly, a right under Section 60(b)
of Indian Easement Act, 1882 was pleaded stating that defendant
No.2, as a co-borrower, had raised loan from a bank and had
executed works of a permanent character i.e. the building with the
help of loan which was so taken and utilized to construct the
page 2 of 9

building.
6.

Needless to state, the plaintiff denied that his daughter

contributed a penny for the construction of the property.

He

admitted that his daughter was a co-borrower but pleaded that his
daughter did not repay a single penny for return of the loan which
was taken for constructing the house and that he had repaid the
entire loan.
7.

On the pleadings of the parties two issues were framed.

Firstly, whether the plaintiff was entitled to decree for mandatory
injunction and secondly whether the plaintiff was the owner of the
suit property?
8.

Issue No.2 was decided first and thereafter issue No.1 was

decided by the learned Trial Judge vide judgment and decree dated
5.5.2007.
9.

In respect of issue No.2, in view of

the evidence led,

learned Judge opined that the daughter has failed to establish that
either her mother or she i.e. the daughter contributed a penny on
the construction. On the fact of the daughter being a co-borrower a
finding has been returned

that the loan was taken from HDFC

Bank and that the father had led evidence to establish that

the

entire loan was returned to HDFC Bank by him.
10.

Discussing the testimony of the

witnesses and the

evidence led, learned Trial Judge has noted that the mother of
page 3 of 9

defendant No.2 was not produced as a witness. Learned Trial Judge
has

noted that the daughter deposed that her mother had

contributed towards construction was so stated by her as told to her
by the mother and her grand mother. Learned Trial Judge has held
that in the absence of mother of defendant No.2 being produced in
the witness box said statements of the daughter that her mother
also contributed in the construction is not sufficient evidence to hold
that it stands proved that even the mother contributed money when
the house was constructed. The statement of the daughter that she
had contributed towards construction of the house was sought to be
proved through the testimony of DW-2 a person

engaged in the

supply of building material. No evidence was led to show that the
daughter paid a single penny to DW-2 when building material was
purchased. In fact DW-2 could not even prove any bill issued by him
evidencing that he supplied any building material.
11.

Taking note of the positive evidence led by the father of

having repaid entire loan raised from HDFC Bank and taking note of
the fact that the father was the perpetual lessee of the land, a
finding has been arrived at

by

the learned Trial Judge that the

plaintiff i.e. the father was the sole owner of the suit property.
12.

This finding of fact

has been affirmed by the First

Appellate Court.
13.

The finding on issue No.2 not only relates to a question of
page 4 of 9

fact and on said account would not be open to further scrutiny in a
Regular Second Appeal, even on the evidence before the learned
courts below I find no infirmity in the said finding.
14.

Defence under Section 60(b) of the Indian Easement Act

could succeed only when the daughter would have proved that she
had spent money on the construction.

As noted hereinabove no

evidence was led by the daughter that she spent a penny on the
construction. The fact that she was a co-borrower when loan was
raised from HDFC Bank does not help her for the reason positive
evidence has been led by the father to prove that it was he alone
who repaid the entire loan to HDFC Bank.
15.

Pertaining to the issue whether suit for mandatory

injunction was maintainable, learned Trial Judge noted the decision
cited by the appellants, namely JT 2005 (8) SC 509, Joseph
Severance & Ors. Vs. Benny Mathew & Ors.

View taken by the

learned Trial Judge is that even as per the said judgment a suit for
mandatory injunction alleging continued occupation by a licensee
after license was revoked was held to be maintainable.
16.

The

first Appellate Court has concurred with the said

view.
17.

Indeed, in the afore-noted decision, Hon'ble Supreme

Court was considering an appeal where the plaintiff was the licensor
and had obtained a decree of mandatory injunction after terminating
page 5 of 9

the license.
18.

Thus, a suit for mandatory injunction against a licensee

would be maintainable after the license is revoked.
19.

I may note a fact, not considered by the courts below,

concept of permissive possession is different from the concept of a
license. A child lives with his parents in the house of the parents
under a permissive possession and not strictly as a licensee.

No

rights akin to the rights of a licensee are available to the child.

In

the instant case as stated in the plaint the daughter

and her

husband were residing jointly in the house of the father. All were
sharing the entire accommodation.
20.

Reverting to the decision of the Supreme Court in Joseph

Severance's case (supra) in para 6 thereof it has been noted as
under:-

21.

“Before the High Court the plea was taken for the
first time that the suit was not maintainable being
one for mandatory injunction and for prohibitory
injunction and not one for recovery.
Strictly
speaking the question is not substantial question of
law, but one whose adjudication would depend
upon factual adjudication of the issue relating to
reasonableness of time.”
The aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court need
a little clarification.

22.

The correct position in law as explained by the Supreme

Court is that a licensee whose license is terminated would not
become a trespasser immediately upon determination

of license.
page 6 of 9

He would have to be granted a reasonable time to vacate the
licensed premises.

Only after reasonable

status be akin to a trespasser.

time expires would his

Meaning thereby concept of

reasonable time for a licensee to vacate after a license is revoked
depends upon the pleadings of parties.

It is a question requiring

factual adjudication relating to reasonableness of time.
23.

As noted by the Supreme Court a factual foundation has

to be laid in the pleadings.
24.

In para 14 of its report the Supreme Court observed as

under :-

25.

“The defendants did not specifically raise any plea
that the time taken was unreasonable. No evidence
was led. No specific plea was raised before the
Trial Court and the first Appellate Court.
The
question of reasonable time was to be factually
adjudicated. For the first time in the second appeal
the dispute essentially founded on factual
foundation could not have been raised.”
It is urged by learned counsel for the appellants that as

pleaded in the plaint the license was revoked in November,2000 and
suit was filed on 14.11.2002.
26.

Counsel seeks to urge that this is the unreasonable time

for the suit to be instituted.
27.

Counsel urged that the courts below have dealt with the

issue of reasonableness of the time.
28.

In my opinion the discussion by learned Trial judge

is

purely hypothetical for the reason learned Trial Judge has himself
page 7 of 9

noted in para 18 of the judgment and decree dated 5.5.2007 that
during arguments an interesting point was raised.

In my opinion, in

the absence of pleadings laying a factual foundation the plea ought
not to have been considered how-so-ever interesting it was.
29.

Be that as it may, when permission granted to a married

daughter to reside in the house is withdrawn by the father, taking
note

of

the

paucity

of

accommodation

in

Delhi,

time

of

approximately 2 years granted to the daughter to move out of the
house would be more than reasonable.
30.

Further the issue of reasonableness has to be considered

with respect to the minimum time to be granted to a licensee to
vacate the licensed premises and not with respect to a extended
time granted by way of bounty by the licensor.
31.

In my opinion, for the reasons noted herein above, no

substantial question of law arises for consideration.
32.

Before concluding I would be failing if I do not note the

observations in para 21

of the order passed by

the learned

appellate Judge.
33.

In the judgment and

decree dated 26.9.207, learned

Appellate Judge has recorded a social philosophy which to my
opinion ought not to find mention in the decision. Even otherwise
the said observations reflect a gender bias and have to be ignored.
34.

The Appellate Judge has noted that appellant No.2 as
page 8 of 9

daughter was living with her father and in the Indian social set up
was expected to move out of her father's house to set

up a

matrimonial house as a daughter-in-law where her husband desired.
Learned Appellate Judge

has recorded that

after marriage a

daughter goes to her parental house more as a guest.
35.

I am afraid, the view is loaded with gender bias.

A

daughter is not less than a son. After marriage daughter does not
visit the house of her father as a guest.
member.
daughter.

She comes as a family

Just as after marriage a son visits his father so does a
Status of a married daughter is no different than a

married son.
36.

I find no

merits in

the second appeal.

The same is

dismissed in limine.

November 19, 2007
pu

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 9 of 9

