*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO.No.371/2006
M/s. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
........
through:
Mr. Ram N.Sharma, Advocate

Appellant

VERSUS
Smt. Asha Rani & Ors.
........ Respondents
through:
Mr. Arvind Kumar, Advocate with
Mr. C.B.Garg, Advocate for R-1.
DATE OF DECISION
18.03.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2.

The insurance company has challenged the order dated

31.7.2006 passed by the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation
granting compensation in sum of Rs.2,22,710/- with interest @ 12%
per annum from 19.4.1998 i.e. the date when Pradeep Kumar S/o
Asha Rani died as a result of injuries sustained at a stated road
accident till date of payment.
3.

The fact that vehicle No. DL-4C-D-7374 met with an

accident and it being driven by Pradeep Kumar as also the fact that

FAO No.371/06

page 1 of 7

Satpal, the owner of the vehicle had obtained an insurance policy
from the appellant are not in dispute.
4.

Additionally the fact that Pradeep Kumar died during

course of employment while he was driving the truck is also not in
dispute.
5.

3 points have been urged in the appeal. Firstly that the

driving license of Pradeep Kumar was a fake driving license and that
the policy of insurance clearly stipulated that in case the insured
committed breach thereof, insurance company would be entitled to
avoid the policy. Taking the argument further it is urged that a fake
license is no license in the eyes of law and hence by the act of
handing over the truck to a person not possessing a valid driving
license, the insured having committed a breach of the term of the
policy entitled the appellant to repudiate the policy.
6.

The second contention urged is that while computing the

compensation payable, since the formula prescribed under the
statute was followed, age of the deceased becomes relevant.
7.

It is stated

the

compensation

has

been

computed

treating the age of the deceased to be 21 years whereas the MLC of
the deceased records his age as 24 years. It is urged that the MLC
of the deceased has been ignored.
8.

Lastly it is urged that no notice under Section 10 of the

Workmen's Compensation Act was ever served nor was the
insurance company impleaded as a party respondent in the claim
petition as originally filed. It is stated that the insurance company
FAO No.371/06

page 2 of 7

was impleaded as a respondent only on 13.1.2003 and hence under
no circumstances could insurance company be saddled with the
liability to pay interest prior to 13.1.2003.
9.

I need not decide the last contention urged for the

reason learned counsel for respondent No.1 at the outset concedes
that in view of the correct facts brought to the notice of this court
pertaining to the date of impleadment of the insurance company,
viz-a-viz the insurance company, the award may be modified
directing that subject to decision on contentions 1 and 2, date with
effect wherefrom interest would be payable would be 13.1.2003.
10.

Pertaining to the two questions urged by learned counsel

for the appellant it would be useful for this court to note the findings
of the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation on the issue of the
driving

license

of

Pradeep Kumar.

The finding by the

Commissioner Workmen's Compensation is as under:“Now, as per the issue the question arises, as to who
is liable to pay the amount of compensation and
interest for the delay to the claimant? Admittedly,
the vehicle No.DL-4C-D-7374 was comprehensively
insured with the Respondent No.2 who has denied
the liability stating that the driving licence possessed
by deceased Pradeep Kumar was fake.
The
Respondent No.2 has relied upon the report
submitted by hteir investigator Sh. JS Kalra on
30.9.03. A simply photo copy of the said report has
been filed by the Respondent No.2 in support of their
contention. Perusal of the the said report makes it
clear that the investigator did not contact the
Licensing Authority but he relied upon verbal
statement of the licensing clerk who is stated to have
told him verbally that the licence in question was
fake. There is nothing on record that any competent
authority has declared the licence of deceased
Pradeep Kumar as fake. In view of this I am declined
FAO No.371/06

page 3 of 7

to accept this contention of the respondent.
However, counsel appearing on behalf of the
claimant has drawn my attention to the judgment of
the APEX court in the matter of Oriental Insurance
Co. Ltd. V/s. Sh. Nanjappan and Ors. (II 2004 SLT
115) in which it has been held that the insurer is
liable to pay, compensation to the claimant in case of
the driving licence is found fake, with the liberty to
recover the said amount from the insured.”
11.

The original record of the Commissioner Workmen's

Compensation has been perused by me. The only witness on the
issue produced by the insurance company is Sh. Oma Kant
Additional Divisional Manager, Oriental Insurance Company, K-37,
Cannaught Place, New Delhi. In his affidavit by way of evidence he
deposed that his office had deputed one Sh. J.S.Kalra to investigate
and verify whether the driving license possessed by Pradeep Kumar
was a valid license. Since the license was purportedly issued from
the office of the RTO, Karnal, Sh. J.S.Kalra went to the said office and
submitted a report R-2/R2 to the effect that information gathered by
him through RTO office revealed that the license produced by
Pradeep Kumar was not issued by the said office.
12.

Suffice would it be to state that the view taken by the

Commissioner Workmen's Compensation with respect to the quality
of the evidence led is absolutely correct.

What prevented the

insurance company from summoning the concerned record keeper
of the licensing authority is a question which has been posed by me
to learned counsel for the appellant.
13.

In response learned counsel for the appellant urges that

FAO No.371/06

page 4 of 7

an

application

was

filed

with

the

Commissioner

Workmen's

Compensation seeking summoning of a witness from the office of
the RTO at Karnal. Counsel urges that the same was declined.
14.

When confronted with the record of the Commissioner

Workmen's Compensation which contains no such application, on
personally going through the record, learned counsel for the
appellant concedes that indeed no such application was filed.
15.

The

insurance

company

had

set

up

the

plea

of

entitlement to avoid the policy of insurance on the ground that the
insured handed over the vehicle to a person not possessing a valid
license entitling the insurance company to avoid the policy.

The

onus was on the insurance company to lead credible evidence to
sustain said plea.
16.

Report of J.S.Kalra sought to be proved by Oma Kant is a

wrong method to prove the report. Where the author of the report is
in the world of living he must step into the witness box to prove the
report. The reason is obvious. He would be subjected to a cross
examination and his knowledge whereon the report is based would
be tested. Surely, Oma Kant had no personal knowledge as regards
the report in question and hence could not be meaningfully cross
examined.
17.

I find no merits in the first contention urged.

18.

On the second plea, no doubt in the MLC age of the

deceased recorded is 24 years but I note that mother of the
deceased i.e. the claimant, who deposed as her witness and filed
FAO No.371/06

page 5 of 7

her examination-in-chief by way of affidavit clearly stated in
paragraph 3 that her son was aged 20 years when he died. She was
cross examined. Her cross examination is available at pages 146147 of the record of the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation. I
do not find her testimony to the effect that her son was aged 20
years when he died being challenged.
19.

In that view of the matter it would be unsafe for this

court to rely upon the MLC of the deceased to ascertain his age for
the reason even the doctor who drew the MLC has not been
examined as a witness, much less question as to how he wrote that
the deceased was aged 24 years.
20.

The second contention urged also fails.

21.

In view of the concession made by learned counsel for

respondent No.1 pertaining to the date wherefrom liability can be
fastened on the appellant to pay interest, I dispose of the appeal
maintaining the quantification of the compensation under the
impugned award. I also maintain the rate at which the interest has
been awarded.

However, the date wherefrom appellant would be

liable to pay interest is shifted to 13.1.2003. Meaning thereby, on
the principal sum awarded appellant's liability to pay interest would
commence from 13.1.2003

till

date

payment was deposited with

the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation. For the prior period
as per the award, the respondent No.1 would be entitled to recover
the differential interest from the owner of the vehicle namely
respondent No.2 as per the award.
FAO No.371/06

page 6 of 7

22.

Parties are left to bear their own cost.

23.

TCR be returned.

March 18, 2008
mm

FAO No.371/06

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 7 of 7

