IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.414/2006
#
!

Smt. Anupama Malik & Anr.
........Appellants
through: Mr. S.C.Singhal, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^
%

Smt. Sudershan Malhotra & Anr.
........ Respondent
through: Mr. Lalit Gupta, Advocate for R-1
DATE OF DECISION: 15.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)
The facts lie within a fairly narrow compass though

dispute appears to be gigantic. It is a usual story of the owners
of the property selling different floors to different persons and
everybody fighting for common space.
2.

Sudarshan

Malhotra

owned

property

No.1/14

Ramesh Nagar, New Delhi. The property consists of a ground
floor, a first floor and a second floor. A staircase leads up to
the floor above from the ground floor and is covered by a
mumty. Water tanks are installed on the mumty which serves

the

entire

building.

Sudarshan

Malhotra

executed

an

agreement to sell, power of attorney and a will in favour of
Anupama Malik and her husband Chander Mohan Malik
pertaining to the second floor of the property. These are the
usual documents being executed in Delhi to transfer rights in
immovable property. Recital in the agreement to sell recorded
that the staircase and the mumty would be common together
with proportionate rights in the land.
3.

The second floor has a terrace in front. To reach to

the roof of the mumty an iron monkey staircase has been
installed at the terrace in front of the second floor. Meaning
thereby he who has to access the water tanks at the roof of the
mumty has to come up to the staircase and through the door
opening on to the terrace in front of the second floor has to
enter the terrace and therefrom use the iron ladder to climb up
to the monkey ladder to reach the roof of the mumty.
4.

Dispute started when a gate was installed cutting

access from the floors below to the second floor and the
gate/door opening on to the terrace at the second floor came to
be locked by the purchasers of the second floor.

Sudarshan

Malhotra retaliated by cancelling the agreement to sell, power
of attorney etc.
5.

A suit was filed by Sudarshan Malhotra praying,

amongst others, issuance of permanent injunction restraining
Anupama Malik and her husband from affixing any locks on the
doors marked 'A' and 'B' in the site plan filed along with the
plaint.

She claimed a mandatory injunction that the gates

marked 'A' and 'B' should be permanently removed.
6.

Considering an application under Order 39 Rule 1

and 2 CPC filed by Sudarshan Malhotra, and in view of the sale
documents in favour of Anupama Malik and her husband,
learned Trial Judge held that the staircase and the mumty and
the right to go to the roof of the mumty was a common right
and hence nobody could lock the gates marked 'A' and 'B'. A
limited injunction has been issued in favour of Sudarshan
Malhotra which reads as under:-

7.

“8.
Accordingly the application of plaintiff
under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 read with Section
151 CPC is hereby allowed and defendants are
restrained from locking the gates A and B
situated on the second floor of property bearing
No.1/14, Ramesh Nagar, New Delhi without
providing plaintiff the duplicate keys of the locks
of the said doors and also not to change the
locks of the said gates without her consent
during the pendency of the suit.”
In view of the title documents relied upon by the

respective parties and in view of the admitted position that the

staircase and the mumty is expressly stated to be common
areas for use by all occupants of the building as also the fact

that water tanks are installed on the roof of the mumty and
access to the water tanks has to be through the terrace in front
of the second floor, (even easementry rights flow in favour of
Sudarshan Malhotra) the impugned order cannot be faulted.
8.

I find no merits in the appeal.

9.

The appeal is dismissed.

November 15, 2007
dk-bainsla

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

