IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM(M) No.2721-23/2005
#
!

Mrs.Reba Mukherjee & ors.
........ Petitioners
through: Mr.C.S.Vaidyanathan, Sr. Adv. with
Mr.Manoj V. George and
Mr.H.N.Takkar, Advs.
VERSUS

$
^
%

Sh. Rajiv Behl
through:

........ Respondent
Mr.Kumar Dushyant Singh, Adv.

DATE OF DECISION: 10.1.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)
After both parties closed evidence an application

was filed by the plaintiff pleading as under:“1.
That the plaintiff has filed the afore-said suit
for specific performance of the collaboration
agreement dated 6th September, 1995 which had been
entered in between him and the predecessor-ininterest of the defendants and in the alternative for
the relief of damages.
2.
That the facts and circumstances as stated
in the accompanying suit may be read as part and
parcel of this application. The same are not being
repeated for the sake of brevity and to avoid
Page 1 of 7

unnecessary repetition. The plaintiff applicant craves
leave of this Hon'ble Court to refer to and rely upon
the same at the time of hearing.
3.
That the present application is being made
seeking
summons
for
the
attendance
Mr.B.Chakrawarthy S/o B.P.Chakrawarthy address as
given herein above who is the attesting witness of the
receipt dated 6.9.1995.
4.
At this stage it is pertinent to mention that
the receipt dated 6th September 1995 has never been
denied by the defendant in pleadings. In the written
statement in para 6 and further the defendants have
categorically admitted that there is a token money
receipt dated 6th September 1995.
5.
It is further submitted that the defendants
after the completion of the plaintiff's evidence the
defendants malafidely, just to delay the proceedings
moved an frivolous application under Order 7 Rule 11
CPC. However the same was dismissed with cost.
6.
Subsequently, when the affidavit by way of
evidence was filed on behalf of the defendant No.2, he
is now disputing the signature of Mr.P.K.Mukherji on
the front side of the receipt, as well as the signatures
of the witness on the back of the receipt dated
6.9.1995.
7.
It is respectfully submitted that the original
receipt filled by the plaintiff exhibited as Ex.PW-1/A is
the principal documents and to prove the validity and
authenticity of the said document the examination of
Mr.B.Chakrawarthy is necessary in the interest of
justice and equity.
8.
That the plaintiff earlier did not examine the
said witness as the receipt dated 6th September 1995
was never disputed by the defendant neither was the
authenticity of the signatures of the witness, was
questioned except now in the affidavit by way of
evidence filed by him.
9.

At this stage as there is a dispute with
Page 2 of 7

regard to the main documents hence the examination
of the attesting witness is necessarily required.
10.
The present application is made bonafidely
and in the interest of justice and equity. No prejudice
would be caused to either party if the aforesaid
witness is called for the examination by the Court.”
2.

It was prayed that Mr.B.Chakrawarthy be permitted

to be examined as a witness to prove the receipt dated
6.9.1995.
3.

Dealing with the application learned Trial Judge has

passed the impugned order dated 5.9.2005 which reads as
under:“This application of the plaintiff has come up for
arguments and consideration. As per the plaintiff, this
application was necessitated on the ground that while
in para 8 of the written statement the defendants have
admitted execution of the receipt, in the crossexamination, it has been denied.
He, therefore,
submits that the attesting witness to the receipt be
examined or in the alternative the hand writing
analysis of the same be carried out.
The prayer of the applicant is vehemently opposed by
the learned counsel for the defendant on the grounds
that the said receipt is an after thought and has been
fabricated.
Be that as it may, it would be in the interest of both
sides to have evidence adduced on record whether the
said signatures are genuine or fabricated. I have no
reasons to appreciate the opposition of the defendant.
The plaintiff shall take necessary steps to summon the
witness on filing of PF and DM for 6.10.05.”
4.

Respondents suit seeking specific performance of a

collaboration agreement dated 6.9.1995 averred in para 4 and
Page 3 of 7

para 8 as under:“4.
The
predecessor-in-interest
of
the
defendants herein entered into a collaboration
agreement on 6th September 1995 with the plaintiff for
developing the suit property by way of demolition of
the old structure and erecting new structure. The
plaintiff undertook the entire project of carrying out
the demolition and erection of the structure.
xxx xxx xxx
8.
In pursuance of the said collaboration
agreement, the plaintiff paid as token money an
amount of Rs.25,000/- (Rs.20,000/- by way of cheque
and Rs.5,000/- in cash) to the predecessor-in-interest
of the defendants against which a formal receipt dated
6th September 1995 was issued to the plaintiff.”
5.

Responding in the written statement to paras 4 and

8 of the plaint, respondents replied as under:“4.
Contents of the para 4 of the plaint are
wrong and the same are denied. It is specifically and
emphatically denied that the predecessor of the
defendants had entered into a collaboration
agreement on 6th September 1995 with the plaintiff for
developing the suit property.
It is stated that
predecessor of the defendants never entered into a
collaboration agreement on 6th September 1995 as
alleged by the plaintiff in the para under reply.
xxx xxx xxx
8.
Contents of the para 8 of the plaint are
wrong and are denied. It is specifically denied that in
pursuance of the said collaboration agreement the
plaintiff paid token money of Rs.25,000/- paid by the
plaintiff to the predecessor of the defendant neither
was an advance, earnest money nor part payment but
the same was token money. It is also relevant here to
point out that the formal receipt of the token money
was a condition precedent to discuss further
negotiations of the proposed collaboration agreement,
Page 4 of 7

which were never agreed upon between the parties. It
is also relevant to point out that the proposed terms
and conditions suggested by the plaintiff to the
predecessor of the defendants which were never
accepted by the predecessor of the defendants, hence
the talks of the collaboration agreement between the
parties failed and negotiations came to an end. It is
also relevant to point out that after the negotiations
for the proposed collaboration agreement failed
between the parties and the token money of
Rs.25,000/- was returned on 18.9.95 by the
predecessor of the defendants to the plaintiff and for
the same plaintiff promised to issue the receipt on his
letter head on the next day. Thereafter the plaintiff
never came to the predecessor of the defendants the
plaintiff on the one pretext or the other kept on
avoiding and till date no receipt has been issued to the
defendants in lieu of money received back in cash
from the defendants.”
6.

Suffice would it be to note that it was categorically

pleaded in the written statement that the defendants never
entered in a collaboration agreement on 6.9.1995.

With

respect to the sum of Rs.25,000/- stated to be paid by the
plaintiff to the defendants it was specifically stated in para 8 of
the written statement that execution of a formal receipt
evidencing receipt of token money was a condition precedent
for the parties to further discuss negotiations for the proposed
collaboration agreement. It has further been stated that this
never happened. Meaning thereby it is specifically stated by
the defendant that the receipt relied upon was not executed.
7.

A perusal of the case set up in the written statement

and in particular the averments made in para 8 of the written
Page 5 of 7

statement and as noted above clearly brings out that the
defendants categorically and in unequivocal terms denied
execution of any receipt which was stated to be executed as
per the plaintiff in para 8 of the plaint.
8.

Under the circumstances it is obvious that the

learned Trial Judge has wrongly proceeded on the basis as if
the receipt was denied only during evidence.
9.

The other reason which can be culled out from the

impugned order interest of justice requiring evidence to be led
on the issue, suffice would it be to state that interest of justice
cannot be used as in an unruly and unbriddled manner.
10.

When parties have led their evidence and closed the

same, it is impermissible to allow a party to fill up the gaps and
lacuna unless compelling circumstances are brought on record
as to why a particular witness could not be examined by the
party while leading evidence. A prayer made to examine a
person as a witness has to be on basis of strong and
compelling facts more so when this prayer is made even after
defendant's evidence is led.
11.

Irreparable injustice may result to the defendant in

permitting plaintiff to lead evidence to prove gaps in the case
of the plaintiff for the reason defendant's evidence is always
led keeping in view the evidence led by the plaintiff.
Page 6 of 7

12.

The petition is allowed.

5.9.2005 is quashed.

Impugned order dated

Respondent's application praying that

Mr.B.Chakrawarthy be permitted to be examined as plaintiff's
witness is dismissed.
13.

No costs.

January 10, 2008

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

d.k.bainsla

Page 7 of 7

