IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA No.123/2002
#
!

Daya Chand & Ors.
through:

........ Appellants
Mr.Naresh Thanai, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Chunni Lal & Ors.
through:

%

Nemo.

........ Respondents

DATE OF DECISION: 13.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y
To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the appellants.

2.

It is unfortunate that for over 5 years even a

question of law has not been formulated in the above
captioned appeal.
3.

Being a second appeal, unless it is shown that a

substantial question arises for consideration, the appeal has to
be dismissed.
4.
find
which

Since the matter has remained pending for 5 years, I
it

appropriate to formally frame the question of

law

page 1 of 6

can always be framed in every litigation being whether on
evidence on record the finding arrived at by the learned Courts
below is legal and valid?
5.

Surely, without appreciating evidence, issue of

conclusion arrived at being right or wrong is a question of law
and not a question of fact.
6.

Briefly stated, appellants filed a suit for permanent

injunction against the defendants alleging that the subject
property of the suit was a private temple constructed by their
ancestor Harphool Singh.

They claim that they had been

permitting residents of the locality to visit the temple but
disclaimed a public dedication of the temple.
7.

Defendants refuted the claim of the appellants and

pleaded that the temple was dedicated to the public and the
appellants had no right to interfere with their right to visit and
worship at the temple.
8.

On the pleadings of the parties following issues were

framed:“1.

Whether the suit property is privately owned by the
plaintiff?

2.

Whether the suit property is a public or private
temple? Onus on the parties.
page 2 of 6

3.

4.

Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to
institute the present suit?

5.

Whether the plaintiff No.3 was entrusted the job of
Poojari in the temple as claimed by the defendant?

6.

9.

Whether the plaintiff has concealed material fact
from the Court and is not entitled to equity of
injunction?

Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief prayed
for in the suit?

7.

Relief.”
Holding that the evidence on record established that

the temple was dedicated to the public the suit was dismissed
vide judgment and decree dated 12.5.1994.
10.

A first appeal was preferred against the judgment

and decree passed by the learned Trial Judge which was
registered as RCA No.625/2000.

An application was filed by

the appellants in the appeal under Order 41 Rule 27 of the
Code of Civil Procedure praying that they may be given liberty
to lead additional evidence. Additional evidence sought to be
led pertained to the house tax assessment relating to the
property.

Presumably, appellants intended to establish that

the house tax in respect of the property was being paid by
them.
11.

Vide order dated 5.1.2002 afore-noted application

filed by the appellants was dismissed and by a judgment
and

page 3 of 6

decree of even date i.e. 5.1.2002 the appeal was dismissed.
12.

In respect of the order dated 5.1.2002 passed by the

learned Appellate Judge dismissing application under Order 41
Rule 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure suffice would it be to
state that under the Delhi Municipal Corporation act 1957
instance of property taxes falls on persons primarily liable to
pay tax as per Section 120 thereof.
tax

He who pays the property

is the person treated as primarily liable for payment of

property tax. Said liability does not result in a title in favour of
the person concerned.
13.

It is trite that entries in municipal records do not

create titles. The learned Appellate Judge has treated this to
be the basis while rejecting application under Order 41 Rule 27
of the Code of Civil Procedure filed by the appellants. I concur.
14.

On merits, relevant would it be to note that neither

party brought on record the original title deed in respect of the
land constituting the temple. The Courts below have referred
to and relied upon entries in the revenue record pertaining to
the land in question i.e. the land over which the temple was
built. These documents are Ex.PW-3/F and Ex .PW-3/G. In the
words of learned Trial Judge, the contents of the documents are
noted as under:page 4 of 6

15.

“Both these documents are to the effect that the
suit temple was in existence since 1957. It may
also be pointed out that these documents also
contain a recital to the effect that the people of
the locality visit the temple to perform puja.”
Learned Trial Judge has further taken note of the

testimony of late Harphool Singh in a revenue proceedings
where during cross-examination he had admitted that the land
in question over which the temple was constructed was not
purchased by him.
16.

View which has been taken is that from the afore-

noted documents and testimony of Harphool Singh in earlier
revenue proceedings it appeared to be a case where Harphool
Singh had effected construction on gaon sabha land.
17.

In this connection relevant would it be to note that

in his testimony PW-3 i.e. witness of the plaintiff proved
documents effect whereof has been discussed by the learned
Trial Judge in para 9 of the judgment. The discussion is as
under
“Ex.PW-3/C is the certified copy of the statement
given by one Shri Randhir Singh before the Court
of Revenue Assistant. By the above statement
dated 12.7.73, Shri Randhir Singh had deposed
that a temple was in existence in the suit
property. Ex.PW-3/D is statement of one Shri
Banwari. He had not only deposed that a temple
was in existence in the suit property, but also
that the said temple was 15 to 16 years old. The
statement of the witness was recorded in the
year 1973. It means that as per the testimony
of the

page 5 of 6

18.

said witness the temple was in existence since at
least 1958. Ex.PW-3/E is the statement dated
27.7.1993 of none other than late Shri Harphool
Singh, the father of the plaintiff. He had deposed
that about 16 to 17 years before making the said
statement he constructed a temple in the suit
property. Since then he had been residing in the
temple and the people of the locality visit the
temple for puja.”
The issue of public dedication of a temple has to be

considered with reference to the origin of the temple; the
manner in which its affairs are managed; the nature and extent
of the gifts received by it; the right exercised by the devotees
worshiping therein and the consciousness of those who
manage the temple and the devotees.
19.

In view of the testimony of the witnesses of the

plaintiffs and in particular PW-3 as also the documentary
evidence being Ex.PW-3/C, PW-3/D, PW-3/F and PW-3/G and in
particular testimony of Harphool Singh recorded by the
Revenue Authorities on 27.7.1993 being Ex.PW-3/E, finding
returned by the learned Trial Judge and as affirmed by the
learned Appellate Judge is correct and is sustainable on the
basis of the evidence which was led by the parties.
20.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

21.

No costs.

November 13, 2007
dk-bainsla

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
page 6 of 6

