IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.(M) No.1981/2003
#
!

M/s.Bharat Nidhi Ltd.
........ Petitioner
through: Mr.Krishendu Datta, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Registrar of Companies
....... Respondent
through : Mr.Suresh Kait, Adv.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 12.09.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
A short point arises for consideration. Whether on the

allegations made in the complaint an actionable cause has been
disclosed?
2.

Complaint has been filed under Section 205-A(8) of the

Companies Act 1956 as it existed in the year 1988, the year in
which the complaint was filed.
3.

Gravement of the allegation is as averred in para 3 of

the complaint. The same reads as under:“3.
Though the default of the Provisions of
Section 205-A came to the notice during the
course of inspection under Section 209-A by an
officer of the Company Law Board, Department of
Company Affairs. It was observed during the

4.

course of inspection that the company had
declared dividend but did not transfer the amount
of dividend to Special Dividend Account in respect
of those dividends/warrants which had been
posted within the stipulated time i.e. 42 days but
had not been encashed due to some reason or the
other.
Thus by not transferring the amount
pertaining to such dividends/warrants to a special
account the company has committed default of
the aforesaid provisions of the Act. A show cause
notice for this non-compliance was issued to the
company on 7.7.84 (Annexed).
It is apparent, a fact not disputed by learned counsel

for the respondent, that the case of the prosecution against the
accused persons is of not transferring the amount of dividend to
Special Dividend Account.
5.

At the relevant point of time requirement of law

pertaining to transfer of amount of dividend to Unpaid Dividend
Account was as stipulated in sub-section (1) of Section 205-A of
the Companies Act 1956. The same read as under:-

6.

“205-A (1)
Where,
after
the
commencement of the Companies (Amendment)
Act, 1974, a dividend has been declared by a
company but has not been paid, or the warrant in
respect thereof has not been posted, within fortytwo days from the date of the declaration to any
shareholder entitled to the payment of the
dividend, the company shall, within seven days
from the date of expiry of the said period of fortytwo days, transfer the total amount of dividend
which remains unpaid or in relation to which no
dividend warrant has been posted within the said
period of forty-two days, to a special account to be
opened by the company in that behalf in any
scheduled bank to be called 'Unpaid Dividend
Account of ......... Company Limited/Company
(Private) Limited'.”
It would be relevant to note that with effect from

15.6.1998 by the Companies (Amendment) Act 1988 legal

provision was amended to read as under:-

7.

“205A.(1) Where, after the commencement of the
Companies (Amendment) Act, 1974, a dividend
has been declared by a company but has not
been paid, or claimed, within forty-two days from
the date of the declaration, to any shareholder
entitled to the payment of the dividend, the
company shall, within seven days from the date of
expiry of the said period of forty-two days,
transfer the total amount of dividend which
remains unpaid [or unclaimed] within the said
period of forty-two days, to a special account to
be opened by the company in that behalf in any
scheduled bank, to be called 'Unpaid Dividend
Account of ............ Company Limited/Company
(Private) Limited'.”
The issue pertaining to interpretation of Section 205-A

of the Companies Act is no longer res integra.
8.

Decision of the Supreme Court reported as 1970(1)

SCC 437 H.P.Gupta vs. Hiralal has concluded the issue.

It has

been held that dividend is paid either when it is paid in cash or
when a cheque or a warrant is

sent

through

post

at

the

registered address of the shareholder who is entitled to payment
thereof.
9.

Perusal of Section 205-A(1) of the Companies Act as it

existed prior to the amendment on 15.6.1988 reveals that
warrant in respect of a dividend has to be posted to the
shareholder within 42 days from the date of declaration of
dividend.
10.

The requirement of transfer of the Unpaid Dividend

Account was only when either dividend warrant was not posted
within 42 days to the shareholder or was not otherwise tendered.

11.

Warrants which may be not encashed and amount

continuing to be retained by the company was a serious lacuna
which stands addressed by the amendment incorporated on
15.6.1988.
12.

The words 'or the warrant in respect thereof has not

been posted' have been replaced by the words 'or claimed'.
13.

The effect of the amendment is that wherever dividend

remains unpaid or unclaimed within 42 days from the date of
declaration of the dividend then alone the said amount has to be
transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account. The amendment is
not retrospective.
14.

From a perusal of the complaint, (refer para 4), it is

apparent that the complaint relates to the balance-sheet of the
company as of 31.3.1981.
15.

The petition is accordingly allowed.

The impugned

complaint and the order summoning the petitioner to face trial
are quashed.
16.

No costs.

September 12, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

