IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.2207/2004
#
!

Rama Beri & Anr.
through:

........ Petitioners
Mr.R.N.Mittal, Senior Advocate with
Mr.Puneet Mittal and
Mr.Pawan Kumar Mittal
with petitioner No.2 in person.
VERSUS

$
^

State

....... Respondent
through : Mr.Ashok Arora for the complainant
with complainant in person.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 12.10.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Prayer made in the petition is as under:'(a) delete/modify the observations made in the
order dated 21.08.2004, reproduced herein below
and the same may be treated as non-est in the
eyes of law;
“During reconciliation proceedings, it was
stated by the husband that he was willing to
pay Rs.10,000/- p.m. for the bringing up and
schooling of both children. He was also
prepared to pay maintenance of the equal
amount to the wife. He stated that he had

2.

already deposited Rs.1 lakh each in the
name of children by way of FDR and he
would further make fixed deposit of Rs.4 lacs
each in the name of his children. He has
also agreed to pay a sum of Rs.10 lacs to the
wife, without prejudice to the rights and
claims of istridhan and dowry articles etc.
which shall be subject to adjudication by the
Court of competent jurisdiction. Wife has
also agreed that husband would be at liberty
to meet the children whenever he comes to
Delhi and desires to meet them. He may
take the children on the last weekend of the
month to Dehradun and leave them back to
her on the next working day. Whenever,
there are long vacations of the children,
husband may take the children with him to
Dehradun for a period of 2 weeks during
summer vacations and for one week during
winter vacations. Husband and wife both
have volunteered to above arrangements.”'
The said observations are a part of an order passed by

the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi granting anticipatory
bail in FIR No.263/04 under Section 498-A/406/34 IPC PS K.M.Pur
to the petitioner.
3.

At the outset it may be noted that the stated voluntary

arrangement noted in the paragraphs in the order dated
21.8.2004, deletion whereof has been prayed for, is not a
condition of the anticipatory bail granted to the petitioner.
4.

It may further be noted that for non-compliance of the

stated voluntary arrangement as reproduced in the order dated
21.8.2004,

the

complainant

(wife)

filed

an

application

for

cancellation of the bail granted to the petitioner. The said request
of hers was declined.

Application filed by her was dismissed.

Thus, for all practical purposes, petitioner stands freed from the
rigours of the observations, deletion whereof has been prayed for
from the order dated 21.8.2004.
5.

However, learned senior counsel for the petitioner

urges that the observations are coming in the way of the
petitioner in other proceedings initiated by the wife against the
petitioner. It is urged that the wife is using the said observations
to urge that they reflect a settlement between the parties before
the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi.
6.

Opposing the prayer made in the petition, learned

counsel for the respondent states that the observations in the
order dated 21.8.2004 are in fact a consent agreement between
the parties and indeed, learned Judge has recorded in the
concluding sentence of the paragraph that the husband and the
wife have both volunteered to the above arrangement. Counsel
urges that if petitioner had any grievance pertaining to the factual
observations made by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
petitioner ought to have filed an application before the learned
Additional Sessions Judge.
7.

Learned counsel further submits that as recorded by

the learned Additional Sessions Judge in the order dated
21.8.2004, chamber hearings were held to try and effect a
reconciliation.
settlement.

Attempts were made to find some amicable

Counsel urges that what has been recorded in the

order dated 21.8.2004, deletion whereof is sought, is nothing but
the agreed settlement between the parties.
8.

In the rejoinder, learned counsel for the petitioner

points out that as pleaded in the petition, the terms which have
been recorded as a part of the settlement were proposed by the
petitioner provided the complainant agreed to a divorce by
mutual consent. Counsel states that it was improper on the part
of the learned Additional Sessions Judge to have recorded what
transpired during reconciliation proceedings as if the same
reflected a voluntary agreement between the parties.
9.
noted

Having considered the rival submissions, it may be
that

in

the

decision

dated

23.8.2007

in

Crl.M.C.

No.3920/2003 titled 'Anupam Sharma vs. NCT of Delhi & Anr.' this
Court had an opportunity to consider whether Courts while
deciding applications for anticipatory bail or bail by the in-laws in
a complaint filed by a estranged wife should or should not
encourage settlement.

The view taken was that dispute being

essentially a matrimonial dispute, every attempt has to be made

to try and find an agreed solution so that multifarious litigations
between the parties is avoided.
10.

To that extent, the attempt by the learned Additional

Sessions Judge to find an amicable solution to the problem is a
laudable step.
11.

However, care has to be taken not to record what

transpired during chamber hearings until and unless a clear
consent emerges.

Further, if clear consent emerges, the same

has to be expressed with clarity in the order, lest the order
becomes a fertile ground for further litigation.
12.

In the order dated 21.8.2004 in the paragraph

immediate prior to the paragraph in question, exemption whereof
has been prayed for, learned Additional Sessions Judge has
himself recorded as under:“From the reconciliation proceedings held by the
court in the chamer, it appears that parties are not
in a mood to patch up their differences and live
together. Husband has his own conditions for wife
and wife has her own apprehensions about her
welfare and welfare of her children. Both parties
belong to wealthy and fortune families and have
spent lavishly on the marriage, reception,
honeymoon etc. Husband family owns properties
in Dehradun and other places. Wife's parents are
also rich persons. Both parties have engaged
reputed Advocates for their cases.”
13.

It is thus apparent that the learned Additional Sessions

Judge has himself recorded that the chamber hearings attempted
at arriving an amicable settlement did not fructify.
14.

In that view of the matter, prima facie, learned

Additional Sessions Judge should not have recorded what
transpired during reconciliation proceedings much less as a
voluntary arrangement between the parties.
15.

Needless to state, a voluntary arrangement has to

have definite and well-defined contours evidencing that parties
have agreed to bury the hatchet on said agreed terms being
complied with.
16.

In this context, it becomes relevant that the learned

Additional Sessions Judge has himself consciously not made as a
condition of bail the so-called voluntary arrangement between the
parties.
17.

Since the contours of the so-called arrangement are

neither well-defined nor crystallized and a formal resolution of the
dispute did not take place between the parties before the learned
Additional Sessions Judge and since the stated consent terms
have not been made a condition of the bail granted to the
petitioner, the instant petition needs to be disposed of with
declaratory observation that nothing stated in the order dated
21.8.2004 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi

would be construed as an agreement between the parties for the
reason the order itself reveals that an incohate settlement took
place.
18.

The petition is accordingly disposed of declaring that

nothing recorded by the learned Additional Sessions Judge in the
order dated 21.8.2004 shall be construed in any proceedings as
evidencing an agreed settlement between the parties.
19.

No costs.

October 12, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

