IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.2944/2004
#
!

Shri Balaji Hospital Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.
...
Petitioners
through: Mr.Ranjeet Singh, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Shri Om Prakash Khatri
...
Respondent
through: Mr.Ajay Kumar and
Mr.Praveen Dabas, Advs.
RESERVED ON: 08.08.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 17.08.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioners Balaji Hospital Pvt. Ltd. and Dr.P.K.Jain, a

consultant surgeon with said hospital pray that complaint
No.39/2001 under Section 304-A read with Section 34 of the
Indian Penal Code be quashed.
2.

Petitioners have been summoned by the learned

Metropolitan Magistrate in a complaint filed by Om Prakash
Khatri under Section 190 read with Section 200 Cr.P.C. 1973.
3.

Undisputed

Crl.M.C. No.2944/04

facts

are

that

the mother of

the

Pg.No.1 of 5

complainant was admitted at Balaji Hospital Pvt. Ltd. i.e.
petitioner No.1 for gall bladder surgery. On 14.1.2003, the gall
bladder was removed.

Surgery was conducted by petitioner

No.2. The patient was discharged on 22.1.2003. It is also not
in dispute that when the gall bladder was removed it was full of
large stones and had pus accumulated within it.

The gall

bladder was sent to a pathologist for an opinion whether it was
cancerous.
4.

Hereinafter, parties are at variance as to what

happened. Whereas the complainant says that the petitioners
sent the gall bladder to the path-lab. Petitioners allege that the
gall bladder was handed over to the complainant and he
delivered the same to the path-lab and it was his responsibility
to collect the report and take necessary follow up measure.
5.

As per the complainant, his mother continued to

complain of abdominal pain.

On 11.3.2003, due to acute

abdominal pain she was taken to Jaipur Golden Hospital. The
attending doctor admitted the mother of the complainant. She
was diagnosed as suffering from cancer which had spread in
the stomach cavity.

The doctor treating the mother of the

complainant opined that there was zero chance of recovery.
Mother of the complainant died on 23.3.2003.
6.

According to the complainant had this fact been

Crl.M.C. No.2944/04

Pg.No.2 of 5

disclosed in the month of January 2003, as per opinion of the
doctors at Jaipur Golden Hospital mother of the complainant
could have been saved.
7.

The rival versions of the petitioners is that after the

surgery on the mother of the complainant on 14.1.2003 the gall
bladder was handed over to the complainant with a direction
that he should deliver the same at Dr.Verma's Diagnostic Clinic
at Janakpuri to test whether the same was cancerous. That the
complainant handed over the gall bladder at said diagnostic
centre but was negligent in not obtaining a report from the
diagnostic centre.
8.

Thus, the petitioners washed their hands of the

charge of negligence.
9.

It has not been disputed by the petitioners that the

report of the pathologist pertaining to the gall bladder of the
mother of the complainant records that the same was
cancerous.
10.

Whether complainant delivered the gall bladder of

his mother to the diagnostic centre on 14.1.2003 or whether
petitioners delivered the same to the diagnostic centre is a
question of fact. It needs evidence before it can be resolved.
Evidence can come on record only when trial is conducted.
11.

That apart, it is not in dispute that when removed

Crl.M.C. No.2944/04

Pg.No.3 of 5

after surgery by petitioner No.2, gall bladder was full of stones
and had accumulated pus.

There was a possibility that the

same was cancerous. That is why petitioner No.2 required the
gall bladder to be sent to a pathologist for a detailed analysis.
Assuming he handed over the gall bladder to the complainant
i.e. the son of the patient to be delivered to the pathological
laboratory, was it not the duty of petitioner No.2 to enquire and
ensure that the report was received from the path lab? It would
certainly need trial to decide whether it was the duty of the
surgeon who performed the operation to ensure that report of a
pathologist was obtained to rule out the possibility of the gall
bladder being cancerous, for the reason, if it was found to be
cancerous, further treatment would have been necessary. This
issue would require expert evidence to be led as to how a
doctor should have ordinarily conducted himself in view of the
physical condition of the gall bladder which was noted by him
after surgery was performed.
12.

Looked at from any angle, questions which arise for

consideration cannot be decided without evidence being led.
13.

As regards the complaint, suffice would it be to note

that it was not the case of the petitioners that the same lacks in
material averments constituting a charge under Section 304-A
IPC.
Crl.M.C. No.2944/04

Pg.No.4 of 5

14.

The petition is dismissed.

15.

Trial Court record be returned forthwith.

August 17, 2007
dk

Crl.M.C. No.2944/04

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Pg.No.5 of 5

