IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C.No.1542/2002
#
!

Satya Narain
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr. D.C.Mathur, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Mohit Mathur, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Local Health Authority & Anr.
........
Respondents
through: Mr. Anil Soni, Advocate for State.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 17.08.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Petitioner Satya Narain Gupta prays that order dated

27.9.1999 as also order dated 1.3.2002 passed by the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate be quashed.
2.

Vide order dated 27.9.1999, petitioner has been

summoned to face trial in a complaint filed under Section 16 of
the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954. Vide order dated
1.3.2002 learned MM has dismissed an application filed by the
petitioner seeking recall of the summoning order. In view of the

decision of the Supreme Court in Adalat Prasad Vs. Rooplal Jindal
& Ors. (2004) 7 SCC 338 , it was conceded by learned counsel
that the learned Metropolitan Magistrate could not recall the
summoning order and hence learned counsel for the parties
conceded that issue should be decided with reference to the
summoning order.
3.

Order dated 27.9.1999 is a cryptic order. It reads as

under:“Certificate received from Director CFL Colcotta.
Perused. Contents revealed to both sides. Sample has
been found adulterated at the accused by summoned.”
4.

Though, order dated 1.3.2002 need not be discussed,

but as it would be relevant, it may be noted that reason why
petitioner's application seeking recall of the summoning order was
dismissed is a finding by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate that
in case no nomination was made under Section 17 of the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954 with the local health
authority at Ghaziabad, being the managing partner of accused
no.2 petitioner would be liable if complaint ultimately succeeded.
5.

There are three accused in the complaint.

Accused

No.1 is Mr. Khalik Hasan. Accused No.2 is M/s Swastik Fragrances,
a partnership firm. Accused No.3 is the petitioner.

6.

A sample of Pan Masala manufactured by accused No.

2 was lifted from a depot in Delhi. Khalik Hasan was the depot
incharge.

After following the process of lifting the sample and

sealing the same, on being tested, sample failing, it was stated in
the complaint that as product was manufactured by M/s Swastik
Fragrances and as petitioner was the managing partner of the
partnership firm i.e. accused No.2, the partnership firm, the depot
incharge at Delhi and the petitioner were liable to be punished for
selling adulterated pan masala.
7.

There is no assertion in the complaint that the

complainant made enquiry from the local health authority at
Ghaziabad, the place of manufacture of pan masala, to find out
whether any nomination was made under Section 17 of the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954.
8.

It is not disputed by learned counsel for the State that

one Vishwanath Ajmera was nominated on 23.2.1998 by the firm
as the person responsible to prevent commission of offence by
accused No.2 under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954.
It is also not in dispute that the sample was lifted on 1.5.1998.
9.

Thus, in view of the authoritative pronouncement by

the Supreme Court in the decision reported as 1992 CRL.L.J. 1523
R.Banerjee Vs. H.D.Dubey & Ors., the petition must succeed for

the reason, admittedly there are no averments in the complaint
the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of the petitioner.
10.

Suffice would it be to record that in R.Banerjee's case

(Supra), it has been held that the person nominated under Section
17 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954 would be
responsible if offence is committed by a company (as per
explanation to Section 17 company includes a firm or an
association of individuals).

It was further held that apart from

persons so nominated, if a Manager, Secretary or Director of a
company is sought to be made liable, there have to be specific
averments in the complaint that the offence was committed with
the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on
the part of the said person.
11.

Thus, if a partner of a firm is held accountable and

there is a nomination under Section 17 by the firm, averments
have to be made to justify accountability of the partner(s).
12.

The petition is allowed.

13.

Order dated 27.9.1999 summoning the petitioner to

face trial in the complaint in question is quashed.
August 17, 2007
mm

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

