IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No. 82/2007
#
!

Mr. Suraj Bhan
through:

........
Appellant
Mr. Harish K. Mehra, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

State & Ors.
through:

........
Respondents
Mr. S.M.Chopra, Advocate for
respondents 2 to 4.

RESERVED ON: 7.01.2008
%

DATE OF DECISION: 10.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated

30.11.2006 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi
whereby petition filed by the appellant under Section 276 of the
Indian Succession Act 1925 seeking probate of the will dated
10.12.1992 purported to have been executed by Late Sh. Prabhu
Singh in favour of the appellant was dismissed.
2.

Late Sh. Prabhu Singh (hereinafter referred to as the

deceased) who died on 28.12.1992 was survived by his wife Smt.
FAO No.82/2007

page 1 of 26

Asarfi (respondent No.2), two sons namely Suraj Bhan (appellant),
Jai Bhagwan (respondent No.3) and a married daughter Smt.
Patasso (respondent No.4).
3.

Suraj Bhan i.e. appellant herein filed a petition under

Section 276 of the Indian Succession Act 1925 seeking probate of
the will purported to have been executed by the deceased on 10th
December 1992.
4.

As per the said will the deceased has bequeathed

following movable and immovable properties in favour of Suraj
Bhan to the exclusion of his other legal heirs:A

Plot ad measuring 120 square yards and bearing

Municipal No.60, Khasra No.32/6 and 32/7, Village Matiala, New
Delhi.
B

Compensation of one killa which shall be granted in

respect of agricultural land ad measuring 4 bighas and 8 biswas
and situated in Khasra No.57/7, Revenue Estate, Village Matiala,
New Delhi. (It has been mentioned in the will that compensation
of one killa in respect of same agricultural land has already been
received by younger son of the deceased i.e. Jai Bhagwan).
C

Amount lying deposited in the saving account of the

deceased with the Oriental Bank, Naraina.
5.

The will in question Ex. PW-1/1 is a computer typed

document and consists of a single sheet of paper. It has been

FAO No.82/2007

page 2 of 26

typed in the English language. Towards the bottom of the sheet
at the right corner a thumb impression purported to have been
affixed by the deceased is affixed.
6.

The will Ex. PW-1/1 is a notarized and unregistered

document.
7.

The will in question has been witnessed by one Sh.

Man Singh and one Sh. Syed Ahmed.
8.

The other legal heirs of the deceased i.e. his widow

Asarfi, son Jai Bhagwan and daughter Patasso has opposed the
petition for grant of probate.
9.

In the objections to the petition filed by the appellant

respondents has pleaded that the will Ex. PW-1/1 is a forged and
fabricated document. That the deceased never executed a will in
favour of the appellant. That the deceased during his life time
was living under the care and guidance of respondents No. 2 and
3. That the relations between the deceased and appellant were
strained evidenced by the fact that the appellant did not
participate in the last rites of the deceased.
10.

In the reply to the objections filed by the respondents,

appellant denied that during his life time the deceased was living
under the care and guidance of respondents No.2 and 3 or that
the relations between him and deceased was strained.

It is

necessary to note following portion of the reply filed by the

FAO No.82/2007

page 3 of 26

appellant:“4. .......It is pertinent to mention here that the
deceased before his death used to live separately
at his own house and the petitioner took best
possible care and provided all the necessary
treatment to his deceased father. It is reiterated
that the deceased Sh. Prabhu Singh, before his
death, executed a will in favour of the petitioner.
7.
That para 7 of the objections is wrong false
and denied except to the extent that the petitioner
could not be present at the time of cremation of the
deceased Sh. Prabhu Singh as he was on duty but
the other family members of the petitioner were
present at the time of cremation and the petitioner
participated in the other last rites of the deceased
Sh. Prabhu Singh. It is vehemently denied that the
petitioner refused to take care of his father or that
he refused to see him after his death.”
11.

It is relevant to note that it was only pleaded by the

appellant that he used to look after the deceased but it has
nowhere been pleaded that the deceased used to live with the
appellant.
12.

To prove the genuineness of the will Ex. PW-1/1

appellant examined himself as PW-1 and the two attesting
witnesses to the will i.e. Syed Ahmad and Man Singh as PW-2 and
PW-3 respectively.
13.

Appellant in his testimony as PW-1 deposed that:-

A

Will Ex. PW-1/1 was executed by the deceased at the

house where deceased was residing.
B

Man Singh and Syed Ahmad has witnessed the due

execution of the will Ex. PW-1/1.
FAO No.82/2007

page 4 of 26

C

He was present when the will Ex. PW-1/1 was executed

by the deceased.
D

Before his death deceased used to live with him.

E

During

his

life

time

deceased

never

lived

with

respondent No. 2 and 3.
F

He, the deceased and the two attesting witnesses to

the will Ex. PW-1/1 had no knowledge of English language.
14.

As regards preparation and notarization of the will Ex.

PW-1/1 appellant deposed as under:“The will was prepared on 10.12.92. I and Sayed
Ahemd went to get the will prepared. We got
prepared the will from the court. We came to court
by bus. Will was prepared at home on a plain paper
and the same was typed in court.......... The stamps
on the will of Notary Public were put in my presence
after putting of thumb impression at home. Man
Singh signed on the will at home. One typist typed
the will.”
15.

When questioned in cross examination as to why he

did not attend the cremation of the deceased appellant deposed
as under:“I was in Delhi when my father expired. I am the
elder son of my father. It is correct that I have not
given light as per rituals to the dead body of my
father as I was not there.”
16.

It is relevant to note that the appellant has nowhere

deposed as to in what circumstances the will Ex. PW-1/1 came
into his possession. Did the deceased ask the appellant to keep
the will Ex. PW-1/1 in his possession?
FAO No.82/2007

page 5 of 26

17.

Syed Ahmed in his testimony as PW-2 deposed that

the deceased was his friend.
18.

As regards the preparation and notarization of the will

Ex.PW-1/1 Syed Ahmed deposed that a draft of the will was first
prepared in Hindi as per the instructions of the at the residence of
the deceased.

(Who prepared the draft in Hindi is not

forthcoming from the testimony of PW-2). That thereafter he and
appellant went to the court where the draft scribed in Hindi was
got typed by a typist in English language.

Thereafter they

returned to the residence of the deceased with the typed will.
That he and appellant explained contents of the typed will to the
deceased. Thereafter deceased affixed his thumb impression on
the typed will. Thereafter he and Man Singh signed on the will as
an attesting witness. That after execution and attestation of the
will Ex. PW-1/1 he and appellant again went to the court where
the will was got notarized from a Notary Public.
19.

It is necessary to note following portion of the

testimony of PW-2:“I have no knowledge of English language....... The
contents of the will also gives half share of the old
properties which also includes a vehicle........ I and
Suraj Bhan explained Prabhu Singh regarding the
contents of the will.”
20.

Man Singh in his testimony as PW-3 deposed that the

deceased was his elder brother.

FAO No.82/2007

That the deceased affixed his

page 6 of 26

thumb impression on the will Ex. PW-1/1 in his presence. That he
signed the will Ex. PW-1/1 in the presence of the deceased as also
in the presence of the other attesting witness Syed Ahmed. That
before the deceased signed the will contents of the will were
explained to the deceased in Hindi. That the deceased was ill for
a period prior to 2-3 years before his death. That the deceased
used to stay for 10 days with his elder son Suraj Bhan and for the
next 10 days with his other son Jai Bhagwan.
21.

It is relevant to note that it is not forthcoming from the

testimonies of both the attesting witnesses as to in what
circumstances they happened to become the attesting witnesses
to the will. Who ask them to attest the will? When were they
asked to attest the will?
22.

On behalf of the respondents Jai Bhagwan respondent

No.4, one Sh. Jile Singh (an acquaintance of the family of the
deceased) and Smt. Asarfi respondent No.2 were examined as
RW-1, RW-2 and RW-3 respectively.
23.

Jai Bhagwan and Asarfi in their testimony as RW-1 and

RW-3 respectively deposed on the lines of the objections filed by
them.

Jai Bhagwan also deposed that the will Ex. PW-1/1 is a

forged and fabricated document inasmuch as because of the ill
health it was not possible for the deceased to have executed the
will Ex. PW-1/1.

FAO No.82/2007

That the deceased died in a hospital.

That

page 7 of 26

before being hospitalized deceased was residing with him.
24.

Jile Singh in his testimony as RW-2 deposed that he

had known family of the deceased since a long time as he was
residing in the same village as that of the family of the deceased.
He deposed that the relations between the deceased and
appellant were strained.
25.

After considering the case in its entirety vide order

dated 30.11.2006 learned Additional District Judge has held that
the appellant failed to prove that the will Ex. PW-1/1 is a genuine
document and that it was last legal and valid testament of the
deceased and thus dismissed the petition filed by the appellant
under Section 276 of the Indian Succession Act 1925. Relevant
portion of the decision of the learned Trial Court reads as under:“Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
deals with proof of execution of document
required by law to be attested. This section lays
down that if the deed sought to be proved is a
document required by law to be attested and if
there by an attesting witness alive and subject to
process of the Court and capable of giving
evidence, he must be called to prove execution.
Execution consists in signing a document written
out, read over and understood and to go through
the formalities necessary for the validity of legal
act.
Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act gives
meaning of attestation as under:
Section 63- Execution of unprivileged
wills - Every testator, not being a soldier
employed in an expedition or engaged
in actual warfare, (or an airman so
FAO No.82/2007

page 8 of 26

employed or engaged,) or a mariner at
sea, shall execute his Will according to
the following rules:(a) The testator shall sign or shall affix
his mark to the Will, or it shall be
signed by some other person in his
presence and by his direction.
(b) The signature or mark of the
testator, or the signature of the person
signing for him,shall be so placed that
it shall appear that it was intended
thereby to give effect to the writing as
a Will.
(c) The Will shall be attested by two or
more witnesses, each of whom has
seen the testator sign or affix his mark
to the Will or has seen some other
person sign the Will, in the presence
and by the direction of the testator, or
has received from the testator a
personal acknowledgement of his
signature or mark, or of the signature
of such other person; and each of the
witnesses shall sign the Will in the
presence of the testator, but it shall not
be necessary that more than one
witness be present at the same time,
and no particular form of attestation
shall be necessary.
It is clear from the definition that the attesting
witness must state that each of the two witnesses
had seen the executor sign or affix his mark to
the instrument or has seen some other persons
sign the instrument in the presence and by the
direction of the executant. The witness should
further state that each of the attesting witnesses
signed the instrument in the presence and by the
direction of the executant. The witness should
further stated that each of the attesting witnesses
signed the instrument in the presence of the
executant.
These are the ingredients of the
FAO No.82/2007

page 9 of 26

attestation and they have to be proved by the
witnesses. The word 'execution' in Section 63
includes attestation as required by law.
In other words, the onus on the propounder can
be taken to be discharged on proof of the
essential facts indicated above.
Registration of the will does not dispense with the
need of proving, execution and attestation of a
document which is required by law to be proved
in the manner as provided in Section 68 of the
Evidence Act.
The onus is discharged by the propounder
adducing prima facie evidence providing the
competence of the testator and execution of the
will in the manner contemplated by law. In such
circumstances, the onus shift to the contestant
opposing the will to bring material on record
meeting such prima facie cases in which event
the onus shift back on the propounder to satisfy
the court affirmatively that the testator did know
well the contents of the will and in sound
disposing capacity executed the same.
In this case, prima facie both the attesting
witnesses deposed that the will was thumb
marked by the testator in their presence and they
both signed in the presence of each other. But
there are certain suspicious circumstances in
which this will was executed. PW-3 deposed that
testator was sick for about 2-3 years prior to the
execution of this will. He died in a hospital after
fifteen days of the execution of the will. There is
no documentary proof on record that for how
many days deceased remained admitted in the
hospital. He was an old man. This is the case in
which all the three witnesses examined on behalf
of the petitioner deposed that the will was
prepared at home. Then it was taken to the court
by the petitioner and Sayed Ahmed where it was
got typed in English. They came back with the
will.
It was executed in the house of the
petitioner. Again petitioner and Sayed Ahmed
went back to the court and got is notarized. Draft
FAO No.82/2007

page 10 of 26

will is not on file. There is no evidence that who
scribed the will at home. PW-3 has deposed that
the original will was prepared in Hindi. It was got
typed in English from a typist by the petitioner
himself. Neither the petitioner nor the testator
could read and write English. Both the attesting
witnesses also do not understand English
language.
PW-3 deposed that the will was
explained to the testator in Hindi by the petitioner
himself.
The petitioner himself does not
understand English. There is no evidence that
who explained the contents of the will to the
testator in Hindi before obtaining his thumb mark
and if a document was thumb marked by the
testator at the instance of the petitioner who
himself is the sole beneficiary under this will, it
cannot be taken as proved to have been executed
with the free consent of the testator without any
pressure from any third party. It is the admitted
fact that PW-3 Man Singh is having strained
relations with the respondents and he appeared
as a witness in another civil suit also which was
pending between the petitioner and the
respondents. There is no evidence that the will
which is placed on record was prepared at the
instructions of the testator either by any typist or
by an advocate. It is an admitted case that the
testator did not go to the court to get the will
notarized. Notary public has not been examined
in this case. No particulars of the notary public
including his name is given on the will. Notarial
stamp of rupees three is affixed and the stamp
reads:
“attested
Notary Public, Delhi
10.12.1992.”
At one place it has the stamps of Chaudhary
D.S.Dalal, Notary Public, Delhi. It is the admitted
case of the petitioner that testator did not go to
the court. The will was got typed from the court.
It was brought to the house of the testator where
it was executed and then petitioner along with
Sayed Ahmed went to the court and got it
notarized. I do not know what was attested by
FAO No.82/2007

page 11 of 26

26.

the notary public because none of the signatory
of this document signed in his presence. Even
the testator did not sign in his presence. Without
seeing the testator the notary even affixed his
rubber stamp on the photograph. Considering the
fact that testator died after fifteen days of the
execution of the will in hospital and he was sick
for 2-3 years prior to his death and considering
the fact that neither the executor nor any of the
witness to the will understood English language
and it was got prepared by the petitioner who is
the sole beneficiary under this will, I hold that
petitioner has failed to prove it beyond suspicion
that the will Ex. PW1/A was executed by the
testator in his sound disposing mind without any
coercion or pressure from the petitioner.”
Aggrieved by the impugned order dated 30.11.2006

passed by the learned Additional District Judge appellant has filed
the present appeal.
27.

In support of the appeal following two grounds have

been urged by the appellant:A

That

by

leading

the

evidence

of

two

attesting

witnesses to the will Ex. PW-1/1 the appellant discharged the
onus of proving the will and that the onus shifted upon the
objectors/respondents to disprove the will which they failed to
discharge.

That

the

learned

Trial

Court

ignored

that

objectors/respondents failed to establish that the will Ex. PW-1/1
is a forged and fabricated document.
B

That Smt. Asarfi in her testimony as RW-3 turned

hostile as she did not depose on the lines of the case projected
by the objectors in the objections filed by them. That the learned

FAO No.82/2007

page 12 of 26

trial court failed to appreciate this aspect of the case.
28.

In the decision reported as Smt Jaswant Kaur v Smt

Amrit Kaur AIR 1977 SC 74 the Supreme Court has described the
nature and standard of evidence required to prove a Will. In para
10 of the decision, the Supreme Court has observed as under:“10. There is a long line of decisions bearing on the
nature and standard of evidence required to prove a
will. Those decisions have been reviewed in an
elaborate judgment of this Court in R. Venkatachala
Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma and Ors. [1959] Supp. 1
S.C.R.
426.
The
Court,
speaking
through
Gajendragadkar J., laid down in that case the following
propositions:1. Stated generally, a will has to be proved
like any other document, the test to be
applied being the usual test of the
satisfaction of the prudent mind in such
matters. As in the case of proof of other
documents, so in the case of proof of wills,
one
cannot
insist
on
proof
with
mathematical certainty.
2. Since Section 63 of the Succession Act
requires a will to be attested, it cannot be
used as evidence until, as required by
Section 63 of the Evidence Act, one
attesting witness at least has been called
for the purpose of proving its execution, if
there be an attesting witness alive and
subject to the process of the court and
capable of giving evidence.
3. Unlike other documents, the will speaks
from the death of the testator and therefore
the maker of the will is never available for
deposing as to the circumstances in which
the will came to be executed. This aspect
introduces an element of solemnity in the
decision of the question whether the
document propounded is proved to be the
FAO No.82/2007

page 13 of 26

last will and testament of the testator.
Normally, the onus which lies on the
propounder can be taken to be discharged
on proof of the essential facts which go into
the making of the will.
4. Cases in which the execution of the will is
surrounded by suspicious circumstances
stand on a different footing. A shaky
signature, a feeble mind, an unfair and
unjust disposition of property, the propounder himself taking a leading part in the
making of the will under which he receives
a substantial benefit and such other
circumstances raise suspicion about the
execution of the will. That suspicion cannot
be removed by the mere assertion of the
pro-pounder that the will bears the
signature of the testator or that the testator
was in a sound and disposing state of mind
and memory at the time when the will was
made, or that those like the wife and
children of the testator who would normally
receive their due share in his estate were
disinherited because the testator might
have had his own reasons for excluding
them.
The
presence
of
suspicious
circumstances makes the initial onus
heavier and therefore, in cases where the
circumstances
attendant
upon
the
execution of the will excite the suspicion of
the court, the propounder must remove all
legitimate suspicions before the document
can be accepted as the last will of the
testator.
5. It is in connection with wills, the
execution of which is surrounded by
suspicious circumstance that the test of
satisfaction of the judicial conscience has
been evolved. That test emphasies that in
determining the question as to whether an
instrument produced before the court is the
last will of the testator, the court is called
upon to decide a solemn question and by
reason of suspicious circumstances the
FAO No.82/2007

page 14 of 26

court has to be satisfied fully that the will
has been validly executed by the testator.
6. If a caveator alleges fraud, undue
influence, coercion etc. in regard to the
execution of the will, such pleas have to be
proved by him, but even in the absence of
such
pleas,
the
very
circumstances
surrounding the execution of the will may
raise a doubt as to whether the testator was
acting of his own free will. And then it is a
part of the initial onus of the propounder to
remove all reasonable doubts in the
matter.”(underlining emphasised)
29.

Judgment of this court in the decision reported as

Vidya Sagar Soni Vs. State & Ors. AIR 2006 Delhi 354 extensively
dealt with the legal burden of proof when a will is propounded.
What would constitute suspicious circumstances and what form
of affirmative proof should be sought by the court to satisfy the
judicial conscience that the document propounded is the last
legal and valid testament. I need not repeat. Principles culled
out in paras 5 to 21 of the said decision are as under:“5. Section 2(h) of the Indian Succession Act,
1925 defines a will to mean the legal declaration
of the intention of a testator with respect to his
property which he desires to be carried into effect
after his death.
6.
The legal burden to prove due execution
always lies upon the person propounding a will.
The propounder must satisfy the judicial
conscience of the court that the instrument so
propounded is the last will of a free and capable
testator.
7.
A will is a solemn document, being written
by a person who is dead and who cannot be
FAO No.82/2007

page 15 of 26

called in evidence to testify about the due
execution of the will. It is the living who have to
establish the will. It naturally throws a heavy
burden on the court to satisfy its judicial
conscience that the burden of proof of due
execution is fully discharged and every suspicious
circumstance explained.
8.
No specific standard of proof can be
enunciated which must be applicable to all the
cases.
Every case depends upon its own
circumstances. Apart from other proof, conduct
of parties is very material and has considerable
bearing on evidence as to the genuineness of the
will which is propounded. Courts have to be
vigilant and zealous in examining evidence.
Rules relating to proof of wills are not rules of
Laws but are rules of prudence. Normally, a will
is executed by a person where he desirous, to
either alter the normal rule of succession, or
where he desirous to settle his estate in a
particular manner amongst the legal heirs.
Therefore, though to be kept in mind, as to what
is the nature of bequest too much importance
cannot be attached to the disproportionate nature
of a bequest. However, as observed in AIR 1995
SC 1684, Rabindra Nath Mukherjee and Anr.
Vs. Panchanan Banerjee (dead) by LRs,
disproportionate nature of a bequest is no doubt a
suspicious circumstance to be kept in mind, but,
being a mere suspicion, it is capable of being
dispelled by other evidence to show voluntary
character of the document.
9.
Therefore, the first rule to appreciate
evidence is to peruse the will. Normally, if there
is rationality in a will, a presumption arises about
due execution. Of course, being a presumption, it
is rebuttable.
10. As observed in AIR 1962 Punjab 196 Smt.
Kamla Devi Vs. Kishori Lal Labhu Ram and
Ors., the omission of a close relation from the
bounty of a testator raises a presumption in
favour of some undue influence. The probative
force of such a testament rises and falls in inverse
FAO No.82/2007

page 16 of 26

ratio to its unreasonableness.
11. The more unreasonable an instrument is,
the less probative value it carries. Where the
terms of a will are unusual and the evidence of
testamentary capacity doubtful, or due execution
doubtful, the vigilance of the Court will be roused
and before pronouncing in favour of the will, the
court
would
microscopically
examine
the
evidence to be satisfied beyond all reasonable
doubt that the testator was fully conversant of
the contents and executed the will fully aware of
what he was doing.
12. Expanding on the care and caution to be
adopted by courts, and presumptions to be
raised, in the decision reported as (1864) 3 Sw
& Tr. 431 In The Goods of Geale, it was opined
that where a person is illiterate or semi literate or
the will is in a language not spoken or understood
by the executor, the court would require evidence
to affirmatively establish that the testator
understood and approved all the contents of the
will.
13. This affirmative proof of the testator's
knowledge and approval must be strong enough
to
satisfy
the
court,
in
the
particular
circumstances, that the will was duly executed.
14. One form of affirmative proof is to establish
that the will was read over by, or to, the testator
when he executed it. If a testator merely cats his
eye over the will, this may not be sufficient. [see
1971 P.62 Re Moris). In the report published as
(1867) 1 P.D.359 Goodacr Vs. Smith, it was
held that another form of affirmative proof is to
establish that the testator gave instructions for
his will and that the will was drafted in
accordance with those instructions.
15. Courts have to evaluate evidence pertaining
to the circumstances under which the will was
prepared. If a will is prepared and executed
under circumstances which raise a well grounded
suspicion that the executor did not express his
FAO No.82/2007

page 17 of 26

mind under the will, probate would not be granted
unless that suspicion is removed.
16. As held in the report published as (1838) 2
Moo P.C. 480 Barry Vs. Butlin, a classic
instance of suspicious circumstances is where the
will was prepared by a person who took a
substantial benefit under it. Another instance is
as opined in the report published as (1890) 63
LT 465 Brown Vs. Fisher
where a person
taking benefit under the will has an active role to
play in the execution of the will.
17. A word of caution. Circumstances can only
raise a suspicion if they are circumstances
attending, or at least relevant to the preparation
and execution of the will itself.
18. How the legal heirs acted and how and when
a will was propounded after the death of the
executor are also relevant to decide upon, where
the will is genuine or a created or a procured
document.
19. Another point that has to be considered is
about the improbability in the manner in which
the instrument is scripted. As observed in the
report published as AIR 1959 SC 443
H.Venkatachala
Iyengar
V.
B.N.
Thimmajamma & Ors., instance of suspicious
circumstances would be alleged signatures of the
testator being shaky and doubtful, condition of
the testator's mind being feeble and debilitated,
bequest being unnatural, improbable or unfair.
Apart from these infirmities, propounder taking a
prominent part in the execution of the will, more
so when substantial benefits flow to them are all
presumptive of the will not being duly executed
and or of suspicious circumstances.
20. Suspicious circumstances are a presumption
to hold against the will. Greater is the suspicion
more heavy would be the onus to be discharged
by he who propounds the will.
21.
FAO No.82/2007

Reference

to

satisfaction

of

judicial
page 18 of 26

conscience is a heritage inherited by court's since
time immemorial for the reason, as noted above,
a will is a solemn declaration as per which the
living have to carry out the wishes of a dead
person.”
30.

Thus from the aforenoted two judgments it is clear

that when the execution of a will is surrounded by suspicious
circumstances the initial onus upon the propounder to prove the
will is very heavy.
31.

As already noted in the instant case the Trial Court

has held that the execution of the will Ex. PW-1/1 is surrounded
by suspicious circumstances.
32.

It has to be first seen whether the Trial Court has

rightly held that the execution of the will Ex. PW-1/1 is
surrounded by suspicious circumstances.
33.

It is an admitted fact that the deceased died within 20

days of the execution of the will Ex. PW-1/1. It has further come
in the testimony of Man Singh Ex. PW-3 that the deceased was ill
for a period of 2-3 years prior to his death. It is an admitted fact
that the will Ex. PW-1/1 was allegedly executed at the residence
of the deceased and that the deceased also did not go to the
court to get the will notarized. These three circumstances cast a
doubt upon the fact that the deceased was having a sound
disposing mind at the time when he executed the will Ex. PW-1/1.
34.

Appellant in his testimony as PW-1 has admitted that

FAO No.82/2007

page 19 of 26

he was present at the time when will Ex. PW-1/1 was executed by
the deceased. The testimonies of the appellant and the attesting
witnesses particularly that of Sayed Ahmed PW-2 show that the
appellant played an active role in the execution of the will Ex.
PW-1/1.
35.

Sub Para 4 of para 10 of the decision of the Supreme

Court in Jaswant Kaur's case (supra) clearly holds that the feeble
mind of the testator, the propounder himself taking a leading
part in the making of the will under which he receives a
substantial benefit are the circumstances which raise suspicion
about the due execution of the will.
36.

In such scenario when the execution of the will Ex.

PW-1/1 is fraught by the suspicious circumstances the question
arises whether the evidence of the attesting witnesses that the
will bears the signatures of the testator and that the testator was
in a sound and disposing state of mind and memory at the time
when the will was made is sufficient to establish the genuineness
of the will Ex. PW-1/1.
37.

The answer to the above question is to be found in sub

para 4 and sub para 5 of the para 10 of the decision of the
Supreme Court in Jaswant Kaur's case (supra).

Reading of the

aforenoted two paras make it clear that in cases where the
execution of the will is fraught by suspicious circumstances the

FAO No.82/2007

page 20 of 26

propounder of the will must remove all such suspicions by
leading positive evidence. In such cases the court scrutinizes the
evidence led by the propounder with a microscopic eye.
38.

A cumulative reading of the pleadings of the appellant

and the evidence led by him reveals following facts:A

Objectors/respondents

pleaded

that

the

relations

between the deceased and the appellant were strained. In order
to lend credence to their version objectors further pleaded that
the appellant did not participate in the last rites of the deceased.
To counter the version of the objectors appellant in the reply filed
by him relevant portion whereof has been noted in para 10 above
pleaded that he was unable to attend the cremation of the
deceased as he was on duty. In his testimony relevant portion as
been noted in para 15 he has deposed that the death of the
deceased had taken place in Delhi and that he was also present
in Delhi on the death of the deceased but he was unable to
attend the cremation of the deceased as he was not present
there. Why he was not present has not been explained by the
appellant. The ipxi dixi and evasive stand taken by the appellant
in his testimony strengthens the version of the objectors that the
relations between the deceased and appellant were strained.
B

Appellant and Sayed Ahmed have deposed that a draft

of the will was first prepared in Hindi as per the instructions of

FAO No.82/2007

page 21 of 26

the deceased. As noted in para 18 above who prepared the draft
of the will has not been explained by them in their respective
testimonies.

The omission of this necessary fact weakens the

case of the appellant.

(This fact has been noted by the Trial

Court).
C

Though a testator may inform some other person

about the execution of will but generally he keeps the will in safe
custody during his lifetime.

Appellant and Sayed Ahmed have

deposed that after the will was executed and attested they went
to the court to get the will notarized. As already noted in para 16
above neither appellant nor Sayed Ahmed have explained as to
in what circumstances the will was handed over to them by the
deceased. Had deceased himself given the will to the appellant?
The omission of this necessary fact weakens the case of the
appellant.
D

Appellant and Sayed Ahmed have deposed that they

took draft of the will to the court and that the same was got
typed in English language by a typist.

That thereafter they

returned to the residence of the deceased with the typed will and
explained the contents of the will to the deceased in Hindi as
deceased was having no knowledge of the English language.
Appellant and Sayed Ahmed have deposed in their respective
testimonies that they were having no knowledge of English

FAO No.82/2007

page 22 of 26

language. When they themselves did not know English language
how could they explain the contents of the will Ex. PW-1/1 which
was written in English language to the deceased remains a
mystery? (This fact has been noted by the Trial Court)
E

As already noted in para 21 above Sayed Ahmed and

Man Singh have not explained as to in what circumstances they
happened to attest the will Ex. PW-1/1.

The omission of this

necessary fact weakens the case of the appellant.
F

Sayed Ahmed in his testimony

relevant portion

whereof has been noted in para 19 above has deposed that in
the will Ex. PW-1/1 deceased has also bequeathed a vehicle. A
perusal of the will Ex. PW-1/1 reveals that the will nowhere talks
about a vehicle. This glaring defect in the testimony of Sayed
Ahmed discredits his testimony.
G

The appellant has deposed that during his lifetime the

deceased used to reside with him and that he never resided with
respondent No.2 or 3. However Man Singh (a witness on behalf
of the appellant) belied the version of the appellant by deposing
that deceased used to stay for 10 days with appellant and for the
next 10 days with respondent No.3.
H

In his testimony as PW-1 appellant has sought to

prove that during his lifetime the deceased used to reside with
him. However in the reply filed to the objections of the

FAO No.82/2007

page 23 of 26

respondents relevant portion whereof has been noted in para 10
above appellant has not clearly stated that the deceased used to
reside with him. The said vagueness in the pleading of the
appellant coupled with the testimony of PW-3 that deceased used
to reside with both appellant and respondent no.3 belies the
version of the appellant.
I

It is an admitted fact that the will Ex. PW-1/1 was

notarized by a Notary Public in the absence of the deceased and
Man Singh. How did a Notary Public who had never seen or met
deceased and Man Singh attest their signatures on the will Ex.
PW-1/1 remains a mystery?

(This fact has been noted by the

Trial Court).
J

Man Singh in his testimony as PW-3 has admitted that

the relations between him and respondent were strained. In such
circumstances not much importance can be attached to the
testimony of PW-3. (This fact has been noted by the Trial Court).
39.

The ill health of the deceased, appellant playing an

active role in the execution of the will Ex. PW-1/1 and the facts
noted in para 38 above throw a grave suspicion on the
genuineness of the will Ex. PW-1/1.
40.

Smt Asarfi RW-2 in her cross-examination deposed as

under:“I do not know anything about the will of the deceased.”

FAO No.82/2007

page 24 of 26

41.

This statement of the Smt. Asarfi RW-2 has been

sought to be relied upon by the appellant in support of his
contention that the Smt. Asarfi was a hostile witness.
42.

By no stretch of imagination it can be said that the

afore-noted statement of Smt Asarfi made her a hostile witness.
By stating she knew nothing about the will of the deceased she
only meant that she has no knowledge about the will Ex.PW1/1
dated 10.12.92 purported to have been executed by the
deceased. While appreciating testimony of Smt Asarfi it has to be
borne in mind that she was an illiterate lady.
43.

The evidence on record particularly the evidence led

by the appellant probablizes the view taken by the Trial Court
that the will Ex. PW-1/1 is not a genuine document and is not the
last legal and valid testament of the deceased.
44.

It is settled law that a finding of fact arrived at by the

Trial Court shall not be interfered by an Appellate Court unless
the view taken by the Trial Court is perverse, contrary to settled
principles of law or any material evidence or fact has been
ignored to by the Trial Court.
45.

In view of above discussion I find no infirmity in the

impugned order dated 30.11.2006 passed by the learned
Additional District Judge Delhi.
46.

The appeal is dismissed.

FAO No.82/2007

page 25 of 26

47.

No costs.

January 10, 2008
mm

FAO No.82/2007

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 26 of 26

