IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No.810/2007
#
!

$
^

Kunal Kapoor
through:

........ Petitioner
Mr.O.P.Wadhwa, Adv.
Mr.Rajat Wadhwa, Adv. and
Mr.Rishikesh Kumar, Adv.
VERSUS

State

through:

........ Respondent
Mr.Jaideep Malik, Adv. for State.
Ms.Rekha Palli, Adv. for
the complainant.

Bail Application No.1292/2007
#
!

Varun Popli @Varun & Anr.
........ Petitioners
through: Mr.O.P.Wadhwa, Adv.
Mr.Rajat Wadhwa, Adv. and
Mr.Rishikesh Kumar, Adv.

$
^

State

VERSUS
through:

........ Respondent
Mr.Jaideep Malik, Adv. for State.
Ms.Rekha Palli, Adv. for
the complainant.

RESERVED ON: 02.11.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 13.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.
seek

Petitioners Kunal Kapoor, Varun Popli and Varun Sehgal
bail

in

FIR

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

No.800/06

under

Section
page 1 of 25

363/376(2)(g)/506/341/342/366 IPC P.S. Janak Puri.
2.

They along with co-accused Devender Singh @ Giani

are the four persons put up for trial in the afore-noted FIR.
3.
for having

On 29.5.2007, all four accused persons were charged
committed

the offence punishable

under Section

341/34 IPC, Section 342/34 IPC, 363/34 IC, Section 366/34 IPC,
Section 376(2)(g)/34 IPC and Section 506/34 IPC.
4.

Prosecutrix

Km.SK

aged 17 years is the alleged

victim.
5.

Criminal law was set into motion when in the

intervening night of 26.12.2006 and 27.12.2006 at 3.05 am a
wireless message was flashed to the local police station at P.S.
Hari Nagar informing that from a mobile phone No.9811424384
message was received by the PCR that the daughter of the
informant was abducted and removed in motor vehicle No.DL-4CB-9005 and was left outside their residence and that she i.e.
mother of the girl

was taking her daughter to Mai Kamliwali

Hospital, Rajouri Garden. A police officer was deputed to go to
the hospital.

Somewhere between 4 A.M. to 6.30 A.M. on

27.12.2006 the officer recorded the statement of Km.SK who
informed that she was aged 17 years and was a student of class
XII. That she used to take tuition from Mr.Kathuria and had left
her house at 2 P.M. on 26.12.2006 to go the tuition center i.e. C4, Janakpuri. The tutor was giving a test and she was to take the

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 2 of 25

same. After the test was over at 4.30 P.M. she left in a rickshaw
for her residence. When the rickshaw reached near C4E, Janak
Puri red light, chain of the rickshaw got snapped.

She got down

from the rickshaw to proceed on foot towards her house. She
crossed the red light.

A Scorpio car No.DL-4C-B-9005 stopped

near her. A boy wearing a black coloured jacket pulled her inside
the car

where three more boys were sitting.

addressing

They were

each other as Varun and Chuha. When the Scorpio

car passed near PVR Vikas Puri she told the boys that her friend
Chandan lived there and she will complain to him about them.
At this, one boy out of the four took out his mobile phone and
told her to talk to her friend stating that her friend
harm them.

could not

That she contacted her friend Chandan on mobile

No.9871458423. One boy out of the four told her that if Chandan
received the call she should tell him not to take any phone call
from her residence.

That when she tried to talk to Chandan

they disconnected the phone.

That the four boys did wrong

things with her in the moving car which was having tinted glasses.
At 12.00 mid night they dropped her near her residence. Her four
note-books were left in the car.

The boy named Varun

threatened her that she would be killed if she told anything to her
mother.
6.

Based on the statement of Km.SK, FIR was registered.

Thereafter, a lady investigating officer, Inspector Usha Joshi was

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 3 of 25

deputed to investigate the matter. She recorded supplementary
statement of Km.SK under Section 161 Cr.P.C. on 27.12.2006
wherein Km.SK ostensibly gave further details of what happened
when she was forcible lifted from the road in addition to what she
had stated earlier in the morning. She further informed and gave
details as to in what manner the four boys, one after the other,
committed rape upon her.

She further informed that in addition

to call she had made to her friend Chandan, the four boys had
made her speak to her mother from a land line number from a
PCO booth.

She further stated that

the Sikh boy in the car

appeared to be familiar to her. (I may however note that in her
examination-in-chief the prosecutrix has not been examined by
the learned APP in respect to her alleged second statement
recorded

by

the

investigating

officer,

but

during

cross

examination she has deposed that her statement was recorded
twice by the police. Further I may note that no questions have
been put to her regarding the alleged second statement. She has
not even been re-examined by the learned APP to elicit
clarification as to whether the second statement filed by the
prosecution with the charge-sheet was the one she was referring
to as her second statement when she was cross-examined.)
7.
were

Accused persons were arrested on 27.12.2006. They
got medically examined between 1.15 PM to 1.35 PM at

DDU Hospital, New Delhi.

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 4 of 25

8.

As

examination

regards
at

Mai

Km.SK,
Kamliwali

she

was

Hospital.

discharged

after

Thereafter,

on

29.12.2006, Km.SK was got further medically examined at DDU
hospital, New Delhi.
9.

MLC prepared by Mai Kamliwali Hospital records that

Km.SK was brought by her mother to the hospital at 14.50 AM on
27.12.2006 i.e. intervening night between 26 and 27.12.2006. It
recorded that

Km.SK was in a state of drowsiness.

That the

mother of Km.SK who had brought her to the hospital informed
that Km.SK was forcibly taken away by some unknown persons in
a car and was kept confined and was dropped back in a drowsy
condition. Physical examination noted in the MLC records that
the body of Km.SK was
without any injury.
body. No laceration

No

having dust.

The breast was normal

injury mark was seen anywhere in the

or tears were seen.

The hymen was noted

as intact. Seminal discharge was seen present on perineum. The
MLC records that slide samples were taken and handed over to
the police.
10.

Being relevant it may be noted that in the MLC it was

originally recorded that hymen was partially intact.

Thereafter,

the word 'partially' was scored off. It may further be noted that
the words “no signs of torn hymen seen” recorded in the MLC are
over written on what was originally written with a different pen.
What was originally written can be deciphered with a little close

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 5 of 25

look. Following appears to have been written originally : “signs of
torn hymen”.
11.

It appears that MLC as originally recorded

read as

follows: “hymen partially intact, signs of torn hymen”. Thereafter,
the work 'partially' has been scored off. Before the word “signs”
the word “no” has been written and after the word 'hymen' the
word 'seen' is added. Thus, the original writing “hymen partially
intact, signs of torn hymen” has been made to read : “hymen
intact, no signs of torn hymen seen”.
12.

Being further relevant it may be noted that at DDU

Hosptial when Km.SK was examined, the MLC was prepared vide
proforma at serial No.32771 wherein it was recorded : “present
abrasions

over right side of chest”.

The said sentence was

scored off. Thereafter, the MLC as a whole was scored off and
new MLC was prepared vide proforma at serial No.32772. On the
said MLC, no injury was recorded on the person of Km.SK It was
further recorded

in the said MLC that there were no injury marks

seen on the body or on any private part.

However, it was

recorded : ”hymen not intact”.
13.

When investigation was being conducted, mother of

Km.SK filed an application before the learned ACMM informing
that the investigation was being attempted to be thwarted.
was pointed out in the application that MLC on form

It

at serial

No.32771 should be requisitioned. Orders were passed by the

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 6 of 25

learned MM directing the I.O. to seize the MLC prepared vide form
at serial No.32771. The same was seized and forms part of the
record of sessions trial.
14.

Pertaining to the medical examination of the accused

persons, after they were arrested, the MLC of Varun Sehgal and
Kunal Kapoor records : “Scanty smegma seen”. MLC of Devender
Singh does not record anything regarding presence or absence of
smegma on the penis.

MLC of Varun Popli records: “smegma not

seen”.
15.

According to the prosecution, the accused persons

could be tracked down because from the mobile No.9911276799,
admittedly belonging to the accused Kunal Kapoor, a call was
made to Chandan's mobile No.9871458423. With the help of said
number Kunal Kapoor was tracked down and thereafter all others.
16.

Statement of the prosecutrix was thereafter recorded

under Section 164 Cr.P.C. before a Magistrate.

She broadly

recorded what was already stated by her in the supplementary
statement recorded by Inspector Usha Joshi.
17.

The Scorpio car in which alleged gang rape took place

was seized by the police.

Four note-books which Km.SK stated

she had left in the Scorpio were seized from the Scorpio. From
the back seat cover, fabric was lifted

and sent for forensic

examination. The same revealed no presence of human semen
on the fabric.

Clothes worn by Km.SK i.e. her under garments

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 7 of 25

and pant

which were handed over

to the police by the

authorities at Mai Kamliwali Hospital and sent for forensic
examination revealed no presence of human semen, but blood
was detected.

Underwears

were handed over

of the four accused persons which

by the doctors

were medically examined were

after the

accused persons

likewise sent for forensic

examination. The four underwears were marked Ex. 8, 11, 14
and 17 out of many exhibits which were sent for forensic
examination. As per FSL report human semen was detected on all
4 underwears. The under garments of the four accused persons
were seized by Inspector Usha Joshi on 27.12.2006 when same
were handed over by Dr.Aarti, Dr.Ankush Garg and Dr.Rishi to her.
It may be noted that Dr.Aarti had examined accused Devender
Singh. Dr.Ankush Garg had examined accused Varun Sehgal and
Kunal Kapoor. Dr.Rishi had examined accused Varun Popli.
18.

Statement of Km.SK was recorded during trial on

10.9.2007 and 18.10.2007. She stated that on 26.12.2006 after
taking the test conducted by Shri Kathuria, her tutor, she left the
tutorial centre. It was cloudy and drizzling. She took a rickshaw
to go to her house.

The chain of the rickshaw broke.

She

disembarked and went ahead. As she crossed the red-light near
Bharti College a Gypsy came from behind and one boy wearing a
black colour jacket came out from the Gypsy and pushed her
inside the Gypsy where one Sikh gentleman already inside the

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 8 of 25

Gypsy dragged her inside. There were 4 boys inside the vehicle.
They were calling each other by the names of Varun, Chuha,
Gyani and Sehgal. The Sikh boy took out a kirpan and pointed the
same at her stomach and threatened that if she spoke too much
she would be killed. The 4 boys drove the Gypsy from one place
to another. The window panes of the Gypsy were black. The Sikh
boy and the boy called Chuha started touching her body.

She

pointed towards accused Kunal Kapoor as Chuha and accused
Devender as Gyani. She pointed towards accused Varun Sehgal
as the boy who was driving the Gypsy and pointed accused Varun
Popli as the fourth accomplice.

She stated that accused Kunal

Kapoor removed her pant and thereafter helped by Devender he
removed her upper dress. At that point she saw a signboard of
Vikaspuri and told the accused that several of her friends live in
Vikaspuri and if they saw the accused they would kill them. At
this, Kunal Kapoor handed over his cellphone to her and told her
that she could make a call to her friend. From the cellphone of
Kunal Kapoor she telephoned her friend Chandan.

At that,

Devender caught hold of her hair and told her to tell her friend
Chandan that if he receives any call from her parents he should
not respond. She told Chandan as directed by Devender. That
Chandan inquired from her as to why she was saying this. Before
she could say anything more Devender snatched the cellphone
and disconnected the same.

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

Thereafter Devender removed his

page 9 of 25

clothes and committed rape on her. Thereafter Kunal Kapoor put
his finger in her vagina and raped her. She was in pain. She was
made to wear her clothes. The Gypsy was driven on to a lonely
road.

Near a chemist shop which was closed the Gypsy was

stationed near a STD booth. The accused along with her came
out from the Gypsy and went to the STD booth. Devender dialled
her mother's cellphone which he knew earlier. Devender told her
to tell her mother that she was going to die. Devender put the
phone near her ear. She told her mother as directed by Devender
that she was going to die.

Her mother enquired why she was

speaking like that and told her not to worry as she would search
her out. Devender disconnected the phone. She was taken back
inside the Gypsy.

Accused Varun and Devender slapped her.

Once again they removed her clothes. Devender started pressing
her breast.

Thereafter Varun Popli followed by Varun Sehgal

raped her in turn.

She became unconscious and when she

regained consciousness she found herself in Mai Kamliwali
Hospital. Her mother, a doctor and a police officer were present.
She was discharged from the hospital the next day.
statement was recorded.

Her

That she did not know what was

recorded in her statement but that it bore her signatures at point
'A' (the statement was exhibited as Ex.PW-1/A).

She further

stated that after a day or two of being discharged from the
hospital she was taken to D.D.U. Hospital where she was

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 10 of 25

medically examined. That she had 2 notes registers with her and
was also having the assignment of the tutorial centre and a
photostate spiral bound notebook with her when she was
abducted.

She identified the Scorpio Ex.P-A as the vehicle in

which she was abducted. She also identified, as Ex.P-5 and P-6
the registers she was carrying in which she would take down her
notes at the tutorial centre. The spiral bound assignment sheets
were identified by her as Ex.P-7 and the spiral bound notes were
identified by her as Ex.P-8.
19.

In

cross-examination

she

admitted

that

accused

Devender used to tease her when she was studying in class IX
and that he was running a shop in DDA market near her house
wherefrom her family used to purchase daily articles.

She

volunteered that when she completed class-IX the shop was
closed. She stated that she could distinguish between a Gypsy
and a Scorpio.

Confronted with Ex.P-5 she stated that it was

correct that it recorded notes up to 26.11.2006 but volunteered
that the said date was wrongly mentioned and should read
26.12.2006. She further admitted that in the register there was
no work of dated 19.12.2006, 21.12.2006 and 23.12.2006. She
also admitted that there was no work done in the register Ex.P-5
after 12.12.2006.

She denied that she never went to coaching

centre after 12.12.2006. She denied that she would go elsewhere
on the pretext of going to the coaching centre. She volunteered

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 11 of 25

that the tutor Mr.Kathuria used to mark her presence regularly in
a register maintained by him.

She also admitted that in the

register Ex.P-5 only date prior to 12.12.2006 recorded as
25.11.2006.

When cross examined regarding duration of time

consumed by each accused when each allegedly raped her she
said she was unable to remember the same.
20.

In cross examination a suggestion was given to her

that she was at Gurudwara Bangla Sahib. She denied the same.
She denied the suggestion that she made 4 telephonic calls to
Chandan after borrowing the cellphone from accused Kunal
Kapoor. She denied the suggestion that on 26.12.2006 she went
by metro train from Tagore Garden to Gurudwara Bangla Sahib
and met Devender and Kunal Kapoor at the Gurudwara.

She

denied the suggestion that she was disturbed and was going to
commit suicide but Devender stopped her from so doing.
denied

the

suggestion

that

around

10.00

pm

She

Devender

telephoned Varun Popli and Varun Sehgal from Bangla Sahib
Gurudwara. She denied the suggestion that at 11.00 pm people
at the parking at Gurudwara Bagla Sahib persuaded the accused
to drop her at her residence. She denied the suggestion that the
accused persons brought her from the parking of the Gurudwara
Bangla Sahib and dropped her at her residence. She stated that
as a result of the rape she had suffered bruises on her breast and
there were bluish signs on her legs due to beating caused by the

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 12 of 25

accused persons. She disclosed that the mobile number of her
mother was 9811424384 and that of Chandan was 9871458423.
She admitted the suggestion that from the mobile phone of Kunal
Kapoor she had spoken with Chandan.

She stated that at Mai

Kamliwali Hospital a police officer had recorded her statement.
She stated that the entire incident was disclosed by her to a
police officer.
21.

Prosecutrix was confronted with her statement Ex.PW-

1/A being the first statement recorded by the police officer
wherein most of what was stated by her in examination-in-chief
was not found correct. But she volunteered that what she had
stated before the Court was stated by her to the police in her
second statement.

She admitted that in the morning at Mai

Kamliwali Hospital her mother had told her that the accused
persons have been apprehended.
22.

Urging for freedom of the petitioners who are in judicial

custody since 27.12.2006, Shri O.P.Wadhwa, learned counsel for
the petitioners urged that the young age of the petitioners who
are aged between 20 to 22 years should be kept in view. Their
middle class background should also be taken into consideration.
Counsel urged that keeping the petitioners with hardened
criminals in jail is likely to be counter productive for the reason
there is likelihood of the young minds being polluted by hardened
criminals. Learned counsel drew attention of the Court to certain

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 13 of 25

features emanating from the testimony of Km.SK and the mobile
phone record of accused Kunal Kapoor, the mother of the
prosecutrix and the mobile phones of accused Varun Sehgal and
Varun Popli.

Counsel urged that though it is the law that a

conviction can be sustained on the testimony of the prosecutrix
but for this, the Court has to be reassured that the prosecutrix is
trustworthy.
23.

The

features

which

were

pointed

out

by

Shri

O.P.Wadhwa are as follows:(i)

The manner in which the prosecutrix has alleged her
abduction

and

commission

of

offence

is

not

trustworthy. Drawing attention to the testimony of the
prosecutrix in the cross examination that accused
Devender was known to her and her testimony in
examination-in-chief that Devender knew the mobile
phone number of her mother when jaxtaposed with her
version that she was abducted by 4 boys, one of whom
was a Sikh boy renders her version suspect inasmuch
as she already knew Devender.
(ii)

The manner and sequence in which the prosecutrix
alleged rape was highly unbelievable.

Counsel drew

attention to the testimony of the prosecutrix wherein
she referred to her being raped by Devender and Kunal
Kapoor after undressing her.

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

Thereafter her being

page 14 of 25

made to wear her clothes. Followed by all 4 taking the
prosecutrix outside the vehicle and facilitating a
telephonic call between the prosecutrix and her
mother from a land-line number.

Followed by the

prosecutrix being taken back to the car; undressed
once again and thereafter raped by Varun Popli and
Varun Sehgal.
(iii)

It was urged that far from creating evidence against
themselves perpetrators of crime would take steps to
destroy the incriminating evidence. Counsel wondered
as to why would Kunal Kapoor and the accused
persons when they were having Km.SK in unlawful
custody would make her speak to her friend and her
mother. Counsel wondered: were the accused stupid
to create incriminating evidence against themselves?

(iv)

Drawing attention to the mobile phone record of the
mother of
number

the prosecutrix i.e. mobile

9811424384

and

the

mobile

telephone
telephone

number of Kunal Kapoor 9911276799 learned counsel
pointed out that the same records incoming and
outgoing calls of 183 and 117 seconds between the 2
numbers at 5.54 am and 5.58 am on 27.12.2006. This
was followed by Kunal Kapoor ringing up the mother of
the prosecutrix at 6.33 am, repeated call being made

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 15 of 25

at 7.06 am. The 4 telephone calls, one made by the
mother of the prosecutrix to Kunal Kapoor and 3 made
by Kunal Kapoor to the mother of the prosecutrix were
highlighted by learned counsel to submit that this is
not the conduct of an accused who had raped the
daughter of the person with whom the accused was
speaking. With reference to the mobile telephone of
Varun Popli i.e. No.9910295777 and the telephone of
Kunal Kapoor i.e. No.9911276799, counsel pointed out
that the two had spoken at 5.56 am and 6.34 am on
27.12.2006.

From the inter-se calls between the

mother of the prosecutrix, Kunal Kapoor and Varun
Popli learned counsel submitted that what had actually
happened was that the mother of the prosecutrix had
rung up Kunal Kapoor and had requested him to reach
Mai Kamliwali Hospital as her daughter was in distress.
They being the friends of her daughter she wanted
help from them. The accused persons who had helped
prosecutrix the previous evening went to the hospital
to render assistance to the prosecutrix and her mother.
They were led into a trap and arrested. Counsel urged
that the accused persons voluntarily reaching the
hospital when summoned by the mother of the
prosecutrix shows their innocence.

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 16 of 25

(v)

Drawing attention to the arrest memos of the accused
persons learned counsel pointed out that the accused
were shown arrested from their residence.

Accused

Devender Singh was shown arrested at 10.25 am.
Accused Varun Popli was shows arrested at 11.20 am.
Accused Kunal Kapoor was shown arrested at 11.50
am and accused Varun Sehgal was shown arrested at
12.30 pm. All were shown arrested from their house.
Counsel pointed out that the arrest memos were ex
facie fabricated documents for the reason prosecutrix,
categorically deposed that when she was in the
hospital, in the morning, her mother had told her that
the accused had been arrested.
(vi)

With reference to the medical examination of the
prosecutrix counsel urged that at best it could be
treated that the hymen of prosecutrix was partially
intact, meaning thereby partially torn. It could not be
so if 4 male adult persons had raped the prosecutrix.
Counsel further submitted that neither was there any
injury on the person of the prosecutrix now was there
any injury on the person of the accused.

(vii) The next circumstance brought into aid by learned
counsel for the petitioners was the absence of any
semen stain from the vehicle in question used in the

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 17 of 25

commission of the crime as also absence of semen on
the clothes worn by the prosecutrix.
(viii) Explaining

the

undergarments

presence
of

the

of

accused,

semen
learned

on

the

counsel

submitted that when the accused persons were taken
to the hospital for medical examination, as recorded in
the MLC that there was nothing to suggest that the
accused persons were not capable to performing
sexual intercourse, the doctors had conducted the test
to see whether stimulation of the sex organ of the
accused resulted in erection followed by ejaculation of
semen. It was this semen which was detected on their
undergarments.
(ix)

Counsel urged that Km.SK was a city bread girl and
was expected to differentiate between a Gypsy and a
Scorpio.

Counsel highlighted the testimony of the

prosecutrix where she referred to the vehicle in which
she was raped as a Gypsy but the offending vehicle
was claimed by the prosecution to be a Scorpio.
(x)

Lastly it was pointed out that conduct of the mother of
the prosecutrix was abnormal for the reason the
mother claimed and so did the prosecutrix that the two
had spoken at around 9.30 pm and the daughter had
told the mother that she was going to die and yet the

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 18 of 25

mother did not take recourse to legal help.
24.

Summing

up

his

submissions,

Shri

O.P.Wadhwa,

learned counsel for the petitioners urged that the petitioners were
known to the prosecutrix. As suggested in the cross examination
of the prosecutrix she had met them in a disturbed state of mind
at Gurudwara Bangla Sahib.

The accused persons had left the

prosecutrix at her residence on humanitarian grounds on being
persuaded by the people at the parking of the Gurudwara Bangla
Sahib to so do.

Counsel submits that since the issue was

highlighted in the press the very next day and a nominee from
the National Commission of Women had got involved the police
came under a pressure to some how or the other break the case.
The convenient method of false implication was resorted to by the
police.
25.

Learned counsel for the State Shri Jaideep Malik ably

assisted by Ms.Rekha Palli, learned counsel for the complainant
projected a contra view point and highlighted the incriminating
circumstances against the accused persons.

Learned counsel

pointed out as follows:(a)

That semen was found present on the underwears
worn

by

the

accused

persons.

It

prima

facie

established sexual activity by the accused persons.
(b)

MLC of accused Varun Popli categorically records
'smegma not seen'. MLC of Varun Sehgal and Kunal

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 19 of 25

Kapoor records 'scanty smegma seen'.

Meaning

thereby that there was positive evidence to suggest
that Varun Popli had had sexual intercourse in the
preceding less than 24 hours.

That MLC of Varun

Sehgal and Kunal Kapoor suggested sexual intercourse
by the 2 for the reason presence of scanty smegma
evidenced

that

some

smegma

had

formed

and

accumulated on their sex organ in the intervening 12
hours after they had raped the prosecutrix.
(c)

The telephone call details of Kunal Kapoor were curious
as urged by learned counsel. Counsel submitted that
Kunal

Kapoor's

mobile

No.9911276799

evidenced

constant calls being made to various numbers and
especially

the

No.9910295777.

telephone

of

Varun

Popli

being

Counsel pointed out that right

through midnight of the intervening night of 26 and 27
December 2006 Kunal Kapoor was constantly ringing
up somebody or the other. Counsel pointed out that
this was suggestive of the fact that the accused
persons were attempting to create some alibi knowing
fully well that as the prosecutrix knew them they would
certainly be exposed shortly.
(d)

Counsel urged that bestiality is not unknown in the
world of sexual crimes. The influence of Hindi movies

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 20 of 25

where villains are shown committed rape in public and
with impunity i.e. with a macho image could have led
the accused persons to show their manhood in like
manner.

That the fact that the accused persons

traumatized the victim and showed boldness by
permitting her to ring up her mother and her friend is
explainable under the circumstances.
(e)

It was lastly urged that there was no occasion for the
prosecutrix to have named the accused persons and
especially when no enemity between the accused and
the prosecutrix has been suggested.

(f)

Conduct of the mother pertaining to the telephone call
received by her from the daughter was explained with
reference to calls made by the mother to her sister and
the tuition centre to find the whereabouts of her
daughter. Counsel stated that it is a normal tendency
not to rush to the police due to social stigma which
may get attached to a girl child.

26.

Having considered the rival submissions it would be

relevant to not the legal position before I evaluate the rival
versions.
27.

A conviction in a rape case can be sustained on the

sole testimony of the prosecutrix provided the same inspires
confidence meaning thereby there are no inherent contradictions

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 21 of 25

in the testimony of the prosecutrix. Further, while discussing the
evidence for grant of bail or refusal thereof when other witnesses
of the prosecution have yet to be examined, this Court is required
to abstain from a meticulous appreciation of the partial evidence
which is on record inasmuch as this exercise would have to be
conducted when evidence is concluded.
28.

Further, gravity of the offence including the manner in

which it was committed, if found heinous would disentitle the
accused to the grant of bail. Lastly, being an alleged case of gang
rape, as per explanation (i) to Section 376 IPC even if the victim is
raped by one or more persons acting in furtherance of their
common intention, each person shall be deemed to have
committed gang rape within the meaning of gang rape as defined
in Section 376 IPC.
29.

My discussion commences with a very important and in

my opinion incriminating circumstance against the petitioners. As
projected in defence when the prosecutrix was cross-examined,
the

prosecutrix,

was

having

if

not

acquaintance with the accused persons.

friendly,

at

least

an

All were together at

Gurudwara Bangla Sahib and the accused persons suggested to
the prosecutrix that people at the parking at Gurudwara Bangla
Sahib had persuaded them to drop her at her residence.
Suggestions which were put to the prosecutrix are that accused
Devender and Kunal Kapoor met prosecutrix at Gurudwar Bangla

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 22 of 25

Sahib. They telephoned accused Varun Popli and Varun Sehgal.
Thereafter at 11.00 pm all accused persons, on being persuaded
by people at the parking, dropped the prosecutrix at her
residence. If this was so, why did the accused persons virtually
throw out the prosecutrix at the lane of her residence and not
deposit her safely in the custody of her mother? Further, the first
information received by the police was when the mother of the
prosecutrix made a telephonic call at the PCR informed that she
was taking her daughter to the hospital and that her daughter
was traumatized and was dropped by unknown persons in a
vehicle bearing No.DL4CV-9005.

Indeed, this vehicle is the

Scorpio in question and belongs to the uncle of Varun Popli.
Knowledge of the mother of the prosecutrix pertaining to the
number of the vehicle before information was flashed to the
police is of vital importance.
30.

It is true that the telephone record of Kunal Kapoor and

Varun Popli does record inter-se conversation between the 2 from
around 9.30 pm on 26.12.007 continuing till dawn the next day.
But this would have to be understood and appreciated in the light
of the suggestions put by the accused to the prosecutrix to the
effect that at some point of time all accused persons and the
prosecutrix were present together. Since further evidence has to
be led, how the mystery unravels pertaining to these telephone
calls would be a matter of evidence. I refrain from speculating,

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 23 of 25

surmising or from entering into conjectures.

If I do so it will

prejudice the trial.
31.

Kunal Kapoor would have to explain as to why he

continued taking all through out the night to some or the other.
He would have to explain the 5 to 6 calls every hour of the
midnight till the morning of 27 December 2006.

Similarly, the

prosecution would have to explain the positions of the accused
persons if possible with reference to the towers from which the
calls were transmitted and as recorded in the call details.
32.

Suffice would it be to note that semen was detected in

the slide sample taken from the perineum of the victim i.e. the
region between the anus and the vulva. I may further note that
there are cuttings and overwritings in the MLCs of the prosecutrix
which have to be explained by the doctors. I further note that
blood

was

prosecutrix.

detected

in

the

undergarments

worn

by

the

Her MLC does not record that she was in

menstruation. Vis-a-vis the accused persons, to be fair to them, I
may note that absence of any semen from the seat covers of the
vehicle in question would have to be explained.
33.

The prosecutrix was admittedly in company of Kunal

Kapoor at 5.46 pm for the reason admittedly from the mobile
number of Kunal Kapoor a call has been made to Chandan, the
friend of the prosecutrix.

Line of cross-examination adopted

reveals that the prosecutrix was with the accused persons at

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

page 24 of 25

11.00 pm.
34.

Lot of issues for or against the accused have to be

unravelled. But at the moment it would be difficult to opine that
the case of the prosecution is not falling.
35.

Considering the gravity of the offence and the manner

in which prosecution has alleged the rape committed on the
prosecutrix, notwithstanding the young age of the petitioners, I
am of the opinion that no case is made out to release the
petitioners on bail.
36.

The bail applications are dismissed. However, I direct

the learned Trial Judge to expedite the trial and try and complete
the same as quickly as possible and preferably within 6 months
from the date of receipt of the present order.

November 13, 2007
dk-bainsla

Bail Applications No.810/07 & 1292/07

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 25 of 25

