IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA No. 108/2002
#

Sh. Balwant Singh
........ Appellant
through: Mr. Kumar Sushobhan, Advocate
VERSUS

$

DDA

through:

....... Respondent
Mr. Rajiv Bansal, Advocate
Ms. Surbhi Aggarwal, Advocate
RESERVED ON: 14.12.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 17.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The above captioned second appeal arises out of the

judgment and decree dated 22.1.2002 passed by the learned
Additional District Judge Delhi whereby the appeal filed by the
respondent against the judgment and decree dated 16.7.1996
passed by the learned Civil Judge Delhi in favour of the appellant
was allowed.
2.

Appellant has filed a suit for specific performance

against the respondent DDA. Material averments in the plaint were
that vide allotment letter dated 30.9.1975 DDA allotted a residential
RSA No. 108/2002

Page 1 of 10

plot bearing Municipal No. K-1/154, Block-B, Shalimar Bagh, New
Delhi in name of the appellant. That the entire sale consideration in
sum of Rs.4,011/- was paid by the appellant. That vide letter dated
11.1.1988 respondent DDA returned the sale consideration paid by
the appellant and informed him that the allotment of plot has been
cancelled. That respondent DDA refused to execute the perpetual
lease deed in respect of the plot and refused to hand over the
possession of the plot.
3.

Defence set up by the respondent was that the scheme

under which appellant was allotted the said plot was a special
scheme meant only for allottees of shops or plots in New Sabzi
Mandi. That as per the scheme residential plot could be allotted to
only those persons who were already allotted either a shop or a plot
in New Sabzi Mandi. Thus allotment of a shop or a plot in New Sabzi
Mandi was a pre-requisite for allotment of residential plot. That the
appellant was allotted a shop in New Sabzi Mandi.

That since

appellant failed to pay the cost of construction the allotment of shop
in New Sabzi Mandi was cancelled. That because allotment of the
shop was cancelled, the allotment of the residential plot in his name
was also cancelled. That the allotment of the plot was cancelled in
the year 1978. That since the allotment itself was cancelled there
was no occasion either to execute the perpetual lease deed of the
plot in favour of the appellant or to hand over the possession of the
plot to the appellant.
4.

In support of his case appellant himself stepped into the

RSA No. 108/2002

Page 2 of 10

witness box as PW-1. Besides his testimony no other oral evidence
was led by the appellant.
5.

As regards documentary evidence 3 documents namely

allotment

letter

dated

30.9.1975

Ex.

PW-1/1,

cheque

dated

4.11.1987 in sum of Rs.4,011 Ex. PW-1/4 and a legal notice dated
1.11.1987 Ex.PW-1/2 issued by the counsel for the appellant and got
served upon respondent DDA were proved by the appellant.
6.

On behalf of the respondent DDA Mr. K.C.P.Ahluwalia,

UDC, L & B (Residential), DDA were examined.
7.

As regards documentary evidence respondent DDA filed

following documents:i.

Ex. DW-1/1 being the allotment letter dated 30.9.1975

ii.

Ex. DW-1/2 being the terms and condition of the

allotment of the residential plot.
iii.

Ex. DW-1/3, Ex. DW-1/4 and Ex. DW-1/6 being official

notings recording that the appellant has not made the payment of
cost of construction of the shop allotted to him in New Sabzi Mandi
and thus the allotment of the shop is cancelled.

Notings also

recommend that the allotment of the residential plot in name of the
appellant be also cancelled.

Ex. DW-1/4 also records that the

commissioner, DDA has accepted the recommendation of the
cancellation of the allotment of the residential plot.
iv.

Ex. DW-1/5 being a letter dated 5.5.1978 issued by the

respondent DDA and addressed to the appellant. The letter records
that the sale consideration paid by the appellant is being returned.
RSA No. 108/2002

Page 3 of 10

v.

Ex. DW-1/7 being a letter dated 11.1.1988 issued by the

respondent DDA and addressed to the appellant. This letter is sent
in reply to the legal notice dated 1.11.1987 sent by the appellant to
the DDA.
8.

After considering rival versions of the parties, the

learned Trial Court has held as under:-

9.

“It is no where the case of the defendant in its WS or
from the documents placed on record that the allotment
of the residential plot (Plot in question) was subject to
the existence/subsistence of the allotment of the shop in
Subzi Mandi i.e. it has neither been pleaded in the W.S.
nor does any of the documents support that the
allotment of the residential plot was liable to be
cancelled automatically in case of cancellation of the
allotment of the shop in Sabzi Mandi.”
On basis of aforenoted reasoning vide judgment and

decree dated 16.7.1996 Trial Court has decreed the suit filed by the
appellant.
10.

Respondent DDA preferred an appeal before the court of

Additional District Judge against the judgment and decree dated
16.7.1996 passed by the learned Trial Court.
11.

As already noted, vide judgment and decree dated

22.1.2002 the Appellate Court allowed the appeal filed by the
respondent and thus set aside the judgment and decree dated
16.7.1996 passed by the learned Trial Court.
12.

In these circumstances following substantial question of

law was framed for consideration:“Whether on the evidence on record learned Appellate
Court was justified in reversing the findings returned by
the learned Trial Judge?”

RSA No. 108/2002

Page 4 of 10

13.

In support of the appeal learned counsel for the

appellant has urged following two grounds:i.

That the learned Trial Court has rightly held that the
issue pertaining to cancellation of the allotment of the
residential plot on the basis of cancellation of the
allotment of the shop in New Sabzi Mandi was not
averred by the respondent in his pleadings.

ii.

That the Appellate Court has not appreciated the
testimony of DW-1 in correct perspective.

14.

Since the first ground urged by the counsel for the

appellant relates to pleading of the respondent it is necessary to set
out the relevant portion of the written statement as also documents
filed along with the written statement.
15.

Para 4 of the written statement reads as under:“4. In reply to para 4 of the plaint the issuance of the
letter dated 17.5.76 is admitted. The receipt of the
affidavit dated 27.5.76 is also admitted which was duly
received on 29.5.76. It is not out of place to mention here
that the scheme for allotment of residential plot was on
the basis of the shop/plots allotted in New Subzi Mandi,
Azadpur. Since the allotment already stands cancelled
and the amount was refunded, therefore, question of
execution of the lease deed or handing over the
possession of the plot does not arise. Rest of the para is
denied.”

16.

The above underlined portion shows that the respondent

DDA laid a foundation in the written statement that allotment of a
shop or plot in New Sabzi Mandi was a pre-requisite for allotment of
a residential plot.
17.

Relevant part of allotment letter Ex. DW-1/1 dated

RSA No. 108/2002

Page 5 of 10

30.9.1975 reads as under:“Sub: Allotment of a residential plot to the allottee of
shop/plot in New Subzimandi near Azadpur under a
Special Scheme.”
18.

The said allotment letter dated 30.9.1975 was also filed

by the appellant and exhibited as PW-1/1.

This shows that the

appellant was conscious of the fact that the allotment of a shop or
plot in New Sabzi Mandi was a pre-requisite for allotment of a
residential plot.
19.

Relevant part of Ex. DW-1/2 reads as under:“TERMS AND CONDITIONS
For the sale by the Delhi Development Authority,
New Delhi on behalf of the President of India, or the
Perpetual Lease-hold rights in residential plots in Shalimar
Bagh to the allottees of new Subzimandi in the
LIG/MIG/HIG by draw of lots.
1.

ELIGIBILITY:

Any individual who is not a minor may apply for
allotment of only one plot if he/she fulfills the following
conditions:
1)
The applicant should have been allotted shop/plot in
the New Subzimandi by the DDA.”
20.

Relevant portion of Ex. DW-1/3 reads as under:“L.S.O (R) may kindly see that the allottees of New
Subzimandi Azadpur have been allotted residential plots
in Shalimar Residential Scheme by him. The allotee/M/s./
Sh. Gopal Singh Balwant Singh has/have not made
payment of cost of construction of the shop allotted to
him/them in New Subzimandi Azadpur, as such the
allotment of the shop has been cancelled by the
competent Authority. You are, therefore, requested to
cancel the allotment of residential plot also, if any, made
to him/them by you in Shalimar Residential Scheme.”

RSA No. 108/2002

Page 6 of 10

21.

Relevant portion of Ex. DW-1/4 reads as under:“As a matter of fact allotment of plots to these persons is
totally linked up with allotment of shops in New Sabzi
Mandi. We have been following it in all cases. This is also
evident from the terms and conditions of allotment of plot
appended with the application form.
x

x

x

x

Commissioner (L) may kindly approve as proposed in
the above note. Cancellation of allotment of plot has
already been done in similar cases where allotment of
shops has been cancelled.”
22.

A further

perusal

of

Ex.

DW-1/4

shows

that

the

Commissioner (L) has accepted the recommendation that allotment
of residential plot in name of appellant be cancelled.
23.

Relevant portion of Ex. DW-1/6 reads as under:“The allotment of residential plot is made on the basis of
shop/plot allotted in New Sabzi Mandi. The allotment of
shop/plot of New Sabzi Mandi has been cancelled by the
E.O. (Impl.). We may also cancel the allotment of the
residential plot and refund the earnest/premium in full as
the
allotment
is
being
cancellation
on
the
recommendation of E.O. (Impl.) and there is no breach of
term in this case.”

24.

The stand taken by the respondent DDA has not found

favour with the learned Trial Court for the following two reasons:i).

That it was not pleaded by the respondent that the
allotment of a shop or plot in New Sabzi Mandi was prerequisite for allotment of a residential plot.

ii).

That it was neither pleaded in the written statement nor
does any of the document filed by the respondent
support the stand of the respondent that the allotment
of the residential plot was liable to be cancelled in case

RSA No. 108/2002

Page 7 of 10

of cancellation of allotment of shop in Sabzi Mandi.
25.

The

necessary

foundation

was

laid

down

by

the

respondent in the written statement. Documents in relation thereto
were filed. Parties led evidence to prove the same. Parties were
conscious of the fact that allotment of a shop or plot in New Sabzi
Mandi was a pre-requisite for allotment of residential plot.

Even

appellant was conscious of such fact as evidenced by the fact that
he placed on record allotment letter dated Ex. PW-1/1. Further Ex.
DW-1/4 and Ex. DW-1/6 clearly record that the allotment of shop or
plot in New Sabzi Mandi and residential plot in Shalimar Bagh were
interlinked.
26.

Ex. DW-1/4 and Ex. DW-1/6 coupled with the testimony

of DW-1 proves that the allotment of residential plot in name of the
appellant was cancelled by the respondent DDA.
27.

A contention was urged that DW-1 in his testimony has

deposed that the allotment of shop in New Sabzi Mandi was
subsequently restored in favour of the appellant.

That after the

restoration of the shop appellant is entitled for the restoration of the
residential plot. Learned counsel for the appellant urged that while
dealing with the appeal, the Appellate Court has not considered this
portion of the testimony of DW-1.
28.

A perusal of the judgment of the Appellate Court shows

that Appellate Court has duly considered the said portion of the
testimony of DW-1 and opined and in my opinion, rightly so, that the
official witnesses often depose contrary to official records in order to
RSA No. 108/2002

Page 8 of 10

favour the opposite party.
29.

No document has been placed on record by the

appellant to establish that the allotment of the shop in New Sabzi
Mandi was subsequently restored in his favour.
30.

At

the

hearing

counsel

sought

to

show

certain

photocopies ostensibly evidencing that the allotment of the shop in
Sabzi Mandi was subsequently restored in the favour of the
appellant.
31.

Said photocopies can not be considered by this court for

the reason no application under Order XLI Rule 27 CPC for leading
additional evidence has been filed by the appellant. No evidence in
relation thereto has been led.
32.

Lastly I note that the appellant has sought to project

that for the first time in the year 1988 DDA informed him that the
allotment of residential plot has been cancelled.
33.

However, this stand of the appellant is belied by the

letter dated 11.1.1988 issued by the respondent DDA in reply to the
legal notice dated 1.11.1987 sent by the appellant.
34.

Relevant portion of Ex. DW-1/7 reads as under:
“With reference to your letter dated nil Advocate notice
dated 1.11.87 on the subject cited above, I am directed to
inform you that your request for the restoration of plot
mentioned above has been considered & examined, but it
is regretted that the same cannot be acceded to.
Further, cheque No. 499770 dated 4.11.87 of Rs.4011/deposited by you on account of premium of above said
plot is also enclosed.”

RSA No. 108/2002

Page 9 of 10

35.

The letter dated 11.1.1988 Ex. DW-1/7 was admitted by

the appellant. This shows that the appellant was aware of the fact
that the allotment of the residential plot in his name has been
cancelled prior to 1988.
36.

In view of above discussion I hold that the respondent

has duly proved that the allotment of the shop or plot in New Sabzi
Mandi and residential plot in Shalimar Bagh were interlinked and
that because of cancellation of allotment of shop in his name in New
Sabzi Mandi, the allotment of residential plot in his name in Shalimar
Bagh was also cancelled.
37.

The substantial question is answered by holding that the

on the evidence on record learned Appellate Court was justified in
reversing the finding returned by the learned Trial Judge.
38.

The appeal is dismissed.

39.

No costs.

December 17, 2007
mm

RSA No. 108/2002

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Page 10 of 10

