IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C.No.3003/2004
#
!

Thiru N. Ravi & Ors.
.......Petitioners
through: Mr. N.K.Khetrapal, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

S.D.Kathuria & Ors.
.......Respondents
through: Mr. Manoj Kumar Srivastava, Advocate
for Respondent No. 1

%

DATE OF DECISION: 10-08-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)
Petitioner No.1 is the editor of a daily newspaper

published from Madras called 'The Hindu'.

Second petitioner is

the publisher of the newspaper. Third petitioner is the newspaper
itself.
2.

The 3 petitioners pray that the order summoning the

petitioners to face trial for an offence under Section 499/500 IPC
as also the complaint whereon said order has been passed be
quashed.

Page 1 of 9
3.

Relevant facts which need to be noted for adjudicating

the claim of the petitioners is that on 18.6.1994, a news item was
published in 'The Hindu' which reads as follows:“Young Housewife, Lovleen Kathuria was probably
harassed more by the staff of the Crime against Women
Cell (CAW) of the Delhi Police now than by her in laws
while she was staying with them. She has been running
from pillar to post to get back her belongings from her
husband's house.
Repeated visits to CAW office at Nanak Pura police
station for the past six months have left her without any
hope of getting justice. Justice delayed is justice denied
says her father Mr.N.D.Chawla a head clerk in the
vigilance department of Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
Mr.Chawla's efforts to retrieve his daughter's belonging
(streedhan) from the in laws have proved futile as he
suspects that the police are in the connivance with the inlaws. Besides jewellery, VCP, furniture, utensils and
Rs.25,000/- in cash, Loveleen's original academic
certificate and three blank papers with her signature are
in their possession. Chawla alleged.
Lovleen who was married to Rakesh Kathuria on January
15, 1992 was sent back to her parents' house at Vishnu
Garden just after 4 months. Lovleen alleged that she was
harassed, humiliated and even beaten up by her in laws
and also her husband, when she failed to fulfill their
demand for a colour TV, scooter and refused to get
money from her father.
When the two parties failed to resolve the issue, Lovleen
filed a complaint with the CAW cell in December to
retrieve the streedhan which her in laws refuse to return.
However several hearing, at the police station did not
yield any result which forced Mr.Chawla to meet Deputy

Commissioner of Police.

Page 2 of 9
They were asked to meet the investigating officer
Mr.Satish Chandra Sharma. He alleged that the staff of
CAW was rude to them and had even abused them in the
filthiest language several times. “I feel that the police are
hand in glove with the Lovleen's in laws who neither
come for the hearing. Nor do they every comply with the
orders of IO but they get away with everything.” He said.
On March 5, this year, the Assistant Commissioner, CAW
Cell directed Loveleen's in laws to pay Rs.50,000/- to
Mr.Chawla within 10 days and resolve the issue. But no
payment has been made so far, Mr.Chawla said.

4.

Mr.Chawla even has met the Additional Commissioner of
Police (Crime) a couple of times in this connection. What
he has received is only assurances from him.”
Lovleen was married to Rakesh Kathuria, son of the

first respondent.

Evidenced from the newspaper report, the

husband and wife were having a matrimonial dispute.
5.

Feeling offended by the newspaper report and alleging

that the father and the son were defamed, first respondent and
his son (who has since died) filed a complaint in the Court of Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate under Section 499/500 IPC.
6.
her

Whereas Lovleen was impleaded as accused No.6 and
father,

N.D.Chawla,

was

impleaded

as

accused

No.5,

petitioners herein were impleaded as accused Nos.1, 2 and 4.
7.

Before summoning order was passed by the learned

Metropolitan Magistrate to whom the complaint was assigned for
Page 3 of 9

adjudication, a settlement took place between the complainants
and Ms.Lovleen and her father. As per the settlement Lovleen
and her husband Rakesh Kathuria agreed to withdraw all criminal
and civil proceedings against each other as also their family
members and dissolve their marriage by obtaining a decree of
divorce by mutual consent.
8.

Pursuant to the settlement FIR lodged by Lovleen

against the complainants under Section 498-A/406 was got
quashed.

The couple separated after obtaining a decree of

divorce by mutual consent. Complainants made a statement in
the complaint with which I am dealing today to the effect that
having settled the dispute with N.D.Chawla and Lovleen they were
not desirous of prosecuting the same against said 2 accused. The
result was that accused No.5 and 6 were discharged. Summoning
order was issued against the petitioners.
9.

A two fold contention has been urged by learned

counsel for the petitioners seeking quashing of the summoning
order against them. It is firstly urged that as per the complaint
principal tort feaser were Lovleen and her father N.D.Chawla. At
best, role of the petitioners would be of aiding and abetting.
Learned counsel submitted that having dropped the complaint
Page 4 of 9

against the principal tort feasers, the complaint could not be
prosecuted against the petitioners. Second submission made was
that the allegations in the complaint did not attract Section 499
IPC against the petitioners.
10.

To appreciate the two submissions made, a brief pen

profile of the complaint may be noted.
11.

After setting out the description of the accused facts

have been averred pertaining to the marriage of complainant No.2
with Lovleen followed by assertions that the couple separated.
Next followed by the averments pertaining to the afore-noted
newspaper report.
12.

Alleging that the newspaper 'The Hindu' has a wide

circulation, it is stated in the complaint that accused No.5 and 6
i.e. father of Lovleen levelled false allegations with a mala fide
intention to blackmail the complainants. It has been stated in the
complaint that Lovleen took back all her dowry articles and
streedhan.

It is stated that the news item has defamed the

complainants.

Pertaining to the petitioners, relevant averments

are in para 14 of the complaint. The same reads as under:“14.
That the accused Nos.1 to 4 without
verifying the truthfulness of allegations levelled by
the accused No.5 and 6 published the said news.
However, in the said news accused Nos.1 to 4 have
mentioned that these allegations have been

13.

page 5 of 9
levelled by accused Nos.5 and 6. From the said
news published by accused Nos.1 to 4 it is clear that
they have deliberately published and printed the
said news item in the said newspaper and
committed offences punishable under Sections
499/500 IPC and the complainants reserve their
right for claim damages against the accused
persons for the loss of their reputation.”
A bare perusal of para 14 of the complaint evidences

that the gravement of allegations against the petitioners is that
they published what was alleged by Lovleen and her father
without verifying the truth of the allegations.
14.

Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code reads as under:“499.
Defamation.–Whoever, by words either
spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by
visible representations, makes or publishes any
imputation concerning any person intending to
harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that
such imputation will harm, the reputation of such
person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter
expected, to defame that person.

15.

Explanation 1.
...............
Explanation 2.
...............
Explanation 3.
...............
Explanation 4.
...............”
A bare perusal of Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code

shows that knowledge or having reasons to believe that the
offending imputation will harm the reputation of a person is the
sine qua non of the offence under Section 499 of the Indian Penal
Code.

Page 6 of 9
16.

Thus, to be actionable, a complaint must state that the

maker or publisher of the offending words knew or had reasons to
believe that the imputation will harm the reputation of the person
concerned or it must be averred that the maker or the publisher
intended to harm the reputation of the person forming subject
matter of the statement.
17.

Qua the petitioners, material averments attracting

Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code are lacking.
18.

A perusal of para 14 of the complaint shows that the

draftmen of the complaint had in mind the ninth exception to
Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code which protects the maker of
a statement if he establishes that the statement was made in
good faith. It needs hardly to be clarified that he who claims good
faith must show that before making the statements he had made
inquiry with due care and attention and was satisfied about the
truth of the imputation.
19.

Unfortunately, the draftman of the complaint failed to

appreciate that good faith was a defence and had to be
established by the maker of the complaint. But, before the maker
of the statement could be called to account for his statement, it
had to be alleged and proved by the complainant that

the

offending words were used or published with an
Page 7 of 9
intention to harm the reputation of the person against whom the
statement was made or that the maker of the statement had
knowledge or reasons to believe that the imputation would harm
the person who was the subject matter of the statements.
20.

Thus, on the second contention urged, the petition

must succeed.
21.

In respect of the first submission, whether or not what

was published in the newspaper was true or false cannot be
established by the publisher save and except through the
evidence of the makers of the statement. Thus, truthfulness of
the statement made by Lovleen and her father to the press would
require summoning of said 2 persons as witnesses.
22.

Having chosen to drop proceedings against Lovleen

and her father, complainants cannot be permitted to indirectly
achieve what they cannot achieve directly.
23.

Lovleen and her father have been freed of all bondage

pertaining to, arising out of and connected with the matrimonial
bond between Lovleen and complainant No.2. In my opinion, they
being the principal tort feasers, complaint cannot be allowed to
continue against the printer and the publisher or for that matter

editor of the newspaper who at best would be guilty of abetting
the commission of the offence under
Page 8 of 9
Section 499 IPC. My reason for so holding is that there are no
averments in the complaint that the petitioners published the
offending news item with an intent to defame the complainants.
Charge against the petitioners is, as per para 14 of the
complainant, that they did not verify the truth of the allegations
levelled by accused Nos.5 and 6 before publishing the news item.
It is further relevant to note that the complaint nor the
summoning order has proceeded on the basis that qua the
petitioners case is made out under Section 499 IPC read with
Section 107 IPC or read with Section 34 IPC.

There is no

allegation of conspiracy, i.e. Section 120B IPC is not attracted.
24.

The petition is accordingly allowed.

25.

Summoning order as also the complaint against the

petitioners is quashed.

August 10, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

