IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
C.R.P. No.472/2003
#
!

Dr.K.N.Shukla
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr.V.M.Issar, Advocate and
Mr.Vishesh Issar, Advocate.

VERSUS
$
^

M/s.B.L.A. Chit Fund Ltd. & Ors. ........
Respondents
through: Mr.N.Safaya, Advocate.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 14.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioner impleaded as defendant No.1 in a suit

filed by the respondent under Order 37 of the Code of Civil
Procedure suffered a decree by default.

He failed to cause

appearance to be entered when summons in the suit were
served.

Page 1 of 5

2.

He filed an application under Order 37 Rule 4 CPC

for setting aside the ex-parte decree. The application suffered
a dismissal vide impugned order dated 17.1.2003.
3.

In the application under Order 37 Rule 4 CPC it was

pointed out to the learned Judge i.e. it was pleaded that the
suit was filed on 17.7.2000. It was listed on 18.7.2000 when
summons were issued returnable for 7.8.2000.

That process

server reported that he went to the address notified for
effecting service of the summons on 4.8.2000 when a lady met
him and stated that she was the wife of the petitioner but
refused to accept the summons. That treating the same to be
a service upon him the learned Court proceeded to hold that
since he had not entered appearance within the stipulated
period, plaintiff was entitled to a judgment of a deemed
admission.
4.

Pertaining to the summons sent by registered post it

was pleaded that the A.D. card does not bear the signature of
any person residing with him.
5.

Responding to the application, plaintiff informed the

learned Judge that the requirement of Rule 4 of Order 37 i.e.
apart from showing special circumstances which prevented him
from appearing required facts to be pleaded which would
entitle the petitioner to leave to defend.

It was stated that
Page 2 of 5

none have been pleaded.

Thus, plaintiff prayed that the

application be dismissed.
6.

Learned Trial Judge has dismissed application filed

by the petitioner under Order 37 Rule 4 CPC.
7.

No doubt, there is good merit in the submission

made by learned counsel for the petitioner that the process
server could not have recorded refusal even if petitioner's wife
declined to accept the summons for the reason law requires
attempt to be made to personally serve summons upon the
party concerned and when attempts to so serve fail, only then
it is permissible to serve an adult member residing with the
defendant.

But, the petitioner has to cross an additional

hurdle.
8.

In the decision reported as Rajni Kumar vs. Suresh

Kumar Malhotra & Anr., JT 2003 (3) SC 307 in para 10 it was
observed as under:“10.
It is important to note here that the power
under Rule 4 of Order 37 is not confined to setting
aside the ex parte decree, it extends to staying or
setting aside the execution and giving leave to
appear to the summons and to defend the suit. We
may point out that as the very purpose of Order 37 is
to ensure an expeditious hearing and disposal of the
suit filed thereunder, Rule 4 empowers the Court to
grant leave to the defendant to appear to summons
and defend the suit if the Court considers it
reasonable so to do, on such terms as Court thinks fit
in addition to setting aside the decree. Where on an
application, more than one among the specified
Page 3 of 5

reliefs may be granted by the Court all such reliefs
must be claimed in one application.
It is not
permissible to claim such reliefs in successive
petitions as it would be contrary to the letter and
spirit of the provision.
That is why where an
application under Rule 4 of Order 37 is filed to set
aside a decree either because the defendant did not
appear in response to summons and limitation
expired, or having appeared, did not apply for leave
to defend the suit in the prescribed period, the Court
is empowered to grant leave to defendant to appear
to the summons and to defend the suit in the same
application.
It is, therefore, not enough for the
defendant to show special circumstances which
prevented him from appearing or applying for leave
to defend, he has also to show by affidavit or
otherwise, facts which would entitle him leave to
defend the suit. In this respect, Rule 4 of Order 37 is
different from Rule 13 of Order 9.”
9.

Indeed, an application under Order 37 Rule 4 CPC

differs vis-a-vis an application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC for
the reason an application under Order 37 Rule 4 CPC is a
composite application determination whereof, if in favour of
the applicant, results in not only the ex-parte decree being set
aside but leave to defend being granted to the party
concerned.

It is for this reason law requires that the

defendant, in addition to show special circumstances which
prevented him/her from appearing, must additionally disclose
facts entitling him/her to obtain leave to defend.
10.

In the instant case, petitioner has disclosed no such

facts which would entitle the petitioner to be granted leave to
defend.
Page 4 of 5

11.

Under the circumstances the petition must fail.

12.

Ordered accordingly.

13.

The petition is dismissed.

January 14, 2008
bainsla

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 5 of 5

