IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA No. 195/2004
#
!

Sh. Zile Singh
through:

........
Appellant
Mr. Harish Kumar Mehra, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Sh. Mangloo Ram Bansal
........
Respondent
through:
Mr. Roop Chand, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 15.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)
The present appeal has been filed by the appellant against

the judgment dated 5.8.04 passed by the ADJ, Delhi whereby appeal
filed by the appellant against the judgment and decree dated 6.5.03
passed by the Civil Judge, Delhi was dismissed.
2.

Appellant was the defendant in the suit filed by the

respondent seeking a decree in sum of Rs.2 lacs.
3.
entered

It was pleaded in the plaint that the plaintiff and defendant
into an agreement

to sell

dated

17.9.90

whereunder

defendant agreed to sell an alternative plot which was to be allotted to
page 1 of 11

him by DDA for a sale consideration of Rs.2 lakhs. That pursuant to the
said agreement the plaintiff paid earnest money in sum of Rs.1 lakhs to
the defendant on 17.9.90. That the balance sale consideration was to
be paid at the time when the possession of the plot was to be handed
over to the plaintiff and execution of sale deed and other necessary
documents. That the defendant failed to perform its part of obligations
under the agreement. That it was a stipulation of the agreement that in
case of breach by the defendant he i.e. the defendant would be liable
to pay to the plaintiff double the amount of the earnest money. Thus,
the suit for recovery of Rs.2 lakhs was filed.
4.

Vide judgment and decree dated 6.5.03 the learned Civil

Judge has held that the defendant had breached the agreement to sell
dated 17.9.90 and that the plaintiff is entitled to recover a sum of Rs.1
lakhs together with the interest @ 12% p.a. for the period

from

17.9.90 (date of payment of earnest money of Rs. 1 lakhs) till the date
of the decree. Plaintiff was further held entitled to future interest @ 6%
p.a. from the date of decree till date of realization.
5.

Against the said judgment and decree the defendant filed

an appeal under Section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Vide
judgment dated 5.8.04, the learned Additional District Judge dismissed
the appeal and affirmed the judgment and decree dated 6.5.03.
6.

In these circumstances the appellant/defendant has filed

page 2 of 11

the present second appeal under Section 100 of the Code of Civil
Procedure challenging the judgment dated 5.8.04.
7.

In the memorandum of the appeal it was submitted by the

appellant that no claim for pre-suit interest was raised by the plaintiff
in the demand notice or in the plaint and in absence of any contract
between the parties providing for payment of pre-suit interest the
learned Trial Court was not justified in awarding pre-suit interest to the
plaintiff.
8.

Per Contra, it was submitted by the plaintiff/respondent

that the ‘interest’ is an integral part of the claim and therefore he is
entitled to receive interest from the date of the agreement till the date
of the decree.
9.

Vide order dated 21.5.07 following substantial question of

law was formulated by this Court: -

10.

“1. Whether the plaintiff was entitled to get interest from
17th September, 1990 to 5th June 1998, that is, the date on
which the suit was filed without praying the same in the
demand notice or in the plaint?”
At the hearing today learned counsel conceded that the

substantial question of law as framed is not happily worded. Counsel
concedes that the substantial question of law should read as under :-

“In absence of any contract between the parties providing for
payment of pre-suit interest and in light of the fact that no claim for
page 3 of 11

pre-suit interest was raised by the plaintiff in the plaint or in the
demand notice, whether the learned Trial Court was justified in
awarding pre-suit interest?”
11.

The claim relating to payment of interest in a suit for

money can be made under three heads –
I.

Interest prior to the institution of the suit on the principal

sum adjudged;
II.

Pendente lite interest on the principal sum adjudged from

the date of the suit to the date of the decree; and
III.

Future interest on the principal sum adjudged from the

date of the decree to the date of the payment.
12.

So far as pendente lite and future interest are concerned,

Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure is applicable. As per Section
34 of CPC, the court may order interest at such rate as the court
deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged from the
date of the suit to the date of the decree. So far as the future interest
is concerned, the court may direct payment of interest not exceeding
six per cent on the sum adjudged. The proviso to Section 34, however,
makes it clear that where the liability in relation to the sum adjudged
has arisen out of commercial transaction, the rate of such further
interest may exceed six per cent per annum, but shall not exceed the
contractual rate of interest or when there is no contractual rate, the

page 4 of 11

rate at which moneys are lent or advanced by nationalised banks in
relation to commercial transactions.
13.

Interest Act, 1978, governs payment of pre-suit interest.

Section 3 and 4 of the Interest Act, 1978 are relevant for the aforesaid
purpose. The relevant portions of the said provisions are quoted
hereunder :"3.
Power of court to allow interest.- (1) In any
proceedings for the recovery of any debt or damages or
in any proceedings in which a claim for interest in
respect of any debt or damages already paid is made,
the court may, if it thinks fit, allow interest to the person
entitled to the debt or damages or to the person making
such claim, as the case may be, at a rate not exceeding
the current rate of interest, for the whole or part of the
following period, that is to say, (a) if the proceedings relate to a debt payable by virtue
of a written instrument at a certain time, then, from the
date when the debt is payable to the date of institution
of the proceedings;
(b) if the proceedings do not relate to any such debt,
then, from the date mentioned in this regard in a
written notice given by the person entitled or the person
making the claim to the person liable that interest will
be claimed, to the date of institution of the proceedings:
Provided that where the amount of the debt or damages
has been repaid before the institution of the
proceedings interest shall not be allowed under this
section for the period after such repayment.
xxxxxx
(3) Nothing in this section,(a) shall apply in relation to(i) any debt or damages upon which interest is payable
page 5 of 11

as of right, by virtue of any agreement; or
(ii) any debt or damages upon which payment of
interest is barred, by virtue of an express agreement;
(b) shall affect(i) the compensation recoverable for the dishonour of a
bill of exchange, promissory note or cheque, as defined
in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881); or
(ii) the provisions of rule 2 of Order II of the First
Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of
1908);
(c) shall empower the court to award interest upon
interest."
"4. Interest payable under certain enactments.- (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3,
interest shall be payable in all cases in which it is
payable by virtue of any enactment or other rule of law
or usage having the force of law.
(2) Notwithstanding as aforesaid, and without prejudice
to the generality of the provisions of sub-section(1),the
court shall, in each of the following cases, allow interest
from the date specified below to the date of institution
of the proceedings at such rate as the court may
consider reasonable, unless the court is satisfied that
there are special reasons why interest should not be
allowed, namely:(a) where money or other property has been deposited
as security for the performance of an obligation
imposed by law or contract, from the date of the
deposit;
(b) where the obligation to pay money or restore any
property arises by virtue of a fiduciary relationship, from
the date of the cause of action;
(c) where money or other property is obtained or
retained by fraud, from the date of the cause of action;
page 6 of 11

14.

(d) where the claim is for dower or maintenance, from
the date of the cause of action."
Noting the provisions of Section 3 and 4 of the Interest Act,

the Madras High Court in the decision reported as Batliboi & Co Ltd v
Beama Mfg Pvt Ltd, (2006) 1 MLJ 276 observed as under :“A combined reading of the provisions contained in
Sections 3 and 4 makes it clear that,
(1) interest is payable on a pre-suit claim, if there is any
statutory enactment to that effect (provisions contained
in the Negotiable Instruments Act or the Land
Acquisition Act or specific instances where interest is
payable under an enactment);
(2) interest is payable under other rule of law;
(3) interest is payable by virtue of any usage having the
force of law;
(4) interest is payable as of right by virtue of any
agreement as contemplated under Section 3(3)(a);
Keeping in view the fact that in Section 3(3) the
expression
"agreement"
has
been
used
in
contradistinction with Section 3(1)(a), where the
expression "written instrument" has been used, it is
obvious that such agreement contemplated under
Section 3(3)(a) can be express agreement or even
implied agreement.
(5) interest is payable if the claim relate to a debt
payable by virtue of a written instrument at a certain
time;
(6) interest is payable from the date of any written
notice given by the person entitled to such claim.
It is however required to be noticed that in the matters
coming within Section 4 of the Interest Act, 1978, it is
mandatory for the court to award Page 1560 interest,
page 7 of 11

15.

whereas in the matters coming within the Section 3, it is
discretionary for the court to consider the question of
grant of interest.”
The provisions contained in the Interest Act, 1978 are almost

similar to the provisions contained in the Interest Act, 1839.

While

considering the question of payability of interest for the period prior to
the date of filing of the suit, the Privy Council in the decision reported
as Bengal Nagpur Railway Co. Ltd. v. Ruttanji Ramji and Ors. AIR 1938
Privy Council 67 observed as under :“... The crucial question however is whether the Court
has authority to allow interest for the period prior to the
institution of the suit; and the solution of this question
depends, not upon the Civil Procedure Code, but upon
substantive law. Now, interest for the period prior to the
date of the suit may be awarded, if there is an
agreement for the payment of interest at a fixed rate, or
it is payable by the usage of trade having the force of
law, or under the provision of any substantive law
entitling the plaintiff to recover interest, as for instance,
under Section 80, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, the
Court may award interest at the rate of 6 per cent per
annum, when no rate of interest is specified in the
promissory note or bill of exchange. There is in the
present case neither usage nor any contract express or
implied to justify the award of interest. Nor is interest
payable by virtue of any provision of the law governing
the case. Under the Interest Act, 32 of 1839, the Court
may allow interest to the plaintiff, if the amount claimed
is a sum certain which is payable at a certain time by
virtue of a written instrument."
16.

It was further observed :-

"...There is a considerable divergence of judicial opinion
in India on the question of whether interest can be
recovered as damages under Section 73, Contract Act,
where it is not recoverable under the Interest Act. Now,
Section 73, Contract Act, gives statutory recognition to
page 8 of 11

17.

the general rule that, in the event of a breach of a
contract, the party who suffers by such a breach is
entitled to recover from the party, breaking the
contract, compensation for any loss or damage thereby
caused to him. On behalf of the plaintiffs, reliance is
placed upon Illus.(n) to that section. The illustration
however does not deal with the right of a creditor to
recover interest from his debtor on a loan advanced to
the latter by the former. It only shows that if any person
breaks his contract to pay to another person a sum of
money on a specified date, and in consequence of that
breach the latter is unable to pay his debts and is
ruined, the former is not liable to make good to the
latter anything except the principal sum which he
promised to pay, together with interest up to the date of
payment. He is not liable to pay damages of a remote
character. The illustration does not confer upon a
creditor a right to recover interest upon a debt which is
due to him, when he is not entitled to such interest
under any provision of the law. Nor can an illustration
have the effect of modifying the language of the section
which alone forms the enactment."
The claim of the plaintiff/respondent for pre-suit interest is

to be judged keeping in view the aforesaid principles.
18.

There is no dispute that in the present case there is no

written instrument under which the debt is payable at a certain time.
The plaintiff has also not averred in the plaint that there was any
agreement with the defendants regarding payment of interest or there
is any usage having the force of law regarding payment of interest. In
the absence of any proof of agreement, either express or implied, or
usage having the force of law regarding payability of interest, and in
the absence of any written instrument, the claim of interest can be
sustained only if it is proved that a written notice of demand to that

page 9 of 11

effect has been issued.
19.

In the present case admittedly no written notice was ever

issued claiming interest at any point of time.
20.

In such view of the matter the appellant is right in

contending that no interest could have been claimed much less
decreed prior to the date of filing of the suit. So far as pendente lite
and future interest are concerned, it is well settled that such matters
are within the discretion of the Court. Therefore, the calculation of the
interest @ 12% per annum during the pendency of the suit and 6% per
annum after the decree which is based on the discretion of the Trial
Court cannot be said to be arbitrary and in view of the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the decision reported as Mahesh Chandra Bansal v
Krishna Swaroop Singhal & Anr 1997 (III) CTC 367, I do not find any
reason to interfere with such part of the decree.
21.

In light of the above discussion, I hold that the learned Trial

Court was not justified in awarding pre-suit interest @ 12% p.a. for the
period from payment of earnest money i.e. 17.9.90 till the date of filing
the suit i.e. 5.6.98. The judgment and decree dated 6.5.03 is
accordingly modified holding that interest prior to 5.6.1998 is declined.
22.

The appeal is accordingly allowed in terms of para 21

above.
23.

No costs.

page 10 of 11

November 15, 2007
sl

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 11 of 11

