IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) No.1372-74/2006
# Shri G.C.Khanna & Ors.
.......Petitioners
!
through: Mr.Ajay Shekhar, Adv. &
Mr.Sanjiv Bahl, Adv.
VERSUS
$ Electric Construction & Equipment Co. Ltd. .......Respondent
^
through: Mr.Valmiki Mehta, Sr. Adv. with
Mr.Dil Raj Kumar, Adv.
RESERVED ON : 08.03.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 14.03.2007

CORAM:
*
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y
To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioners are the landlords. Respondent is the tenant.

2.

Petitioners are aggrieved by the impugned order dated

3.6.2006 passed by the Rent Controller, Delhi dismissing an
application dated 12.1.2006 filed by the petitioners seeking
permission to lead evidence pertaining to subsequent events
which have transpired during the pendency of the eviction
petition.
3.

Request has been declined.

4.

Reason for declining the request is that on an earlier

CM(M) No.1372/2006

Page No.1 of 10

occasion, being aggrieved by not allowing eviction sought for on
ground of bona fide requirement, the landlords had filed a
revision petition registered as C.R.No.3/2000. The same resulted
in the dismissal order being set aside followed by a remand
containing a direction to the Rent Control Tribunal to re-decide
the matter after dealing with the contentions urged by the
landlords with regard to the availability of alternative suitable
residential accommodation at the back portion of property No.7,
Sri Ram Road, Delhi.
5.

In passing the impugned order, learned Rent Controller

has held that the order of remand dated 10.3.2004 limits the
scope of inquiry at the remanded stage and the scope of inquiry
cannot be expanded.
6.

Being relevant, order of remand dated 10.3.2004 in

C.R.No.3/2000 may be reproduced. It reads as under:“The grievance of the petitioners who has filed
eviction petition under Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi
Rent Control Act is that the learned ARC has not
taken into consideration the fact that the so called
alternative accommodation available with the
petitioners bearing No.7, Sriram Road (back portion)
which was got vacated from S.K.Mehra way back in
the year 1990 was in dilapidated condition and it was
on this property that the petitioner had constructed
two portions, one part of which was let out to the
respondent and other portion to Minerva Talkies.
It is contended that the learned ARC fell in grave
error in holding that this accommodation was
available with the petitioner as an alternative
suitable residential accommodation at the time when
the instant petition was filed. Since the aforesaid
contentions involve substantial question of facts and
can be determined by way of evidence or inspection
CM(M) No.1372/2006

Page No.2 of 10

report submitted by the Local Commissioner in the
instant proceedings as no finding can be returned
about the availability of suitable residential
accommodation without dealing with the aforesaid
contentions and pleas of the petitioners. In order to
determine this, learned ARC shall allow the petitioner
to adduce further evidence in this regard with the
right of rebuttal to the respondents.
In the result, petition is allowed, impugned order is
set aside with direction to the learned ARC to
redecide the matter after dealing with the
contentions raised by the counsel for the petitioners
with regard to the availability of the alternative
suitable residential accommodation bearing No.7,
Sriram Road (back portion) at the time of filing of
instant petition and by taking into consideration the
report of the Local Commissioner in respect of the
said property. The parties shall appear before the
trial court on 22nd March 2004 for the aforesaid
purpose. Since the eviction petition was filed in the
year 1983, the trial court shall positively decide the
matter within six months.

7.

Trial court record, if received, be sent back
forthwith.”
Noting decisions on the point that subsequent events

which have transpired during pendency of the eviction petition
namely births and deaths in the family can always be brought on
record as long as an eviction petition is pending consideration,
the learned Rent Controller, being of the opinion that his hands
were tied due to the language of the remand order has construed
the legal position as under:“The
proposition of law laid down in aforesaid
judgment is not in dispute. However, this judgment is
not applicable to the peculiar facts and circumstances
of the present case, as the matter has been
remanded back, as per the directions of Hon'ble High
Court dated 10.3.2004 with the directions to allow the
petitioners to adduce further evidence in this regard
with the right of rebuttal to the respondent and it has
been directed that the matter be decided afresh after
CM(M) No.1372/2006

Page No.3 of 10

8.

dealing with the contentions raised by the counsel for
the petitioner with regard to the availability of
alternative
suitable
residential
accommodation
bearing No.7, Sriram Road, as the directions of the
Hon'ble High Court are clear, while remanding back
the matter vide order dated 10.3.2004, therefore, this
court has no jurisdiction to enlarge the scope of the
remand order, as per the directions of the superior
court and only the evidence, which can be accepted
and filed on the record by the petitioners is pertaining
to
the
availability
of
suitable
alternative
accommodation and the petitioners cannot be
allowed to enlarge the scope of enquiry by filing an
affidavit regarding the change in the family of the
petitioner due to elapse of time and he cannot be
allowed to re-open the entire case beyond the
directions contained in the order dated 10.3.2004 of
Hon'ble High Court. Accordingly, the application of
the petitioners is also no sustainable for the aforesaid
reasons. The same is also dismissed.”
Shri Valmiki Mehta, learned senior counsel for the

respondent urged that the past events show that different
portions of the property bearing No.7, Sri Ram Road, Delhi was
earlier on let out by the petitioners to different tenants. Invoking
Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, namely, pleading
bona fide requirement, landlords got the tenants evicted but did
not occupy the vacated portions even for a single day.
portion of the property was demolished.

Front

2 independent units

were constructed. Both were let out. One was taken on lease by
his client. As regards the back portion, it is stated that from time
to time the same was let out to various tenants and since
November 1981, the same was lying vacant. It was urged that in
the first round of litigation, learned Rent Controller noted the
aforesaid facts of constant letting of the different portions of the
property at 7, Sri Ram Road, Delhi as also vacant portion towards
CM(M) No.1372/2006

Page No.4 of 10

the rear being available with the landlords. Counsel urged that
since landlords urged in the Civil Revision Petition No.3/2000 that
the back portion was in a dilapidated condition, limited remand
made by this Court vide order dated 10.3.2004 restricted the
scope of inquiry only to the issue whether the back portion was
habitable or not.
9.

Subsequent events sought to be introduced by the

landlords are disclosed in the affidavit of G.C.Khanna, petitioner
No.1. In his words, petitioner No.1 described the same as under:“That G.C.Khanna (HUF) is the owner of the entire
property at 7, Sri Ram Road, Delhi-54. The area of
entire property is 2100 sq.yards. Property consists of
front portion on area of 1000 sq.yds. and rear portion
having area of 1100 sq.yds. The said property was
originally constructed in 1911. The property became
dilapidated, as such the front portion was demolished
& two flats were constructed in 1970. The said flats
are occupied by tenants, one of whom is the
respondent. The rear portion is lying in a dilapidated
condition and is not safe for occupation and living. It
has not been occupied by anyone since 1981. The
said portion has outlived its life and can collapse
anytime. The walls, floors and roof are cracked and
require demolition.
The HUF consists of the following family members who
live at 1, Sri Ram Road, Delhi.
1.
G.C.Khanna Karta aged 77 years.
2.
His wife Tej Khanna aged 76 years.
3.
His son Arun Khanna aged 50 years.
I G.C. Khanna M.A. am Chairman of Fast Foods Pvt.
Ltd., Senior partner of The Exchange and President of
Swami Ramtirth National Education Society, Delhi.
My Income Tax Return for assessment year 2005-06
has been filed showing total annual income of over
Rs.9 lacs.
My wife Mrs.Tej Khanna M.A. is Director of Fast Foods
CM(M) No.1372/2006

Page No.5 of 10

Pvt. Ltd. and Vice President of Association for Social
Health in India. Her Income Tax Return 2005-06 filed
showing total Annual Income of Rs.3.45 lacs.
My son Arun Khanna (UK Diploma Holder) aged 50
years Mg.Director, Fast Foods Pvt. Ltd. & Chairman of
All Indian Mfrs. Organization, UP.
This Original Income Tax Return of 2005-06 of Rs.3.39
lacs showing Annual Income has been filed.
Besides the following dependent family members also
live at 1, Sri Ram Road.
My daughter in law Mrs.Monica Khanna B.A. aged 43
years, Partner in The Exchange Agencies, Original
Income Tax Return of 2005-06 of Rs.1.45 lacs Annual
Income is filed.
My grand daughter Puja Khanna B.A. aged 21 years is
a post graduate student-Original Birth Certificate DOB
29/10/84 attached.
Copy of B.A. Honors Examination 2005 attached.
Copy of Receipt of Amity Business School Noida
attached.
My second grand daughter Aradhana Khanna is aged
19 years.
Original Birth Certificate DOB 13/8/86 attached.
Copy of Amity Business School Noida receipt attached.
My grand son Adhish Khanna is over 17 years.
Original Birth Certificate DOB 19/3/88 attached.
Copy of CBSE Examination 2003 Certificate attached.
Copy of Receipt of Indian Institute of Planning and
Mgt. attached.
All the above grand 3 children are college students.
My other immediate family members who live near-by
are:1. My daughter Kiran Kapur B.A. aged 48 years.
2.

Her husband Deepak Kapur B.Sc. aged 51 years
Vice President, Chambal Fertilizers.

3.

Her son Samir Kapur (US qualified) aged 21 years,
presently working abroad.

4.

Her daughter Natasha Kapur college student aged

CM(M) No.1372/2006

Page No.6 of 10

18 years.
5.

My younger daughter Madhuri Mehra B.A. aged 42
years, employed as a Teacher.

6.

Her husband Rajeev Mehra B.A. aged 44 years,
Businessman.

7.

Her son Sahil Mehra school student aged 16
years.

8.

Her second son Arman Mehra school student aged
9 years.

These two daughters along with their families often
come and stay with me as and when they desire.
The flat at 1, Sri Ram Road, Delhi, which I own in my
individual capacity, consists of the following
accommodation:
2 Bedrooms & 2 Toilets, 1 study-cum-office room,
Drawing cum Dining room, Kitchen, Verandah, servant
quarter and garage.
This said accommodation is not suitable/sufficient for
myself, my wife, my son, his wife and three college
going grand children, besides my two married
daughters & their families, leaving aside other close
relatives and friends.

10.

Due to paucity of accommodation great deal of
tension constantly prevails with my son and his wife
who have no right in these premises, whereas he is
legally entitled to live in the suit premises. Two adult
grand daughters and third grandson age over 17
years are not able to pursue their education in a
proper manner. They have no privacy and cannot
entertain any friend at home. At night they huddle
together and sleep in the drawing room. Since filing
of this case 22 years ago six adult members and the
youngest grand son over 17 years old have now to
manage in two bed rooms.”
Suffice would it be to note that the eviction petition was

filed in the year 1983. Events attempted to be brought on record
by the landlords are of the infants becoming major.

CM(M) No.1372/2006

Some of

Page No.7 of 10

them getting married and having children who not only were born
during pendency of the eviction petition but became adults. In a
nutshell, requirement of the extended joint family was sought to
be projected.
11.

I need not note the plethora of authorities which permit

Courts to take cognizance of subsequent events which have
transpired during pendency of eviction petition, more so when
eviction

sought

is

predicated

on

the

plea

of

bona

fide

requirement. Suffice would it be to note that in relation to claims
of bona fide requirement it is the duty of the Court to test the
bona fide requirement as on date when the matter is being
decided.
12.

Reason thereof is that due to docket explosion in this

country, considerable time elapses between the date when
eviction petition is instituted and its final decision.

Births and

deaths take place in the family of the landlord. Deaths go to the
benefit of the tenant, in that, removal of a member from the
family of the landlord diminishes a requirement. Births go to the
benefit of the landlord as the same results in an increase in the
requirement of the family.

Similarly, needs of the growing

children and in particular on their attaining adulthood, to have
separate rooms for themselves becomes important. Marriage of a
child and in particular a male would further increase the demand
for space within the family. Daughters getting married and
moving out would reduce, to some extent, the requirement of the
CM(M) No.1372/2006

Page No.8 of 10

family members.
13.

If life is not static, so cannot be the law. As the saying

goes, the rule of law would lose its meaning if it does not run
close to the rule of life.
14.

As a proposition of law, it is clearly decipherable that as

long as an eviction petition is pending, each and every
subsequent event which is relevant for a proper adjudication of
rival claims can always be brought to the notice of the Court.
Indeed, it is the duty of every Court to take it on record.
15.

The only point which needs a little attention in the

instant case is whether the remand order curtails the power of the
Rent Controller in deciding the limited issue pertaining to
availability of certain space at the rear of the property bearing
No.7, Sri Ram Road, Delhi?
16.

No doubt, while remanding the matter to the Rent

Control Tribunal, this Court, vide order of remand dated
10.3.2004, has called upon the Rent Control Tribunal to consider
whether the back portion is available as suitable for residence.
But, with reference to what facts would the Tribunal consider the
availability thereof, if ultimately found to be habitable?
17.

Obviously, in relation to the family members of the

landlord.
18.

Thus, meaningfully read, order of remand does not

require, least of all mean, that the landlord would be precluded
from bringing to the notice of the Tribunal the change in family
CM(M) No.1372/2006

Page No.9 of 10

circumstances and the need of the growing family. Inextricable
linked to the inquiry pertaining to the bona fide requirement of a
landlord are the twin factors, namely habitable accommodation
available with the landlord and the extent of the family of the
landlord.
19.

Therefore, the petition stands disposed of quashing the

impugned order dated 3.6.2006.

The application filed by the

landlords seeking placing on record subsequent events with right
to lead

additional evidence pertaining

thereto is allowed.

Affidavit filed by the petitioners in support of the application is
directed to be taken on record.
20.

Since the eviction petition has remained pending since

the year 1983, it is hoped and expected that the Rent Controller
would take extra endeavour to expedite trial thereof and try and
pronounce a decision as expeditiously as possible.
21.

No costs.

March 14, 2007
dk

CM(M) No.1372/2006

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.10 of 10

