IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA No.6/2005
#
!

M/s. GMB Packaging and
Printing Pvt. Ltd.
........
Appellant
through: Mr. Vinay Kumar Garg, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Mukesh Puri
through:

........
Respondent
Mr. Ravi D.Sharma, Advocate

RESERVED ON: 07.12.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 12.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
I need to answer the following substantial question

of law:

2.

“Whether in view of the evidence on record findings
returned by the learned Trial Judge and as affirmed
by the learned Appellate Judge are sustainable?”
Since the legal issue relates to appreciation of

evidence I prefer to preface my decision with a restatement of
the legal position as to under what circumstances appreciation
of evidence partakes the colour of substantial question of law

Page 1 of 15

and when is the Appellate Court entitled to interfere with the
findings of fact.
3.

Noting 2 earlier decisions reported as AIR 1951 SC

120 Sarju Parshad Ramdeo Sahu Vs. Jwaleshwari Pratap Borain
Singh and AIR 1983 SC 114 Madhusudan Das Vs. Narayanibai;
in the decision reported as 2001 (3) SCC 179 Santosh Hazari
Vs. Purushottam Tiwari the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in para 15
observed as under:-

4.

“15. - - - - - - As a matter of law if the appraisal of the
evidence by the trial court suffers from a material
irregularity or is based on inadmissible evidence or on
conjectures and surmises, the appellate court is
entitled to interfere with the finding of fact. (See
Madhusudan Das V. Narayanibai (1983) I SCC 35).
The rule is - and it is nothing more than a rule of
practice – that when there is conflict of oral evidence
of the parties on any matter in issue and the decision
hinges upon the credibility of witnesses, then unless
there is some special feature about the evidence of a
particular witness which has escaped the trial judge's
notice or there is a sufficient balance of improbability
to displace his opinion as to where the credibility lie,
the appellate court should not interfere with the
finding of the trial judge on a question of fact. (See
Sarju Pershad Ramdeo Sahu V. Jwaleshwari Pratap
Narain Singh, AIR 1951 SC 120).”
Where a court proceeds to evaluate evidence by

casting a wrong onus on a party the decision is contrary to law
for the reason casting of onus is on legal principles and wrong
application of a legal principle can be corrected in second
appeal. Similarly if evidence is appreciated with reference to
wrong principles of law relatable to appreciation of evidence,
Page 2 of 15

the same relates to a question of law and can be corrected in a
second appeal.
5.

Mukesh Puri, the respondent filed a suit for recovery

of Rs.92,234/- stating that he was the sole proprietor of M/s.
Karan Enterprises and was carrying on business of sale of
machines and spare parts used for manufacture of corrugated
boxes. That Sh. Harvinder Singh Bawa, the managing director
of the appellant placed an order on him for supply of
corrugated machine rolls and gears which were duly supplied
and bill No. 120 dated 14.3.1996 in sum of Rs.57,609/- was
raised.

Subsequently an order fro supply of spare parts was

placed by Sh. Harvinder Singh Bawa which was executed by
him and in respect whereof he raised bill NO. 275 dated
24.3.1996 in sum of Rs.2,000/-. Thus, Rs.59, 609/- became due
and payable. That no payment was made. That as per the bills
he was entitled to interest for late payment @ 18% p.a. That
since he served a legal notice upon the defendant he was
entitled to be reimbursed Rs.550/- as legal charges. Thus claim
made was in sum of Rs.92,334/-.
6.

The suit was filed on 12.3.1999.

7.

Appellant pleaded in the written statement that it

had paid a sum of Rs.25,000/- as advance to the plaintiff by
and under cheque No. 463149 dated 26.2.1996 and that no
Page 3 of 15

goods were delivered to it. The sum of Rs.25,000/- remained
as advance due.

That in April 1998 spares worth Rs.3,000/-

were supplied by the plaintiff and while so supplying, the
plaintiff acknowledged that Rs.22,000/- were still lying with him
to the credit of the appellant. It was pleaded that when order
was placed by the appellant for supply or corrugated machine
rolls and advance payment of Rs.25,000/- was made it had
issued requisite sales tax form No.31.

The appellant denied

receipt of bill No.120 and 275 or goods thereunder.

The

appellant laid a counter claim in sum of Rs.22,000/-.
8.

Plaintiff examined himself as the sole witness:

Appellant examined H.S.Bawa as the sole witness.
9.

Plaintiff deposed that goods were sent by him from

Delhi to the appellant at Greater Noida (UP) through tempo No.
DL-IC-5066 and the two bills Ex. PW-1/1, Ex. PW-1/2 were
raised. (Plaintiff proved the carbon copies).

He stated that

manager of the defendant namely Raja Mohd. signed the office
copies of the 2 bills.

In cross examination he admitted that

since goods had to be delivered outside Delhi the sales tax
check post had to be crossed. He stated that he had himself
gone to deliver the goods and had insisted the either stamp of
the company be affixed on the office copies of the bills or that
Mr. H.S.Bawa who was present which delivery was effected
Page 4 of 15

should sign in acknowledgment of having received the goods
and the bills, but neither was done.

To quote, he stated as

under:
“When I supplied the goods the managing director of
the company as well as Mr. Raja both were present. I
had insisted that either Mr. Bawa should himself
accept the goods or the seal of the company be
affixed but they did not put the seal and ignored my
insistence.”
10.
Pertaining to Rs.25,000/- stated in the written
statement by the appellant as having been paid as advance
money for supply of the goods, Mukesh Puri stated, on cross
examination, as under:-

11.

“It is correct that a cheque amount of Rs.25,000/issued in the name of my firm by the deft. company.
That cheque has been credited to the firm's account.
It is incorrect to suggest that I have not supplied the
goods ordered by the deft. company. It is correct
that eft. had given an advance of Rs.25,000/- again
said, deft. had cleared the previous account. It is
correct that I have not stated in my plaint that this
Rs.25,000/- were received against the previous
accounts. It is correct that I have not filed any
accounts.”
H.S.Bawa, the managing director of the appellant

appeared as the sole witness of the appellant. In examination
in chief he deposed on the lines of the written statement.
12.

H.S.Bawa

was

confronted

with

three

alleged

previous bills stated to have been raised by the plaintiff being
Ex. DW-1/PX, Ex. DW-1/PY and Ex. PW/PZ. The testimony is as
under:-

Page 5 of 15

13.

“My dealing with with the pltff. had started from
1996. I am not aware as to whether I purchased any
goods from the pltff. in the year 1995. I have to
check from my records whether I purchased goods
from the pltff. in the year 1995. I have not brought
the record i.e. accounts books. I am produce the
accounts books for the year 1995. Again said I
have to check from my record as to whether the
pltff. supplied goods against their bills copies of
which are being filed which are being filed which
are Ex. DW-1/P-X Ex.DW-1/PY and DW-1/PZ. It is
incorrect that I have not made the payments as I
had to check from the record about the receipt of
the goods. It is incorrect that when I placed the
order in 1996 with the pltff. the pltff. asked me to
clear the previous outstanding dues. It is incorrect
to suggest that I have paid Rs.25,000/- towards the
payment of bills Ex.DW-1/PX to PZ. Volunteered I
have paid that Rs.25,000/- as advance to the order
placed by me at that time.
It is correct that the
goods were not received by me for the order which I
placed and Rs.25,000/- was given advance. I had
given reminders. I had given reminders to the pltff.
on telephone but not by writing.”
It be noted that during trial, the plaintiff served upon

the defendant a notice dated 21.7.2000 under Order 12 Rule 8
CPC to produce the original bill i.e. original of Ex. PW-1/1 and
Ex. PW-1/2. None were produced for according to the appellant
none were received.
14.

Discussing the evidence, learned Trial Judge held as

under:“The plaintiff i.e. PW-1 has stated in his crossexamination that he had supplied the goods at
Surajpur (UP) and has stated that EX.PW1/1 does not
bear any seal of the defendant company. He has
stated that the goods were received on behalf of
defendant by a person namely Shri Raja Mofd. who
was the accounts manager of the company. He has
Page 6 of 15

admitted to have received an amount of Rs.25,000/issued in the name of firm by the
defendant
company. PW-1 has admitted that the defendant
had given an advance of Rs.25,00/-. He has again
said that the defendant had cleared the previous
account and further admitted that he has not stated
in his plaint that Rs.25,000/- were received against
the previous accounts and also admitted that the
plaintiff has not filed any accounts. He has admitted
that no written order for the goods was there which
he claims to have been supplied.
On the other hand DW-1 Shri H.S.Bawa has denied to
have been received any goods. Ex.PW1/1 and PW1/2
does not bear any rubber stamp of the defendant
company and the said documents have been denied
by the defendant. The legal notice is dated 9.3.1999
and the suit has been filed on 12.3.1999 that is just
after three days
of the date of
legal notice.
However, it is pertinent to note that the plaintiff has
served the notice U/O 12 R.8 CPC read with Section
66 of Evidence Act, dated 21.7.2000 which is Ex.PW1/5, on defendant to produce the documents i.e.
original bills dated 14.3.1996 and 24.3.1996 and also
the original legal notice dated 9.3.1999 and the
defendant has failed to produce the same. The
plaintiff has also filed the postal receipt as well as the
duly received A.D. card. There is no reply to this
notice nor the original documents
have been
produced by the defendant. In view of the above
adverse inference is drawn against the defendant and
the issues are decided in favour of plaintiff and
against the defendant.
In the cross-examination of DW-1 he has stated that
his dealings started with the plaintiff from 1996 and
he is not aware whether he purchased any goods
from the plaintiff in the year 1995. He has further
stated that he can produce the account book for the
year 1995 and he can tell from the records whether
the plaintiff supplied the goods against their bills.
The plaintiff has produced three bills dated
10.4.1995, 20.4.1995 & 18.5.1995
which are
Ex.DW1/PX to DW1/PZ respectively. The defendant
has denied that he has made the payment of
Page 7 of 15

Rs.25,000/- towards the payment of bills Ex.DW/1PX
to DW1/PZ.
DW-1 has stated in his crossexamination that he has not raised any demand in
writing from the plaintiff.
DW-1 has stated that
there was no person namely Sh.Raja Mohd. in his
company in the year 1996 and further stated that
prior to 1999 he did not kept any record about his
employees
and further stated that in 1996 the
attendance register was maintained but in 2001
since old rec ords were destroyed by fire in his
factory and the factory was completely burnt down.
He has stated that apart from attendance register
there was no record available. In view of above it is
clear that the defendant is making lame exercise and
he has in fact received the goods vide said two bills
and had not paid Rs.25,000/- as advance but with
respect to the bills Ex.DW1/PZ. Now, the plaintiff has
already adjusted Rs.25,000/- for the earlier three bills
and it is clear that the defendant has received the
goods vide bills Ex.PW1/1 and PW1/2, accordingly this
issue is decided against the defendant.
From the above findings it is clear that the defendant
is not entitled to any relief in his counter claim and
further in view of the fact that the defendant has paid
Rs.25,000/- against the earlier three bills of the
plaintiff and the plaintiff has supplied the goods to the
defendant vide bills Ex.PW1/1 and 1/2, the plaintiff is
entitled to recover the amount of these two bills and
the suit of the plaintiff is accordingly decreed in his
favour and against the defendant. The plaintiff is
awarded the following reliefs:
(1)
(2)
15.

A sum of Rs.59,600/- as principle amount
against the outstanding bills.
Simple interest @ 10% per annum from the date
of filing of the suit till realisation.”
Suffice would it be to note that under-noted reasons

may be culled out from the decision of the learned Trial Judge:
a.

Since appellant failed to produce the original bills

carbon copies whereof were Ex. PW-1/1 and Ex. PW-1/2 inspite
Page 8 of 15

of service of Ex. PW-1/5 i.e. notice to produce issued by the
plaintiff under Order 12 Rule 8 CPC an adverse inference had to
be drawn against the appellant.
b.

Appellant

not

having

produced

a

register

of

employee working at it's factory an adverse inference had to
be drawn against the appellant pertaining to Raja Mohd. its
stated manager who has ostensibly signed Ex. PW-1/1 and Ex.
PW-1/2.
c.

Appellant not having raised any demand pertaining

to non supply of goods for which it claimed having paid
Rs.25,000/- as advance payment was a fact wherefrom an
adverse inference could be drawn that Rs.25,000/- was not
outstanding towards it for non supply of goods by the plaintiff.
Additionally Ex. DW-1/PX to PZ i.e. the 3 bills produced by the
plaintiff evidence that appellant had to pay money under said
bills and that it could reasonably be presumed that the plaintiff
received Rs.25,000/- for payment under said three pending
bills.
16.

Before the first Appellate Court it was urged by the

appellant that:
a)

Since appellant had denied receipt of the bills
carbon copies whereof were Ex. PW-1/1 and Ex. PW1/2 no adverse inference could be drawn against it
Page 9 of 15

for not producing the 2 bills when notice under
Order 12 Rule 8, Ex. PW-1/5 was served upon it. It
was urged that before an adverse inference could
be drawn against a party for not producing a
document the sine qua non was to establish that
said document(s) was/were in the possession of the
party.

That this condition precedent fact was not

proved.
b)

That sale was inter city. Admittedly sales tax
barrier had been crossed in transit. There was no
endorsement on Ex. PW-1/1 and Ex. PW-1/2 by the
sale tax officials at the transit post of goods having
crossed the transit post. Hence it was not proved
that the goods were transported into UP from Delhi.

17.

The Appellate Court dismissed the appeal and

returned a finding as under:“9. Regarding first submission made by learned
counsel for the appellant in respect of endorsement
of sales tax of U.P. on bill Ex.PW1/1 & 2, it is seen
that the goods sent through the aforesaid bills by
respondent were v duly received by employee of the
appellant, namely, Shri Raja Mohd.
Though there
was denial by the appellant of the receipt of the
goods by Raja Mohd. Because no person in the said
name ever worked with the appellant. It is strange
that the appellant failed to produce the attendance
and wages register of its employees for the reasons
best known to the appellant. Non-production of said
record about the employees working with appellant
Page 10 of 15

goes against the appellant for which the Trial Court
rightly drew adverse inference against the appellant
because if the said record had been produced that
would definitely have gone against it. Regarding
payment of advance amount of Rs.25,000/- by the
appellant to the respondent, the respondent had
categorically stated that goods for the said amount
was already supplied to the appellants towards bill
EX.DW1/PX to Ex.DW1/PZ.
It is amazing that the
appellant failed to produce any record such as
accounts books pertaining to the previous years
which could have dispelled all doubts. It is also
interesting that the appellant did not take trouble to
serve the respondent with any legal notice for non
supply of any goods against advance payment of
Rs.25,000/-. Thus, the plea taken by the appellant
about advance payment of Rs.25,000/- appears to be
an after-thought and had been not supported by any
evidence.

18.

10. Keeping in view the discussion above, I am of
the opinion that the impugned order does not suffer
from any infirmity. I also do not find any perversity
in the order passed by the learned Civil Judge.
Accordingly, appeal filed by the appellant
is
dismissal being devoid of any merit.”
It may be noted at the outset that the first Appellate

Court has not discussed the issue pertaining to reasoning (a)
(noted in para 15 above) of the learned Trial Judge pertaining
to Ex. PW-1/5. The Appellate Court has dealt with reasoning b
and c (noted in para 15 above) of the learned Trial Judge.
Further, non endorsement on Ex. PW-1/1 and Ex. PW-1/2 by the
UP sales tax officials manning the sales tax post at Delhi-U.P.
border has not been discussed by the first Appellate Court.
19.

Indeed, if a party denies receipt of a document and

pleads that the same is not in it's possession, unless it is
Page 11 of 15

proved that the same was in it's possession, no adverse
inference can be drawn against the party for non production
thereof.
20.

But, as noted above, learned Trial Court has, after

analysing the evidence, given 3 reasons in support of it's
conclusions.

First reason has not been discussed by the

learned Appellate Judge.

The other 2 reasons have found

favour with the Appellate Judge.
21.

The second appeal requires this court to consider

whether the 2nd and 3rd reason given by the learned Trial Judge,
affirmed by the Appellate Judge, are sufficient to uphold the
decisions of the court below.
22.

I think, they do.

23.

First and foremost is the admission of the appellant

that it had issued Form No.31 under the sales tax law for inter
state sale of the goods. The appellant has not spoken a word
that since it did not receive the goods it sought return of said
form. A reasonable inference can be drawn that the said form
was duly utilized for sales tax purposes. Appellant's plea that
Ex. PW-1/1 and Ex. PW-1/2 did not bear the endorsement of the
sales tax department when goods crossed the Delhi-U.P. border
is neither here nor there for the reason the said exhibits were
carbon/office copies of the bills. The original endorsement had
Page 12 of 15

to be on the original bills.
24.
accounts.

Secondly, appellant did not produce it's books of
It may be noted that appellant justified not

producing the register of employees by stating that due to fire
in the factory in the year 2001 some record including the
attendance register for the year 1996 was destroyed, but did
not say that the account books for said year and the year 1995
was destroyed in the fire. If indeed, Rs.25,000/- was paid as
advance and not towards Ex. DW-1/PX to PZ and no goods
were supplied against the advance, the conduct of the
appellant is suspicious as rightly held by both courts.
25.

Contention of learned counsel for the appellant that

plaintiff's testimony that he insisted on the appellant affixing
it's seal on Ex. PW-1/1 and Ex. PW-1/2 or managing director of
the appellant signing the bills but neither was done and inspite
thereof plaintiff being satisfied with Raja Mohd. signing the two
bills is contrary to human conduct be noted and dealt with.
26.

It was a petty trade. People in India and especially

those engaged in petty trade are known for un-officious
conduct.

The plaintiff had carried the goods from Delhi to

Greater Noida. Re-import to Delhi would have required a lot of
paper work relatable to sales tax. The plaintiff had 2 choices.
Firstly to bring back the goods, an exercise which required lot
Page 13 of 15

of paper work. Secondly to trust the appellant to be honest. I
find nothing abnormal in the plaintiff opting for the second
alternative.
27.

I do not find that the appraisal of evidence and in

particular pertaining to reasons 'b' and 'c' recorded by the Trial
Judge suffers from a material irregularity or is based on
inadmissible evidence or on conjectures or surmises. The said
2 reasons by themselves and cumulatively are sufficient to
sustain the finds returned. Pertaining to what happened to the
original bills, it may be noted that evidence probablizes that
they were delivered to the appellant.

The silence of the

appellant pertaining to Form No.31 which it admittedly issued
pertaining to the bill Ex. PW-1/1 gives rise to an inference that
the form was duly accounted for in relation to sales tax
pertaining to the sale of goods covered by the bill Ex. PW-1/1.
28.

Before concluding I may note that the respondent

did not urge on the maintainability of the appeal. Nor did it
urge on the maintainability of the first appeal.
29.

It has to be noted that appellant's counter claim was

dismissed when respondent's suit was allowed. The judgment
and decree may be factually one but conceptually it had to be
two. The suit of the respondent was decreed and counter claim
was dismissed. As per law a counter claim is treated as a suit.
Page 14 of 15

Thus 2 appeals had to be filed.
30.

The single appeal, both first and second, are

arguably not maintainable. Order 41 Rule 1 reads as under:-

31.

“Form of appeal – What to accompany
memorandum – (1) Every appeal shall be preferred
in the form of a memorandum signed by the appellant
or his pleader and presented to the Court or to such
officer as it appoints in this behalf. The memorandum
shall be accompanied by a copy of the judgment.”
Since issue was not raised I leave it at that.

32.

The appeal is dismissed.

33.

Cost awarded in favour of the respondent and

against the appellant in sum of Rs.5,000/-.
34.

LCR be returned.

December 12, 2007
MM

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page 15 of 15

