IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No. 1869/2007
#
!

Amar Pal Singh Chadha @ Sonu
........
Petitioner
through: Mr. Atul Sharma, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

State & Anr.
........
Respondent
through: Mr. Jaideep Malik, Advocate for
State.
Mr. Manu Sisodia, Advocate for the
complainant.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 17.09.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

FIR No. 550/2007 dated 7.8.2007
U/S. 498A/406/34 IPC
PS: Tilak Nagar.
Petitioner Amar Pal Singh Chadha is the husband of the

complainant Manjit Kaur.
2.

He seeks pre-arrest bail in aforenoted FIR.

3.

It is an admitted case of the parties that petitioner and

the complainant solemnize their marriage on 23.4.2000 at
Haldwani and resided as husband and wife at Haldwani. It is also
an admitted fact that the parties never resided in Delhi.
4.

Gravement of the allegations against the petitioner

and his family members as contained in the FIR are that soon
after

the

marriage

dowry

demand

commenced.

That

notwithstanding that father of the complainant spent 20 lacs at
the time of the marriage, petitioner and his family members
demanded more and more. That the complainant was physically
assaulted by not only the petitioner but even his paternal uncle
and his paternal aunt. That in March 2001 complainant had to
leave her matrimonial house.

That in April 2001, due to

intervention of family elders there was a reconciliation.

That

complainant went back to her matrimonial house but had to leave
in August 2001 because of continued harassment. That in May
2003 complainant went to Haldwani to attend the marriage of her
cousin.

At that point of time, reconciliation was attempted but

failed.

That the entire istridhan and dowry articles of the

complainant have been misappropriated by her husband and her
in-laws.
5.

It is urged by the petitioner that from a perusal of the

FIR it is apparent that the complainant left her matrimonial house
in August 2001. That a belated complaint has been filed just to
harass the petitioner and his family members.
6.

It is urged that it is difficult to believe that the

complainant who left her matrimonial house in August 2001
would keep quiet till the year 2007 if indeed her istridhan was
misappropriated.

7.

Raising a legal plea, it is urged that entire cause of

action, if at all, had accrued in Haldwani. Thus, the police at Delhi
would have no jurisdiction to even register the FIR.
8.

It is not in dispute that the marriage between the

parties took place at Haldwani and whatever dowry was given by
the parents of the complainant was at Haldwani. Further, all acts
of alleged cruelty have admittedly been committed in Haldwani.
Further, if at all entrusted, the istridhan of the complainant was
entrusted by her to her in-laws at Haldwani.
9.

In the light of the undisputed facts about marriage,

alleged harassment and entrustment at Haldwani, question arises
whether territorial jurisdiction would be at Delhi.
10.

In so far as territorial jurisdiction is concerned, Section

177 Cr.P.C. provides that every offence shall ordinarily be
enquired into and tried by a court within whose jurisdiction it was
committed.

Sections 178 to 184 Cr.P.C. carve out certain

exceptions to the general rule.
11.

With reference to Section 181 (4) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, in the decision reported as Rajender Singh
Vs. State & Anr. 1998 (2) JCC (Delhi) 279, it was held that an
offence of criminal breach of trust could be enquired into or tried
by a court within whose legal jurisdiction the offence was
committed or any part of the property which was the subject
matter of the offence was received or retained or was required to

be returned or accounted for by the accused.
12.

Since complainant is now residing in Delhi, prima facie,

she would be entitled to return of her istridhan at Delhi and thus,
courts at Delhi would have jurisdiction over the matter.
13.

Since I am dealing with an application for bail, I refrain

from returning conclusive findings lest the accused persons are
prejudiced if at all in a substantive petition a jurisdictional
challenge is raised.
14.

On the merits of the matter, suffice would it be to state

that the inordinate delay (nearly 6 years) in filing the complaint
after the complainant had withdrawn from her matrimonial house
gives rise to a presumption in favour of the petitioner that no
istridhan of the complainant was retained by him or any of his
family members.
15.

I must additionally note that the FIR is the usual FIR

which I notice in each and every case. All members of the family
of

the

in-laws,

uncles,

aunts,

married

sisters-in-law,

their

husbands, married brothers of the petitioner, their wives, parents
of the petitioner, even the brothers and sisters of the father-in-law
and the mother-in-law of the complainant have been roped in.
The number of accused disclosed in the complaint are 15.
16.

Prima facie, complainant is trying to harass virtually

every member of the family of her in-laws.
17.

Under the circumstances, case is made out to grant

anticipatory bail to the petitioner.
18.

The petition accordingly stands disposed of directing

that on the petitioner joining the investigation and cooperating
with the investigating officer, in the event of being arrested by
the IO, petitioner would be released on bail on his furnishing a
personal bond in sum of Rs.10,000/- with one surety in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the IO in the above captioned FIR.
19.

Dasti.

September 17, 2007
mm

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

