IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC.APP.No.28/2005
#
!

New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
....... Appellants
through: Mr.S.L.Gupta, Advocate
VERSUS

$
Sanjay Kr. & Ors.
^
through:
Mr.S.P.Jain

........ Respondents
Mr.S.N.Parashar,
Adv.
with
Adv. for respondents 1 and 2

MAC.APP.No.46/2005
#
New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
.......
Appellants
!
through: Mr.S.L.Gupta, Advocate
VERSUS
$
Sanjay Kr. & Ors.
^
through:
Mr.S.P.Jain

........ Respondents
Mr.S.N.Parashar,
Adv.
with
Adv. for respondents 1 and 2

MAC.APP.No.562/2005
#
!

The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
....... Appellants
through: Mr.Kapil Chawla, Advocate
VERSUS

$
Jitender Garg & Anr.
Respondents
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

........

page 1 of 53

^

through: None
MAC.APP.No.236/2005

#
National Insurance Co. Ltd.
Appellants
!
through: Mr.P.K.Seth,Advocate

.......

VERSUS
$
^

Harish Kr. & Ors.
through: None

........ Respondents

MAC.APP.No.378/2005
#
Mrs.Vilasrani Kurup
.......
Appellants
!
through: Mr.Rajesh Gupta, Adv.
with Mr.Harpreet Singh, Adv.
VERSUS
$
^

National Insurance Co.
........ Respondents
through: Mr.Manoj Ranjan Sinha for R-1
MAC.APP.No.154/2005

#
The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
.......
Appellants
!
through: Mr.A.K.Soni, Advocate
VERSUS
$
Udaiveer Singh & Ors.
Respondents
^
through: None.

........

FAO No.476/2003
#
National Insurance Co. Ltd.
.......
Appellants
!
through: Mr.Pradeep Gaur, Advocate.
VERSUS
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 2 of 53

$
^
%

*
1.

Shri Hari Chand & Ors.
........ Respondents
through: Mr.Parbhat Kumar, Adv. for R-3
DATE OF DECISION:

17-04-2007

CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Common questions of law arose for consideration in

the captioned 7 appeals and hence the same are being decided
by a common order. The issue involved is, if it is established
that the driver of the vehicle at the time of the accident was
not holding a valid driving licence would entitle the insurance
company to avoid liability under the policy to pay any money to
the third party or are the rights of the insurance company to
recover from the insured, after paying the sum awarded to the
injured/claimants of the deceased. An ancillary question arises
for consideration as to what should be the standard of proof for
the insurance company to establish breach of the policy of
insurance by the assured.
2.

In FAO.No.476/03, MAC.APP.No.562/05, MAC.APP.

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 3 of 53

No.28/05,

MAC.APP.No.46/05

and

MAC.APP.No.154/05

grievance of the insurance company is that no recovery rights
have been granted. Save and except FAO No.476/2003, only
contention

urged is that the finding that the insurance

company is liable to satisfy the award in favour of the
claimants is contrary to law.

In FAO No.476/2003 it is

additionally urged that the finding by the Tribunal that the
insurance company has failed to establish that the driver of the
vehicle at the time when the vehicle met with the accident was
not holding a valid driving licence is contrary to evidence on
record.
3.

In MAC.APP. No.236/2005 grievance of the insurance

company is akin to the grievance in the other appeals.
However, the facts of the said case are a little different as
would be noted hereinafter.
4.

Filtering the facts a little further, owners of the

vehicles involved in the accident which are the subject matter
of FAO No.476/2003 and MAC. APP. No.562/2005 failed to
contest the proceedings before the learned Judge, MACT and in
spite of a notice under Order 12 Rule 8 CPC issued by the
insurance company during trial to the assured and the driver to
produce the original driving licence held by the driver
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 4 of 53

concerned,

failed

to

respond

MAC.APP.No.28/2005,

to

MAC.APP.

the

notice.

In

No.46/2005,

MAC.APP.No.154/2005 and MAC.APP.No.236/2005 the owners
appeared and gave testimony.
5.

Same vehicle was the subject matter of the accident

in MAC.APP.No.28/.2005 and MAC.APP.No.46/2005. The owner
of the vehicle Shri Pawan Kumar Yadav examined himself as
R2W1. His deposition reads as under :“R2W1
Shri Pawan Kumar Yadav, S/o Sh.Prabhu Singh
Yadav, R/o.WZ-1393A, Nangal Raya, New Delhi.
on S.A.
I know Sanjay Kumar S/o Sh. Shiv Kumar. He was
my driver. On 3.2.01. I have seen the DL of my
driver before handed over my truck No.DL 1GB
0148. I examined the driving licence about the
category which is issued Transport Authority,
Rohtak. I have brought the photocopy of the same
which is Ex.R2W1/A. The original is sized by the
police. Driving licence no.030452/S initially issued
from Transport Authority, Sonepat.
My driver
taken the training fro heavy transport driving from
Driver Training School, Haryana Roadways,
Gurgaon. The training No. was 695. The heavy
licence number is 835/TPT/Veh/99 RTU dated
6.8.99. This driving licence number is issued for
HGV + HPV passed by MVI Rohtak. After expiring
of DL. my driver renewed for the same licence from
the Sonepat Authorities, Haryana. The complete
record of DL of my driver is available with Sonepat
Authorities. At present DL Number is 735 DTO/02
dt. 20.11.02. The photocopy of renewed driving
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 5 of 53

licence is mark A which is shown the DL is category
of HGV + HPV. The driver left the job from my
office.
xxxxx by Sh. Amar Singh, cl. for petitioner.

6.

My driver himself got his DL made. At the time of
accident he was holding DL Ex.R2W1/A as per my
knowledge.”
Owner of the vehicle which is subject matter of

MAC.APP.No.154/2005

examined

himself

as

R2W1.

He

deposed by way of an affidavit. Not a word has been spoken
by him in his testimony as to what prudent steps were taken by
him to check the driving skills of the driver engaged by him,
namely, Uday Veer Singh. Not a word has been spoken that
he saw the driving licence produced by the driver and on
perusal thereof satisfied himself that the driver was authorised
to drive the truck.
7.

The owner of the vehicle concerned which is subject

matter of MAC.APP.No.236/2005 stepped into the witness box
as R3W1 and deposed that at the time of the accident, i.e.,
1.9.2000 he entrusted the car for servicing to Goldie Car Scan.
When he went to pick up the car in the evening from the
service center he was informed that the same had met with an
accident.

The insurance company proved that the driving

driving the vehicle when it met with an accident did not

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 6 of 53

possess a valid driving licence.
8.

The owner of the vehicle which is subject matter of

MAC.APP.No.378/2005

chose not to defend the proceedings.

Insurance company served upon her a notice under Order 12
Rule 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure calling upon her to
produce the original driving licence.

She failed to respond

thereto. The insurance company successfully established that
the driving licence held by the driver to whom she had
entrusted the vehicle was a fake driving licence.
9.

The issue has to be adjudicated with reference to

the provisions of Section 149 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
The same reads as under :149. Duty of insurers to satisfy judgments
and awards against persons insured in respect of
third party risks.-(1)
If, after a certificate of
insurance has been issued under sub-section (3) of
Section 147 in favour of the person by whom a
policy has been effected, judgment or award in
respect of any such liability as is required to be
converted by a policy under clause (b) of subsection (1) of Section 147 (being a liability covered
by the terms of the policy) or under the provisions of
Section 163A is obtained against any person insured
by the policy, then, notwithstanding that the insurer
may be entitled to avoid or cancel or may have
avoided or canceled the policy, the insurer shall,
subject to the provisions of this section, pay to the
person entitled to the benefit of the decree any sum
and exceeding the sum assured
payable
thereunder, as if he were the judgment debtor, in
respect of the liability, together with any amount
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 7 of 53

payable in respect of costs and any sum payable in
respect of interest on that sum by virtue of any
enactment relating to interest on judgments.
(2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer under
sub-section (1) in respect of any judgment or award
unless, before the commencement of the
proceedings in which the judgment or award is given
the insurer had notice through the court or, as the
case may be, the Claims Tribunal of the bringing of
the proceedings, or in respect of such judgment or
award so long as execution is stayed
thereon
pending an appeal; and an insurer to whom notice
of the bringing of any such proceedings is so given
shall be entitled to be made a party thereto and to
defend the action on any of the following grounds,
namely :(a) that there has been a breach of a specified
condition of the policy, being one of the following
conditions, namely :
(i)

a condition excluding the use of the vehicle -

(a)

for hire or reward, where the vehicle is on
the date of the contract of insurance a
vehicle not covered by a permit to ply for
hire or reward, or

(b)

for organized racing and speed testing, or

(c)

for a purpose not allowed by the permit
under which the vehicle is used, where the
vehicle is a transport vehicle, or

(d)

without side-car being attached where the
vehicle is a motor cycle, or

(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named
person or persons or by any person who is not
duly licensed, or by any person who has been
disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving
licence during the period of disqualification; or
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 8 of 53

(iii) a condition excluding liability for injury
caused or contributed to by conditions of war,
civil war, riot or civil commotion; or
(b) that the policy is void on the ground that it was
obtained by the non-disclosure of as material fact or
by a representation of fact which was false in some
material particular.
(3) Where any such judgment as is referred to in
sub-section (1) is obtained from a court in a
reciprocating country and in the case of a foreign
judgment is, by virtue of the provisions of Section 13
of the Code of Civil Procedure,1908 (5of 1908)
conclusive as to any matter adjudicated upon by it,
the insurer (being an insurer registered under the
Insurance Act,1938 (4 of 1938) and whether or not
he is registered under the corresponding law of the
reciprocating country) shall be liable to the person
entitled to the benefit of the decree in the manner
and to the extent specified in sub-section (1), as if
the judgment were given by a court in India:
Provided that no sum shall be payable by the
insurer in respect of any such judgment unless,
before the commencement of the proceedings in
which the judgment is given, the insurer had notice
through the Court concerned of the bringing of the
proceedings and the insurer to whom notice is so
given is entitled under the corresponding law of the
reciprocating country, to be made a party to the
proceedings and to defend the action on grounds
similar to those specified in sub-section (2).
(4)
Where a certificate of insurance has been
issued under sub-section (3) of Section 147 to the
person by whom a policy has been effected, so
much of the policy as purports to restrict the
insurance of the persons of the persons insured
thereby by reference to any condition other than
those in clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall, as
respects such liabilities as are required to be
covered by a policy under clause (b) of sub-section
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 9 of 53

(1) of Section 147, be of no effect :
Provided that any sum paid by the insurer in or
towards the discharge of any liability of any person
which is covered by the policy by virtue of this subsection shall be recoverable by the insurer from
that person.
(5) If the amount which an insurer becomes liable
under this section to pay in respect of a liability
incurred by a person insured by a policy exceeds
the amount for which the insurer would apart from
the provisions of this section be liable under the
policy under the policy in respect of that liability,
the insurer shall be entitled to recover the excess
from that person.
(6) In this section the expression “material fact”
and “material particular”
means, respectively a
fact or particular of such a nature as to influence
the judgment of a prudent insurer in determining
whether he will take the risk and, if so, at what
premium and on what
conditions, and the
expressions “liability covered by the terms of the
policy” means a liability which is covered by the
policy or which would be so covered but for the
fact that the insurer is entitled to avoid or cancel or
has avoided or canceled the policy.
(7) No insurer to whom the notice referred to in
sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) has been given
shall be entitled to avoid his liability to any person
entitled to the benefit of any such judgment or
award as is referred to in sub-section (1) or in such
judgment
as is referred to in sub-section (3)
otherwise than in the manner provided for in subsection (2) or in the corresponding law of the
reciprocating country, as the case may be.”

10.

The forerunner of Section 149 of the M.V. Act, 1988

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 10 of 53

was Section 96 of the M.V.Act, 1939.
11.

In the report published as 1996 (5) SCC 21 Sohan

Lal Passi Vs. P.Shesh Reddy & Ors. the Supreme Court
compared and contrasted the provisions of Section 96 of the
M.V. Act, 1939 and Section 149 of the M.V.Act, 1988. Earlier
decision of the Supreme Court reported as 1987 (2) SCC 654
Skandia Insurance Co. Vs. Kokilaben Chandravadan was also
noticed in Sohan Lal Passi's case. In para 12 of the decision it
was opined as under :“12. Now it has to be examined as to whether the
insurance company can be absolved of its liability
to pay the compensation in a case where the owner
of the vehicle had got the vehicle insured, but the
accident took place when it was being driven by a
person not holding the driving licence. In the
present case the accident took place when the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 was in force. Section 96 of
that Act prescribed the duty of the insurers to
satisfy the judgments against persons insured in
respect of third party risks (the parallel provision
being Section 149 in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988).
The relevant part of Section 96 provided:
“96. Duty of insurers to satisfy judgments
against persons insured in respect of third
party risks.—(1) If, after a certificate of
insurance has been issued under sub-section
(4) of Section 95 in favour of the person by
whom a policy has been effected, judgment in
respect of any such liability as is required to
be covered by a policy under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of Section 95 (being a liability
covered by the terms of the policy) is
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 11 of 53

obtained against any person insured by the
policy, then, notwithstanding that the insurer
may be entitled to avoid or cancel or may
have avoided or cancelled the policy, the
insurer shall, subject to the provisions of this
section, pay to the person entitled to the
benefit of the decree any sum not exceeding
the sum assured payable thereunder, as if he
were the judgment-debtor in respect of the
liability.
(2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer
under sub-section (1) in respect of any
judgment unless before or after the
commencement of the proceedings in which
the judgment is given the insurer had notice
through the court of the bringing of the
proceedings, or in respect of any judgment so
long as execution is stayed thereon pending
an appeal; and an insurer to whom notice of
the bringing of any such proceedings is so
given shall be entitled to be made a party
thereto and to defend the action on any of
the following grounds, namely:
(a)

*

*

*

(b) that there has been a breach of a
specified condition of the policy, being one of
the following conditions, namely:
(i)

*

*

*

(a) to (d)

*

*

*

(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named
person or persons or by any person who is
not duly licensed, or by any person who has
been disqualified for holding or obtaining a
driving licence during the period of
disqualification; or
*

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

*

*”

page 12 of 53

In view of sub-section (1) of Section 96 if after
the certificate of insurance has been issued in
favour of the person by whom a policy has
been effected, judgment in respect of any
such liability as is required to be covered by a
policy, the insurer shall subject to the
provisions of the said section pay to the
person entitled to the benefit of the decree
any sum not exceeding the sum assured
payable thereunder, as if he was the
judgment-debtor, in respect of the liability.
(emphasis supplied) Sub-section (2) of
Section 96 enjoins that notice of the
proceedings in which the judgment is given,
has to be given to the insurer and such
insurer shall be entitled to defend the action
on any of the grounds mentioned in subsection (2) of Section 96. We are concerned in
the present case only
with Section
96(2)(b)(ii), a condition excluding driving by
any person who is not duly licensed. The
question is as to whether the insurance
company can repudiate its liability to pay the
compensation in respect of the accident by a
vehicle only by showing that at the relevant
time it was being driven by a person having
no licence. In the case of Skandia Insurance
Co. Ltd. v. Kokilaben Chandravadan, in
respect of this very defence by the insurance
company, it was said:
“The defence built on the exclusion
clause cannot succeed for three reasons,
viz.:
(1) On a true interpretation of the
relevant clause which interpretation is at
peace with the conscience of Section 96,
the condition excluding driving by a
person not duly licensed is not absolute
and the promisor is absolved once it is
shown that he has done everything in his
power to keep, honour and fulfil the
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 13 of 53

promise and he himself is not guilty of a
deliberate breach.
(2) Even if it is treated as an absolute
promise, there is substantial compliance
therewith upon an express or implied
mandate being given to the licensed
driver not to allow the vehicle to be left
unattended so that it happens to be
driven by an unlicensed driver.
(3) The exclusion clause has to be ‘read
down’ in order that it is not at war with
the ‘main purpose’ of the provisions
enacted for the protection of victims of
accidents so that the promisor is
exculpated when he does everything in
his power to keep the promise.”
To examine the correctness of the aforesaid view
this appeal was referred to a three-Judge Bench,
because on behalf of the insurance company, a
stand was taken that when Section 96(2)(b)(ii) has
provided that the insurer shall be entitled to defend
the action on the ground that there has been
breach of a specified condition to the policy i.e. the
vehicle should not be driven by a person who is not
duly licensed, then the insurance company cannot
be held to be liable to indemnify the owner of the
vehicle. In other words, once there has been a
contravention of the condition prescribed in subsection (2)(b)(ii) of Section 96, the person insured
shall not be entitled to the benefit of sub-section (1)
of Section 96. According to us, Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
should not be interpreted in a technical manner.
Sub-section (2) of Section 96 only enables the
insurance company to defend itself in respect of the
liability to pay compensation on any of the grounds
mentioned in sub-section (2) including that there
has been a contravention of the condition excluding
the vehicle being driven by any person who is not
duly licensed. This bar on the face of it operates on
the person insured. If the person who has got the
vehicle insured has allowed the vehicle to be driven
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 14 of 53

by a person who is not duly licensed then only that
clause shall be attracted. In a case where the
person who has got insured the vehicle with the
insurance company, has appointed a duly licensed
driver and if the accident takes place when the
vehicle is being driven by a person not duly
licensed on the basis of the authority of the driver
duly authorised to drive the vehicle whether the
insurance company in that event shall be absolved
from its liability? The expression ‘breach’ occurring
in Section 96(2)(b) means infringement or violation
of a promise or obligation. As such the insurance
company will have to establish that the insured was
guilty of an infringement or violation of a promise.
The insurer has also to satisfy the Tribunal or the
Court that such violation or infringement on the
part of the insured was willful. If the insured has
taken all precautions by appointing a duly licensed
driver to drive the vehicle in question and it has not
been established that it was the insured who
allowed the vehicle to be driven by a person not
duly licensed, then the insurance company cannot
repudiate its statutory liability under sub-section (1)
of Section 96. In the present case far from
establishing that it was the appellant who had
allowed Rajinder Pal Singh to drive the vehicle when
the accident took place, there is not even any
allegation that it was the appellant who was guilty
of violating the condition that the vehicle shall not
be driven by a person not duly licensed. From the
facts of the case, it appears that the appellant had
done everything within his power inasmuch as he
has engaged a licensed driver Gurbachan Singh and
had placed the vehicle in his charge. While
interpreting the contract of insurance, the tribunals
and courts have to be conscious of the fact that
right to claim compensation by heirs and legal
representatives of the victims of the accident is not
defeated on technical grounds. Unless it is
established on the materials on record that it was
the insured who had willfully violated the condition
of the policy by allowing a person not duly licensed
to drive the vehicle when the accident took place,
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 15 of 53

12.

the insurer shall be deemed to be a judgmentdebtor in respect of the liability in view of subsection (1) of Section 96 of the Act. It need not be
pointed out that the whole concept of getting the
vehicle insured by an insurance company is to
provide an easy mode of getting compensation by
the claimants, otherwise in normal course they had
to pursue their claim against the owner from one
forum to the other and ultimately to execute the
order of the Accident Claims Tribunal for realisation
of such amount by sale of properties of the owner
of the vehicle. The procedure and result of the
execution of the decree is well known.”
Decision in Skandia Insurance Co.'s case and Sohan

Lal Passi's case were revisited by the Supreme Court in the
decision reported as 2001 (4) SCC 342 New India Assurance
Co. Vs. Kamla & Ors.

In paras 17 to 25 it was observed as

under :“17. The details regarding the requirements of the
policy including the limits of liability to be insured are
enumerated in Section 147. Sub-section (3) of it
states that a policy shall be of no effect for the
purposes of that Chapter unless and until a certificate
of insurance is issued by the insurer in the prescribed
form in favour of the insured. It is in Section 149 that
provisions, relating to the duty of the insurer for
satisfying the judgments and awards in respect of
third-party claims, are incorporated. Sub-section (1)
says that the insurer shall pay to the person entitled
to the benefit of a judgment or award as if the insurer
were the judgment-debtor in respect of the liability,
when any such judgment or award is obtained
against the insured in whose favour a certificate of
insurance has been issued. Of course, the said
liability of the insurer is subject to the maximum sum
assured payable under the policy.

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 16 of 53

18. Section 149(2) of the Act says that notice
regarding the suit or other legal proceedings shall be
given to the insurer if such insurer is to be fastened
with such liability. The purpose of giving such notice
is to afford the insurer to be made a party in the
proceedings for defending the action on any one of
the grounds mentioned in the sub-section. Among
the multiplicity of such grounds the one which is
relevant in this case is extracted below:
“149. (2)(a) that there has been a breach of a
specified condition of the policy, being one of the
following conditions, namely—
*

*

*

(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named
person or persons or by any person who is not
duly licensed, or by any person who has been
disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving
licence during the period of disqualification;”
19. Sub-section (4) of Section 149 of the Act says
that so much of the policy as purports to restrict the
insurance of the person insured by reference to any
condition shall “as respects such liabilities as are
required to be covered by a policy ..., be of no
effect”. The proviso to the said sub-section is
important for the purpose of considering the question
involved in this case and hence that proviso is
extracted below:
“Provided that any sum paid by the insurer in or
towards the discharge of any liability of any
person which is covered by the policy by virtue
only of this sub-section shall be recoverable by
the insurer from that person.”
20. Similarly, in this context sub-section (5) is
equally important and hence that is also extracted
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 17 of 53

below:
“149. (5) If the amount which an insurer
becomes liable under this section to pay in
respect of a liability incurred by a person insured
by a policy exceeds the amount for which the
insurer would apart from the provisions of this
section be liable under the policy in respect of
that liability, the insurer shall be entitled to
recover the excess from that person.”
21. A reading of the proviso to sub-section (4) as well
as the language employed in sub-section (5) would
indicate that they are intended to safeguard the
interest of an insurer who otherwise has no liability to
pay any amount to the insured but for the provisions
contained in Chapter XI of the Act. This means, the
insurer has to pay to the third parties only on account
of the fact that a policy of insurance has been issued
in respect of the vehicle, but the insurer is entitled to
recover any such sum from the insured if the insurer
were not otherwise liable to pay such sum to the
insured by virtue of the conditions of the contract of
insurance indicated by the policy.
22. To repeat, the effect of the above provisions is
this: when a valid insurance policy has been issued in
respect of a vehicle as evidenced by a certificate of
insurance the burden is on the insurer to pay to the
third parties, whether or not there has been any
breach or violation of the policy conditions. But the
amount so paid by the insurer to third parties can be
allowed to be recovered from the insured if as per the
policy conditions the insurer had no liability to pay
such sum to the insured.
23. It is advantageous to refer to a two-Judge Bench
of this Court in Skandia Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Kokilaben Chandravadan. Though the said decision
related to the corresponding provisions of the
predecessor Act (Motor Vehicles Act, 1939) the
observations made in the judgment are quite
germane now as the corresponding provisions are
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 18 of 53

materially the same as in the Act. Learned Judges
pointed out that the insistence of the legislature that
a motor vehicle can be used in a public place only if
that vehicle is covered by a policy of insurance is not
for the purpose of promoting the business of the
insurance company but to protect the members of
the community who become sufferers on account of
accidents arising from the use of motor vehicles. It is
pointed out in the decision that such protection would
have remained only a paper protection if the
compensation awarded by the courts were not
recoverable by the victims (or dependants of the
victims) of the accident. This is the raison d’être for
the legislature making it prohibitory for motor
vehicles being used in public places without covering
third-party risks by a policy of insurance.
24. The principle laid down in the said decision has
been followed by a three-Judge Bench of this Court
with approval in Sohan Lal Passi v. P. Sesh Reddy.
25. The position can be summed up thus:
The insurer and the insured are bound by the
conditions enumerated in the policy and the insurer
is not liable to the insured if there is violation of any
policy condition. But the insurer who is made
statutorily liable to pay compensation to third parties
on account of the certificate of insurance issued shall
be entitled to recover from the insured the amount
paid to the third parties, if there was any breach of
policy conditions on account of the vehicle being
driven without a valid driving licence. Learned
counsel for the insured contended that it is enough if
he establishes that he made all due enquiries and
believed bona fide that the driver employed by him
had a valid driving licence, in which case there was
no breach of the policy condition. As we have not
decided on that contention it is open to the insured to
raise it before the Claims Tribunal. In the present
case, if the Insurance Company succeeds in
establishing that there was breach of the policy
condition, the Claims Tribunal shall direct the insured
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 19 of 53

to pay that amount to the insurer. In default the
insurer shall be allowed to recover that amount
(which the insurer is directed to pay to the claimant
third parties) from the insured person.”
13.

The decision in Kamla's case (Supra) clearly brings

out the distinction and the consequences which flow due to
breach of specified conditions of the policy enumerated in
Section 149 (2) (b) of the M.V. Act, 1988 and the consequences
which flow on account of policy being void on the conditions
contemplated by Section 149(2)(b) of the M.V.Act, 1988. The
language of sub-section 4 and the proviso to sub-section 4 of
Section 149 of the M.V.Act, 1988 was specifically noted in para
19 of the decision to the effect that the said provisions were
intended to safeguard the interest of an insurer, meaning
thereby that on the insurer paying to the third party on account
of a policy of insurance having been issued in respect of the
vehicle it would be entitled to recover such sum from the
assured.

In para 22 of the decision, the Supreme Court re-

emphasized and repeated that the effect of sub-section 4 of
Section 149 of the M.V.Act,1988 and the proviso to sub-section
4 of Section 149 was that for the

breaches envisaged by

clause 'a' of sub-section 2, insurance company has to pay to
the third parties whether or not there has been any breach or
violation of the policy conditions. But the amount so paid by
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 20 of 53

the insurer to third parties can be allowed to be recovered from
the assured if as per the policy conditions the insurer had no
liability to pay such sum to the assured.
14.

But, the insurance companies did not relent. They

raised the issue once again. In the report published as 2003
(3) SCC 338 United India Insurance Co. Vs. Lehru & Ors., the
issue was revisited. Decision in Skandia Insurance, Sohan Lal
Passi and Kamla's case were once again noted with approval.
In paras 11, 12, 15 and 18 of the decision in Lehru's case it was
observed as under :11. In the case of Skandia Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Kokilaben Chandravadan the object and purpose of
getting motor vehicles insured was considered. The
question was whether the Insurance Company could
avoid liability because the accident was caused by
the cleaner of the truck who had no licence. The
Insurance Company relied upon Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
which read as under:
“96. (2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer
under sub-section (1) in respect of any
judgment
unless
before
or
after
the
commencement of the proceedings in which the
judgment is given the insurer had notice
through the court of the bringing of the
proceedings, or in respect of any judgment so
long as execution is stayed thereon pending an
appeal; and an insurer to whom notice of the
bringing of any such proceeding is so given
shall be entitled to be made a party thereto and
to defend the action on any of the following
grounds, namely :
(a)
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

*

*

*
page 21 of 53

(b) that there has been a breach of a specified
condition of the policy, being one of the
following conditions, namely :
(i)

*

*

*

(a)-(d)

*

*

*

(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named
person or persons or by any person who is not
duly licensed, or by any person who has been
disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving
licence during the period of disqualification; or”
12. To be noted that Section 96(2)(b)(ii) is identical
to Section 149(2)(a)(ii) on which reliance is placed in
this case. The argument that the Insurance Company
could avoid liability was negatived for the following
reasons:
“12. The defence built on the exclusion clause
cannot succeed for three reasons viz.:
(1) On a true interpretation of the relevant
clause which interpretation is at peace with the
conscience of Section 96, the condition
excluding driving by a person not duly licensed
is not absolute and the promisor is absolved
once it is shown that he has done everything in
his power to keep, honour and fulfil the promise
and he himself is not guilty of a deliberate
breach.
(2) Even if it is treated as an absolute promise,
there is substantial compliance therewith upon
an express or implied mandate being given to
the licensed driver not to allow the vehicle to be
left unattended so that it happens to be driven
by an unlicensed driver.
(3) The exclusion clause has to be ‘read down’
in order that it is not at war with the ‘main
purpose’ of the provisions enacted for the
protection of victims of accidents so that the
promisor is exculpated when he does
everything in his power to keep the promise.
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 22 of 53

13. In order to divine the intention of the
legislature in the course of interpretation of the
relevant provisions there can scarcely be a
better test than that of probing into the motive
and philosophy of the relevant provisions
keeping in mind the goals to be achieved by
enacting the same. Ordinarily it is not the
concern of the legislature whether the owner of
the vehicle insures his vehicle or not. If the
vehicle is not insured any legal liability arising
on account of third-party risk will have to be
borne by the owner of the vehicle. Why then
has the legislature insisted on a person using a
motor vehicle in a public place to insure against
third-party risk by enacting Section 94? Surely
the obligation has not been imposed in order to
promote the business of the insurers engaged
in the business of automobile insurance. The
provision has been inserted in order to protect
the members of the community travelling in
vehicles or using the roads from the risk
attendant upon the user of motor vehicles on
the roads. The law may provide for
compensation to victims of the accidents who
sustain injuries in the course of an automobile
accident or compensation to the dependents of
the victims in the case of a fatal accident.
However, such protection would remain a
protection on paper unless there is a guarantee
that the compensation awarded by the courts
would be recoverable from the persons held
liable for the consequences of the accident. A
court can only pass an award or a decree. It
cannot ensure that such an award or decree
results in the amount awarded being actually
recovered, from the person held liable who may
not have the resources. The exercise
undertaken by the law courts would then be an
exercise in futility. And the outcome of the legal
proceedings which by the very nature of things
involve the time cost and money cost invested
from the scarce resources of the community
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 23 of 53

would make a mockery of the injured victims, or
the dependents of the deceased victim of the
accident, who themselves are obliged to incur
not inconsiderable expenditure of time, money
and energy in litigation. To overcome this ugly
situation the legislature has made it obligatory
that no motor vehicle shall be used unless a
third-party insurance is in force. To use the
vehicle without the requisite third-party
insurance being in force is a penal offence. The
legislature was also faced with another
problem. The insurance policy might provide for
liability walled in by conditions which may be
specified in the contract of policy. In order to
make the protection real, the legislature has
also provided that the judgment obtained shall
not be defeated by the incorporation of
exclusion clauses other than those authorised
by Section 96 and by providing that except and
save to the extent permitted by Section 96 it
will be the obligation of the insurance company
to satisfy the judgment obtained against the
persons insured against third-party risk (vide
Section 96). In other words, the legislature has
insisted and made it incumbent on the user of a
motor vehicle to be armed with an insurance
policy covering third-party risks which is in
conformity with the provisions enacted by the
legislature. It is so provided in order to ensure
that the injured victims of automobile accidents
or the dependants of the victims of fatal
accidents are really compensated in terms of
money and not in terms of promise. Such a
benign provision enacted by the legislature
having regard to the fact that in the modern
age the use of motor vehicles notwithstanding
the attendant hazards, has become an
inescapable fact of life, has to be interpreted in
a meaningful manner which serves rather than
defeats the purpose of the legislation. The
provision has therefore to be interpreted in the
twilight of the aforesaid perspective.

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 24 of 53

14. Section 96(2)(b)(ii) extends immunity to the
insurance company if a breach is committed of
the condition excluding driving by a named
person or persons or by any person who is not
fully licensed, or by any person who has been
disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving
licence during the period of disqualification. The
expression ‘breach’ is of great significance. The
dictionary meaning of ‘breach’ is ‘infringement
or violation of a promise or obligation’. It is
therefore abundantly clear that the insurer will
have to establish that the insured is guilty of an
infringement or violation of a promise that a
person who is duly licensed will have to be in
charge of the vehicle. The very concept of
infringement or violation of the promise that the
expression ‘breach’ carries within itself induces
an inference that the violation or infringement
on the part of the promisor must be a wilful
infringement or violation. If the insured is not at
all at fault and has not done anything he should
not have done or is not amiss in any respect
how can it be conscientiously posited that he
has committed a breach? It is only when the
insured himself places the vehicle in charge of a
person who does not hold a driving licence, that
it can be said that he is ‘guilty’ of the breach of
the promise that the vehicle will be driven by
the licensed driver. It must be established by
the insurance company that the breach was on
the part of the insured and that it was the
insured who was guilty of violating the promise
or infringement of the contract. Unless the
insured is at fault and is guilty of a breach the
insurer cannot escape from the obligation to
indemnify the insured and successfully contend
that he is exonerated having regard to the fact
that the promisor (the insured) committed a
breach of his promise. Not when some mishap
occurs by some mischance. When the insured
has done everything within his power inasmuch
as he has engaged a licensed driver and has
placed the vehicle in charge of a licensed
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 25 of 53

driver, with the express or implied mandate to
drive himself it cannot be said that the insured
is guilty of any breach. And it is only in case of
a breach or a violation of the promise on the
part of the insured that the insurer can hide
under the umbrella of the exclusion clause.
To construe the provision differently would be
to rewrite the provision by engrafting a rider to
the effect that in the event of the motor vehicle
happening to be driven by an unlicensed
person, regardless of the circumstances in
which such a contingency occurs, the insured
will not be liable under the contract of
insurance. It needs to be emphasised that it is
not the contract of insurance which is being
interpreted. It is the statutory provision defining
the conditions of exemption which is being
interpreted.
These
must
therefore
be
interpreted in the spirit in which the same have
been enacted accompanied by an anxiety to
ensure that the protection is not nullified by the
backward-looking interpretation which serves to
defeat the provision rather than to fulfil its life
aim. To do otherwise would amount to nullifying
the benevolent provision by reading it with a
non-benevolent eye and with a mind not tuned
to the purpose and philosophy of the legislation
without being informed of the true goals sought
to be achieved. What the legislature has given,
the court cannot deprive of by way of an
exercise in interpretation when the view which
renders the provision potent is equally plausible
as the one which renders the provision
impotent. In fact it appears that the former view
is more plausible apart from the fact that it is
more desirable. When the option is between
opting for a view which will relieve the distress
and misery of the victims of accidents or their
dependants on the one hand and the equally
plausible view which will reduce the profitability
of the insurer in regard to the occupational
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 26 of 53

hazard undertaken by him by way of business
activity, there is hardly any choice. The court
cannot but opt for the former view. Even if one
were to make a strictly doctrinaire approach,
the very same conclusion would emerge in
obeisance to the doctrine of ‘reading down’ the
exclusion clause in the light of the ‘main
purpose’ of the provision so that the ‘exclusion
clause’ does not cross swords with the ‘main
purpose’ highlighted earlier. The effort must be
to harmonize the two instead of allowing the
exclusion clause to snipe successfully at the
main purpose.”
*

*

*

15. The question was again considered by a threeJudge Bench of this Court in the case of Sohan Lal
Passi v. P. Sesh Reddy. In this case the bus was being
driven by the cleaner, an employee of the owner, at
the time of accident. The cleaner did not have a valid
licence. The Insurance Company sought to avoid
liability on the ground that there was breach of
Section 96(2)(b)(ii) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
inasmuch as the vehicle was being driven by a
person who was not duly licensed. The Insurance
Company questioned the correctness of the view
taken in Skandia case. Hence this case was placed
before a three-Judge Bench. The Bench held as
follows:
“12. ... on behalf of the insurance company, a
stand was taken that when Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
has provided that the insurer shall be entitled to
defend the action on the ground that there has
been breach of a specified condition to the
policy i.e. the vehicle should not be driven by a
person who is not duly licensed, then the
insurance company cannot be held to be liable
to indemnify the owner of the vehicle. In other
words, once there has been a contravention of
the condition prescribed in sub-section (2)(b)(ii)
of Section 96, the person insured shall not be
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 27 of 53

entitled to the benefit of sub-section (1) of
Section 96. According to us, Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
should not be interpreted in a technical manner.
Sub-section (2) of Section 96 only enables the
insurance company to defend itself in respect of
the liability to pay compensation on any of the
grounds mentioned in sub-section (2) including
that there has been a contravention of the
condition excluding the vehicle being driven by
any person who is not duly licensed. This bar on
the face of it operates on the person insured. If
the person who has got the vehicle insured has
allowed the vehicle to be driven by a person
who is not duly licensed then only that clause
shall be attracted. In a case where the person
who has got insured the vehicle with the
insurance company, has appointed a duly
licensed driver and if the accident takes place
when the vehicle is being driven by a person not
duly licensed on the basis of the authority of the
driver duly authorised to drive the vehicle
whether the insurance company in that event
shall be absolved from its liability? The
expression ‘breach’ occurring in Section
96(2)(b) means infringement or violation of a
promise or obligation. As such the insurance
company will have to establish that the insured
was guilty of an infringement or violation of a
promise. The insurer has also to satisfy the
tribunal or the court that such violation or
infringement on the part of the insured was
wilful. If the insured has taken all precautions by
appointing a duly licensed driver to drive the
vehicle in question and it has not been
established that it was the insured who allowed
the vehicle to be driven by a person not duly
licensed, then the insurance company cannot
repudiate its statutory liability under subsection (1) of Section 96. In the present case far
from establishing that it was the appellant who
had allowed Rajinder Pal Singh to drive the
vehicle when the accident took place, there is
not even any allegation that it was the appellant
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 28 of 53

who was guilty of violating the condition that
the vehicle shall not be driven by a person not
duly licensed. From the facts of the case, it
appears that the appellant had done everything
within his power inasmuch as he has engaged a
licensed driver Gurbachan Singh and had placed
the vehicle in his charge. While interpreting the
contract of insurance, the tribunals and courts
have to be conscious of the fact that right to
claim compensation by heirs and legal
representatives of the victims of the accident is
not defeated on technical grounds. Unless it is
established on the materials on record that it
was the insured who had wilfully violated the
condition of the policy by allowing a person not
duly licensed to drive the vehicle when the
accident took place, the insurer shall be
deemed to be a judgment-debtor in respect of
the liability in view of sub-section (1) of Section
96 of the Act. It need not be pointed out that
the whole concept of getting the vehicle insured
by an insurance company is to provide an easy
mode of getting compensation by the claimants,
otherwise in normal course they had to pursue
their claim against the owner from one forum to
the other and ultimately to execute the order of
the Accidents Claims Tribunal for realisation of
such amount by sale of properties of the owner
of the vehicle. The procedure and result of the
execution of the decree is well known.
13. This Court in the case of Kashiram Yadav v.
Oriental Fire and General Insurance Co.
reiterated the views expressed in Skandia
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Kokilaben Chandravadan.
While referring to that case it was said:
‘..… There the facts found were quite
different. The vehicle concerned in that case
was undisputedly entrusted to the driver who
had a valid licence. In transit the driver
stopped the vehicle and went to fetch some
snacks from the opposite shop leaving the
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 29 of 53

engine on. The ignition key was at the ignition
lock and not in the cabin of the truck. The
driver had asked the cleaner to take care of
the truck. In fact the driver had left the truck
in care of the cleaner. The cleaner meddled
with the vehicle and caused the accident. The
question arose whether the insured (owner)
had committed a breach of the condition
incorporated in the certificate of insurance
since the cleaner operated the vehicle on the
fatal occasion without driving licence. This
Court expressed the view that it is only when
the insured himself entrusted the vehicle to a
person who does not hold a driving licence,
he could be said to have committed breach of
the condition of the policy. It must be
established by the Insurance Company that
the breach is on the part of the insured.
Unless the insured is at fault and is guilty of a
breach of the condition, the insurer cannot
escape from the obligation to indemnify the
insured. It was also observed that when the
insured has done everything within his power
inasmuch as he has engaged the licensed
driver and has placed the vehicle in his
charge with the express or implied mandate
to drive himself, it cannot be said that the
insured is guilty of any breach.
We affirm and reiterate the statement of law
laid down in the above case. We may also
state that without the knowledge of the
insured, if by driver’s acts or omission others
meddle with the vehicle and cause an
accident, the insurer would be liable to
indemnify the insured. The insurer in such a
case cannot take the defence of a breach of
the condition in the certificate of insurance.’
We are in respectful agreement with the view
expressed in the case of Skandia Insurance
Co. Ltd. v. Kokilaben Chandravadan.”
*

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

*

*

page 30 of 53

18. Now let us consider Section 149(2). Reliance has
been placed on Section 149(2)(a)(ii). As seen, in
order to avoid liability under this provision it must be
shown that there is a “breach”. As held in Skandia
and Sohan Lal Passi cases the breach must be on the
part of the insured. We are in full agreement with
that. To hold otherwise would lead to absurd results.
Just to take an example, suppose a vehicle is stolen.
Whilst it is being driven by the thief there is an
accident. The thief is caught and it is ascertained that
he had no licence. Can the insurance company
disown liability? The answer has to be an emphatic
“No”. To hold otherwise would be to negate the very
purpose of compulsory insurance. The injured or
relatives of the person killed in the accident may find
that the decree obtained by them is only a paper
decree as the owner is a man of straw. The owner
himself would be an innocent sufferer. It is for this
reason that the legislature, in its wisdom, has made
insurance, at least third-party insurance, compulsory.
The aim and purpose being that an insurance
company would be available to pay. The business of
the company is insurance. In all businesses there is
an element of risk. All persons carrying on business
must take risks associated with that business. Thus it
is equitable that the business which is run for making
profits also bears the risk associated with it. At the
same time innocent parties must not be made to
suffer or loss. These provisions meet these
requirements. We are thus in agreement with what is
laid down in the aforementioned cases viz. that in
order to avoid liability it is not sufficient to show that
the person driving at the time of accident was not
duly licensed. The insurance company must establish
that the breach was on the part of the insured.”
15.

One would have expected that the issue attained

finality.

But yet once again, matter was raised by the

insurance companies before a 3 Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court. The decision is reported as 2004 (3) SCC 297 National

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 31 of 53

Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Swaran Singh & Ors. Decision in Skandia
Insurance, Sohan Lal Passi, Kamla, Lehru and a host of other
decisions were noted. The Supreme Court noted the law on the
subject and in particular the language of Section 147 and 149
of the M.V. Act, 1988. In paras 36, 39, 40, 41, 48, 49, 50, 51,
69, 70, 73, 77, 84, 110(iv) and (v) it was observed as under :“36. Sub-section (1) of Section 149 casts a liability
upon the insurer to pay to the person entitled to the
benefit of the decree “as if he were the judgmentdebtor”. Although the said liability is subject to the
provision of this section, it prefaces with a non
obstante clause that the insurer may be entitled to
avoid or cancel or may have avoided or cancelled the
policy. Furthermore, the statute raises a legal fiction
to the effect that for the said purpose the insurer
would be deemed to be a judgment-debtor in respect
of the liability of the insurer.
*

*

*

39. The question as to whether an insurer can avoid
its liability in the event it raises a defence as
envisaged in sub-section (2) of Section 149 of the Act
corresponding to sub-section (2) of Section 96 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 had been the subject-matter
of decisions in a large number of cases.
40. It is beyond any doubt or dispute that under
Section 149(2) of the Act, an insurer, to whom notice
of the bringing of any proceeding for compensation
has been given, can defend the action on any of the
grounds mentioned therein.
41. However, clause (a) opens with the words “that
there has been a breach of a specified condition of the
policy”, implying that the insurer’s defence of the
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 32 of 53

action would depend upon the terms of the policy. The
said sub-clause contains three conditions of
disjunctive character, namely, the insurer can get
away from the liability when (a) a named person
drives the vehicle; (b) it was being driven by a person
who did not have a duly granted licence; and (c) driver
is a person disqualified for holding or obtaining a
driving licence.
*

*

*

48. Furthermore, the insurance company with a view
to avoid its liabilities is not only required to show that
the conditions laid down under Section 149(2)(a) or
(b) are satisfied but is further required to establish
that there has been a breach on the part of the
insured. By reason of the provisions contained in the
1988 Act, a more extensive remedy has been
conferred upon those who have obtained judgment
against the user of a vehicle and after a certificate of
insurance is delivered in terms of Section 147(3). After
a third party has obtained a judgment against any
person insured by the policy in respect of a liability
required to be covered by Section 145, the same must
be satisfied by the insurer, notwithstanding that the
insurer may be entitled to avoid or to cancel the policy
or may in fact have done so. The same obligation
applies in respect of a judgment against a person not
insured by the policy in respect of such a liability, but
who would have been covered if the policy had
covered the liability of all persons, except that in
respect of liability for death or bodily injury.
49. Such a breach on the part of the insured must be
established by the insurer to show that not only the
insured used or caused or permitted to be used the
vehicle in breach of the Act but also that the damage
he† suffered flowed from the breach.
50. Under the Motor Vehicles Act, holding of a valid
driving licence is one of the conditions of contract of
insurance. Driving of a vehicle without a valid licence
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 33 of 53

is an offence. However, the question herein is whether
a third party involved in an accident is entitled to the
amount of compensation granted by the Motor
Accidents Claims Tribunal although the driver of the
vehicle at the relevant time might not have a valid
driving licence but would be entitled to recover the
same from the owner or driver thereof.
51. It is trite that where the insurers, relying upon the
provisions of violation of law by the assured, take an
exception to pay the assured or a third party, they
must prove a wilful violation of the law by the assured.
In some cases violation of criminal law, particularly,
violation of the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act
may result in absolving the insurers but, the same
may not necessarily hold good in the case of a third
party. In any event, the exception applies only to acts
done intentionally or “so recklessly as to denote that
the assured did not care what the consequences of his
act might be”.
*

*

*

69. The proposition of law is no longer res integra that
the person who alleges breach must prove the same.
The insurance company is, thus, required to establish
the said breach by cogent evidence. In the event the
insurance company fails to prove that there has been
breach of conditions of policy on the part of the
insured, the insurance company cannot be absolved of
its liability. (See Sohan Lal Passi.)
70. Apart from the above, we do not intend to lay
down anything further i.e. degree of proof which
would satisfy the aforementioned requirement
inasmuch as the same would indisputably depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case. It will
also depend upon the terms of contract of insurance.
Each case may pose a different problem which must
be resolved having regard to a large number of factors
governing the case including conduct of parties as
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 34 of 53

regards
duty
to
inform,
correct
disclosure,
suppression, fraud on the insurer etc. It will also
depend upon the fact as to who is the owner of the
vehicle and the circumstances in which the vehicle
was being driven by a person having no valid and
effective licence. No hard-and-fast rule can, therefor,
be laid down. If in a given case there exists sufficient
material to draw an adverse inference against either
the insurer or the insured, the Tribunal may do so. The
parties alleging breach must be held to have
succeeded in establishing the breach of conditions of
the contract of insurance, on the part of the insurer by
discharging its burden of proof. The Tribunal, there
cannot be any doubt, must arrive at a finding on the
basis of the materials available on records.
*

*

*

73. The liability of the insurer is a statutory one. The
liability of the insurer to satisfy the decree passed in
favour of a third party is also statutory.
*

*

*

77. In United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jaimy it is
stated:
“Section 149(2) relates to the liability of the
insurer and speaks of a situation in regard to
which no sum shall be payable by an insurer in
respect of any judgment or award. In the context
it is provided that an insurer to whom notice of
bringing of any such proceeding is given, could
defend the action stated in the said statutory
provision. The contention in the context would be
found in Section 149(2)(a) in the event of a
breach of a specified condition of the policy
enabling the insurer to avoid liability in regard
thereto. In the process in regard to the right of
the insurer to recover the amount from the
insured, it would have to be seen by referring to
Section 149(4) as to under what circumstances
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 35 of 53

this can be successfully recovered from the
insured.
Section 149(4) says that where a certificate of
insurance is issued, so much of the said policy as
purports to restrict the insurance of the persons
insured thereby by referring to any of the
conditions mentioned and it is precisely enacted
in regard thereto that the liability covered by
Section 2(b) as is required to be covered by the
policy would not be available. The position is
made further clear by the proviso enacting that
any sum paid by the insurer in or towards the
discharge of any liability of any person who is
covered by the policy by virtue of this sub-section
shall be recoverable by the insurer from that
person.
In other words, Section 149(4) considers the right
of the insurance company in regard to
reimbursement of the amount paid by them only
in the context of a situation other than the one
contemplated under Section 149(2)(b). It would
mean that except under the situation provided by
Section 149(2)(b), the insurer would not be in a
position to avoid the liability because he has got
rights against the owner under the above
provision.
The learned counsel strenuously submitted that
this would not be the correct understanding and
interpretation of the statutory provisions of
Section 149 of the 1988 Act. The learned counsel
submitted that to read the statutory provision to
understand that the insurance company could
only claim from the owner in situations governed
by Section 149(2)(b) and to have no right under
the said provision with regard to other situations
under Section 149(2)(a) would not be the proper
reading of the statutory provision. The learned
counsel submitted that in fact the provision would
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 36 of 53

have to be meaningfully understood. It is not
possible to consider the submission of the
learned counsel in the light of the plain language
of the statutory provision. It is necessary to
emphasise that under the new Act the burden of
the insurance company has been made heavier
in the context of controlling the need of taking up
contentions to legally avoid the liabilities of the
insurance company.”
*

*

*

84. We have analysed the relevant provisions of the
said Act in terms whereof a motor vehicle must be
driven by a person having a driving licence. The owner
of a motor vehicle in terms of Section 5 of the Act has
a responsibility to see that no vehicle is driven except
by a person who does not satisfy the provisions of
Section 3 or 4 of the Act. In a case, therefore, where
the driver of the vehicle, admittedly, did not hold any
licence and the same was allowed consciously to be
driven by the owner of the vehicle by such person, the
insurer is entitled to succeed in its defence and avoid
liability. The matter, however, may be different where
a disputed question of fact arises as to whether the
driver had a valid licence or where the owner of the
vehicle committed a breach of the terms of the
contract of insurance as also the provisions of the Act
by consciously allowing any person to drive a vehicle
who did not have a valid driving licence. In a given
case, the driver of the vehicle may not have any hand
in it at all e.g. a case where an accident takes place
owing to a mechanical fault or vis major.
*

*

*

110. The summary of our findings to the various
issues as raised in these petitions is as follows:(i)

*

*

*

(ii)

*

*

*

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 37 of 53

(iii)

*

*

*

(iv) Insurance companies, however, with a view to
avoid their liability must not only establish the
available defence(s) raised in the said proceedings but
must also establish “breach” on the part of the owner
of the vehicle; the burden of proof wherefor would be
on them.
(v) The court cannot lay down any criteria as to how
the said burden would be discharged, inasmuch as the
same would depend upon the facts and circumstances
of each case.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .”
16.
The legal position could therefore be stated as
follows:(a) Where the offending vehicle is admittedly an insured
vehicle, limited to the terms of the policy of insurance,
the insurance company is obliged to take over the liability
of the assured and pay the sum awarded by the Tribunal
to the claimant.
(b)

Where the insurance company alleges breach of the
terms and conditions of the policy of insurance and
Section 149 (2)(a) of the M.V. Act, 1988 is attracted, on
proof of violation of a breach of a specified condition of a
policy, the insurance company would still be liable to pay
the sum awarded to the claimants but would be entitled
to recovery rights against the assured, meaning thereby,

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 38 of 53

on proof of having satisfied the award in favour of the
claimant would be entitled to recover the said amount
from the assured.
(c)

Where the policy is avoided on proof of facts which
attracts Section 149(2) (b) of the M.V. Act, 1988, the
liability of the insurance company to pay under the policy
of insurance stands avoided vis-a-vis even the third
parties, meaning thereby the Tribunal would have no
power to direct recovery against the insurance company.

(d)

Mere breach of the conditions of the policy would not
entitle the insurance company to either avoid liability to
pay or have recovery rights against the assured unless
the insurance company additionally proves that the
assured, knowingly and consciously breached the terms
of the policy or by proving facts evidencing conduct of
acting so recklessly as to denote that the assured did not
care what the consequences of his act might be.

17.

It is more than elementary that decisions decide

contentions on the basis of pleadings and evidence. Section
101 of the Evidence Act requires a fact to be pleaded and
proved in the context of a legal right. Where escapement from
liability is pleaded, it has to be on the basis of averments in
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 39 of 53

pleading that there is a breach. The breach has to be pleaded
in the context of violation of the terms of the insurance policy.
The law grants immunity to the insurer from liability to
indemnify the assured if breach of the terms of policy is
committed by the assured.
18.

A breach is the infringement or violation of a

promise or obligation on the part of the assured.

Therefore, it

follows from the rule of evidence that if the insurer desires the
court to give judgment as to his legal right to be exonerated
from the liability to indemnify the insured, he must prove that
those facts exist.
19.

Further, evidence must be brought on record to

establish the breach.

Since obligation on the insurer is to

prove that the assured, knowingly, willingly or intentionally
violated the conditions of the policy or that

he acted so

recklessly as to denote that he did not care what the
consequences of his act might be, the insurance company has
not only to prove, where breach alleged is of entrusting the
vehicle to a person not possessing a valid driving licence, that
the driver did not possess a valid driving licence but
additionally has to prove that the owner was conscious of the
said fact when the vehicle was entrusted to the driver.
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 40 of 53

20.

In the context of a fake driving licence, the factual

arena becomes a little complex.

With the advancement of

science and technology and computer aids it has become very
easy to replicate licences.

Indeed, it has become extremely

difficult to distinguish the fake from the real. Cases have been
reported where a licence, origin whereof is fake, has been
renewed by the Licencing Authority. Kamla's case (Supra) was
dealing with a licence, origin whereof was dubious but was
subsequently renewed by the Licencing Authority.

If the

Licencing Authority could not detect, when presented for
renewal, that the licence was

fake licence, how can a lay

person detect the same?
21.

Knowledge is a state of mind. It is personal to the

person possessed of the knowledge.

Till he steps into the

witness box, it would be impossible for any person to establish
what his knowledge was.
22.

Thus, where the insurance company alleges that the

term of the policy of not entrusting the vehicle to a person
other than one possessing a valid driving licence has been
violated, initial onus is on the insurance company to prove that
the licence concerned was a fake licence or was not a valid
driving licence. This onus is capable of being easily discharged
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 41 of 53

by summoning the record of the Licencing Authority and in
relation thereto proving whether at all the licence was issued
by the authority concerned with reference to the licence
produced by the driver.

Once this is established, the onus

shifts on to the assured i.e. the owner of the vehicle who must
then step into the witness box and prove the circumstances
under which he acted; circumstances being of proof that he
acted bona fide and exercised due diligence and care. It would
be enough for the owner to establish that he saw the driving
licence of the driver when vehicle was entrusted to him and
that the same appeared to be a genuine licence. It would be
enough for the owner, to discharge the onus which has shifted
on to his shoulders, to establish that he tested the driving skill
of the driver and satisfied himself that the driver was fit to
drive the vehicle. Law does not require the owner to personally
go and verify the genuineness of the licence produced by the
driver.

23.

Where the assured chooses to run away from the

battle i.e. fails to defend the allegation of having breached the
terms of the insurance policy by opting not to defend the
proceedings, a presumption could be drawn that he has done
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 42 of 53

so because of the fact that he has no case to defend. It is trite
that a party in possession of best evidence, if he withholds the
same, an adverse inference can be drawn against him that had
the evidence been produced, the same would have been
against said person. As knowledge is personal to the person
possessed of the knowledge, his absence at the trial would
entitle the insurance company to a presumption against the
owner.
24.

That apart, what more can the insurance company

do other than to serve a notice under Order 12 Rule 8 of the
Code of Civil Procedure calling upon the owner as well as the
driver to produce a valid driving licence. If during trial such a
notice is served and proved to be served, non response by the
owner and the driver would fortify the case of the insurance
company.
25.

In the backdrop of the legal position as extracted

hereinabove, reference may conveniently now be made to
facts of each appeal.
MAC.APP. No.28/2005 and MAC. APP. No.46/2005
26.

MAC.APP.No.28/2005 and MAC. APP. No.46/2005

pertain to the same accident involving truck No.DL 1GB 0148
owned by Pawan Kumar Yadav. The vehicle was entrusted by
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 43 of 53

him to one Sanjay Kumar. Testimony of Pawan Kumar Yadav,
as noted in para 5 above establishes that he took more than
reasonable care to satisfy himself that Sanjay Kumar was
competent to drive a heavy duty vehicle.
27.

Notwithstanding that the insurance company has

proved that the licence produced by Sanjay Kumar was a fake
driving licence, the insurance company, which has been denied
recovery rights cannot succeed in the appeal, inasmuch as it
has failed to establish that Pawan Kumar Yadav knowingly or
willingly breached the condition of the policy of insurance. On
the contrary Pawan Kumar Yadav has positively established
that he acted with due diligence.
28.

MAC.APP.No.28/2005 and MAC.APP.No.46/2005 are

accordingly dismissed.
FAO No.476/2003
29.

Evidence

on

record,

being

the

chargesheet

submitted by the police, proved as Ex. R1 by the insurance
company establishes that the driver of the vehicle failed to
produce any driving licence

before the police authorities in

spite of being called upon to do so.
30.

Notwithstanding that, learned Judge MACT has held

that the insurance company has failed to establish that there
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 44 of 53

was a breach of the conditions of the policy of insurance.
31.

It would be relevant to note that neither the owner

nor the driver produced any licence before the Motor Accident
Claim Tribunal.
32.

I therefore do not agree with the view taken by the

learned Judge that the insurance company failed to prove that
there was a breach of a condition of the policy of insurance
which required the owner not to entrust the vehicle to a person
not possessing a valid driving licence.
33.

The learned Judge failed to appreciate that as per

the provisions of Section 158 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
every driver of a motor vehicle is legally obliged to keep with
him the driving licence while driving a vehicle and produce the
same required by a authority empowered to seek production of
the licence.

What else could the insurance company prove

other than the fact that the driver failed to produce any driving
licence when called upon to do so after the accident?

A

presumption has to be drawn that the driver possessed no
licence.
34.

The appeal has to succeed. As per para 84 of the

decision in Swaran Singh's case (Supra), insurance company
would be entitled to avoid any liability. However, I note that
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 45 of 53

vide order dated 1.8.2003, the insurance company was
declined any interim relief, in that, application filed by the
insurance company seeking stay of execution of the award
against it was declined.
35.

Since the insurance company has satisfied the

award vis-a-vis the claimant, I dispose of the appeal granting
recovery rights to the insurance company.

The insurance

company would be entitled to recover the amount paid to the
claimant from the owner of the vehicle insured. The insurance
company would be entitled to interest @ 8% p.a. on the sum
paid to the claimant with effect from the day it satisfied the
award till date of recovery from the owner.
MAC. APP. No.562/2005
36.
proved

Notwithstanding that the insurance company has
through

the

testimony

of

R3W2,

Khem

Raj,

Superintendent from the Regional Transport Office, wherefrom
the licence produced by the driver was purportedly issued that
the licence was never issued by said office, i.e. that the licence
was a fake licence, recovery rights have been denied by the
learned Judge MACT on the ground that the insurance company
failed to prove that it served a notice under Order 12 Rule 8
CPC upon the owner and the driver to produce the original
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 46 of 53

genuine licence.

The learned Judge has opined that the

insurance company has failed to prove willful breach.
37.
the claim.

The owner as also the driver had failed to contest
Thus, facts in the personal knowledge of the owner

as also the driver were withheld by the two. By establishing
that the licence was a fake licence, insurance company
successfully discharged the initial burden on it. As the owner
nor the driver led any evidence, the onus did not shift back on
the insurance company.
38.

MAC.APP.No.562/2005 stands disposed of granting

recovery rights to the insurance company. The insurance
company would be entitled to interest @ 8% p.a. on the sum
paid to the claimants pursuant to the award with effect from
the day it satisfied the award till date of recovery from the
owner.

MAC. APP. No.154/2005
38.

As noted in para 6 above owner of the vehicle

insured examined himself as R2W1. He deposed by way of an
affidavit. Not a word has been spoken by him in his testimony
as to what prudent steps were taken by him to check the
driving skills of the driver engaged by him. Not a word has
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 47 of 53

been spoken that he saw the driving licence produced by the
driver before giving him employment under him. Not a word
has been spoken that on perusal of a driving licence he was
satisfied that the driver was authorised to drive a truck.
39.

Notwithstanding that, the appeal must fail for the

reason the insurance company did not summon the record
from

the

Licencing

Authority,

Firozabad,

the

authority

wherefrom the licence in question was purportedly issued.
Attempt by the insurance company to prove that the licence
was a fake licence is through the testimony of R3W1, Shri
Balram Mahajan, Addl. Divisional Manager of the appellant. He
stated that they had engaged the services of an advocate,
Chander Raj Singh Chauhan who submitted a report marked 'A'
to the effect that the licence was not issued by the authority at
Firozabad. Report of the Licencing Authority enclosed with the
report of Raj Singh Chauhan being Ex. R3W1/B cannot be
accepted as a proof that the driving licence was fake for the
reason neither was Raj Singh Chauhan produced as a witness
nor was the author of Ex.R3w1/B produced as a witness.
Further, no record was summoned from the authority at
Firozabad.
40.

I may only add that proof of violation of the policy of

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 48 of 53

insurance has not to be lightly inferred.

Clear and cogent

evidence has to be led by the insurance company. A report
emanating from an authority can be proved either by the
author of the report or a record keeper from the authority who
proves the signatures of the concerned officer on the report
and deposes that the report has emanated from their office. It
would be additionally desirable to summon the original record
pertaining to the licence in question and in relation thereto
prove the person in whose name the licence is issued.
41.

MAC. APP. No.154/2005 is accordingly dismissed.

MAC. APP. No.236/2005
42.

As noted in para 7 above, owner of the vehicle

stepped into the witness box as R3W1 and deposed that on the
date of the accident, i.e. 1.9.2000, in the morning he had
entrusted the vehicle to Goldie Car Scan for service. He further
stated that when he went to take delivery of the car in the
evening he learnt that he had met with an accident.
43.

It would be interesting to note that the owner was

not cross-examined in spite of opportunity given.
44.

It is not a case where the owner, knowingly or

willingly or recklessly handed over the vehicle to a person not
possessing a valid driving licence. He entrusted the vehicle to
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 49 of 53

a service center. If the owner of the service centre allowed a
person not possessing a driving licence to drive the same, it
would not be a breach of the conditions of the policy of
insurance by the owner of the vehicle.
45.

Observations of the Supreme Court in para 18 of the

judgment in Lehru's case (supra) are squarely attracted.

As

held therein, the owner himself would be an innocent sufferer.
46.

MAC. APP. No.236/2005 is dismissed.

MAC.APP. No.378/2005
47.

Admittedly, the owner chose to remain ex-parte

before the MACT.

Evidence on record led by the insurance

company has established that the driving licence produced by
the driver after the accident was a fake driving licence. R3W4,
Suraj Mal, Licencing Clerk from the Licencing Authority
wherefrom the licence was purportedly issued proved that no
such licence as produced by the driver was issued to him.
48.

Since the owner chose to not step into the witness

box, the Tribunal has held it to be a case of knowingly or
intentionally violating the policy of insurance which mandated
that the vehicle insured would not be entrusted to a person not
possessing a valid driving licence.
49.

Thus, as regards the award dated 22.11.2002, no

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 50 of 53

exception can be taken to the grant of recovery rights against
the owner.
50.

In the appeal order dated 30.3.2005 dismissing

application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC for setting aside of the
award has also been challenged.
51.

As recorded in the said order dated 30.3.2005,

appellant was duly served and had engaged a counsel Ms.
Kiran Kumari. Case of the appellant was that her counsel kept
her in the dark. She stated that she learnt about the award on
16.8.2004.
52.

Learned Judge has held against the appellant inter

alia on the ground that during pendency of the proceeding,
since appellant was not appearing at the trial, a notice dated
1.8.2001 under Order 12 Rule 8 CPC was served upon her by
the insurance company calling upon her to produce the driving
licence of the driver as also the original policy of insurance. No
explanation was furnished by the appellant as to why she did
not respond to the said notice by producing the documents,
production whereof was sought.

Learned Judge has opined

that the said notice was a caution to the appellant.
53.

What has further weighed with the learned Judge is

that the insurance company had challenged the award vide
MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 51 of 53

FAO No.40/2003 and had questioned the liability cast upon it to
first pay the money to the claimants and thereafter recover the
same from the appellant. Learned Judge has noted that in the
said appeal, appellant was duly served and appeared through
her counsel on 5.3.2003.
54.

I agree with the view taken by the learned Judge

that when served with the notice in FAO No.40/2003, on
perusing the grounds of appeal urged by the insurance
company, appellant in the instant appeal as owner of the
vehicle would have known that under the impugned award
recovery rights have been granted against her.
55.

Indeed, learned counsel for the appellant had no

answer when questioned during arguments as to on what basis
could the appellant urge that she learnt about the award only
when recovery proceedings were initiated against her by the
insurance company.
56.

I find no infirmity in the order dated 30.3.2005.

57.

MAC. APP. No.378/2005 is accordingly dismissed.

58.

No costs in any appeal save and except MAC.APP.

No.378/2005 which is dismissed with costs in sum of Rs.5000/against the appellant and in favour of respondent No.1.
59.

LCR be returned in all the cases wherever received.

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

page 52 of 53

April 17, 2007
vg

MAC.APP.NO.28/05

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 53 of 53

