IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM(M) No. 1441/2007
#
!

V.K.Dhingra
through:

........ Petitioner
Mr. O.P.Saxena, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Shriram Scientific & Industrial
Research Foundation
........ Respondent
through: Mr. S.K.Jain, Advocate
RESERVED ON: 12.11.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 12.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

By and under the impugned order dated 10.10.2007

petitioner's application under Section 10 read with Order 7 Rule
11 of the Code of Civil Procedure praying for rejection of the
plaint has been dismissed.
2.

At the hearing held on 12.11.2007, learned counsel

for the petitioner stated that he presses the petition treating
the application in question as under Section 10 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.
CM(M) No. 1441/2007

Page 1 of 7

3.

Respondent is the plaintiff of the suit. Petitioner is

the defendant. Alleging that when in service Flat No.A-2, Sri
Colony, Delhi was licensed to the petitioner as a service benefit
and since he has ceased to be in employment the possession
was unauthorized the suit seeks to recover past damages @
Rs.12,000/- per month and future damages @ Rs.15,000/- per
month.
4.

It is not in dispute that pertaining to the alleged

cession of service there is a dispute between the parties.
Petitioner alleges that his voluntary resignation was withdrawn
by him before it was accepted and therefore he continues to be
an employee of the respondent. A fact which is disputed by the
respondent.
5.

It is also not in dispute that the respondent has

sought ejectment of the petitioner by resorting to action under
Section 14 (1) (i) read with Section 22 of the Delhi Rent Control
Act 1958 in which it is alleged that the petitioner was a service
tenant and since employer-employee relationship has snapped,
petitioner is liable to be ejected from the flat.
6.

The said eviction petition is a previously instituted

petition. The suit has been filed subsequent thereto.
7.

Contention

urged

by

learned

counsel

for

the

petitioner was that both actions have been initiated by the
CM(M) No. 1441/2007

Page 2 of 7

respondent.

Before the rent controller, respondent is the

petitioner. In the suit, respondent is the plaintiff. It is urged
that the petitioner accepts being a service tenant under the
respondent and that the only issue to be decided was whether
petitioner continues to be a service tenant. It was urged that
said dispute squarely arose for consideration before the learned
Rent Controller and that before respondent could had awarded
mesne profits, it had to establish that the petitioner was no
longer a service tenant. Thus, counsel urged that in view of the
previously instituted eviction petition, instant suit requires to be
stayed.
8.

Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that

the landlord-tenant relationship is a fact to be decided by the
Rent Controller to assume jurisdiction. The said dispute does
not relate to the substantive dispute between the parties. That
a decision of a Tribunal on a fact pertaining to its jurisdiction
can never be treated as binding on a civil court. Thus, counsel
urged that the suit filed by the respondent was maintainable.
9.

Having considered the rival submissions, it would be

relevant to note that the respondent is the petitioner before the
Rent Controller and is the plaintiff in the civil suit. Foundation
of the eviction petition as well as the suit is the assertion of the
respondent that petitioner continued possession post snapping
CM(M) No. 1441/2007

Page 3 of 7

of the employer-employee relationship is without authority of
law.
10.

The defence is common in both the proceedings.

Petitioner denies that the employer-employee relationship has
snapped.
11.

Thus,

it

is

not

a

case

where

landlord-tenant

relationship is in dispute as sought to be projected by learned
counsel for the respondent. I clarify, the employer-employee
relationship is an admitted fact when petitioner entered into
possession of the property concerned. The issue between the
parties is, whether the relationship has snapped.
12.

This issue squarely falls for determination in the

proceedings before the learned Rent Controller.
13.

The only other issue which needs to be decided is,

whether the decision by the learned Rent Controller on the
issue of landlord-service tenant relationship continues or not,
would be binding on the civil court.
14.

In view of the decision of the Supreme Court

reported as (1994) 2 SCC 14 Sulochana Amma Vs. Narayana
Nair, where explanation VIII to Section 11 of the Code of Civil
Procedure was expounded, the answer has to be in the
affirmative.

In para 6 of the decision, the Lordships of the

Supreme Court observed as under:CM(M) No. 1441/2007

Page 4 of 7

“6. The
words "competent to try such
subsequent suit" have been interpreted that it
must refer to the pecuniary jurisdiction of the
earlier court to try the subsequent suit at the time
when the first suit was brought. Mere competency
to try the issue raised in the subsequent suit is not
enough. A decree in a previous suit will not
operate as res judicata, unless the judge by whom
it was made, had jurisdiction to try and decide, not
that particular suit, but also the subsequent suit
itself in which the issue is subsequently raised.
This interpretation had consistently been adopted
before the introduction of Explanation VIII. So the
earlier decree of the Court of a limited pecuniary
jurisdiction would not operate as res judicata when
the same issue is directly and substantially in issue
in a later suit filed in a court of unlimited
jurisdiction, vide P.M Kavade v. A.B. Bokil. It had,
therefore become necessary to bring in the statute
Explanation VIII. To cull out its scope and ambit, it
must be read along with Section 11, to find the
purpose it seeks to serve. The Law Commission in
its report recommended to remove the anomaly
and bring within its fold the conclusiveness of an
issue in a former suit decided by any court, be it
either of limited pecuniary jurisdiction or of special
jurisdiction, like insolvency court, probate court,
land acquisition court, Rent Controller, Revenue
Tribunal, etc. No doubt main body of Section 11
was not amended, yet the expression "the court of
limited jurisdiction" in Explanation VIII is made
enough to include a court whose jurisdiction is
subject to pecuniary limitation and other cognate
expressions analogous thereto. Therefore, Section
11 is to be read in combination and in harmony
with Explanation VIII. The result that would flow is
that an order or an issue which had arisen directly
and substantially between the parties or their
privies an decided finally be a competent court or
tribunal, though of limited or special jurisdiction,
which includes pecuniary jurisdiction, will operate
as res judicata in a subsequent suit or proceeding,
notwithstanding the fact that such court of limited
or special jurisdiction was not a competent court to
try the subsequent suit. The issue must directly
and substantially arise in a later suit between the
CM(M) No. 1441/2007

Page 5 of 7

same parties or their privies. This question is no
longer res integra. In Rai Bajrang Bahadur Singh v.
Rai Beni Madho Rakesh Singh and Anr., the facts
were that under U.P. Land Revenue Act 3 of 1901,
the consolidation and partition of the lands were
effected and became final. Thereafter, one of the
land-owners claimed title in a civil suit for a
declaration that he was the superior land-holder.
In view of Section 233 (K) of the Land Revenue
Act, on a divergence of opinion among Oudh Chief
Court and Allahabad High Court, the judicial
committee held at p.214 that if a question of title
affecting the partition, which might have been
raised in the partition proceedings, was no raised
and the partition was completed, Section 233(K)
debars parties to the partition from raising the
question of title subsequently in a civil court. The
revenue court is a court of special jurisdiction, In
Daryao v. State of U.P., this Court held that the
doctrine of res judicata is in the interest of public
at large and a finality should be attached to the
binding decision pronounced by courts of
competent jurisdiction, and it is also in the public
interest that individuals should not be vexed twice
over with the same kind of litigation. In Gulam
Abbas v. State of U.P., this Court held that the
principle of res judicata though technical in nature,
is founded on considerations of public policy. The
technical aspect, for instance, pecuniary or
subject-wise competence of the earlier forum to
adjudicate the subject matter or to grant reliefs
sought in the subsequent litigation, should be
immaterial when the general doctrine of res
judicata is to be invoked. Explanation VIII, inserted
by the Amending Act of 1976, was intended to
serve this purpose and to clarify this position. It,
therefore has to be held that the decree of the
District Munsif, though of limited pecuniary
jurisdiction, would operate as res judicata in the
subsequent suit between the same parties.”
15.

The petition is accordingly allowed.

16.

Order dated 10.10.2007 is set aside.

Treating

application filed by the petitioner as under Section 10 CPC, the
CM(M) No. 1441/2007

Page 6 of 7

same is allowed.
17.

The suit filed by the respondent is stayed.

18.

No costs.

December 12, 2007
mm

CM(M) No. 1441/2007

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page 7 of 7

