IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Elec. Pet. 1/2004
#
!

Sh. Jaspal Singh
....... Petitioner
through:
Mr. N.Safaya, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Sh. O.P.Babbar
through:

.......
Respondent
Mr. Parag Triptahi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Jayant K.Mehta, Advocate
Elec. Pet. 4/2004

#
!

Sh. Sudarshan Khatri
....... Petitioner
through:
Mr. N.Safaya, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Sh. O.P.Babbar
through:

.......
Respondent
Mr. Parag Triptahi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Jayant K.Mehta, Advocate

RESERVED ON:
%

07-01-2008

DATE OF DECISION: 19-02-2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Jaspal Singh was a contesting candidate for the election

to the Delhi Legislative Assembly held in December 2003.

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

He

Page 1 of 31

contested

from

Tilak

Nagar

Assembly

Constituency

(AC-14).

Sudarshan Khatri claims to be a voter in the said Assembly
Constituency.

One S.Ranjit Singh son of late Gopal Singh R/o

20B/78A, Tilak Nagar, New Delhi had filed a nomination paper to
contest the ensuing elections from said Assembly Constituency.
Vide order dated 15.11.2003 the returning officer rejected the
nomination paper filed by S.Ranjit Singh by passing the following
order:“I have examined the nomination paper in accordance
with Section 36 of The Representation of the People
Act, 1951 and decided as follows:
Nomination paper examined with its enclosures and
following deficiencies noted:(i)
Affidavit as prescribed by ECI not complete and
not attested by Notary on all the pages and
verification also unattested.
(ii)
In affidavit on form 26, candidate did not
declare in para 2 whether he is/not convicted of an
offence.
On the above ground, nomination paper is rejected.”
2.

No evidence has been recorded in the election petitions

for the reason learned counsel for the parties conceded that the
issue may be decided treating that order dated 15.11.2003 as noted
hereinabove was indeed passed by the returning officer as also that
the affidavit filed by S.Ranjit Singh did not comply with the
requirement of para 2 of the affidavit prescribed as per Form No.26
prescribed under Rule 4 A of the Conduct of Elections Rules 1961.
Learned counsel for the parties jointly submitted that the issue may

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 2 of 31

be decided with reference to Section 100(1)(c) of the R.P.Act 1951
as per which the election of a returned candidate is liable to be
declared void on account of an improper rejection of a nomination
paper filed by a person desirous of contesting the election.
3.

The controversy between the parties needs to be

adjudicated with reference to the provisions of Section 33, 33A and
Section 36 of the R.P.Act 1951 read with Rule 4A of the Conduct of
Elections Rules 1961 and Form 26 prescribed under the Rules
pursuant to Rule 4A aforesaid.
4.

At the outset it may be noted that Section 33A of the

R.P.Act 1951 was inserted in the statute book by Act No.72 of 2002
with effect from 24.8.2002. The said Section reads as under:“33A . Right to information.-(1) A
candidate
shall,
apart
from
any
information which he is required to furnish, under
this Act or the rules made thereunder, in his
nomination paper delivered under sub-section (1)
of section 33, also furnish the information as to
whether:
(i)
he is accused of any offence punishable with
imprisonment for two years or more in a pending
case in which a charge has been framed by the
court of competent jurisdiction;
(ii)
he has been convicted of an offence other
than any offence referred to in sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2), or covered in sub-section (3), of
section 8 and sentenced to imprisonment for one
year or more.

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 3 of 31

(2) The candidate or his proposer, as the case
may be, shall, at the time of delivering to the
returning officer the nomination paper under subsection (1) of section 33, also deliver to him an
affidavit sworn by the candidate in a prescribed
form verifying the information specified in subsection (1).
(3) The returning officer shall, as soon as may
be after the furnishing of information to him under
sub-section (1), display the aforesaid information
by affixing a copy of the affidavit, delivered under
sub-section (2), at a conspicuous place at his
office for the information of the electors relating
to a constituency for which the nomination paper
is delivered.”
5.

Section 33 of the R.P.Act 1951 as amended by Act No.27

of 1956 reads as under:“33:- Presentation of nomination paper and
requirements for a valid nomination. ( 1) On or before the date appointed under clause (a)
of section 30 each candidate shall, either in person or
by his proposer, between the hours of eleven O'clock
in the forenoon and three O'clock in the afternoon
deliver to the returning officer at the place specified
in this behalf in the notice issued under section 31 a
nomination paper completed in the prescribed form
and signed by the candidate and by an elector of the
constituency as proposer:
Provided that a candidate not set up by a recognised
political party, shall not be deemed to be duly
nominated for election from a constituency unless the
nomination paper is subscribed by ten proposers
being electors of the constituency:
Provided further that no nomination paper shall be
delivered to the returning officer on a day which is a
public holiday:

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 4 of 31

Provided also that in the case a local authorities'
constituency, graduates' constituency or teachers'
constituency, the reference to "an elector of the
constituency as proposer" shall be construed as a
reference to ten per cent of the electors of the
constituency or ten such electors, whichever is less,
as proposers.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), for election to the Legislative Assembly of
Sikkim (deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of
that State only constituted under the Constitution),
the nomination paper to be delivered to the returning
officer shall be in such form and manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the said nomination paper shall be
subscribed by the candidate as assenting to the
nomination, and-(a) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of
Bhutia-Lepcha origin, also by at least twenty electors
of the constituency as proposers and twenty electors
of the constituency as seconders;
(b) in the case of a seat reserved for Sanghas, also
by at least twenty electors of the constituency as
proposers and at least twenty electors of the
constituency as seconders;
(c) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of
Nepali origin, by an elector of the constituency as
proposer:
Provided further that no nomination paper shall be
delivered to the returning officer on a day which is a
public holiday.
(2) In a constituency where any seat is reserved, a
candidate shall not be deemed to be qualified to be
chosen to fill that seat unless his nomination paper
contains a declaration by him specifying the particular
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 5 of 31

caste or tribe of which he is a member and the area
in relation to which that caste or tribe is a Scheduled
Caste or, as the case may be, a Scheduled Tribe of
the State.
(3) Where the candidate is a person who, having held
any office referred to in section 9 has been dismissed
and a period of five years has not elapsed since the
dismissal, such person shall not be deemed to be duly
nominated as a candidate unless his nomination
paper is accompanied by a certificate issued in the
prescribed manner by the Election Commission to the
effect that he has not been dismissed for corruption
or disloyalty to the State.
(4) On the presentation of a nomination paper, the
returning officer shall satisfy himself that the names
and electoral roll numbers of the candidate and his
proposer as entered in the nomination paper are the
same as those entered in the electoral rolls:
Provided that no misnomer or inaccurate description
or clerical, technical or printing error in regard to the
name of the candidate or his proposer or any other
person, or in regard to any place, mentioned in the
electoral roll or the nomination paper and no clerical,
technical or printing error in regard to the electoral
roll numbers of any such person in the electoral roll
or the nomination paper, shall affect the full operation
of the electoral roll or the nomination paper with
respect to such person or place in any case where the
description in regard to the name of the person or
place is such as to be commonly understood; and the
returning officer shall permit any such misnomer or
inaccurate description or clerical, technical or printing
error to be corrected and where necessary, direct
that any such misnomer, inaccurate description,
clerical, technical or printing error in the electoral roll
or in the nomination paper shall be overlooked.
(5) Where the candidate is an elector of a different
constituency, a copy of the electoral roll of that
constituency or of the relevant part thereof or a
certified copy of the relevant entries in such roll shall,
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 6 of 31

unless it has been filed along with the nomination
paper, be produced before the returning officer at the
time of scrutiny.
(6) Nothing in this section shall prevent any
candidate from being nominated by more than one
nomination paper:
Provided that not more than four nomination papers
shall be presented by or on behalf of any candidate or
accepted by the returning officer for election in the
same constituency.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (6) or in any other provisions of this Act, a
person shall not be nominated as a candidate for
election. (a) in the case of a general election to the House of
the People (whether or not held simultaneously from
all Parliamentary constituencies), from more than two
Parliamentary constituencies;
(b) in the case of a general election to the Legislative
Assembly of a State (whether or not held
simultaneously from all Assembly constituencies),
from more than two Assembly constituencies in that
State;
(c) in the case of a biennial election to the Legislative
Council of a State having such Council, from more
than two Council constituencies in the State;
(d) in the case of a biennial election to the Council of
States for filling two or more seats allotted to a State,
for filling more than two such seats;
(e) in the case of bye-elections to the House of the
People from two or more Parliamentary constituencies
which are held simultaneously, from more than two
such Parliamentary constituencies;

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 7 of 31

(f) in the case of bye-elections to the Legislative
Assembly of a State from two or more Assembly
constituencies which are held simultaneously, from
more than two such Assembly constituencies;
(g) in the case of bye-elections to the Council of
States for filling two or more seats allotted to a State,
which are held simultaneously, for filling more than
two such seats;
(h) in the case of bye-elections to the Legislative
Council of a State having such Council from two or
more Council constituencies which are held
simultaneously, from more than two such Council
constituencies.
Explanation. -For the purposes of this sub-section,
two or more bye-elections shall be deemed to be held
simultaneously where the notification calling such
bye-elections are issued by the Election Commission
under sections 147, 149, 150 or, as the case may be,
151 on the same date.”
6.

Section 36 of the R.P.Act 1951 reads as under:“36. Scrutiny of Nominations: (1) On the date fixed
for the SCRUTINY of nominations under section 30,
the candidates, their election agents, one proposer of
each candidate, and one other person duly authorised
in writing by each candidate but no other person, may
attend at such time and place as the returning officer
may appoint; and the returning officer shall give them
all reasonable facilities for examining the nomination
papers of all candidates which have been delivered
within the time and in the manner laid down in section
33.
(2) The returning officer shall then examine the
nomination papers and shall decide all objections
which may be made to any nomination and may,
either on such objection or on his own motion, after
such summary inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary,
reject any nomination on any of the following

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 8 of 31

grounds:(a) that on the date fixed for the SCRUTINY of
nominations the candidate] either is not qualified or is
disqualified for being chosen to fill the seat under any
of the following provisions that may be applicable,
namely:-Articles 84, 102, 173 and 191,
Part II of this Act and sections 4 and 14 of the
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of
1963) or
(b) that there has been a failure to comply with any
of the provisions of section 33 or section 34; or
(c)
that the signature of the candidate or the
proposer on the nomination paper is not genuine.
(3) Nothing contained in clause (b) or clause (c) of
sub-section (2) shall be deemed to authorise the
rejection of the nomination of any candidate on the
ground of any irregularity in respect of a nomination
paper, if the candidate has "been duly nominated by
means of another nomination paper in respect of
which no irregularity has been committed.
(4) The returning officer shall not reject any
nomination paper on the ground of any defect which is
not of a substantial character.
(5) The returning officer shall hold the SCRUTINY on
the date appointed in this behalf under clause (b) of
section 30 and shall not allow any adjournment of the
proceedings except when such proceedings are
interrupted or obstructed by riot or open violence or
by causes beyond his control:
Provided that in case an objection is raised by the
returning officer or is made by any other person] the
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 9 of 31

candidate concerned may be allowed time to rebut it
not later than the next day but one following the date
fixed for SCRUTINY, and the returning officer shall
record his decision on the date to which the
proceedings have been adjourned.
(6) The returning officer shall endorse on each
nomination paper his decision accepting or rejecting
the same and, if the nomination paper is rejected,
shall record in writing a brief statement of his reasons
for such rejection.
(7) For the purposes of this section, a certified copy
of an entry in the electoral roll for the time being in
force of a constituency shall be conclusive evidence of
the fact that the person referred to in that entry is an
elector for that constituency, unless it is proved that
he is subject to a disqualification mentioned in section
16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43
of 1950).
(8) Immediately after all the nomination papers
have been scrutinized and decisions accepting or
rejecting the same have been recorded, the returning
officer shall prepare a list of validly nominated
candidates, that is to say, concidates whose
nominations have been found valid, and affix it to his
notice board.”
7.

The Conduct of Elections Rules 1961 give teeth to the

provisions of the R.P.Act 1951. Pertaining to the nomination paper
required to be presented under Section 33, Rule 4 of the Conduct of
Elections Rules 1961 supplements, by requiring that the nomination
paper presented under Section 33 shall be as per Forms 2A to 2E as
may be appropriate.
8.

By notification No.SO 935 (E) dated 8.9.2002 Rule 4A

was inserted in the Conduct of Elections Rules 1961. Rule 4A reads

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 10 of 31

as under:4A. Form of affidavit to be filed at the time of
delivering nomination paper – The candidate or his
proposer, as the case may be, shall, at the time of
delivering to the returning officer the nomination paper
under sub-section (1) of section 33 of the Act, also deliver
to him an affidavit sworn by the candidate before a
Magistrate of the first class or a Notary in Form 26”
9.

Conceding that the affidavit filed by S.Ranjit Singh was

not as per the stipulated Form No.26 and hence not in compliance
with Rule 4A of the Conduct of Elections Rules 1961, consequently
Section 33A of the R.P.Act 1951 was not complied with, Sh. N.Safaya
learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the right to reject
a nomination paper vested in the returning officer under Section 36
of the R.P.Act 1951 and that a nomination paper could be rejected
only on the grounds stipulated in clause a, b and c of sub section 2
of section 36 of the R.P.Act 1951.

Counsel submitted that non

compliance of Section 33A of the R.P.Act 1951 or of Rule 4A of the
Conduct of Elections Rules 1961 was not a ground available under
any of the clauses of sub section 2 of Section 36 of the R.P.Act 1951
to reject a nomination paper.

Counsel submitted that the penalty

prescribed for furnishing incorrect, concealing or failure to furnish
information relating to Section 33A was as stipulated under Section
125A of the R.P.Act 1951. It was urged that it is settled law that
where consequence of violation of a statutory provision are
enshrined

in

the

statute,

for

violation

of

the

statute,

only

consequences which can flow are the ones which are stipulated as a
consequence in the statute and no more.
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 11 of 31

10.

Per contra, Sh. Parag P.Tripathi learned senior counsel

for the respondent urged that the legislative history of Section 33A
of the R.P.Act 1951 and introduction of Rule 4A of the Conduct of
Elections Rules 1961 requires a purposive interpretation to be given
to the applicable provisions of the R.P.Act 1951.

Additionally,

counsel submitted that the directive issued by the election
commission vide order No. 3/ER/2002/JS-II/Vol.-III dated 28.6.2002
had also to be kept in mind as the source of the power of the
returning officer to reject the nomination paper filed by S.Ranjit
Singh, being not in compliance with Rule 4A of the Conduct of
Elections Rules 1961, in that, there was a failure to furnish complete
information as required by the affidavit prescribed vide Form No.26
of the Conduct of Elections Rules 1961.

Pertaining to the

consequences of filing false or incomplete declaration as stipulated
under Section 125A of the R.P.ACt 1951, counsel submitted that said
Section provided for a post election consequence and was an
additional penal provision, meaning thereby, the span of the power
of the returning officer to reject an incomplete nomination paper was
not curtailed by Section 125A of the R.P.Act 1951.
11.

Let me begin with the history leading to the insertion of

Section 33A in the R.P.Act 1951 with a consequential amendment by
inserting

Rule

4A

in

the

Conduct

of

Elections

Rules

1961

accompanied by insertion of Form No.26 in the Conduct of Elections
Rules 1961.
12.

In its 170th report, the Law Commission had made a

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 12 of 31

recommendation to make suitable amendments in the R.P.Act 1951.
The Law Commission had noted a subversion in the Indian Electoral
System by criminalization thereof.

Since neither the Union

Government nor the Union Parliament was taking cognizance of the
report filed by the Law Commission, the Association of Democratic
Reforms filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court for direction to
the respondents impleaded in the writ petition to implement the
recommendations made by the Law Commission in its 170th Report
and to make necessary changes under Rule 4 of the Conduct of
Election Rules, 1961. It was pointed out that Law Commission of
India had, at the request of Government of India, undertaken
comprehensive study of the measures required to expedite hearing
of election petitions and to have a thorough review of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 so as to make the electoral
process more fair, transparent and equitable and to reduce the
distortions and evils that had crept into the Indian electoral system
and to identify the areas where the legal provisions required
strengthening and improvement. It was pointed out that Law
Commission has made recommendation for debarring a candidate
from contesting an election if charges have been framed against him
by a Court in respect of certain offences and necessity for a
candidate seeking to contest election to furnish details regarding
criminal cases if any, pending against him. It was also suggested
that true and correct statement of assets owned by the candidate

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 13 of 31

his/her spouse and dependant relations should also be disclosed.
Reference was also made to the report of the Vohra Commission
which had also recommended on the similar lines as the Law
Commission. It was contended that despite the Reports of the Law
Commission and Vohra Committee, successive governments have
failed to take any action and, therefore, petition was filed for
implementation of the said reports and for a direction to the Election
Commission to make mandatory for every candidate to provide
information by amending Form 2-A to 2-E prescribed under the
Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
13.

After hearing the parties, the Delhi High Court by

judgment and order dated 2nd November, 2000 held that it is the
function of the Parliament to make necessary amendments in the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 or the Election Rules and,
therefore the Court cannot pass any order, as prayed, for amending
the Act or the Rules.
14.

However, the Delhi High Court considered whether or

not an elector, a citizen of the country, has a fundamental right to
receive the information regarding the criminal activities of a
candidate to the Lok Sabha or Legislative Assembly for making an
estimate for himself as to whether the person who is contesting the
election has a background making him worthy of his vote, by
peeping into the past of the candidate. After considering the
relevant submissions and the reports as well as the say of Election
Commission, the Delhi High Court held that for making a right
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 14 of 31

choice, it is essential that the past of the candidate should not be
kept in the dark as it is not in the interest of the democracy and well
being of the country. The Court directed the Election Commission to
secure to the voters the following information pertaining to each of
the candidates contesting election to the Parliament and to the
State Legislative:I

Whether

the

candidate

is

accused

of

any

offence(s)

punishable with imprisonment? If so, the details thereof.
II

Assets possessed by a candidate, his or her spouse and

dependant relations?
III

Facts giving insight to candidate's competence, capacity and

suitability for acting as parliamentarian or legislator including details
of his/her educational qualifications;
IV

Information

which

the

election

commission

considers

necessary for judging the capacity and capability of the political
party fielding the candidate for election to Parliament or the State
Legislature.
15.
Court

Accordingly, directions were issued by the Delhi High
to

the

Election

Commission

to

issue

administrative

instructions/guidelines to give effect to its decision.
16.

Aggrieved by the said judgment and order dated

2.11.2000 passed by the Delhi High Court, Union of India and Indian
National Congress preferred an appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court. Further, People's Union for Civil Liberties filed Writ Petition
under Article 32 of the Constitution praying that writ, order or
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 15 of 31

direction be issued to the respondents-- (a) to bring in such
measures which provide for declaration of assets by the candidate
for the elections and for such mandatory declaration every year
during the tenure as an elected representative as MP/MLA; (b) to
bring in such measures which provide for declaration by the
candidate contesting election whether any charge in respect of any
offence has been framed against him/her, and (c) to frame such
guidelines under Article 141 of the Constitution by taking into
considering 170th Report of Law Commission of India.
17.

The challenge to the decision of the Delhi High Court

was repelled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported
as Union of India Vs. Association of Democratic Reforms & Anr.
(2002) 5 SCC 294. The Hon'ble Supreme Court posed the question:
whether in a nation wedded to republican and democratic form of
government, where election as a Member of Parliament or as a
Member of a Legislative Assembly is of utmost importance for
governance of the country, do voters have a right to know the
relevant particulars of the candidates before casting their votes.
Further connected question considered by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court was whether the High Court had jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution of India to issue directions to the Election
Commission to frame appropriate guidelines in this regard.
18.

On behalf of Union of India it was argued that till suitable

amendments are made in the Representation of People's Act 1951

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 16 of 31

and the Conduct of Elections Rules 1961 , the High Court should not
have given any direction to the Election Commission. Reference was
made to various provisions of the Representation of People's Act
1951 and it was submitted that an elaborate procedure is prescribed
under

the

Act

for

presentation

of

nomination

paper

and

requirements for a valid nomination. That it is for the political
parties to decide whether such amendments should be brought and
carried out in the Act and the Rules. That as the Act or the Rules
nowhere disqualify a candidate for non-disclosure of the assets or
pending charge in a criminal case and, therefore, directions given
by the High Court would be of no consequence and such directions
ought not to have been issued.
19.

Supplementing the aforesaid submission Indian National

Congress argued that the Constituent Assembly had discussed and
negatived requirement of educational qualification and possession
of the assets to contest election. That similarly prescribing of
properly qualification for the candidates to contest election was also
negatived by the Constituent Assembly. That therefore furnishing of
information regarding assets and educational qualification of a
candidate is not at all relevant for contesting election and even for
casting votes. That a delicate balance is required to be maintained
with regard to the jurisdiction of the Parliament and that of Courts
and once the Parliament has not amended the Act or the Rules
despite the recommendation made by the Law Commission or the
report submitted by the Vohra Committee, there was no question of
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 17 of 31

giving any direction by the High Court to the Election Commission.
20.

The Election Commission supported the order of the

High Court in so far it issued directions pertaining to pending
criminal cases, assets and educational qualifications.
21.

After noting the respective contentions of the parties,

Hon'ble Supreme Court posed following two questions to be
answered:I

Whether Election Commission is empowered to issue

directions as ordered by the High Court?
II
get

Whether a voter - a citizen of this country - has right to
relevant

information,

such

as,

assets.

qualification

and

involvement in offence for being educated and informed for judging
the suitability of a candidate contesting election as MP or MLA?
22.

After noting the case laws on the subject, Hon'ble

Supreme Court answered the afore-noted two questions as under:“To sum up the legal and constitutional position with
emerges from the aforesaid discussion, it can be stated
that:1. The jurisdiction of the Election Commission is wide
enough to include all powers necessary for smooth
conduct of elections and the word 'elections' is used in a
wide sense to include the entire process of election
which consists of several stages and embraces many
steps.
2. The limitation on plenary character of power is when
the Parliament or State Legislature has made a valid law
relating to or in connection with elections, the
Commission is required to act in conformity with the
said provisions. In case where law is silent, Article 324 is
a reservoir of power to act for the avowed purpose of
having free and fair election. Constitution has taken care
of leaving scope for exercise of residuary power by the
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 18 of 31

Commission in its own right as a creature of the
Constitution in the infinite variety of situations that may
emerge from time to time in a large democracy, as
every contingency could not be foreseen or anticipated
by the enacted laws or the rules. By issuing necessary
directions Commission can fill the vacuum till there is
legislation on the subject. In Kanhiya Lal Omar's
case,
the
Court
construed
the
expressions
"superintendence, direction and control" in Article
324(1) and held that a direction may mean an order
issued to a particular individual or a precept which may
have to follow and it may be a specific or a general
order and such phrase should be construed liberally
empowering the election commission to issue such
orders.
3. The word "elections" includes the entire process of
election which consists of several stages and it embraces
many steps, some of which have an important bearing on
the process of choosing a candidate. Fair election
contemplates disclosure by the candidate of his past
including the assets held by him so as to give a proper
choice to the candidate according to his thinking and
opinion. As stated earlier, in Common Cause case
(supra), the Court dealt with a contention that elections in
the country are fought with the help of money power which
is gathered from black sources and once elected to power,
it becomes easy to collect tons of black money, which is
used for retaining power and for re-election. If on affidavit
a candidate is required to disclose the assets held by him
at the time of election, voter can decide whether he could
be re-elected been in case where he has collected tons of
money
Presuming, as contended by the learned senior counsel
Mr. Ashwini Kumar, that this condition may not be much
effective for breaking a vicious circle which has polluted
the basic democracy in the country as the amount would
be unaccounted. May be true, still this would have its
own effect as a step-in-aid voters may not elect lawbreakers as law-makers and some flowers of democracy
may blossom.
4. To maintain the purity of elections and in particular to
bring transparency in the process of election, the
Commission can ask the candidates about the expenditure
incurred by the political parties and this transparency in
the process of election would include transparency of a
candidate who seeks election or re-election. In a
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 19 of 31

democracy, the electoral process has a strategic role. The
little man of this country would have basic elementary
right to know full particulars of a candidate who is to
represent him in Parliament where laws to bind his liberty
and property may be enacted.
5. The right to get information in democracy is recognised
all throughout and it is natural right flowing from the
concept of democracy. At this stage, we would refer to
Article 19 (1) and (2) of the International Covenant of Civil
and Political Rights which is as under:"(1) Everyone shall have the right to hold
opinions without interference.
(2) Everyone shall have the right to freedom of
expression; this right shall include freedom to
seek, receive and impart information and ideas of
all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in
writing or in print, in the form of art, or through
any other media of his choice."
6. Cumulative reading of plethora of decisions of this Court
as referred to, it is clear that if the field meant for
legislature and executive is left unoccupied detrimental to
the public interest, this Court would have ample
jurisdiction under Article 32 read with Article 141 and 142
of the Constitution to issue necessary directions to the
Executive to subserve public interest.
7. Under our Constitution, Article 19(1)(a) provides for
freedom of speech and expression. Voters's speech or
expression in case of election would include casting of
votes that is to say, voter speaks out or expresses by
casting vote. For this purpose, information about the
candidate to be selected is must. Voter's (little mancitizen's) right to know antecedents including criminal past
of his candidate contesting election for MP or MLA is much
more fundamental and basic for survival of democracy.
The little man may think over before making his
choice of electing law breakers as law makers. “
23.

So holding, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the

directions issued by the High Court were neither unjustified nor
beyond its jurisdiction. However, Hon'ble Supreme Court modified
the directions issued by the Delhi High Court as follows:Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 20 of 31

“The Election Commission is directed to call for
information on affidavit by issuing necessary order in
exercise of its power under Article 324 of the Constitution
of India from each candidate seeking election to
Parliament or a State Legislature as a necessary part of his
nomination paper, furnishing therein, information on the
following aspects in relation to his/her candidature:(1) Whether the candidate is convicted/acquitted/
discharged of any criminal offence in the past-if any,
whether he is punished with imprisonment or fine.
(2) Prior to six months of filing of nomination, whether the
candidate is accused in any pending case, of any offence
punishable with imprisonment for two years or more, and
in which charge is framed or cognizance is taken by the
Court of law. If so, the details thereof.
(3) The assets (immovable, movable, bank balances etc.)
of a candidate and of his/her spouse and that of
dependants.
(4) Liabilities, if any, particularly whether there are any
over dues of any public financial institution or Government
dues.
(5) The educational qualifications of the candidate.”

24.

After the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered its

opinion on 2.5.2002, the representation of the People (3rd
Amendment) Act 2002 was promulgated. Simultaneously Rule
4A was inserted in the Conduct of Elections Rules 1961 as also
Form No.26 prescribing the affidavit required to be filed by a
candidate along with the nomination paper was introduced in
the Rules.
25.

Section 33A as also Section 33B as also Section 125

A was introduced in the R.P.Act 1951.
26.

While amending the statute, the legislature did not

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 21 of 31

give full effect to complete directions issued by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in its decision reported as 2002 (5) SCC 294
UOI Vs. Association for Democratic Reforms & Anr. This led to
another round of litigation where vires of Section 33 of the
R.P.Act 1951 was challenged.
27.

The challenge succeeded.

Section 33B of the

R.P.Act 1951 was struck down.
28.

The said decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is

reported as 2003 (4) SCC 399 Peoples Union for Civil Liberties
& Anr. Vs. UOI & Anr.
29.

Relevant for the purpose of the instant dispute is a

reference to an office order issued by Election Commission
being order No. 3/ER/2002/JS-II/Vol.-III dated 28.6.2002.

The

aforesaid direction was issued by the Election Commission in
implementation of the decision of the Delhi High Court.
30.

The office order under reference reads as under:“Furnishing of any wrong or incomplete
information or suppression of any material
information by any candidate in or from the said
affidavit may also result in the rejection of his
nomination paper where such wrong or
incomplete information or suppression of
material information is considered by the
Returning Officer to be a defect of substantial
character,
apart
from
inviting
penal
consequences under the Indian Penal Code for
furnishing wrong information to a public servant
or suppression of material facts before him:

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 22 of 31

Provided that only such information shall be
considered to be wrong or incomplete or
amounting to suppression of material information
as is capable of easy verification by the
Returning Officer by reference to documentary
proof adduced before him the summary inquiry
conducted by him at the time scrutiny of
nominations under Section 36 (2) of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, and only
the information so verified shall be taken into
account by him for further consideration of the
question whether the same is a defect of
substantial character.”
31.

Though not a subject matter of a direct challenge

before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, taking note of the order
dated 28.6.2002, in para 73 of its report in the decision
reported as 2003 (4) SCC 399 People Union for Civil Liberties &
Anr. Vs. UOI & Anr., their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court opined as under:“73. While no exception can be taken to the
insistence of affidavit with regard to the matter
specified in the judgment in Assn. For Democratic
Reforms Case the direction to reject the nomination
paper for furnishing wrong information or
concealing material information and providing for a
summary enquiry at the time of scrutiny of the
nominations, cannot be justified. In the case of
assets and liabilities, it would be very difficult for
the Returning Officer to consider the truth or
otherwise of the details furnished with reference to
the “documentary proof”.
Very often, in such
matters the documentary proof may not be
clinching and the candidate concerned may be
handicapped to rebut the allegation then and there.
If sufficient time is provided, he may be able to
produce proof to contradict the objector's version.
It is true that the aforesaid directions issued by the
Election Commission are not under challenge but at
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 23 of 31

the same time prima facie it appear that the
Election Commission is required to revise its
instructions in the light of directions issued in
Assn. For Democratic Reforms Case and as
provided under the Representation of the Peoples
Act and its Third Amendment.”
32.

A statute is an edict of the Legislature and the

conventional way of interpreting or construing a statute is to
seek the 'intention' of its maker. A statute is to be construed
according “to the intent of those who make it” and “the duty of
the judicature is to act upon the true intention of the
Legislature – the mens or sententia legis”.
33.

The intention of the Legislature assimilates two

aspects: in one aspect it carries the concept of 'meaning' i.e.
what the words mean and in another aspect, it conveys the
concept of 'purpose and object' or the 'reason and spirit'
pervading through the Statute. The process of construing
intention of the Legislature therefore combines both literal and
purposive approaches.
34.

The

tussle

between

the

literal

and

purposive

approaches is well-highlighted in the following observations of
Lord Millet:“No draftsmen can envisage all the circumstances
which may possibly arise. From time to time,
therefore, events occur which are within the plain
words of the statute yet are outside its evident
purpose and vice versa. This is the battle ground on
which are fought the battle between the literal
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 24 of 31

constructionists
and
the
purposive
constructionists.” ('Construing Statutes' (1999) 20
Statute Law Review, 107)
35.

In the decision reported as Lehigh Valley Coal Co. v

Yensavage 218 Fed 547 Justice Learned Hand observed as
under:“Statutes should not be construed as theorems of
Euclid but with some imagination of the purposes
which lie behind them.”
36.

To the same effect are the following observations of

Justice Frankfurter which were noted with approval by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as United
Bank of India, Calcutta v Abhijit Tea Co. AIR 2000 SC 2957:“Legislation has an aim, it seeks to obviate some
mischief, to supply an inadequacy, to effect a
change of policy, to formulate a plan of
government. That aim, that policy is not drawn, like
nitrogen, out of the air; it is evidenced in the
language of the statute, as read in the light of other
external manifestations of purpose” ('Some
Reflections on the Reading of Statutes' 47 Columbia
LR 527)
37.

In the decision reported as R (On the application of

Quintavalle) v Secretary (2003) All ER 113 Lord Bingham
observed as under:“Every statute other than a pure consolidating
statute is, after all, enacted to make some change,
or address some problem, or remove some blemish
or effect some improvement in the national life. The
Court's task, within the permissible bounds of
interpretation, is to give effect to Parliament's
purpose. So the controversial provisions should
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 25 of 31

be read in the context of a statute as a whole and
statute as a whole should be read in the historical
context of the situation which led to its
enactment.”(underlining emphasised)
38.

In the decision reported as Reserve Bank of India v

Peerless General Finance & Investment Co. (1987) 1 SCC 424,
it was observed as under:“Interpretation must depend on the text and the
context. They are the bases of interpretation. One
may well say if the text is the texture, context is
what gives the colour. Neither can be ignored. Both
are important. That interpretation is best which
makes the textual interpretation match the
contextual. A statute is best interpreted when we
know why it was enacted. With this knowledge, the
statute must be read, first as a whole and then
section by section, clause by clause, phrase by
phrase and word by word. If a statute is looked at, in
the context of its enactment, with the glasses of the
statutemaker, provided by such context, its scheme,
the sections, clauses, phrases and words may take
colour and appear different than when the statute is
looked at without the glasses provided by the
context. With these glasses we must look at the Act
as a whole and discover what each section, each
clause, each phrase and each word is meant and
designed to say as to fit into the scheme of the
entire Act. No part of a statute and no word of a
statute can be construed in isolation. Statutes have
to be construed so that every word has a place and
everything is in its place.”
39.

Importance

of

'purposive

interpretation'

was

highlighted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision
reported as Organo Chemical Industries & Anr v Union of India
AIR 1979 SC 1803. In said decision, it was observed as under:“Each word, phrase or sentence is to be considered
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 26 of 31

in the light of general purpose of the Act itself. A
bare mechanical interpretation of the words devoid
of concept or purpose will reduce most of legislation
to futility. It is a salutary rule, well established, that
the intention of the legislature must be found by
reading the statute as a whole.”
40.

In the decision reported as Seaford Court Estates

Ltd. v. Asher [1949] 2 All. E.R. 155 at 164. Lord Denning L.J.
observed:“When a defect appears, a judge cannot simply fold
his hands and blame the draftsman. He must set to
work on the constructive task of finding the
intention of Parliament... and then he must
supplement the written word so as to give 'force
and life' to the intention of the legislature.... A judge
should ask himself the question how, if the makers
of the Act had themselves come across this ruck in
the texture of it, they should have straightened it
out? He must then do as they would have done. A
judge must not alter the material of which the Act is
woven but he can and should iron out the creases.”
41.

As observed as by Hon'ble Justice Krishna Iyer in the

decision reported as Chairman, Board of Mining Examination &
Chief Inspector of Mines v Ramjee AIR 1977 SC 965 to be literal
in meaning is to see the skin and miss the soul. The judicial
key to construction is the composite perception of the 'deha'
and 'dehi' of the provision.
42.

Noting that the literal interpretation would lead to

an anomalous situation, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in undernoted judgments preferred purposive interpretation over literal
interpretation while interpreting a statute/provision:Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 27 of 31

I

Union of India & Ors v Filip Tiago De Gama of
Vedem Vasco De Gama (1990) 1 SCC 277.

II

State Bank of Travancore v Mohammed Mohammed
Khan AIR 1981 SC 1744.

III

Surjit Singh Kalra v Union of India (1991) 2 SCC 87.

IV

Directorate of Enforcement v Deepak Mahajan &
Anr AIR 1999 SC 1775.

V

Hameedia Hardware Stores v B. Mohan Lal (1998) 2
SCC 513.

VI

O.S.Singh v Union of India (1996) 7 SCC 37.

VII

Union of India v Hansoli Devi (2002) 7 SCC 273.

43.

Keeping in view the legislative history leading to the

incorporation of Section 33A of the R.P.Act 1951, Rule 4A of
the Conduct of Elections Rules 1961 and Form 26 to the said
Rules, it is apparent that the declaration required (with
contents) under Section 33A is mandatory as said information
has been held to be the right to know of each voter. Indeed in
the decision reported as UOI Vs. Association of Democratic
Reforms & Anr. (2002) 5 SCC 294 it was held that right to get
information in democracy is recognized all throughout and it is
natural right flowing from the concept of democracy. It was
further held that Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution provides
for freedom of speech and expression and that voter's speech
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 28 of 31

or expression in case of election would include casting of
votes, that is to say, voters speak or express by casting votes
and for this purpose the information about the candidates is a
must.
44.

The use of the word “shall” in Section 33A of the

R.P.Act 1951 also guides to the mandatory character of the
legislative provision.
45.

To construe Section 33A of the R.P.Act 1951 in any

other manner would run contrary to the ratio of the decision of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in decision reported as UOI Vs.
Association of Democratic Reforms & Anr. (2002) 5 SCC 294.
46.

It is true that it was desirable to amend Section 36

of the R.P.Act 1951 when Section 33A was inserted in the
statute book and expressly provide for a rejection of a
nomination paper which did not comply with Section 33A. But
the problem at hand can be looked at from another angle.
47.

A nomination paper is a nomination paper properly

so called when it complies with the requirements of Section 33
and 33A of the R.P.Act 1951.

A nomination paper not in

compliance thereof is a nomination paper improperly so called.
It is no nomination paper in the eyes of law.

Right to be a

candidate at an election commences by filing a nomination
paper, which has to be as per law.
Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 29 of 31

48.

Where a statute prescribes the manner in which an

act can be performed, the act can be performed in the manner
prescribed and in no other way.
49.

Where the proforma of an application is statutorily

prescribed and requirement of attachments are also statutorily
prescribed and are mandatory, the application has to be as per
the proforma and necessary attachments have to be annexed,
failing which the application is no application in the eyes of the
law.
50.

In exercise of it's plenary power of superintendence,

control and regulation of elections under Article 324 of the
Constitution of India the Election Commission issued the
directions to the returning officers vide order No.3/ER/2002/JSII/Vol.III dated 28.6.2002. The order mandates to the returning
officers to reject nomination papers not complying with the
said directive. Cognizance of the directive was taken by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as 2003 (4)
SCC 399 People Union for Civil Liberties Vs. UOI. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court categorically held that no exception can be
taken to the insistence of affidavit with regard to the matter
specified in the judgment in Association for Democratic
Reforms case.
51.

Thus purposively read, it has to be held that non

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

Page 30 of 31

compliance with Section 33A of the R.P.Act 1951 and Rules 4A
of the Conduct of Elections Rules 1961 renders a nomination
paper a nomination paper improperly so called and hence
liable to be rejected.
52.

That filing false or incomplete affidavit of disclosure

is made punishable under Section 125A of the R.P.Act 1951 is
also a pointer to it's mandatory character.
53.

The

argument

that

the

only

penalty

of

not

complying with Section 33A of the R.P.Act 1951 is as
prescribed under Section 125A of the R.P.Act 1951 holds no
water as Section 125A operates in the post electoral process
whereas issue of accepting or rejecting a nomination paper has
to be dealt with in relation to the power to be exercised when
a nomination paper is received.
54.

I find no merits in the petitions.

55.

Both are dismissed.

56.

Cost to follow.

February 19, 2008
mm

Elect Pets. Nos. 1/2004 & 4/2004

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page 31 of 31

