IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C.No.1274/2001
#
!

Arvind Saraf
through:

....... Petitioner
Mr.D.K.Sabat, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Inspector of Factories & Ors.
....... Respondents
through: Mr.Pawan Sharma for State

%

DATE OF DECISION: 12-09-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Petitioner prays that the complaint against the petitioner by

the Inspector of Factories (Copy at page 15-16) be quashed.
2.

Complaint in question has been filed under Sections 28,

31,61, 62 and 292 of the Factories Act, 1948 alleging various
breaches listed in para 4 of the complaint. It is stated in the
complaint that the breaches stated in para 4 of the complaint
were reported by the Inspector who visited the factory of the
petitioner on 13.8.1997 at 11.45 AM.
page 1 of 5
3.

According to the petitioner, Hon'ble Supreme Court

had passed directions on 26.11.1996 in CW(P) No.4677/1985

M.C.Mehta Vs. UOI

directing that certain industries be closed

down in the Union Territory of Delhi by 31.3.1997.

It is stated

that the factory of the petitioner was wrongly directed to be
closed.

Petitioner approached Hon'ble

Supreme Court praying

that direction contained in the order dated 26.11.1996 be
recalled.

That unfortunately, review application was dismissed.

That on 19.6.1997, Delhi Pollution Control Committee directed
closure of the unit.
4.

Accordingly, petitioner claims that on 13.8.1997 the

factory was lying closed. That Shri K.L.Meena, the Factory
Inspector made a surprise visit and filed the complaint without
giving a reasonable opportunity to the petitioner to clarify the
factual matrix.
5.

Filing response to the petition, in para 3 of the reply

filed by the respondent, it is stated as under :“3. That on the basis of the aforesaid complaint dated
11.8.97, the respondent Inspector of Factories carried
out inspection of the Petitioner's factory i.e. M/s. S.K.S.
Limited located at above address on 13.08.1997 at
11.45 a.m. At the time of aforesaid inspection the
factory of the Petitioner was found working. The
respondent Inspector of Factories prepared the
Inspection Report, a photocopy of which is annexed
hereto and marked as Annexure R-2.
page 2 of 5
That during the course of inspection Sh. D.Bhattacharya,
Chief
Executive
(Operation)
and Sh. K.Pathak, Sr. Officer from HRD of M/s. S.K.S.
Limited were also present on behalf of the management
and Sh. Bhattacharya, Chief Executive (Operation) had
signed the Inspection Form along with Sh. Shambhu
Sharma who was a contractor employed by the company

M/s. S.K.S. Limited for packing, dispatch and carpentry.

6.

At the time of inspection, it was observed by the
respondent Inspector of Factories that 180 workers were
employed and working in different shift/timing in the
factory M/s. S.K.S.Limited and engaged in the
manufacturing process comprising of copper and brass
foils making etc.”
In the rejoinder filed, petitioner has responded as

under :“3. As to para 3. It is vehemently denied that the
unit of M/s. SKS Limited found working on the date of
inspection on 13.08.1997 at 11.45 am. It is respectfully
submitted that the unit was closed and there was no
industrial activity under operation at the unit and even
no electricity and water facilities were available, the
employees/workers were not regularly coming and
attending M/s. SKS Limited and as such when the factory
inspector
visited
the
factory
the
available
employees/workers could not provide them the requisite
details/documents to the concerned officer of the
Respondent and they requested for some time so that
the competent persons be called to provide the
detail/documents to the Inspector of Factories. It is
submitted that the respondent without appreciating the
facts and circumstances, choose to file complaint
against the Petitioner as he was the occupier of M/s. SKS
Limited. It is submitted that the Respondent even has
not considered the past clean record of the petitioner.
It is respectfully submitted that the visit of the
Respondent was based upon the complaint dated
page 3 of 5
11.08.1997 wherein the Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh (Delhi
Branch) alleged that the petitioner is not following the
labour laws and order of Hon'ble Supreme Court. It is
respectfully submitted that for the said allegations the
Chief Factory Inspector is not a competent Authority and
even the Inspector of Factories has not filed any case of
such nature. It is submitted that the complaint of
Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh was an attempt to make
personal gains out of the situation at a time when M/s.
SKS Limited was fighting for its survival. That without
admitting the contents of the Annexure R-1, it is
submitted that even the Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh has
mentioned in their complaint that the units are not

7.

functioning from 8.00 AM to 4.00 PM, therefore, the
submissions made by the Respondent that on
13.08.1997 when they visited unit of M/s. SKS Limited at
11.45 AM, the unit found working, are contradict from
their own records. Therefore, the entire submissions of
Respondent are baseless, vague and misleading.”
Annexure R-2 referred to in para 3 of the counter

affidavit filed by the respondent is the Inspection Report dated
13.8.1997.

Indeed,

Shri D.Bhattacharya, Chief Executive

(Operation) and Shri K.Pathak, Senior Officer from Human
Resource Department of the petitioner were present and have
seen the inspection report.
8.

They have not recorded on the inspection note that the

factory was lying closed pursuant to the directions issued by the
Supreme Court.
9.

I eschew from considering the documentary evidence

placed on record by the petitioner or the respondent for the
page 4 of 5
reason issue needs trial.
10.

Suffice would it be to state that on a disputed question

of fact, complaint cannot be quashed.

I further note that in the

rejoinder filed by the petitioner to the reply filed by the
respondent, petitioner has not even attempted to explain
Annexure R-2 filed by the respondent.
11.

Whether or not the unit was operational is a question

of fact requiring evidence.
12.

The petition is dismissed.

September 12, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 5 of 5

