IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.589/2005
#
!

Pawan Jaggi
through:

....... Petitioner
Mr. Sudhanshu Batra, Advocate &
Mr. Bhuvan Guglani, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

State & Ors.
....... Respondents
through: Mr. Harish Gulati and Mr. Rohit
Sharma, Advocates for CBI
Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate for the
State.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 17-09-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)
Petitioner seeks quashing of RC-S15-2001-S0007 dated

12.11.2001 alleging that a settlement has been arrived at with
the complainant bank.
2.

Relevant facts are that on 9.4.2001 Shri S.K.Widhani,

then Chief Manager of Allahabad Bank, Parliament Street
addressed a complaint to the Superintendent of Police and CBI
informing that Seasons Creation Pvt. Ltd. of which petitioner was
the Chairman-cum-Director had availed of certain credit facilities
from bank.

That on 29.5.1998 the company was sanctioned a

packing credit facility in sum of Rs.71 lacs, an ad-hoc packing
credit Rs.9 lacs, bank guarantee facility in sum of Rs.12 lacs and a
short term loan Rs.5.65 lacs. It was stated in the complaint that
principal document which had induced the bank in granting
aforesaid facilities was an export order purportedly issued by
M/s.J.C. Penny Purchasing Corporation addressed to the company
as per which 36500 pieces of garments valued at US$2,00,750
was in the hand of the company. According to the complainant
said purchase order was found to be a fake document and the
company M/s.J.C. Penny Purchasing Corporation had not placed
any such order.
3.

It was further stated in the complaint that after availing

the credit facilities, the directors of the company, including the
petitioner disposed of all assets of the company.

Nothing was

found at the unit of the company at WZ-271 Shakarpur, Delhi110034.

It was also stated in the complaint that without the

consent of the bank, hypothecated machinery etc. furnished as
collateral securities was liquidated.
4.

It is urged by learned counsel for the petitioner that

since bank had settled the dispute with the petitioner and has
received under one time settlement all dues of the bank and has
agreed to withdraw the allegations against the petitioner and the
company, no useful purpose would be served in continuing with
the criminal prosecution against the petitioner.

5.

I note that on the allegations made by the bank

against the petitioner and co-accused, prosecution has been
launched for offences under Section 420/469/468/471/120-B IPC.
6.

No doubt inherent powers of the Court can be

exercised to quash even non-compoundable offences but the said
power has to be exercised sparingly and whenever facts exist
warranting exercise of said power.
7.

In relation to economic offences, a distinction can be

made as follows:(a)

Category 1 – Where a wholly civil transaction takes
colour of criminal offences and civil dispute is settled
between the parties.

(b)

Category 2 – Where the foundation of the civil
transaction is found to be rested on false and
fabricated documents and the civil litigation between
the parties is settled.

8.

In my opinion, difference in the 2 categories would be

that in the former i.e. category – 1 substratum of facts
constituting the civil as well as criminal dispute would be the
same. If parties have sorted out the civil dispute and desire to
the

Court

that

compounded,

criminal

being

a

prosecution

civil

offence

be

permitted

against

an

to

be

individual,

compounding would be welcomed by the Court.
9.

But, where the foundation of the civil transaction is a

criminal act i.e. forgery of a document resulting in the opposite
party, under inducement, entering into a civil transaction, in my
opinion, in said circumstances mere settlement between the
parties may not be a ground to quash a prosecution.
10.

In the instant case, complainant Allahabad Bank, is a

public sector bank.

It is the custodian of public funds.

Merely

because the company and its directors, under a one-time
settlement have paid dues to the bank and the bank has
consented for compounding of the offences, in my opinion, would
not entitle the petitioner to the exercise of the power by this
Court under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
11.

Noting the gravement of the allegations in the

complaint of the bank against the petitioner and other coaccused, taking note of the decision of the Supreme Court
reported as 2002 (2) Crimes 192 (SC), Inspector of Police, CBI vs.
B.Raja Gopal & Ors., the petition is dismissed.
12.

Needless to state, nothing stated in the present order

would be treated as a conclusive finding by the learned Trial
Judge. Issue would be decided in view of the evidence led.

September 17, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

