IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM(M) No. 1011/2007
#
!

Daya Sapra
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr. Sunil Satyarathi, Advocate
Mr. Raman Gandhi, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Vishnu Dutt Sharma
........
Respondent
through: Mr. J.S.Kanwar, Advocate
RESERVED ON: 03.12.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 14.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
An

interesting

question

of

law

arises

for

consideration in the instant petition. It concerns the inherent
power which a court of justice must possess to prevent misuse
of its procedures in relation to an action initiation whereof may
apparently be not inconsistent with the literal application of the
law but otherwise would be manifestly unjust and unfair to the
defendant amounting to an abuse of the process of law. In turn
the question encompasses the scope of the principle of res
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 1 of 30

judicata:

Is Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908

exhaustive of the sweep of res judicata? How is the principle of
res judicata impacted by Sections 40 to 43 of the Indian
Evidence Act 1872? Do the inherent powers of the court permit
it to striffle a suit, cause whereof was an essential part of a
prosecution for an offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act 1881 in particular when the suit is sought to be
litigated with the same quality and quantity of evidence as
formed the basis of the prosecution for the offence under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881?
2.

Explaining res judicata and its twin effect, George

Spencer Bower in his treaties “The Doctrine of Res Judicata”
IInd Edition, page 1, has to say:“I.
In English jurisprudence a res judicata,
that is to say a final judicial decision
pronounced by a judicial tribunal having
competent jurisdiction over the cause or
matter in litigation, and over the parties
thereto, disposes once and for all of the
matters decided, so that they cannot
afterwards be raised for re-litigation between
the same parties or their privies. The effect of
such a decision is two-fold.
Parties estopped from averring to the contrary
2.
In the first place, the judicial decision
estops or precludes any party to the litigation
from disputing, against any other party
thereto, in any later litigation, the correctness
of the earlier decision in law and fact. The
same issue cannot be raised again between
them, and this principle extends to all matters
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 2 of 30

of law and fact which the judgment, decree, or
order necessarily established as the legal
foundation or justification of the conclusion
reached by the Court.
Transit in rem judicatam
3.
In the second place, by virtue of the
decision the right or cause of action set up in
the suit is extinguished, merging in the
judgment which is pronounced. Transit in rem
judicatam. The result is that no further claim
may be made upon the same cause of action
in any subsequent proceedings between the
same parties or their privies.”
3.

The term 'res judicata' and the term 'estoppel by

record' have at times been used (indiscriminately if I may beg
to use the expression) to signify either, or both, resultant effect
of binding nature of a final judicial decision pronounced by a
court of competent jurisdiction. Spencer Brown however
explains that it would be advisable to distinguish the two as:
estoppel per rem judicatam; and, transit in rem judicatam.
4.

Two reasons support the jurisprudence of res

judicata. First the general interest of the society/community in
termination

of

disputes

by

according

finality

and

conclusiveness to judicial decisions. Secondly to protect the
right of individuals from vexatious multiplication of suits and
prosecutions at the instance of an opponent. The former is
public policy and is succinctly expressed in the maxim 'interest
(or expedit) reipublicae ut sit finis litium'. The latter is private
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 3 of 30

justice and is reflected in the maxims 'nemo debet bis vexari
pro una et eadem causa' and in connection with criminal
litigation 'nemo debet bis vexari pro uno et eodem delicto'.
5.

In para 13 of his publication, George Spencer Bower

has following to write:-

6.

“13. The applicability of the rule both to civil
and criminal proceedings, both to decisions of
courts of record and to those of other judicial
tribunals, and both to English and to foreign
res judicatae, is justified by, and rests upon,
the same theoretical basis of public policy and
private justice.”
Since, in its applicability, the twin aspects of res

judicata striffle the second action, the identity of the subject
matter of the previous decision assumes significance. On the
identity of the subject matter, in Chapter VI George Spencer
Bower opines:“184.
It is of the essence of all estoppels
that there shall be two statements of the same
fact
exhibiting
inter
se
an
essential
contradiction or discrepancy; the result of the
application of the doctrine of estoppel is
always that the earlier statement is to be
taken as the truth, precluding an assertion of
the later. There can be no estoppel per rem
judicatam unless a substantial discrepancy is
shown to exist between the res judicata and
the case set up in the subsequent
proceedings; and no such discrepancy can be
shown to exist unless these two relate to the
same subject matter.
185.
It follows that, in
burden is on the party setting
of alleging and establishing
subject-matter - that is to
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

strictness, the
up the estoppel
this identity of
say, that his
Page 4 of 30

7.

opponent is seeking to put in controversy and
re-agitate some question of law, or issue of
fact, which is the very same question or issue
which has already been the subject of a final
decision between the same parties by a
tribunal of competent jurisdiction. Where there
are no pleadings or particulars, the identity of
the subject matter of the two decisions must
be established by evidence.”
A decision imports a two fold judicial act. In relation

to the grant or refusal of a claim prayed for, it settles the
question of law between the parties and additionally settles
issues of fact between the parties.
8.

In relation to the binding nature of the decision qua

issues of fact between the parties it becomes imperative to
view the previous action and the cause on which it is laid for
only those issues of law and fact which are its essential
foundation, without which the decision cannot stand, are alone
capable of being used as the basis of res judicata between the
parties when a second action is set up.
decision

reported

as

R.

V.

Coleridge J, in the

Hartington,

Middle

Quarter

(Inhabitants) (1855) 4 E & B 780 put the point with precision
and lucidity when he wrote:“the judgment concludes not merely to the
point actually decided, but as to matter which
it was necessary to decide and which was
actually decided, as the groundwork of the
decision itself, though not then directly the
point at issue.................... is conclusive not
merely of the facts directly decided but of
those facts which are necessary steps to the
decision.......... are so cardinal to it that
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 5 of 30

9.

without them it cannot stand. Unless they are
necessary steps, the rule fails and they are
collateral facts.”
Sankey L.J. In the report published as Jaeger Co. Ltd.

Vs. Jaeger (1929) 46 RPC 336 expressed as under:-

10.

“Every judgment is conclusive proof as
against parties and privies of facts directly in
issue in the case actually decided by the court
and appearing from the judgment itself to be
the ground on which it was based.”
Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 has

been held to be not the sole repository and exhaustive of the
principle of res judicata.

They decisions to said effect are

numerous and I need not catalogue them. Suffice would it be to
guide the anxious reader to AIR Commentaries by W.W.Chitaley
& V.B.Bakhale on “The Code of Civil Procedure” under Note 3.
11.

Applicability of the principles of res judicata to both

civil and criminal proceedings have been recognised by George
Spencer Bower.

(Refer para 5 above.) Decision by courts of

competent criminal jurisdiction have been held to be res
judicata in subsequent civil actions in New Zealand.

In the

decision by Chapman J reported as Banks Vs. Wilson (1910) 29
N.2 L.R. 832 where a magistrate had dismissed, on merits, a
complaint made under sections 9 and 10 of the Impounding Act
1908 asking for an award of damages for an alleged illegal
impounding of cattle, the claimant was thereby held estopped
for subsequently suing in a civil court for damages. Estoppel
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 6 of 30

per rem judicatam was applied.
12.

The decision of the House of Lords 1982 A.C. 529

Hunter Vs. Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police & Ors.
also affirmed the applicability of principle of res judicata in a
subsequent civil action where the previous decision was of a
competent court at a criminal trial.
13.

The decision is interesting as it gave a broader

horizon to what constitutes an abuse of the process of

the

court and used the first principle on which res judicata is
founded i.e. public policy to hold that if facts warrant, public
policy can be applied at a latter civil action in relation to a prior
decision at a criminal trial to strike off a claim under inherent
powers of the court.
14.

The facts may be noted as reproduced in the head

note in Hunter's case.
15.

After bomb explosions in two Birmingham public

houses on November 21, 1974 had killed 21 people and injured
161 others, the appellant and four others, Irish Republican
supporters, were arrested by the Lancashire police and taken to
Morecambe Police Station. On November 22, members of the
Birmingham police interviewed the five men, and one of them
made a signed statement.

They were then taken to a

Birmingham police station, where a sixth man was also taken
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 7 of 30

after his arrest at 10:30 p.m. that night. On November 23, at
the Birmingham police station, three more of the men made
signed statements and the two others made oral confessions
regarding their parts in planting the bombs that had caused the
explosions. On November 24, all six men were photographed,
and the photograph of one man showed a mark that might
have been a bruise under the right eye. On Monday, November
25, the six men appeared before a magistrates' court, and,
although three of them complained to the solicitors assigned to
them of assaults by the police, no marks were noticed on their
faces save in the case of the man with black eye, which he said
had been caused by a fall. After formal evidence, the six men
were remanded in custody and taken to Winson Green Prison.
When, three days later, on November 28, they again appeared
at the magistrates' court, their faces showed injuries that
indicated they had been seriously assaulted. They were again
remanded in custody, and first the prison governor and then
the Home Office held an inquiry as to how their injuries had
been sustained. At the trial of the six men on 21 charges of
murder, their counsel objected to the admission in evidence of
their

statements,

which

were

an

essential

part

of

the

prosecution case, on the ground that they had been induced by
violence and threats by the police.
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

After an eight day “trial
Page 8 of 30

within a trial” (voir dire) in the absence of the jury, during
which the police officers and the six men gave evidence, Bridge
J. held that the prosecution had discharged the burden of
proving beyond reasonable doubt that the men had not been
assaulted by the police and that the statements had been
voluntary and should be admitted in evidence. The trial then
continued before the jury, and the six men again alleged that
their statements had been induced by violence by the police.
Bridge J. warned the jury that, if their allegations were, or might
reasonably be, true, the statements were worthless. The jury
convicted all six, and Bridge J. sentenced them to imprisonment
for life. Leave to appeal was refused by the Court of Appeal
(Criminal Division) on March 30, 1976.

The six men issued

writs against the chief constables of the West Midlands and the
Lancashire police and also against the Home Office claiming
damages against the police for injuries caused by assaults,
which were the same allegations as had been made before
Bridge J. at the voir dire and trial, and also against the Home
Office in respect of assaults by prison officers and prisoners
while they had been in Winson Green Prison. They relied, inter
alia, on new medico-forensic evidence as to the photographs
taken on November 24, which were said to reveal that some
injuries had been sustained prior to that date, and statements
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 9 of 30

from the three prison officers that the six men had been
bruised and injured on their arrival at the prison.

The chief

constables applied for the statements of claim against them to
be struck out under R.S.C., Ord. 18, r. 19 and under the
inherent jurisdiction of the court.

Cantley J. dismissed the

applications, but the Court of Appeal allowed an appeal by the
chief constables and ordered that the statements of claim be
struck out.
16.

Dismissing the appeal against the decision of the

Court of Appeal, the House of Lords speaking through Lord
Diplock held:

17.

“That where a final decision had been made by a
criminal court of competent jurisdiction it was a
general rule of public policy that the use of a civil
action to initiate a collateral attack on that decision
was an abuse of the process of the court; and that
such fresh evidence as the plaintiff sought to
adduce in his civil action fell far short of satisfying
the test to be applied in considering whether an
exception to that general rule of public policy should
be made, which, in the case of a collateral attack in
a court of coordinate jurisdiction, was whether the
fresh evidence entirely changed the aspect of the
case.”
At page 539, Lord Diplock noted that in the civil

action, on receipt of summons, the police sought the statement
of claim to be struck of by pleading that what had happened at
the murder trial gave rise to an estoppel per rem judicatam of a
kind which in recent years it had been found convenient to
describe as “issue estoppel”. The fact that even if what had
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 10 of 30

happened did not create as against the plaintiff in favour of the
police what could be strictly classified as “issue estoppel” it
nevertheless made the initiation of the present civil action
against the police an abuse of the process of the court.
18.

Noting thereafter that the trial judge Cantley J.

dismissed the application for a summary rejection of the claim
holding that estoppel by judgment was not attracted but Court
of Appeal held to the contrary, at page 540 Lord Diplock held:-

19.

“Nevertheless it is my own view, which I
understand is shared by all your Lordships,
that it would be best, in order to avoid
confusion, if the use of the description “issue
estoppel” in English law, at any rate (it does
not appear to have been adopted in the
United States), were restricted to that species
of estoppel per rem judicatam that may arise
in civil actions between the same parties or
their privies, of which the characteristics are
stated in a judgment of my own in Mills v.
Cooper (1967) 2 Q.B. 459, 468-469 that was
adopted and approved by his House in Reg. v.
Humphrys (1977) A.C. 1, the case in which it
was also held that “issue estoppel” had no
place in English criminal law.”
But it was held that the civil action was an abuse of

the process of the court.

Reasoning is to be found in the

following passages :“My Lords, collateral attack upon a final
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction
may take a variety of forms.
It is not
surprising that no reported case is to be found
in which the facts present a precise parallel
with those of the instant case.
But the
principle applicable is, in my view, simply and
clearly stated in those passages from the
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 11 of 30

judgment of A.L.Smith L.J. in Stephension v.
Garnett (1989) 1 Q.B. 677, 680-681 and the
speech of Lord Halsbury L.C. in Reichel v.
Magrath (1889) 14 App. Cas. 665, 668 which
are cited by Goff L.J. in his judgment in the
instant case. I need only repeat an extract
from the passage which he cites from the
judgment of A.L.Smith L.J.:
“.....the court ought to be slow to
strike out a statement of claim or
defence, and to dismiss an action
as frivolous and vexatious, yet it
ought to do so when, as here, it has
been shown that the identical
question sought to be raised has
been already decided by a
competent court.”
The passage from Lord Halsbury's speech
deserves repetition here in full:
“.....I think it would be a scandal to
the administration of justice if, the
same
question
having
been
disposed of by one case, the
litigant were to be permitted by
changing
the
form
of
the
proceedings to set up the same
case again.”
xxxxx
My Lords, this is the first case to be reported
in which the final decision against which it is
sought to initiate a collateral attack by means
of a civil action has been a final decision
reached by a court of criminal jurisdiction.
xxxxx
This raises a possible complication that the
onus of proof of facts that lies upon the
prosecution in criminal proceedings is higher
than that required of parties to civil
proceedings who seek in those proceedings
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 12 of 30

20.

to prove facts on which they rely. Thus a
decision in a criminal case upon a particular
question in favour of a defendant, whether by
way of acquittal or a ruling on a voir dire, is
not inconsistent with the fact that the
decision would have been against him if all
that were required were the civil standard of
proof on the balance of probabilities.”
Referring to the probative weight of evidence and

where the subsequent civil action was predicated on the same
evidence as was considered at the criminal trial, Lord Diplock
concluded the decision as under :-

“There remains to be considered the
circumstances in which the existence at the
commencement of the civil action of “fresh
evidence” obtained since the criminal trial and
the probative weight of such evidence justify
making an exception to the general rule of
public policy that the use of civil actions to
initiate collateral attacks on final decisions
against the intending plaintiff by criminal
courts of competent jurisdiction should be
treated as an abuse of the process of the
court.
I can deal with this very shortly, for I find
myself in full agreement with the judgment of
Goff. L.J. He points out that on this aspect of
the case Hunter and the other Birmingham
Bombers fail in limine because the so-called
“fresh evidence” on which they seek to rely in
the civil action was available at the trial or
could be reasonable diligence have been
obtained then. He examines also the two
suggested tests as to the character of fresh
evidence which would justify departing from
the general policy by permitting the plaintiff to
challenge a previous final decision against him
by a court of competent jurisdiction, and he
adopts as the proper test that laid down by
Earl Cairns L.C. in Phosphate Sewage Co. Ltd.
v. Molleson (1879) 4 App. Cas. 801, 814,
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 13 of 30

namely that the new evidence must be such
as “entirely changes the aspect of the case.”
This is perhaps a little stronger than that
suggested by Denning L.J. In Ladd v. Marshall
(1954) 1 W.L.R. 1489, 1491 as justifying the
reception of fresh evidence by the Court of
Appeal in a civil action, viz., that the evidence
“... would probably have an important
influence on the result of the case, though it
need not be decisive;....”
The latter test, however, is applicable where
the proper course to upset the decision of a
court of first instance is being taken, that is to
say, by appealing to a court with jurisdiction to
hear appeals from the first-instance court and
whose procedure, like that of the Court of
Appeal (Civil Division), is by way of a
rehearing. I agree with Goff. L.J. that in the
case of collateral attack in a court of
coordinate jurisdiction the more rigorous test
laid down by Earl Cairns is appropriate.
I need not repeat Goff L.J.'s critical
examination of the “fresh evidence” which
Hunter sought to adduce in his civil action for
assault. It fell far short of satisfying either
test.
I would dismiss this appeal.”
21.
a.

Thus where:The facts were directly in issue and formed the

groundwork of the decision, in that, they were necessary steps
at the adjudication of the criminal trial;
b.

The facts were decided by the Criminal court;

c.

The facts appear from the judgment itself to be the

ground on which it was based; and
d.

The quality and quantity of the evidence at the civil

CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 14 of 30

trial intended to be led was the same as at the criminal trial;
would be the test to be applied and satisfied before the
civil action can be thrown out as an abuse of the process of the
court.
22.

The interplay of Sections 40 to 42 of the Indian

Evidence Act 1872 was considered by their Lordships of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as (2002) 8
SCC 87 K.G.Premshanker Vs. Inspector of Police & Anr. In para
30 and 31 it was held:“30. What emerges from the aforesaid
discussion is – (1) the previous judgment which
is final can be relied upon as provided under
Sections 40 to 43 of the Evidence Act; (2) in
civil suits between the same parties, principle
of res judicata may apply; (3) in a criminal
case, Section 300 Cr.P.C makes provision that
once a person is convicted or acquitted he may
not be tried again for the same offence if the
conditions mentioned therein are satisfied; (4)
if the criminal case and the civil proceedings
are for the same cause, judgment of the civil
court would be relevant if conditions of any of
Sections 40 to 43 are satisfied, but it cannot be
said that the same would be conclusive
except as provided in Section 41. Section 41
provides which judgment would be conclusive
proof of what is stated therein.
31. Further, the judgment, order or decree
passed in a previous civil proceedings, if
relevant, as provided under Section 40 and 42
or other provisions of the Evidence Act then in
each case, the court has to decide to what
extent it is binding or conclusive with regard to
the matter(s) decided therein.
Take for
illustration, in a case of alleged trespass by A
on B's property, B filed a suit for declaration of
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 15 of 30

its title and to recover possession from A and
suit is decreed.
Thereafter, in a criminal
prosecution by B against A for trespass,
judgment passed between the parties in civil
proceedings would be relevant and the court
may hold that it conclusively establishes the
title as well as possession of B over the
property. In such case, A may be convicted for
trespass. The illustration to Section 42 which
is quoted above makes the position clear.
Hence, in each and every case, the first
question which would require consideration iswhether judgment,order or decree is relevant,
if relevant-its effect. It may be relevant for a
limited purpose, such as, motive or as a fact in
issue. This would depend upon the facts of
each case.” (Underlining by way of emphasis)
23.

Thus, decision attracting Section 41 of the Indian

Evidence Act 1872 would ipso facto be binding in subsequent
proceedings, but decisions attracting Section 40 and Section
42 would have to be considered as to their binding or
conclusive nature with reference to the foundational facts of
the prior and the subsequent action. This has been emphasized
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the first sentence in para 31
of the decision in K.G.Premshankar's case (supra).
24.

A Division Bench decision of this court reported as

Gulab Chand Sharma Vs. Shri H.P.Sharma ILR (1974) Delhi 190
opined as under :“Conflicting judicial decisions may be found
cited in commentaries under section 40 to 43
of the Indian Evidence Act, section 403 Cr.P.C.
and section 11 Civil Procedure Code as to
whether a decision in a suit would act as res
judicata in a criminal trial and vice-versa. In
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 16 of 30

our view, the general principle of res judicata
is based firstly on public policy and secondly
on private justice both of which apply to all
judicial proceedings whether civil, criminal or
otherwise. Public policy general interest of the
community litigation must come to an end and
its conclusion must have a finality. Private
justice requires that an individual should be
protected from vexations multiplication of
suits and prosecutions at the instance of an
opponent whose superior power and resources
may enabic him to abuse the process of court.
The principle of res judicata should, therefore,
apply equally to civil and criminal proceedings
inasmuch as the decisions of courts in both the
proceedings are justified by and rest upon "the
same theoretical basis of public policy and
private justice" (Spencer-Bower and Turner on
Res Judicata 2nd Edition paragraph 13).
(9) In Gulabchand v. State of Gujarat A.I.R.
1965 S.C. 1153, it was contended that the
decision in a previously decided writ petition
should not act as res judicata in a
subsequently instituted suit between the same
parties inasmuch as the scope of a suit is
different from the scope of the writ petition.
The Supreme Court, however, held that the
principle of res judicata would apply and at
page 1160 paragraph (29):"The difference in the nature of the
two proceedings is immaterial if the
matter decided inter parties in one
proceeding is the same which is to
be determined in the subsequent
proceedings and the parties to the
suit were also parties to the writ
petition."
Shri A. N. Mulla for the petitioner contends that
an earlier decision can be looked into only for
the purposes of sections 40 to 43 of the Indian
Evidence Act and if not admissible thereunder,
it cannot be used. While the general principle
of res judicata is treated as a part of the
principle of estoppel in 15 Halsbury's Laws of
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 17 of 30

England part II section 11 pages 191 onwards,
the principle is partially embodied in three
different statutes in India namely-section 11
CPC, sections 40 to 43 Indian Evidence Act and
section 403 Cr.P.C. But none of these
provisions exhaust the scope of the general
principle of res judicata. Each of them is
limited to its own purpose. None of them
therefore cut down the rest of the principle of
res judicata. The three essentials of the
general principle of res judicata may be stated
as follows:1.
A decision by a Competent
Judicial Tribunal which is final,
2.
it must determine the same
questions as are sought to be
controverted in the litigation in which
the plea of res judicata is raised, and
3.
parties to the proceedings in
which the plea of res judicata is
raised must be the same as were
parties to the decision which acts as
res judicata.
Therefore, when section 40 of the Evidence Act
says that "the existence of any judgment,
order or decree which by law prevents any
Court from taking cognizance of a suit or
holding a trial" as being a relevant fact when
the question is whether such court ought to
take cognizance of such suit or to hold such
trial, it refers not only to the statutory law but
to the non-statutory general law of res judicata
also. Therefore, either the general principle of
res judicata is not cut down by sections 40 to
43 or it is expressly recognised by section 40.
25.

A few paragraphs on the Negotiable Instruments Act

1881.
26.

Section 118 thereof reads as under:“118.

Presumptions

CM(M) No. 1011/2007

as

to

negotiable
Page 18 of 30

instruments – Until the contrary is proved, the
following presumptions shall be made:(a) of consideration – that every negotiable
instrument was made or drawn for consideration, and
that every such instrument, when it has been
accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was
accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for
consideration;
(b) as to date – that every negotiable instrument
bearing a date was made or drawn on such date;
(c) as to time of acceptance - that every accepted
bill of exchange was accepted within a reasonable
time after its date and before its maturity;
(d) as to time of transfer – that every transfer of a
negotiable instrument was made before its maturity;
(e) as to order of endorsements – that the
endorsements
appearing
upon
a
negotiable
instrument were made in the order in which they
appear thereon;
(f)
as to stamps – that a lost promissory note, bill
of exchange or cheque was duly stamped;
(g) that holder is a holder in due course – that the
holder of a negotiable instrument is a holder in due
course: provided that, where the instrument has been
obtained from its lawful owner, or from any person in
lawful custody thereof, by means of an offence or
fraud, or has been obtained from the maker or
acceptor thereof by means of an offence or fraud, or
for unlawful consideration, the burden of proving that
the holder is a holder in due course lies upon him.”
27.

In the decision reported as AIR 1961 SC 1316

Kundan Lal Rallaram Vs. Custodian Evacuee Property it was
held that presumption under Section 118 is one of law and
thereunder a court shall presume, inter alia, that the negotiable
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 19 of 30

instrument or the endorsement was made for consideration. In
effect it throws the burden of proof of failure of consideration
on the maker of the negotiable instrument.
28.

By Act No. 66 of 1988 Chapter XVIII consisting of

Sections 138 to 147 was inserted in the statute book with effect
from 1.4.1989.
29.

Sections 138 and 139 read as under:“138.
Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency,
etc., of funds in the account – Where any cheque
drawn by a person on an account maintained by him
with a banker for payment of any amount of money to
another person from out of that account for the
discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other
liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either
because of the amount of money standing to the
credit of that account is insufficient to honour the
cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be
paid from that account by an agreement made with
that bank, such person shall be deemed to have
committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to
any other provisions of this Act, be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may be extended to
two years, or with fine which may extend to twice the
amount of the cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall
apply unless (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank
within a period of six months from the date on which
it is drawn or within the period of its validity,
whichever is earlier;
(b) The payee or the holder in due course of the
cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the
payment of the said amount of money by giving a
notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within
thirty days of the receipt of information by him from
the bank regarding the return of the cheque as

CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 20 of 30

unpaid; and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the
payment of the said amount of money to the payee
or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of
the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the
said notice.
139.
Presumption in favour of holder – It
shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that
the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the
nature referred to in section 138 for the discharge, in
whole or in part, of any debt or other liability.”
30.

Section 139 mirrors the presumption which already

existed under Section 118 of the Act.
31.

Pertaining to a cheque, at a criminal trial for an

offence under Section 138 of the Act, the complainant has to
prove that:
a.

The accused is the drawer of the cheque.

b.

That the cheque, when presented for encashment

was returned unpaid by the bank on which it was drawn.
c.

Reason for return was insufficiency of funds to the

credit of the account of the drawer or that the cheque amount
exceeded the amount arranged to be paid from that account by
an agreement between the bank and the drawer.
d.

That the cheque was presented within its validity.

e.

That by a written notice issued within 30 days of

receipt of information of return of the cheque demand was
made to make good the payment regarding the unpaid cheque.
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 21 of 30

f.

That within 15 days of the receipt of said notice the

payment was not made.
32.

The drawer has then to prove that the cheque was

neither in discharge of a debt or a liability.
33.

Be it a civil action or a criminal action, pertaining to

dishonoured cheques the presumption of law is in favour of the
holder of the cheque that it was issued for good consideration.
Onus of proving failure of consideration is on the person who
has issued the cheques.
34.

The forum and the action whether civil or criminal

may be different but the substance of both actions is likely to
be the same. There is greater presumption of complete identity
of the matter which is necessary to be decided and the
groundwork of the decision meaning thereby the necessary
steps are cardinally the same.

Ex-facie, there exist stronger

grounds to invoke the legal principles of res judicata when issue
has been held in favour of an accused on merits at a criminal
trial pertaining to a prosecution under Section 138 of the NI Act
1881 when a civil suit is filed on the same cause i.e. the same
cheque.

I clarify, if at the criminal trial the accused has

successfully rebutted the onus that the cheque was for a
consideration i.e. in discharge of a debt or a liability or part
thereof and has earned an acquittal which has attained finality
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 22 of 30

and the suit is filed alleging same facts as were alleged in the
criminal complaint, prima facie, it would be an abuse of the
process of law as explained in Hunter's case (supra).
35.

Thus, in such a situation it becomes imperative to

carefully view not only the point actually decided at the
criminal trial for the offence under Section 138 of the NI Act but
also the matter which was necessary to be decided and which
was actually decided as also the ground work of the decision
itself. For if the subsequent civil action raises same questions
of law and fact which have already been disposed of and same
set of evidence with same probative value is sought to be used,
the civil action would be an abuse of the process of the law.
36.

Reverting to the facts of the instant case it may be

noted that the respondent filed a complaint under Section 138
of the NI Act impleading the petitioner as the sole accused. In
the complaint he pleaded as under:“CRIMINAL
COMPLAINT
U/S.
138
OF
THE
NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, READ WITH
SECTION 420-I.P.C.
Sir,
It is most respectfully submitted as under:1.
That the complainant is a peace-loving and law
abiding citizen of the State and has been residing at
the above mentioned address.
2.
That on 10th August, 1999, the accused
borrowed a loan of Rs.1,50,000/- (Rupees one lac
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 23 of 30

fifty thousand only) from the complainant and the
accused promised to repay the said amount of loan
within two months.
3.
That on demand of the complainant, the
accused gave a cheque of worth Rs.1,50,000/(Rupees one lac fifty thousand only) on 20th October,
1999 vide cheque No.324162 pertaining to Vijaya
Bank, Delhi.
4.
That on 22nd October, 1999, the complainant
presented the above cheque in his bank Oriental
Bank of Commerce Shahdra, Delhi, but the cheque
was received back with remarks, “INSUFFICIENT
FUNDS”
5.
That the complainant approached the accused
and expressed his sorrows as the cheque was
received back with the above remarks.
6.
That the accused asked the complainant to
present the cheque after the expiry of one week and
ultimately, the complainant presented the cheque on
3rd November, 1999 but the same was again
returned with the above remarks.
7.
That on the request of the complainant, the
complainant presented the said cheque on 15th
November, 1999 and on 10th December 1999 but
every time the cheque was returned back with the
remarks “INSUFFICIENT FUNDS”.
8.
That in this way, the accused intentionally
avoided to make the payment of Rs.1,50,000/- which
were bad on the part of the accused.
9.
That the accused committed the offence
punishable U/s.138 of the Negotiable Instruments
Act read with Section 420-I.P.C.
10. That the complainant sent a legal notice dated
the 10th December, 1999 to the accused in this
regard but nothing has come out and the accused
has suppressed the same.
11.

That the complainant shall suffer an irreparable

CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 24 of 30

loss and injury, if the accused is not summoned,
tried and punished according to law.
12. That the photocopy of the above notice is being
filed herewith this complaint.
13. That the complainant has got no other
alternative or efficacious remedy except to seek the
intervention of this Hon'ble Court to get justice.
14. That
punishable
Court and
jurisdiction

the accused has committed offence
within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble
as such this Hon'ble Court has got
to entertain this complaint.

Under the circumstances, it is most respectfully
prayed that this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased
to summon, try and punish the accused persons
according to law, in the interest of justice.
Prayed accordingly.”
37.

Defence taken by the petitioner was that the

respondent had met her husband who was a property dealer in
connection with some business and that respondent alleged
that pertaining to same land deal the police had to be bribed
and that on 10.8.1999 the respondent accompanied by one Mr.
Malhotra a retired ACP and his son came to the office of her
husband and forcibly took the cheque in question from her
husband since the cheque book was with her husband.
38.

The petitioner successfully established the defence

by producing witnesses. The respondent could not even lead
any evidence to establish that he had Rs.1.5 lacs with him on
the day he alleged to have advanced the loan.
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Indeed, no
Page 25 of 30

receipt or acknowledgment evidencing the loan was proved.
39.

Vide judgment dated 26.9.2003 the petitioner was

exonerated by the learned ADJ who decided the criminal
complaint holding that the petitioner successfully rebutted the
presumption that the cheque was for a valuable consideration
by successfully proving that no loan was ever advanced and
that the cheque in question was physically lifted under coercion
and threat.
40.

Respondents challenge to the decision of the learned

Trial Judge was unsuccessful when, vide order dated 4.12.2003
in Crl.M.A.153/2003 leave to appeal was declined by a learned
Single Judge of this Court.
41.

In the plaint which has now been instituted, case

pleaded by the respondent is as under:“SUIT UNDER ORDER XXVII CPC 1908 FOR RECOVERY
OF RS.2,04,000/Most Respectfully Showeth:1.
That the plaintiff is a peace loving and law
abiding citizen of India and has been residing at the
above mentioned address.
2.
That on 10/08/1999 the defendant borrowed a
loan of Rs.1,50,000/- from plaintiff and the defendant
promised to repay the amount of loan of within 2
months.
3.
That on demand of the plaintiff, the defendant
issued a cheque of worth Rs.1,50,000/- on
20/10/1999 vide cheque No.324162 pertaining to
Vijay Bank, Delhi.
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 26 of 30

4.
That on 22/10/1999, the plaintiff presented the
above cheque in his bank, O.B.C., Shahdara, Delhi for
encashment but the same was dishonoured by the
defendant bank on the defendant issued the cheque
with malafide intention.
5.
That the plaintiff approached the defendant and
expressed his sorrows as the cheque was received
bank with the remark “Insufficient Funds”.
6.
That the defendant asked the plaintiff to
present the cheque after the expiry of one week and
ultimately, the plaintiff presented the cheque on
03/11/1999 but the same was again returned unpaid.
7.
That on the another request of the defendant,
the plaintiff represented the said cheque on
15/11/1999 and on 10/12/1999 but every time the
cheque was returned back with the remarks
“Insufficient Fund”.
8.
That the defendant issued the above noted
cheque fraudulently to avoid the payment.
9.
That on 18/12/1999, the plaintiff served upon
the defendant a legal notice through his counsel to
repay the above loan amount within 15 days. The
said notice was duly served upon the defendant. the
defendant filed to repay with the said notice.
10. That the defendant has filed to repay the
amount of friendly loan of Rs.1,50,000/- which was
taken by the defendant from the plaintiff a sum of
Rs.1,50,000/- with interest @ 12% p.a. while remain
due from the defendant while is defendant is liable to
pay the same to the plaintiff.
11. That the defendant is also liable to pay interest
@ 12% p.a. from the date of notice till realization as
54,000/- and a sum of Rs.1,50,000/- is due from
22.10.1999 to 19.10.2002 from the defendant on
account of interest.
12. That the defendant is liable to pay
Rs.1,50,000/- on account of loan amount taken by
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 27 of 30

the defendant from the plaintiff and Rs.54,000/- on
account of interest thereon.
Thus in all the
defendant is liable to pay Rs.2,04,000/- to the
plaintiff.
13. That no relief which does not full within the
ambit of this rule has been claimed in the plaint.
14. That the present suit is filed upto XXXVII of
C.P.C.1908.
15. That the cause of action to the suit arose to the
plaintiff on 10/08/1999 when the defendant had
taken loan and failure of the defendant to pay the
same inspite of repeated request and demands. The
cause of action finally arose as the same of the
notice dated 18/12/1999 and failure of the defendant
to comply with the same. Hence, the suit.
16. That the parties to the suit resides and work for
gain at Delhi the loan amount taken by the
defendant at Delhi and as such this Hon'ble Court
has the jurisdiction to try and decide the present suit.
17. That the value of the suit for the purpose of
court fee is Rs.2,04,000/- as which the requisite court
fee has been affixed.
It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that a
decree of recovery of Rs.2,04,000/- along with
interest @ 12% p.a. from the date of suit till the
realization be passed in favour of the plaintiff and
against the defendant. Cost of the suit be also
awarded in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendant.”
42.

Ex-facie, the plaint is a virtual repetition of the same

version as was set out in the criminal complaint.

The

respondent has not made any fresh averment pertaining to the
circumstances under which the cheque in question reached his
hands. Ex-facie, the suit is based on the same cause and the
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 28 of 30

averments therein are sought to be established with reference
to the same evidence and relates to the same point as was the
evidence and the point in issue before the learned criminal
court.
43.

In my opinion the suit is an abuse of the process of

the law. The principle of public policy expounded in Hunter's
case is fully applicable.
44.

I note that the learned Trial Judge who has dismissed

the application filed by the petitioner for rejection of the plaint
has considered the issue with reference to the strict principles
of res judicata as traditionally understood in relation to the
binding nature of a previous decision by a court of civil
jurisdiction in the context of a subsequent civil action. Probably
for the reason, learned counsel for the petitioner did not draw
the attention of the learned Trial Judge to the general
applicability of principles of res judicata and in particular when
can a subsequent civil action be held to be an abuse of the
process of the court.
45.

The petition is allowed. The impugned order dated

17.3.2007 is set aside.
46.

I hold that the suit filed by the respondent is an

abuse of the process of the law and requires to be rejected at
the threshold.
CM(M) No. 1011/2007

Page 29 of 30

47.

Ordered accordingly.

48.

No costs.

December 14, 2007
VG/MM

CM(M) No. 1011/2007

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page 30 of 30

