*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

RSA.No.70/2008
Vijay Pal Singh

through:

........
Appellant
Mr.Kumar Sunil, Advocate

VERSUS
Smt.Phoolwati Sharma
through:

........
None.

Respondent

DATE OF DECISION
19.03.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)

1.

The appellant has suffered two concurrent decrees

against him.

The appeal came up for a preliminary hearing

today.
2.

Whether or not a substantial question of law arise

for consideration in the instant appeal would depend upon the
perusal of the impugned decrees and the contentions urged at

RSA.No.70/08

page 1 of 8

the hearing today.
3.

Respondent, Phoolwati Sharma, filed a suit for

possession

and

unauthorized

damages

use

and

against

occupation

the

appellant

against

the

alleging
appellant

claiming that she was the owner of property No.RZ-431-E, Raj
Nagar, Palam Colony, New Delhi and had constructed 7 shops
on the land. She stated for 2 out of 7 shops, bearing Shop No.2
and 3, she had filed 2 suits for ejectment of the son and wife of
the defendant who were tenants under her, after determining
their tenancy, and that she impleaded the appellant as a codefendant in the said 2 suits for the reason appellant was in
possession of the 2 shops. She further pleaded that in the said
suit appellant took a defence that neither his son nor his wife
were tenant in respect of the 2 shops.

She further pleaded

that the appellant took a defence that the land on which the
property was constructed belonged to the Gaon Sabha and that
his possession was without the consent or permission, much
less under authority of the plaintiff.

She stated that having

failed in the earlier 2 suits i.e. not being able to prove that the
son and the wife of the appellant were tenants under her, she
pleaded that she was constrained to file the instant suit for
possession treating appellant's possession as unauthorized.
4.

The defence taken by the appellant was in harmony

RSA.No.70/08

page 2 of 8

with the defence earlier on taken in the 2 previous suits,
namely, that the appellant was occupying the property on land
belonging to Gaon Sabha.
5.

Two technical defences were taken. Firstly, that the

instant suit was barred under Order 2 Rule 2 CPC. Secondly
that the judgment in the earlier 2 suits concluded the issue
between the parties and operated as res-judicata.
6.

At the trial, the identity of the property, with

reference to the sale deed, Ex.P-2, relied upon by the plaintiff
came up for clarificatory evidence for the reason the sale deed
referred to the property as bearing No.RZ-430/D1, Raj Nagar-I,
Palam.
7.

The plaintiff successfully established that at the

time when she purchased the property forming subject matter
of the sale deed, Ex.P-2, it bore municipal No.RZ-430/D1, Raj
Nagar, Palam but later on was assigned a new municipal
No.RZ-431-E, Raj Nagar-I, Palam.
8.

The plea that the suit was barred under Order 2 Rule

2 CPC and that the earlier decision operated as res-judicata
have been negated by both the courts below.
9.

In view of the sale deed, Ex.P-2, and proof that the

property bearing No.RZ-430/D1, Raj Nagar-I, Palam was given a
new municipal
RSA.No.70/08

No.RZ-431-E, Raj Nagar-I, Palam it has been
page 3 of 8

held that the plaintiff has proved ownership of the suit
property. The fact that the appellant himself claimed to be in
unauthorized possession was held to be sufficient to decree the
suit. In respect of the evidence pertaining to rentals, learned
Trial Judge has awarded mesne profits @ Rs.2,000/- per month.
Appellate Court has concurred.
10.

In the instant second appeal it is urged that the

earlier decision by which the 2 ejectment suits filed by the
respondent were dismissed operate as res-judicata and that
additionally the instant suit was barred under Order 2 Rule 2
CPC. It is also urged that the husband of the appellant could
not have deposed as her attorney and since husband of the
plaintiff was the only witness, it has to be held that the plaintiff
has not proved her case.
11.

The plea of res-judicata is prima facie not available

to the appellant to be urged in the second appeal for the
reason, as noted in para 12 of the appellate judgment, at the
first appeal, appellant gave up said plea.
12.

Learned counsel for the appellant cites AIR 1973

Patna 69, Gauri Shankar Tiwari Vs. Maharani Durgeshwari Sani
& Ors.
13.

Suffice would it be to state that the decision is

clearly distinguishable on account of the fact that in the instant
RSA.No.70/08

page 4 of 8

case, the plea of res-judicata which was available and was
urged in the memorandum of appeal before the learned First
Appellate Court, consciously was given up during arguments.
14.

Be that as it may, independent thereof, the plea of

res-judicata
reason,

is not available to the appellant for the simple

in the earlier suit(s) the plaintiff sought ejectment

claiming that the wife and the son of the appellant were
tenants under her in respect of shop No.2 and 3 respectively.
She stated that the appellant was occupying the shops as
relation of the tenants.

Having failed to establish a landlord

tenant relationship, plaintiff lost the battle at the first round.
Thus, nothing prevented her from suing on an independent
cause.
15.

The concept of res-judicata needs to be understood

with reference to a cause of action. Needless to state, a
previous decision on a cause of action binds the parties and
their representatives on the same cause.
16.

Thus an earlier litigation on a different cause of

action is irrelevant and cannot operate as res-judicata when
the second suit is brought on a different cause of action.
17.

Pertaining to the plea of Order 2 Rule 2 CPC being

attracted, suffice

would it be to state that the mandate of

Order 2 Rule 2 CPC requires that the plaintiff should include the
RSA.No.70/08

page 5 of 8

whole claim which the plaintiff is entitled to make, in respect of
a cause of action.

The rule intends not to mandate that

different causes of action arising out of a particular set of facts
have necessarily to be clubbed.

The rule is aimed at

preventing different claims, founded on the same cause of
action, being enforced in different suits.
18.

Thus, Order 2 Rule 2 CPC is not attracted in the

instant case for the reason, the cause on which the earlier suits
were founded was the stated landlord tenant relationship.
Having failed

to establish the same, the instant suit was

founded on the cause that the possession of the appellant was
unauthorized and that the owner was entitled to regain
possession thereof.
19.

On the issue, whether husband of the respondent

could depose as her witness, learned counsel for the appellant
cites 2005 SCCR 42, Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani & Anr. Vs.
Indusind Bank Ltd. & Ors.
20.

The said decision holds that a party cannot appear

as a witness for a party in the capacity of that party.
21.

There is no law which prohibits a person to act as a

witness in his personal capacity.
instant case,

If the husband, as in the

claims to look after the affairs of his wife or

activities which most husbands certainly do in India, in relation
RSA.No.70/08

page 6 of 8

to proof of a sale deed executed in favour of his wife to which
execution the husband is a witness, surely his testimony is in
his personal capacity as a witness and not in the capacity of
his wife.
22.

Let me illustrate. In ejectment proceedings in which

it is stated that the requirement of the landlord is bonafide
premised on the fact that the landlord is an old man aged 80
years and desires the company of his grand children, his son
may not be a competent witness to depose on the desire of the
plaintiff for the reason the desire of the father is in his personal
knowledge. But where the ejectment is on the plea that the 80
years old landlord is living with his two married sons and is
possessed of only two room accommodation falling

short of

the requirement of the family, the son would be a competent
witness to depose that his father is living with his two sons in a
two room accommodation.

He would also be a competent

witness to depose as regards the number of family members.
The reason is obvious. The facts which he deposes are in his
personal capacity as his father's witness. He does not depose
in the capacity of being the father.
23.

No other point has been urged.

24.

Thus I hold that no substantial question of law arises

for consideration in view of the discussion hereinabove.
RSA.No.70/08

page 7 of 8

25.

The appeal is dismissed in limine.

26.

No costs.

March 19, 2008
pu

RSA.No.70/08

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 8 of 8

