IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) No.74/2007
# Indian Medical Association
.......
Petitioner
!
through: Mr. H.L.Tikku, Sr. Adv. with
Ms. Yashmeet Kaur, Adv.
VERSUS
$ Dr.Ramesh Dutta & Anr.
.......
Respondents
^
through: Mr. S.P.Kalra, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Sanjay Kalra, Adv.
%

DATE OF DECISION: 17.04.2007

CORAM:
*
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioner, Indian Medical Association is aggrieved

by the order dated 7.12.2006 passed by a Civil Judge, Delhi
dismissing petitioner's application under Section 8 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996.

Reason as to why

application was being dismissed is as stated in para 14 of
the impugned order. The same reads as under:"14. Rule 41 only provides for arbitration of the
CM(M) No.74/07

page 1 of 11

2.

disputes which are not covered otherwise, under
any other law. It is not the situation in the
present case as the election disputes are clearly
covered under rule 40 (ix) (b).
Therefore,
arbitration under rule 41 cannot be taken up.
Secondly, the present dispute does not only
involve the dispute between a member of a
State branch and IMA but. In its essence the
dispute is between two members of a State
branch and that too regarding election. IMA has
no power to arbitrate in a dispute between two
members under rule 41. The only power given
to IMA to interfere in election dispute is, when a
committee appointed by the State body fails to
resolve the dispute and refer to the same to IMA.
It has not been shown to be so. In these
circumstances, I find that the present dispute is
not a dispute covered under rule 41 and as such
is not a dispute arbitrable by IMA. Therefore, the
matter cannot be referred for arbitration and
section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act
is not applicable. The application is accordingly
dismissed."
To appreciate the rival contentions, suffice would

it be to note that Indian Medical Association is the apex body
at the national level with State Medical Associations as its
members.

As per the memorandum of association, rules

and regulations of Indian Medical Association, pertaining to
election disputes at state level, vide rule 40, an election
tribunal has to be constituted for adjudication of the said
dispute.

Vide rule 41, disputes or differences between a

member of Indian Medical Association or a member of a
State Medical Association with Indian Medical Association

CM(M) No.74/07

page 2 of 11

has to be decided through the process of arbitration.
3.

Dr.Ramesh Dutta, respondent No.1

and the

plaintiff of the suit in question wherein petitioner filed an
application

under

Section

8

of

the

Arbitration

and

Conciliation Act 1996 had intended to contest an election for
the post of the president of the Delhi Medical Association.
Respondent No.2, Dr.Ajay Rohtagi impleaded as defendant
No.1 in the suit filed by Dr.Ramesh Dutta had likewise
intended to contest the election.
4.

Fearing malpractice at the poll, Dr.Ramesh Dutta

filed a suit registered as suit No.1137/2006.

He got an

observer appointed to oversee the poll.
5.

The poll was held. Dr.Ramesh Dutta claims that

he was successfully declared elected.

Respondent No.2,

Dr.Ajay Rohtagi had a dispute.
6.

While filing their response in suit No.1137/2006,

defendants thereof stated that on a petition received from
Dr.Ajay Rohtagi, petitioner had constituted an election
tribunal which had nullified the election.
7.

Suit No.1137/2006 was rendered infructuous.

Dr.Ramesh Dutta filed the instant suit.

He impleaded

Dr.Ajay Rohtagi as defendant No.1 and the petitioner as
CM(M) No.74/07

page 3 of 11

defendant No.2.
8.

Suit

sought

a

decree

of

declaration

and

permanent injunction. The prayers are as under:(i)
Pass a decree for declaration in favour of
the plaintiff and against the defendant No.2
declaring that the plaintiff was elected to the
post
of
President-Elect
(2006-2007)
in
accordance with Memorandum, Rules and Byelaws of Delhi Medical Association.
(ii) Pass further decree for declaration that the
plaintiff has a lawful right to represent himself as
a President-Elect for the year 2006-2007 of Delhi
Medical Association in accordance with D.M.A.
Memorandum, Rules and Bye-laws.
(iii) Pass a decree for permanent injunction in
favour of plaintiff and against the defendant
No.2 restraining defendant No.2 from interfering
in the working/functioning of the plaintiff as
"President Elect" for Delhi Medical Association
for the year 2006-2007.
9.

(iv) Cost of the suit.
In a nutshell, Ramesh Dutta stated in the plaint

that he contested the election for the post of President of
Delhi Medical Association.

That the said election was

conducted according to the rules and regulations of Delhi
Medical Association.
12.2.2006.

That he was declared elected on

That he was never associated at any hearing

before any election tribunal stated to have been constituted
by the petitioner.

CM(M) No.74/07

That he learnt about the poll being

page 4 of 11

nullified when written statement was filed in the earlier suit
filed by him. That the election tribunal constituted by the
Indian Medical Association was in contravention of Article 15
of the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Delhi
Medical Association. That Article 15 envisaged that at the
first instance a complaint regarding election at a State level
would be referred to an internal committee. That no such
committee was constituted. That constitution of the election
tribunal by the petitioner was illegal inasmuch as Article 15
of the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Delhi
Medical Association was violated.
10.

Indian Medical Association filed application under

Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, inter
alia alleging that the dispute raised in the plaint was
between a member of a State association affiliated to it and
the Indian Medical Association. Therefore, matter had to be
referred to arbitration.
11.

To appreciate reasoning of the learned Judge,

relevant part of rule 40 of the rules of the petitioner as also
rule 41 have to be noted.
12.

Relevant part of rule 40 reads as under:"40(b)

CM(M) No.74/07

Election disputes at State/Territorial
page 5 of 11

Branch and Local Branch Level:
(i)
In case of election disputes in the
State/Territorial or Local Branches, an Election
Tribunal shall be constituted. For disputes at the
State/Territorial levels, the Tribunal shall
comprise of the National President of the IMA and
two immediate Past National Presidents of the
IMA. For disputes at the Local Branch level, the
State/Territorial Branch President and two
Immediate Past Presidents of the State/Territorial
Branch under whose jurisdiction the Local Branch
falls, shall form the Tribunal.
(ii) In case the President or a member of the
Tribunal is himself involved in any way in such a
dispute, or in unable to act or refuses to act, or
even otherwise interested, he will not be a
member of the Tribunal and his place shall be
taken by another Past President. When there is a
difference of opinion amongst the members of
the Tribunal, the opinion of the National
President, IMA or Chairman of the Tribunal for
election disputes at the State/Territorial level and
that of the State/Territorial President or Chairman
of the Tribunal for election disputes at the Local
Branch level, shall be final.
(iii) If any of disputing parties is not satisfied
with the Tribunal at State/Territorial level, it may
appeal to the National President of the
Association, who if he feels that a prima facie
case for appeal exists, will refer it to a Tribunal as
provided in Rule 40(a). The decision of the
Tribunal shall be final and binding on all
concerned.
(iv) Records of election shall be maintained for
one year.
(v) No election shall be called in question
except by an election petition presented to the
National President, IMA, in case of an election
CM(M) No.74/07

page 6 of 11

dispute at the State/Territorial Branch level, or to
the
President
of
State/Territorial
Branch
concerned in case of dispute at the Local Branch
level, within 15 days of the declaration of the
election results.
(vi) No election petition shall be entertained
unless accompanied by an application fee of
Rs.300/- (non-refundable) by cash/demand draft.
(vii) National
President
IMA/President
State/Territorial Branch as the case may be, shall
refer the petition within 7 days to the Election
Tribunal as provided in the rules. The Election
Tribunal shall meet within 3 weeks of such a
reference. The Tribunal shall give opportunity
both to the petitioners and defendants concerned
to be present at the hearing. No non-member
shall have the right to represent any party at
these hearings.
(viii) In case of an election dispute at the
State/Territorial Branch level, the Election
Tribunal shall hold its hearings at IMA
Headquarters or at a convenient place
determined by National President IMA or
Chairman of the Tribunal. In case of election
dispute at the Local Branch level, the Election
Tribunal shall hold its hearings at the
Headquarters of the State/Territorial Branch or
such other convenient place as determined by
the President of the State/Territorial Branch or
Chairman of the Tribunal.

13.

(ix) The election dispute, if any, will fall under
the jurisdiction of the court in place of action.
Rule 41 reads as under:"41.
Any disputes or differences solution
for which in not otherwise provided between (a)
a member of IMA/State/Territorial/Local Branch
and (b) the Indian Medical Association shall be
decided by the Working Committee of Indian

CM(M) No.74/07

page 7 of 11

14.

Medical Association.
Any party raising such
disputes shall give at least six weeks notice of
the same to the Headquarters of IMA and the
same shall be placed on the agenda of the
following meeting of the Working Committee.
The Working Committee may regulate its own
procedure for the purpose.
Learned Judge has opined that the language of

rule 41 is limited, in that, it envisages reference of only such
disputes to an arbitration which are not otherwise provided
for between Indian Medical Association or a member of
Indian Medical Association.

It has been held that since

election disputes are covered by rule 40(b), rule 41 was
inapplicable. Second reason is that in essence, dispute was
between 2 members of a State branch pertaining to an
election and Indian Medical Association was incidentally
affected.

Therefore, on said reasoning also dispute could

not be referred to arbitration.
15.

It is settled law that pleadings have to be read

meaningfully and not in a pedantic fashion.

Further,

pleadings have to be understood and appreciated with
reference to the prayer sought for.
16.

In the suit filed by Dr.Ramesh Dutta, Dr.Ajay

Rohtagi was impleaded as defendant No.1 and Indian
Medical Association was impleaded as defendant No.2.

CM(M) No.74/07

page 8 of 11

Declaration

sought

for

was

against

Indian

Medical

Association. Decree for permanent injunction sought for was
also against said association. In the context of the prayers
made, pleadings in the suit had to be understood and
appreciated.
17.

From the averments made in the plaint it is

evident that the grievance of Dr.Ramesh Dutta was that the
election tribunal constituted by Indian Medical Association
pertaining to the grievance of Dr.Ajay Rohtagi was invalid
inasmuch as the Indian Medical Association straightway
constituted the election tribunal in violation of Article 15 of
the Articles of Association of Delhi Medical Association which
envisages reference of an election dispute to an internal
committee of the Delhi Medical Association.
18.

It is thus obvious that the dispute raised by

Dr.Ramesh Dutta was in relation to actions of Indian Medical
Association. If that be so, the inevitable conclusion is that
the dispute was raised by a member of a State branch of
Indian

Medical

Association

with

the

Indian

Medical

Association. The dispute raised was whether Indian Medical
Association can constitute an election tribunal without
following the procedure prescribed under Article 15 of the
CM(M) No.74/07

page 9 of 11

Articles of Association of the Delhi Medical Association. The
sequitur thereof would be that the dispute raised would
squarely be covered by rule 41 of the rules framed by the
Indian Medical Association.
19.

May be, the dispute was between 2 members of a

State branch. But what is relevant to note is that the Indian
Medical Association claimed to have resolved the said
dispute by medium of constitution of an election tribunal.
Plaintiff, Dr.Ramesh Dutta questioned the very constitution
of the election tribunal and its decision.
20.
rules

Meaningfully read, rule 40(b) and rule 41 of the
framed

by

Indian

Medical

Association

can

be

harmonized. Election disputes between State branches have
to be resolved by constitution of election tribunals under
rule 40(b). If there is a dispute pertaining to the constitution
of the election tribunal, the dispute has to be resolved under
rule 41 through the process of arbitration.
21.

The petition accordingly stands disposed of

quashing the impugned order dated 7.12.2006. Application
filed by the petitioner under Section 8 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act 1996 is allowed.

Dispute raised by

Dr.Ramesh Dutta is referred to the working committee of the
CM(M) No.74/07

page 10 of 11

Indian Medical Association for adjudication as per the
requirement of rule 41 of the rules framed by the Indian
Medical Association.
22.

No costs.

April 17, 2007
dk

CM(M) No.74/07

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 11 of 11

