IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
C.R.P. No.193/2005
#
!

Sh. Deep Chand
....... Petitioner
through: Mr. Madan Lal Sharma, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Sh. Kulanand Lakhera & Ors. ..... Respondent
through:
Mr. D.K.Mishra, Adv. for R-1
C.R.P. No.21/2002

#
!

Sh. Harbir Singh
....... Petitioner
through: Mr. Rajender Dutta, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Delhi Development Authority ..... Respondent
through:
Ms. Sangeeta Chandra, Adv.
C.R.P. No.593/2003

#
!

Sh. Om Singh & Ors.
....... Petitioner
through: Mr. S.K.Puri, Sr. Adv. with
Ms. Mahjabeen Shamim, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Municipal Corporation of Delhi
..... Respondent
through:
Mr. Vijay Sharma, Adv. for
Mr. Dev Bhardwaj, Adv.
C.R.P. No.698/2003

#
!

Sh. Yogesh Kumar Hans & Anr.
through: Mr. J.C.Mahindroo, Adv.

....... Petitioner

VERSUS
$
^
%
*
1.

Sh. Bishambar & Ors.
..... Respondent
through:
Mr. Ram Kishan Saini, Adv. for R1 to R6
DATE OF DECISION: 17-04-2007
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y
To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Page 1 of 34

1.

Dealing with possession, in Chapter 9, Salmond On

Jurisprudence (12th Edition), states that few relationships are as vital
to man as that of possession, and we may expect any system of law,
however primitive, to provide rules for its protection. Possession of
material things is essential to life, it is the most basic relationship
between men and things.
2.

Elaborating the concept of possession, at page 266, the

learned author has opined:“But the concept of possession is as difficult to
define as it is essential to protect. In the first place,
possession is an abstract notion and involves the
same sort of difficulties, which we have seen to arise
with other abstract terms such as “law” and “rule”.
There is nothing which we can point at and identify
as possession in the same way as we can do with
concrete things such as tables and chairs.
Moreover, it is an abstract term to which the
traditional type of definition is as inappropriate as
we saw it to be for the term “rule”. Just as we could
not locate the notion of a rule within some wider
class of concepts, so too with possession we cannot
define it by placing it in a wider class and then
distinguishing it from other members of the class;
for possession is, it would seem, is a class of its own.
A second cause of difficulty is the fact that
possession is not purely a legal concept.
Our
discussion of ownership showed that possession
differs from ownership in that the former is of
temporary duration whereas the latter is of a more
permanent, ultimate and residuary nature.
But
possession differs from ownership in another quite
different respect. Ownership, as we saw, consists of
a combination of legal rights, some or all of which
may be present in any particular instance; and such
rights imply the existence of legal rules and a
system of law. With possession this is not so. A
possessor is not so much one who has certain rights
as one who actually has possession. Whether a
person has ownership depends on rules of law;
whether he has possession is a question that could
be answered as a matter of fact and without
reference to law at all. The notion of possession has
application in a pre-legal society, and even perhaps
outside society altogether. Of course in so far as
statements about possession are statements of law,
then they imply the existence of that law, but the
existence of possession is independent of, and prior
to, that of law. Whereas ownership is strictly a legal
Page 2 of 34

concept, possession is both a legal and a non-legal
or pre-legal concept.”
3.

At page 274, the learned author has opined that in a

civilized society some protection of possession is essential.

There

are two methods of protecting the possession. Firstly, the possessor
can be given certain legal rights, such as a right to continue in
possession free from interference by others. Secondly, the law can
protect possession by prescribing criminal penalties for wrongful
interference and wrongful dispossession.
4.

In relation to the former i.e. the first method by which

law can protect possession, the learned author opines that the
possessory right in rem can be supported by various sanctioning
rights in personam against those who violate the possessor's right:
he can be given a right to recover compensation for interference and
for dispossession, and a right to have his possession restored to him.
5.

The learned author goes on to explain that whenever

such remedies are invoked, it will be important to ascertain whether
a person invoking them actually has any possession to be protected.
Consequently, a legal criteria has to be evolved to determine
whether a person is in possession of an object.
6.

But, legal concept of possession is not restricted to the

commonsense concept of possession, namely physical control.
Possession in fact is not a simple notion. The question whether in
fact a person is in possession of an article depends on various factors
such as the nature of the article itself and the attitudes and activities
of other persons.
7.

Possession may be lawful, it may be unlawful. It may be

legal or illegal. The acquisition of legal possession would obviously
be lawful and would of necessity involve the occurrence of some
Page 3 of 34

event recognized by law whereby the subject matter falls under the
control of the possessor. But a problem arises where the duration for
which possession is recognized is limited by the grantor or the law.
Continuance of possession beyond the period specified by the
grantor or recognized by law is not treated as a lawful possession.
For example, a tenant acquires legal as well as lawful possession of
the tenanted premises from the landlord with the express consent of
the landlord but limited to the duration of the lease. On expiry of the
lease, if the landlord does not consent to the lease being continued,
the possession of such tenant would not be a lawful possession. The
nature of possession being not lawful would entitle the landlord to
regain possession.
8.

Can he do so by entering upon the tenanted premises

and physically throwing out the tenant?
9.

From a commonsense point of view, lawful possession

must be the state of being a possessor in the eyes of law.

The

possession must be warranted or authorized by the law; having the
qualifications prescribed by law and not contrary to nor forbidden by
the law.
10.

But law recognizes possession as a substantive right or

an interest. Continued possession of a person is recognized by law
as a sufficient interest capable of being protected by the possessor,
right being founded on mere fact of possession.
11.

This concept of law relating to possession has been a

source of fertile litigation and if I may use the expression, a lawyer's
delight and a Judge's despair.
12.

Salmond On Jurisprudence (12th Edition), page 294, while

discussing possessory remedies has noted that in English law,
possession is a good title of right against anyone who cannot show a
Page 4 of 34

better title. Thus, a possessor, including a wrongful possessor, has
the rights of an owner with respect to all persons except the true
owner. Many legal systems go much further and treat possession as
a provisional or temporary title even against the true owner.

A

wrongdoer who is deprived of his possession can recover it from any
person whatsoever, simply on the ground of his possession and
where the true owner uses force to throw out the wrongdoer, these
legal systems do not permit the true owner to set up his superior title
to protect the possession which was regained by force.

He is

compelled to give up possession and then proceed in due course of
law for the recovery of the thing on the strength of his ownership.
13.

In the latter legal systems, the intention of the law is that

every possessor shall be entitled to retain and recover his possession
until deprived of it by an action according to law.
14.

Legal remedies for protection of possession even against

ownership are called possessory.

Legal remedies for protection of

possession or regaining possession based on ownership (title) are
proprietary. In the modern and medievous civil law, the distinction is
expressed by the contrasted terms petitorium (a proprietary suit)
and possessorium (a possessory suit).
15.

This

duplication

of

remedies,

with

the

resulting

provisional protection of possession, has its beginnings in Roman
Law.

It became part of the Canon Law, where it received

considerable extension, and through the common law it became a
prominent feature of medieval Jurisprudence. It is a part of modern
continental systems; but although well known to the earlier law of
England, it has been long since rejected in England as cumbrous and
unnecessary.
16.

Reason why some legal systems recognize possessory
Page 5 of 34

suit as distinct from proprietary suits is that evils of violent self help
are deemed serious and therefore are discouraged. It is also based
on the recognized principle of law that no one has a right to become
a judge in his own cause.

Civil society recognizes that where law

recognizes a right and provides for a remedy to protect the right, the
right has to be protected only as per the remedy provided by law.
17.

Extended to the extreme it would mean: he who helps

himself by force even to that which is his own must restore it even to
the thief and recover the same as per a recognized legal procedure.
18.

Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act 1963 is a statutory

recognition of possessory suits as distinct from proprietary suits.

It

reads as under :“6. Suit by person dispossessed of immovable
property(1)
If any person is dispossessed without his consent
of immovable property otherwise than in due course of
law, he or any person claiming through him may, by suit,
recover possession thereof, notwithstanding any other
title that may be set up in such suit.
(2)

No suit under this section shall be brought(a) after the expiry of six months from the date of
dispossession; or
(b) against the Government.

(3)
No appeal shall lie from any order or decree
passed in any suit instituted under this section, nor shall
any review of any such order or decree be allowed.
(4)
Nothing in this section shall bar any person from
suing to establish his title to such property and to
recover possession thereof.”

Page 6 of 34

19.

The Section recognizes a right of a person possessed of

immovable property to recover possession thereof if dispossessed
without his consent or otherwise than in due course of law.
20.

What does the phrase 'due course of law' mean.

As

explained in the report published 1992 SUPP (2) SCC 29 East India
Hotels Ltd. Vs. Syndicate Bank (Para 30):“30. What is meant by due course of law? Due
course of law in each particular case means such an
exercise of the powers by duly constituted tribunal
or court in accordance with the procedure establish
ed by law under such safeguards for the protection
of individual rights. A course of legal proceedings
according to the rules and principles which have
been established in our system of jurisprudence for
the enforcement and protection of private rights. To
give such proceedings any validity, there must thus
be a tribunal competent by its constitution, there is
by law of its creation, to pass upon the subject
matter of the suit or proceeding; and, if that involves
merely a determination of the personal liability of
the defendant, it must be brought within its
jurisdiction by service of process within the State, or
his voluntary appearance. Due course of law implies
the right of the person affected thereby to be
present before the tribunal which pronounces
judgment upon the question of life, liberty or
property in its most comprehensive sense; to be
heard, by testimony or otherwise, and to have the
right determination of the controversy by proof,
every material fact which bears on the question of
fact or liability be conclusively proved or presumed
against him. This is the meaning of due course of
law in a comprehensive sense.”
But as I see it, the real problem lies where a person

21.

openly proclaims: Yes I am a trespasser, yes I admit that I wrongfully
took possession of the property, but because I have continued to be
in possession thereof over a sufficiently long period of time, my
possession is a settled possession. It has given to me an enforceable
right.

Since I was dispossessed by force, please restore my

possession.
22.

Position of a person who lawfully enters upon possession

is different than he who gains possession in an unlawful manner. The

Page 7 of 34

former would not be a trespasser. The latter would be. When right
of the former to continue in possession is extinguished by law or by
contract, continued possession is not akin to the possession of a
trespasser. The possession, if original entry was under a lease would
be that of a tenant at sufferance.

If initial possession was

permissive, possession would be simple at sufferance. Possession of
a person who lawfully enters upon a property but retains it beyond
the terms of the grant is treated as a juridical possession.
23.

Does Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act 1963 equate

possession of a trespasser whose very entry is unlawful at par with
the possession of a person who otherwise lawfully enters upon the
property, with consent of the owner, but asserts a right to continue in
possession after the agreed period during which he was to retain
possession has expired?
24.

A peep into the legal precedents show a fairly hazy

picture.
25.

The fore runner of Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act

1963 was Section 9 of the Specific Relief Act 1877. It was the subject
matter of discussion in various decisions.
26.

In the report published as (1911) 13 Bom. LR. 1200

Hillava Subbava Vs. Narayanappa it was observed:-

27.

“No doubt, the true owner of property is entitled to
retain possession, even though he has obtained it
from a trespasser by force or other unlawful
means: Lillu Vs. Annaji (1881) ILR. 5 Bom. 387 and
Bandu Vs. Naba (1890) ILR. 15 Bom. 238.”
Speaking through to Chagla C.J., a Division Bench of the

Bombay High Court, in the decision reported as AIR 1954 Bom. 358
Brig. K.K.Verma & Anr. Vs. UOI & Anr. opined as under:“The statement of the law just referred to in Hill
and Redman on Landlord and Tenant would rather
go to show that in every case a landlord must
express his intention by some act which is
Page 8 of 34

subsequent to the termination of the ,tenancy. and
the reason for that seems to be clear because after
the termination of the tenancy, – however the
tenancy may be terminated, - there is as it were a
neutral position created. The landlord may consent
to the tenant continuing, may accept rent from
him, in which case the tenant would become a
tenant at will. He may, on the other hand, make it
clear that he does not want the tenant to continue
in possession in which case the tenancy on
sufferance which was created by the termination of
the tenancy would cease and the tenant would
become a trespasser.
But, in our opinion, the position in English law is
unnecessary to be considered because, as we shall
presently point out, the law in India is essentially
different, and even assuming Mr. Desai is right that
under the English law on the facts of this case the
tenant became a trespasser, the same position
would not arise under the Indian law. Under the
Indian law, the possession of a tenant who has
ceased to be a tenant is protected by law.
Although he may not have a right to continue in
possession after the termination of the tenancy, his
possession is juridical and that possession is
protected by statute.
Under Section 9 of the
Specific Relief Act, a tenant who has ceased to be a
tenant may sue for possession against his landlord
if the landlord deprives him of possession
otherwise than in due course of law, but a
trespasser who has been thrown out of possession
cannot go to Court under Section 9 and claim
possession against the true owner.
Therefore, our law makes a clear and sharp
distinction between a trespasser and an erstwhile
tenant. Whereas the trespasser's possession is
never juridical and never protected by law, the
possession of an erstwhile tenant is juridical and is
protected by law. Therefore, as far as the Indian
law is concerned, an erstwhile tenant can never
become a trespasser. It may or may not be that in
English law in certain circumstances he can
become a trespasser and it does seem that the
landlord can enter the premises and deprive the
erstwhile tenant of his possession, but in India a
landlord can only eject his erstwhile tenant by
recourse to law and by obtaining a decree for
ejectment. ”
(underlining emphasized)
28.

In the report published as AIR 1968 SC 620 Lallu

Yeshwant Singh Vs. Rao Jagdish Singh & Ors., in para 11 of the
report, 2nd passage above quoted from the decision of Chagla C.J. in
Page 9 of 34

K.K.Verma's case was noted and approval accorded in para 15 of the
decision by recording as under:-

29.

“In our opinion, the law on this point has been
correctly stated by the Privy Counsel, by Chagla C.J.
and by the full Bench of the Allahabad High Court, in
the cases cited above.”
However, I may hasten to add that in the decision in Lallu

Yeshwant Singh's case, the Supreme Court observed that law
respects possession even if there is no title to support it.
30.

On facts, the Supreme Court was dealing with a dispute

between the plaintiff and the defendant pertaining to a Land Tenancy
Act where the plaintiffs claim to be inducted as Sairda – Khillkar
Cultivators and alleged forcible dispossession.

The defendant

pleaded that the right in favour of the plaintiff having ceased as per
law, defendant was entitled to regain possession.

The Board of

Revenue took a view that possession of the tenant whose right has
been so extinguished is not put to an end automatically and the land
owner must be regain possession by following the procedure
prescribed by the Tenancy Act. The High Court took a contra view,
holding that the tenant could protect only lawful possession.

The

Supreme Court reversed the view taken by the High Court and
restored the decision of the Board of Revenue.
31.

Though without a detailed legal discussion, much less

drawing a distinction between possession of a trespasser whose very
entry was unlawful viz-a-viz right to continue in possession by a
person whose initial entry was lawful but dispute was on right to
continue in possession, a learned Single Judge of the Allahabad High
Court, in the report published as AIR 1960 Allahabad 227 Anant
Bahadur Singh Vs. Ashtbhuja Baks Singh held that where a person
entitled to possession based on title regains possession, but by
peaceful means, from a person not entitled to possession, the latter
Page 10 of 34

cannot recover possession on basis of mere possessory title.
32.

The facts were that a widow transferred possession of

property which had devolved through her husband and as per Hindu
Law she had no right to alienate the same. She had a limited right to
possess the property during her life time.
reversioners.

Corpus vested in the

On her death, the reversioners of the husband took

peaceful possession. The alienee brought an action for recovery of
possession based on possessory title. It was observed:-

33.

“In the present case, the defendants did dispossess
the plaintiff peacefully. Now that the rightful owners
are in possession, the plaintiff, who has no title in the
property, cannot obtain the aid of court to dispossess
the rightful owners.”
Though not dealing with an issue directly relating to

Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act 1963, jural concepts evolved in
the decision reported as AIR 1974 SC 104 M.C.Chockalingam & Ors.
Vmanickavasagam & Ors. give good guidance to understand the
concept of lawful, legal and juridical possession. The Supreme Court
was dealing with the claim of a lessee, whose lease had expired, to
obtain a license to operate a cinema hall on the leased premises
under the Madras Cinemas (Regulation) Act 1955. The rules framed
thereunder, in particular Rule 13, viz-a-viz non owner occupants of a
site required lawful possession of the applicant. It was urged by the
lessee that notwithstanding lease having expired and the landlord
having not consented to the continued occupation, till lessee was
evicted by due process of law, his possession was lawful as also legal
and therefore he was entitled to the requisite license.
34.

Noting the decision of Chagla C.J. in K.K.Verma's case

(supra) as affirmed by the Supreme Court in Lallu Yeshwant Singh's
case (supra), the Supreme Court held that lawful possession and
juridical possessions are different concepts. A tenant holding over

Page 11 of 34

without the consent of the landlord would be in juridical possession.
His possession would not be lawful.

Notwithstanding that the

landlord could evict such tenant through the medium of a process
recognized by law, possession of the tenant, post efflux of the lease
period, was and could not be treated as lawful possession. It was
held that he may not be a trespasser as conventionally understood
and to that extent it may be said that the possession is legal, but in
jural concept the possession would be treated as a juridical
possession.
35.

In para 13 of the report, ratio of Lallu Yeshwant Singh's

case (supra) was explained with reference to Section 9 of the
Specific Relief Act 1877, in that, said Section was held as protecting
juridical possession. To quote, the Supreme Court stated as under:“In Lallu Yeshwant Singh's case AIR 1968 SC 620
where this Court considered the possession of a
tenant after expiry of the lease, as in this case, as a
juridical possession in the context of a provision
similar to S.9 of the Specific Relief Act.”
36.

Black's law dictionary, 4th Edition (page 990), defines

juridical as follows:“Juridical: Relating to administration of justice or office
of a Judge.”
37.

In the same dictionary (page 1032) the word “lawful” is

defines as follows:“Lawful: Legal; warranted or authorized by the law;
having the qualifications prescribed by law; not
contrary to nor forbidden by the law.”
38.

Thus, lawful possession would mean a legal possession

which is rightful or at least excusable and consistent with the
superior right to possess in some other person i.e. the owner.
39.

Decision of the Supreme Court reported as AIR 1996 SC

Page 12 of 34

140 R.V.Bhupal Prasad Vs. State of A.P. highlights the applicability of
the concept of a legal/lawful or juridical possession.
40.

The Supreme Court referred to and explained its earlier

decisions in Lallu Yeshwant Singh's case and M.C.Chockalingam's
case.
41.

In R.V.Bhupal Prasad's case the Supreme Court was

dealing with a right to have a license renewed under the A.P.
Cinemas (Regulation) Act 1955. In para 8 it was noted that a tenant
who continues in possession after the expiry of a lease, though
referred to as a tenant holding over, actually is a tenant at
sufferance but where the landlord consents to the continued
retention of possession, the tenant is holding possession under a
tenancy at will.

It was held that the possession under the former

category would not be a lawful possession but would be a juridical
possession.

In

para

M.C.Chockalingam's

9,

case

with

reference

meaning

of

to

the

its

decision

expression

in

lawful

possession was explained in the following words:“....... Lawful possession is not litigious possession
and must have some foundation in a legal right to
possess the property which cannot be equated
with a temporary right to enforce recovery of the
property in case a person is wrongfully or forcibly
dispossess from it. ...... We are clearly of opinion
that juridical possession is possession protected by
law against wrongful dispossession but cannot perse always be equated with lawful possession. ......
Lawful possession means legal possession which is
also rightful or at least excusable. Thus that which
is not stricto legalo may yet be lawful. It should
not be forbidden by law. ....... Lawful is wider in
connotation than legal.”
42.

However, I would be failing if do not note that in para 11

of the report, the Supreme Court has noted that even a trespasser
would be entitled to be evicted by a due process of law.
43.

There are two maxims of law which need to be noted.
Page 13 of 34

First: adversus extraneous vitiose possessio prodesse solet – prior
possession is a good title of ownership against all who cannot show a
better title. Second: possessio contra omnes valat praeter eur cui
ius sit possessionis – he that hath possession hath right against all
but him that hath the very right.
44.

If the 2 maxims are strictly applied, no possession can be

protected without a right to possess against the owner of the
property in whom law recognizes the right to possess.
45.

However the maxim: nemo debet esse judex in propria

causa – no one should be judged in his own cause, is also recognized
by law and this maxim is the foundation against permitting the owner
to regain possession of his property without the aid of a court or a
tribunal established by law i.e. compels the owner to regain
possession in the manner prescribed by law.
46.

Indeed, if people are allowed to be the judge of their own

cause, there would be lawlessness in the society. More often than
not there are competing claims. More often than not a party asserts
no right in the occupier who affirms a right in himself. The two must
have the dispute resolved from the court of competent jurisdiction.
47.

There are wheels and wheels within the laws. Niceties,

caveats, exceptions to the rule and rules within rules have
unfortunately become a part of every legal system.
48.

Whatsoever and howsoever may be the theories of law,

the common man understands law by instinct.

His instinct guides

him that whatever is rational and fair is lawful and anything which is
irrational or oppressive is unlawful. But, more often than not, law is
discovered in a court room through forensic battles fought at length
by legal luminaries. On many an occasion, after hearing arguments,
a Judge goes into legal transcendental meditations to unfathom the
Page 14 of 34

niceties of the law.
49.

Instinct and commonsense would guide that where a

man trespasses into somebody's property and proclaims no right to
possess the property and states that I am a trespasser but please go
to court to regain possession, such a claim cannot be countenanced
inasmuch as it would protect a wrongdoer.
50.

After all, possession may prima facie raise a presumption

of a title, but when the facts are known, where is the place for a
presumption? I wonder!
51.

It could be urged that regaining lost possession, albeit,

without creating a law and order problem and without resorting to
violence, prima facie, from a commonsense point of view would not
amount to taking advantage under an illegal action.
52.

From a moralist point of view, why should a court come

to the aid of a person who founds his cause of action upon an
immoral or illegal act of his.

The maxim ex dolo malo non oritur

actio means: a right of action does not arise out of fraud. No court
will lend its aid to a man who founds his cause of action on an illegal
act. As observed by Lord Mansfield C.J. in Holman Vs. Johnson (1775)
1 Cowper 341:-

53.

“If, from the plaintiff's own stating or otherwise
the cause of action appears to arise exturpicausa
or the transgression or a positive law or this
country, there the court says he has no right to be
assisted. It is upon that ground the court goes;
not for the sake of the defendant, but because
they will not lend their aid to such a plaintiff.”
Courts in India have struck a middle path.
Where

possession of a trespasser assumes the status of a settled
possession, it is protected against forcible ejectment by even the
true owner.

The guiding principle of this middle approach is the

observations of Lord Macnaghten in the celebrated decision of the

Page 15 of 34

Judicial Committee reported as 1907 AC 73 Perry Vs. Clissold wherein
the principle was stated as follows:-

54.

“It cannot be disputed that a person in possession
of land in the assumed character of owner and
exercising peaceably the ordinary rights of
ownership has a perfectly good title against all the
world but the rightful owner. And if the rightful
owner does not come forward and assert his title by
the process of law within the period prescribed by
the provisions of the statute of Limitation applicable
to the case, his right is for ever extinguished, and
the possessory owner acquires an absolute title.”
Without expressly authorizing a person to occupy one's

property and lose the right to possess the same, an owner may by
his action, inaction or deeds do something which would be treated as
acquiescence by the owner, resulting in the person entering into
possession acquiring settled possession.
55.

In the report published as 1 (2004) SLT 675 Rame Gowda

Vs. M.Varadappa Naidu, recognizing the right of a owner who has
been wrongly dispossessed of property to regain possession, if he
can do so, peacefully and without the use of unreasonable force, only
limitation placed was when the trespasser acquires effective
possession or settled possession.

In para 11 of the report it was

observed that the sine qua non for settled possession or effective
possession of a trespasser was when the same extended over a
sufficiently long period of time and acquiesced to by the true owner.
In relation to the concept of settled possession developed by various
judicial pronouncements, noting the same in para 11 of the report, it
was observed that the phrase “settled possession” does not carry
any special charm or magic, nor is it a ritualistic formula which can
be confined in a straight jacket.

However, following tests which

could be adopted as working rules were evolved:“(i) That the trespasser must be in actual
physical possession of the property over a
sufficiently long period;
Page 16 of 34

(ii)
That the possession must be to the
knowledge (either express of implied) of the
owner or without any attempt at concealment by
the trespasser and which contains an element of
animus possidendi. The nature of possession of
the trespasser would, however, be a matter to be
decided on the facts and circumstances of each
case;
(iii) The process of dispossession of the true
owner by the trespasser must be complete and
final and must be acquiesced to by the true
owner; and

56.

(iv) That one of the usual tests to determine the
equality of settled possession, in the case of
culturable land, would be whether or not the
trespasser, after having taken possession, had
grown any crop. If the crop had been grown by
the trespasser, then even the true owner has no
right to destroy the crop grown by the trespasser
and take forcible possession.”
A deceitful, undercover or a trespass shrouded under

darkness of secrecy; not to the knowledge, express or implied of the
owner, howsoever long may be the duration of the possession would
not amount to a settled possession. The reason for the law is that
where a person knowingly permits another to take possession of his
property and deal with the same he may encourage the trespasser to
improve upon the property i.e. permit the trespasser to spend his
time, money or energy on the property.

Having encouraged the

trespasser to do so, the owner would be precluded i.e. estopped from
alleging that the trespasser has no right whatsoever in the property.
57.

To put it differently, where the owner permits a

trespasser to go into settled possession he permits the status of the
possession of the trespasser acquiring the status akin to that of a
juridical possession.

Thus, juridical possession or possession akin

thereto in any case becomes the sine qua non for an action to be
maintainable under Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act 1963.
58.

It

would

therefore

be

wrong

to

state

that

every

Page 17 of 34

trespasser has a right to retain possession till evicted by a due
process of law. If that was the legal position there would have been
no need for courts to evolve the concepts of legal possession, lawful
possession, juridical possession, settled possession etc.
59.

In legal possession or lawful possession the possessor

has a claim recognized by law to enjoy possession of a property. The
entry upon the property and it's retention is with the consent or
permission of the owner.

In a case of juridical possession, the

possessor asserts a legal right to possess and the facts on which the
right is found is asserted have to be decided and since no one can be
a judge in his own cause, the dispute has to be resolved by a lawful
authority. But where a person asserts no right to possess a property
but illegally holds on to it, nothing requires adjudication. The judicial
forum has to be decide nothing, or to put it differently there is not
even a semblance of a claim. There is nothing juridical which exists.
60.

A perusal of the decisions under Section 6 of the Specific

Relief Act 1963 and its forerunner, namely Section 9 of the Specific
Relief Act 1877, reveal the fairly uselessness of providing a remedy
of a suit based on a mere possessory right.

As would be evident

from the facts noted hereinafter and in particular pertaining to C.R.
No. 193/2005 Deep Chand Vs. Kulanand Lekhera, the remedy under
Section 6 is neither speedy nor effective because more often than
not, evidence which is generally led to establish possession is the
near same as would be required in a title suit.
61.

Way back in the year 1958, the Law Commission under

the chairmanship of Late M.C.Setalvad in the 9th Report of the Law
Commission, dealing with the Specific Relief Act 1877 recommended
deletion of Section 9.

The report records that it was felt that the

question of possession cannot be determined without going into the
Page 18 of 34

question of title to some extent.

Since a decree under Section 9

(now Section 6) does not determine title it was noted by the Law
Commission that the same i.e. the decree was generally followed by
a suit for recovery of possession based on title, thus resulting in
multiplicity of proceedings.
62.

On appreciating the growth of law on the subject as

noted hereinabove, one realizes that though drafted in a manner
which aims to cage its scope; but while defining the concepts of
possession, legal possession, juridical possession, settled possession
akin to juridical possession and rank trespass, the provision of law
i.e. Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act 1963 has rendered nugatory
the object of the Section, more so in view of the docket explosion in
the courts in India. In para 10 of the decision in R.V.Bhupal Prasad's
case (supra), it has been noted that long delay in disposal of cases
has become a ruse to unscrupulous litigants to abuse the due course
of law and remain in unjust or wrongful possession of property.
63.

Time to enter the factual arena.

Petitioner in C.R. No.

21/2002 filed a suit for possession against DDA invoking Section 6 of
the Specific Relief Act 1963. He alleged that he purchased the suit
property i.e. plot no. 41, Transport Nagar, Sabzi Mandi, Azad Pur,
New Delhi for valuable consideration in the year 1978. He alleged
that in the first week of June 1990, employees of DDA came to take
possession by demolishing the structure raised by him. Attempt was
repeated on 6.6.1993.
permanent

injunction

It was alleged that he filed a suit for
against

DDA

to

restrain

DDA

from

dispossessing him without authority of law. That, in the suit written
statement filed by DDA disclosed that he was an unauthorized
occupant. That on 21.6.1995 officers of DDA dispossessed him by
force. Alleging that DDA did not initiate any legal proceedings for his
Page 19 of 34

eviction much less obtained an eviction order, restoration of
possession was prayed for.
64.

In the written statement filed by DDA it was pleaded that

the plot in question was put up for auction in the year 1978.

Sh.

Ishwar Singh, Sh. Surjit Singh and Sh. Manjit Singh were the highest
bidders.

Bid was confirmed.

Bid confirmation letter was issued.

They did not pay the premium as per bid confirmed.
possession of the plot was not handed over to them.

Therefore,
No transfer

document was executed. It was stated that the plaintiff was never
put in possession of the plot. It was further stated that DDA never
gave possession to any third party. Thus, assertion of the petitioner
that he purchase the plot for valuable consideration was false.
65.

In the replication, plaintiff asserted right on mere

possession.
66.

Without recording evidence the suit has been dismissed

on the ground that the petitioner was neither in juridical nor legal
possession of the property as per his pleadings. Additionally, it has
been held that the suit was filed beyond six months of dispossession.
67.

On the issue whether petitioner was dispossessed on a

day/date six months prior to date of filing of the suit or within six
months thereof, the view of the learned Judge cannot be sustained
for the simple reason, no evidence was led and the suit was
dismissed on the preliminary issue whether at all the suit was
maintainable.
68.

However, the suit must fail as drafted and I hold that the

same is not maintainable for the reason there are no specific
averments as to what constituted the acts of possession to the
knowledge of the owner without any attempt at concealment by the
petitioner. As noted hereinabove, the law is that for the trespasser
Page 20 of 34

to claim juridical possession he must be in settled possession i.e.
must satisfy the four working rules laid down by the Supreme Court
in Rame Gawda's case (supra). The simple assertion that petitioner
was in possession since 1978 is not enough to disclose a cause of
action to maintain a suit under Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act
1963.
69.

Every fact, if traversed by the defendant, which must be

proved and established by the plaintiff constitutes the cause of
action.

Thus, the cause of action for a trespasser, to maintain an

action under Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act must consists of
averments in the plaint which, if traversed, on being proved by
evidence establish and prove the four requirements of settled
possession as explained in Rame Gawda' case.
70.

Though issue of title is irrelevant, for record I may note

that documents filed by the petitioner are evidencing a purchase of
the plot from Sh. Ishwar Singh, Sh. Surjit Singh and Sh. Manjit Singh,
the three persons who were the highest bidders but having failed to
pay the premium to DDA failed to perfect their title qua the plot in
question. The said three persons were never put in possession of the
plot by DDA. The petitioner has not even pleaded a semblance of a
claim as to how he entered into legal possession. Indeed, his counsel
claimed: yes, I was in illegal possession but DDA had to evict me by
following due process of law.
71.

C.R.P. No. 21/2002 is accordingly dismissed.

72.

Facts pertaining to C.R. No. 193/2005 are that the

petitioner, Deep Chand, filed a suit alleging forcible dispossession by
Kulanand Lekhera. The subject matter of the suit was property no.
398/3, Block B, Gali No. 19, Bhajan Pura, Delhi.
73.

The colony Bhajan Pura is an unauthorized colony. Land
Page 21 of 34

mafia took advantage of government apathy and on agricultural land,
carved out residential plots later on sold to gullible buyers.
74.

Petitioner pleaded that respondents 2 to 5 connived with

Kulanand Lekhera, respondent no.1, to dispossess him from the suit
property.

He alleged that he purchased the same from one Hari

Singh, impleaded as respondent no.6 (defendant no. 6 in the suit).
75.

Defence set up by defendant no.1, Kulanand Lekhera was

that there is no property by the number 398/3, B Block, Gali No.19,
Bhajan Pura, Delhi. He stated that the property no. corresponding to
the site plan filed by the plaintiff was numbered B-398, Gali No.19,
Bhajan Pura, Delhi.

He stated that he was in lawful possession

thereof.
76.

In a nut shell, in the context of the respective pleadings,

the issue between the parties could not be decided without deciding
whether there existed at site two properties or only one.

The

dispute, whether at all property no. 398/3, Block B, Gali No.19,
Bhajan Pura existed at site and corresponded to the site plan filed
required to be adjudicated. Per necessity, as per written statement
filed by respondent no.1, it had to be decided whether the site plan
in question related to property no. 398, Block B, Gali No.19, Bhajan
Pura, Delhi.
77.

Existence of properties has obviously to be decided with

reference to the title documents.
78.

The instant case highlights the pitfall inherent in an

adjudication under Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act 1963. I would
like to add a caveat. 2/3 rd population of Delhi is residing in such kind
of unauthorized colonies. There are no approved lay out plans. As in
the instant case, documents of title are unregistered agreements to
sell and a power of attorney. It is a nightmare to identify 100 sq.
Page 22 of 34

yards to 150 sq. yards of land in these densely populated areas. In
the instant case, the land comprised is 100 sq. yds.

As per the

parties, it was carved out of land comprised in khasra no. 321 of
Village Ghonda Gujran Khadar, Illaqa Shahdara.
79.

In Delhi, land comprised in a khasra generally ad-

measures 4 bigha and 16 biswa i.e. 4880 sq. yds.

With gross

unauthorized colonization, the permanent points of most of the
villages have been destroyed.
original khasras.

It is impossible to demarcate the

If original khasra cannot be demarcated, who

possibly can demarcate 100 sq. yard land comprised in a khasra.
Further, which part of the khasra stands bifurcated resulting in 100
sq. yd. Land being carved out. Since everything was done illegally,
the revenue officials have not cut the titama at site, much less
reflect the same on the revenue map of the village.
80.

Unauthorized colonization in Delhi and disputes relating

to possession of plots therein are virtually crippling civil courts at the
district (junior division) level in Delhi. Nobody has any clue as to how
a dispute pertaining to identity of a plot can be decided.
81.

As in the instant dispute, where two parties allege with

reference to 2 different numbers that the site in question belongs to
them, I can think of no satisfactory solution other than to prepare the
shajra of the entire revenue estate at the same scale as per the lay
out plan of the illegal colony and thereafter super impose the latter
on to the former to identify as to which plot falls at which part of the
revenue estate.

But this would require the availability of an

authentic copy of the approved lay out plan of the colony.
Unfortunately, none exists.
82.

Reverting back to the facts, in the written statement filed

by respondent no. 6, he denied having sold any land to the
Page 23 of 34

petitioner. He stated that the petitioner told him that he needed to
raise a loan for which he required documents of title for some land.
Since he i.e. respondent no.6 had good relations with the plaintiff, he
obliged the plaintiff by executing whatever documents were got
prepared by the plaintiff.
83.

The documents I note are a registered power of attorney,

a cash receipt evidencing consideration of Rs.1 lac in cash passing
between the petitioner and respondent no.6, an affidavit dated 20th
March 1997 recording delivery of possession and an agreement to
sell of even date.
84.

Non

suiting

the

petitioner

who

alleged

unlawful

dispossession by respondent no.1 with the connivance of respondent
2 to 5 on 13.4.1997, learned Judge has opined that the petitioner
had failed to prove that he took delivery of possession of the suit
property on 20.3.1997.

The learned Judge has noted that the

petitioner failed to even prove that he had Rs.1 lac with him i.e. the
money ostensibly paid at the time of purchase of the property.
85.

In his testimony, petitioner stated that he had purchased

only a part of property no. 398/3, Block B, Gali No. 19, Bhajan Pura
and that the remaining part thereof was in occupation of defendant
no.1.
86.

The learned Judge has additionally noted that the plaintiff

failed to even prove the site plan inasmuch as he had not produced
as witness the person who had prepared the site plan.
87.

Three reasons are forthcoming from the decision dated

7.3.2005. The first is that the petitioner had failed to prove that he
had paid Rs.1 lac to respondent no.6. That he had failed to prove
possession of the property being delivered to him on 20.3.1997 and
lastly he had failed to prove even the site plan.
Page 24 of 34

88.

Scope of challenge in a revision petition is limited.

Petitioner cannot call upon this court to reappreciate the evidence.
89.

I may only add that the petitioner has failed to establish

the very existence of a property by the number 398/3, Block B, Gali
No. 9, Bhajan Pura. In the teeth of the defence set up by respondent
no.1 and the statement made by the petitioner in evidence that he
had purchased only a part of the property, remaining being with
respondent no.1, it was encumbant upon the petitioner to prove with
clarity the existence of two properties. The one he admitted to be in
possession of respondent no.1 and the other on which he pleaded
trespass by respondent no.1. He has failed to do so. The inevitable
consequences have to flow.

C.R. No. 193/2005 is accordingly

dismissed.
90.

Pertaining to C.R.No.593/2003 facts are that Om Singh,

since deceased, now litigating through his sons claimed to be in
possession of 1 bigha and 10 biswa land comprised in a part of land
of Khasra No.428/309, village Babarpur.

He claimed possession

thereof prior to 1954 i.e. the year when Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954
was promulgated in the Union Territory of Delhi. He claimed illegal
dispossession from the land by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi on
3.4.1995. Prayer made in the suit was for possession being restored.
91.

M.C.D. pleaded that the land in question together with

adjacent land belonged to the Gaon Sabha of the village who gifted
the same to a school in the year 1952, which school was taken over
by the MCD when it was formed under the DMC Act 1957.

It was

alleged that petitioner trespassed into the suit land in the year 1973.
Proceedings were initiated for his eviction under Section 86A of the
Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954.

Ejectment order was passed which

attained finality. Proceedings were initiated simultaneously i.e in the
Page 25 of 34

year 1973 under Section 145 Cr. P.C.

The same resulted in a

reference being made under Section 146 (1) Cr.P.C. to a sub-Judge
Delhi, who decided issue of being in possession in favour of the
petitioner. It was stated that the pradhan of the village being related
to the petitioner did not challenge the order dated 12.10.1978
passed by the learned Civil Judge Delhi and as a result possession
was restored to the petitioner.
property remained attached.

It was stated that in between,

It was further pleaded that in the

interregnum, petitioner challenged the ejectment order passed
against him by the revenue assistant by way of a revision petition
which was dismissed. That on 12.12.1975, petitioner filed a suit for
declaration that the orders passed by the revenue authorities were
without jurisdiction.
declined.

Interim injunction was prayed for.

Appeal was filed, which was dismissed.

Same was

That petitioner

filed a civil revision petition in the Delhi High Court challenging the
non grant of interim injunction and managed an ex-parte order in his
favour which was vacated when the civil revision was dismissed on
6.7.1988. Thereafter, petitioner challenged, albeit belatedly with a
delay of 2728 days, the decision by the financial commissioner
upholding the ejectment order by way of a Petition For Special Leave
To Appeal

No.398/1989 before the Supreme Court which was

ultimately withdrawn.
92.

In effect, MCD pleaded that petitioner never went into

settled possession. His trespass in 1973 was countered at 2 levels,
firstly by proceeding under Section 145 Cr.P.C. and secondly by
obtaining an ejectment order under Section 86A of the Delhi Land
Reforms Act 1954. That petitioner managed to hold on to his illegal
entry by resorting to filing of a suit and obtaining interim orders
which were ultimately vacated at each level but resulted in
Page 26 of 34

extending the trespass.
93.

Vide impugned order dated 12.3.2003, learned Civil

Judge has held that relief under Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act
1963 can be granted to a person who has a legal right to possess the
suit property and since petitioner had none, suit had to be dismissed.
94.

Mr. S.K.Puri, learned senior counsel for the petitioners

challenged said fining and urged that the learned civil Judge has
acted with patent illegality and has failed to exercise jurisdiction
vested in him by law by proceeding on an erroneous legal view.
95.

The proposition of law as stated by the learned civil Judge

is too wide, but notwithstanding the same, the suit has to be
dismissed for the reason, when disposed on 3.4.1995, petitioner was
not in settled possession. He entered upon illegal possession in the
year 1973. When challenged, he restored to multifarious litigation to
hold on to his possession.

Period between 1973 to 1995 was of

litigation. Thus possession would be litigious possession.
96.

Sh. S.K.Puri, learned senior counsel for the petitioner

urged that khasra Girdawri's for the land show petitioner's possession
much prior to 1973.
97.

The said entries were adversely commented by the

Revenue Assistant in his order dated 28.6.1974 deciding proceedings
under Section 86A of the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 and ordering
ejectment of the petitioner. Relevant extract of the order reads as
under:“...it is clear that the adverse possession of the
respondent was shown by the patwari for the first
time in kharif, 1966. Similar entry made in the
khasra girdawari for the year 1967-68 was struck off
by the Kanugo after noticed that on the site, the
respondent was not in possession of the land.
Similar entry made in the khasra girdawari for the
year 1969-70 was also struck off by the Kanugo. It
is, thus, evident that the entry made in the year
Page 27 of 34

1966-67 was a collusive entry especially when no
form P.S. was issued and implemented as required
under the rules. Moreover, the halqa patwari seems
to have gone out of the way in manipulating the
revenue record in favour of the respondent once by
showing his possession over 1 bigha 16 biswas in
the khasra girdawari for the year 1969-70. It was
only the vigilance of the Kanugo which was
responsible for nullfying nefarious activities of the
patwari by way of bringing about the correct facts on
the revenue records for the subsequent fasals. I am
thus of the considered opinion that the respondent
has not succeeded in establishing his claim that he
was in possession of the land in dispute in the year
1966-67. In the subsequent khasra girdawaries the
adverse possession of the respondent has not been
shown in the remarks column.
...I am of the view that the witnesses produced by
him are not reliable. From the revenue records, it is
clearly established that the land in dispute forms
part of the Gaon Sabha property falling in Khasra
No.428/309. All the three witnesses produced by
the respondent have stated that the land in dispute
is not Gaon Sabha land. This shows that they are
denying the truth purposefully to help out the
respondent. Moreover, in the face of the revenue
records and the statement of revenue officials, oral
evidence, which can be easily managed by an
interest party has no value.”
As noted above, said order had attained finality in as

98.

much petitioner's revision petition failed before the Financial
Commissioner.
99.
A.

Following dates may be noted:
2.9.1973 ....... Kalandra filed under Section 145 Cr. P.C. as

Gaon Sabha and MCD alleged recent trespass by petitioner who
asserted possession prior to 1954.
B.

28.9.1973 ...... Land attached by the S.D.M.

C.

1973 (exact date non known) ..... Proceedings for ejectment of

petitioner initiated under Section 86A of the Delhi Land Reforms Act
1954.
D.

28.6.1974 .......

Decree for ejectment passed by the revenue

assistant.
E.

29.9.1974 ......

Assistant

Collector

affirmed

order

dated

Page 28 of 34

28.6.1974 passed by the revenue assistant.
F.

1975 (Date not known) .......

Financial Commissioner uphold

ejectment order.
G.

12.12.1975 ......... Petitioner filed a civil suit for declaration that

orders passed by the revenue authorities are without jurisdiction.
Decree for permanent injunction was prayed for.

Pendente lite

injunction was sought.
H.

Date not known ......

Ex-parte injunction granted was vacated

by learned sub-Judge.
I.

12.10.1978 ...... Possession restored to petitioner pursuant to

order dated 12.10.1978 passed by sub Judge Delhi on reference
made to him under Section 146 (1) Cr. P.C.
J.

6.6.1979 ....... Warrant of possession issued to implement the

ejectment order.
K.

4.8.1979 ........

Appeal against warrant of possession dated

6.6.1978 filed by petitioner dismissed by the Additional Collector.
....... However warrants could not be enforced due to interim
order obtained in the suit filed by petitioner.
L.

6.8.1980 ....... M.C.A. No.9/1980 filed by petitioner challenging

order passed by learned sub Judge Delhi, vacating interim injunction
dismissed.
M.

1980 ........ C.R.No. 1058/80 filed in this court challenging order

dated 6.8.1980. Ex-parte stay obtained.
N.

6.7.1988 ....... C.R.No.1058/80 dismissed.

O.

1989 ....... Petition for Special Leave to Appeal filed against

order dated 6.7.1988 and stay obtained.
P.

Date not known ..... Above reformed SLP dismissed as

withdrawn.
Q.

Date not known .......

Suit

for

declaration

and

injunction
Page 29 of 34

dismissed for default and not restored.
R.

1989 ......

Belated SLP No.398/89 filed challenging order

passed by the Financial Commission uphold ejectment order. Interim
stay obtained.
S.
100.

Date not known .....

SLC (C) No. 398/89 dismissed.

There is no need nor requirement to discuss the evidence

of possession between 1973 till 1995 for the reason petitioner
managed to retain the same under strength of interim orders passed
in various proceedings initiated by him.
101.

Evidence establishes a trespass in the year 1973.

Evidence of possession prior thereto has been held to be tainted and
in connivance with the patwari as per order dated 28.6.1974 passed
by the Revenue Assistant. Said order has attained finality. Petitioner
managed to retain possession under strength of interim orders.
Ejectment proceedings under the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 have
attained finality, but warrant of possession could not be executed as
petitioner had an interim stay in the suit.
been dismissed.

the said suit has since

The multifarious proceedings initiated by the

petitioner came to an end in the year 1995 and thereafter, M.C.D.
took possession.
102.

Petitioner cannot take advantage of his possession

between 1973 till 1995 as the same was on the strength of interim
orders attained from time to time in various proceedings.

As of

1973, his possession was unsettled because he was challenged the
moment he trespassed into the property. MCD could have resisted
the trespass by use of even reasonable force. Act of re-entry by MCD
would have been lawful. I repeat litigious possession cannot create
settled possession.
103.

Having lost the battle before the revenue authorities and
Page 30 of 34

civil suit being dismissed, albeit in default, petitioner has no case at
all. Ejectment order has attained finality.
104.

Civil Revision No.593/03 is accordingly dismissed.

105.

Though order impugned in C.R. No.698/2003 has to be

upheld. However, due to change in circumstances noted hereinafter,
the revision petition has to be allowed.
106.

By and under the impugned order dated 30.4.2003, suit

filed by the plaintiffs, impleaded as respondents in the revision
petition, has been decreed holding that they were in possession of
the suit property six months prior to the date of the suit being filed,
and were dispossessed therefrom by the petitioners without following
the due process of law.
107.

Bishambar Dayal, since deceased and now represented

by his wife and daughter, Suraj Prakash and Jijji joined as co plaintiffs
to seek a decree of possession against the petitioners. They pleaded
ownership of plot no.178, comprised in khasra no.256/4, in the
revenue estate of village Mandaoli. They pleaded that the plot was
situated in a colony called Chander Vihar.
land ad-measured 200 square yards.

According to them the

They further pleaded that

Bishambar Dayal had purchased 80 square yards of land and Suraj
Prakash and Jijji had purchased 60 square yards each.
108.

It may be noted at the outset that which part of the plot

comprising 80 square yards, 60 square yards and 60 square yards
respectively was purchased by them, was not stated.
109.

They stated that they were illegally dispossessed by the

defendants on 26.8.90.
110.

Defendants stated that the land comprised in plot no.178

ad-measured 180 square yards and belonged to one Sh. Bhagwat
Singh. They pleaded having purchased 90 square yards each from
Page 31 of 34

Sh. Bhagwat Singh. They further pleaded that Jijji was married to the
sister of the defendants and due to financial difficulties was allowed
to carry on dairy business from the land. They further pleaded that
on the death of their sister, Jijji remarried and voluntarily surrendered
possession of the property.
111.

In his deposition, Bishambar, examined as PW-1, stated

that he purchased 80 square yards of land from one Ramesh Chander
by and under the agreement to sell and a power of attorney, proved
as Ex. P-2 and P-1 respectively.

He stated that he rented out his

portion to plaintiff no.2 i.e. Suraj Prakash. He stated that Suraj and
Jijji were running a dairy from the land.
112.

Jijji appeared as PW-2 and stated that he and Suraj

Prakash purchased 60 square yards of land each vide agreement to
sell, power of attorney, receipt, affidavit and a will Ex.PW-2/1 to PW2/5. He stated that he was in possession of the entire plot.
113.

Suraj Prakash appeared as PW-5 and likewise proved title

documents in his favour namely will, power of attorney, agreement to
sell, affidavit and a receipt.
114.

Defendants examined themselves as their witness and

proved their title documents, namely general power of attorney,
agreement to sell and a receipt.
115.

Whereas

plaintiffs

led

evidence

pertaining

to

an

electricity connection obtained by them qua the suit land, defendants
led evidence pertaining to the house tax record maintained by the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi for the suit property.
116.

Learned Judge has correctly held that issue of title could

not be gone into in a suit under Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act.
117.

On the issue of possession, analyzing the evidence, a

finding has been returned in favour of the plaintiffs.
Page 32 of 34

118.

Dispute pertaining to title has to be got adjudicated at a

regular trial where the cause of action pleaded is the title. However,
the petition has to be allowed for the reason, vide CM No.3085/2006
which was disposed of on 10.10.2006, a settlement between the
petitioner i.e. defendants of the suit and respondents 2 & 3 i.e
plaintiffs 2 & 3 of the suit was recorded to the effect that
respondents 2 & 3 claim no right title or interest in the suit property.
119.

The effect of the compromise is that as of today,

petitioners would admittedly have a right title and interest in 120 out
of 200 square yards of land. This would include a possessory right.
As noted hereinabove, in his deposition, Bishambar, predecessor in
interest of respondents 1A and 1B admitted that Suraj Prakash was in
possession of the entire plot inasmuch as he stated that he had let
out his share of 80 square yards land comprised in the plot to Suraj
Prakash. As noted hereinabove, which part of land ad-measuring 80
square yards out of the total plot ad-measuring 120 square yards was
purchased by Bishambar was neither disclosed by him in his
testimony, nor the same can be segregated from the sale documents
relied upon by Bishambar.
120.

Ex. P-2, agreement to sell relied upon by Bishambar nor

any other document relied upon by him segregates 80 square yards
of land comprised in the plot in question, which as noted hereinabove
ad-measures 200 square yards.
121.

Since plaintiffs 2 and 3 have compromised the dispute

with the petitioners herein, qua them, the decree must suffer a
reversal.

Qua Bishambar, since 80 square yards of land allegedly

owned by him cannot be segregated as boundaries thereof have not
been determined, the decree cannot be severed. I may additionally
note that according to Bishambar, he had handed over possession of
Page 33 of 34

80 square yards land purchased by him to Suraj Prakash who
according to Bishambar was his tenant.

The effect of the

compromise between Suraj Prakash and Jijji on one side and the
petitioners on the other is that Suraj Prakash recognizes the
surrender of possession in favour of the petitioners.
122.

Qua Bishambar, it would thus be a case of a tenant

wrongfully handing over possession of the tenanted premises to a
third party. This would be the position if the stand of the Bishambar
qua ownership of 80 square yards land has to be accepted.
Therefore, Bishambar has to regain possession in a properly
constituted suit, taking into account the compromise between
plaintiffs 2 & 3 and the petitioners herein.
123.

CR. No. 698/2003 is accordingly allowed.

Impugned

judgment and decree dated 30.4.2003 passed by Ms. Illa Rawat, Civil
Judge, Delhi in suit no.117/2002 is set aside.
124.

There shall be no order as to costs in any of the revision

petition disposed of by this common order.
125.

Trial court record be returned.

April 17, 2004
mm

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 34 of 34

