IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.345/2007
#
!

Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd
........ Appellant
through:
Mr.L.K.Tyagi, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Nausad & Anr.
through:

........ Respondents
None.

RESERVED ON: 5.03.2008
%

DATE OF DECISION: 10.03.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Present appeal has been preferred by the insurance

company under Section 30 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923
challenging the award dated 12.07.07 passed by the Commissioner
Workmen’s Compensation, Delhi.
2.

By the impugned award, respondent no.1 Sh. Nausad

(hereinafter referred to as the workman) has been awarded a sum of
Rs.5,24,328/- as compensation along with interest @ 12% per annum.
3.

Admitted facts which are necessary to be noted are that

the workman was employed by the respondent no.2 Sh. Abdul as a
driver. On 01.07.04 while on duty and driving a tractor bearing no.UP17-A-5640 in respect whereof respondent no.2 had obtained an

FAO No.345/2007

Page 1 of 16

insurance cover, the workman sustained multiple injuries due to a road
accident. As a result the left hand of the workman above the wrist had
to be amputated. The workman was aged 24 years at the time of the
accident and his last drawn wages were Rs.4,000/- per month.
4.

Workman filed a claim petition before the Commissioner

Workmen’s Compensation, Delhi claiming compensation.

Appellant

was impleaded as a respondent being the insurer of the tractor.
5.

Medical Board, Bhagpat, U.P. assessed the disability

suffered by the workman at 65% in relation to the whole body.
However noting the avocation of the workman, injury suffered by him
and effect of the injury on the ability of the workman to perform in his
avocation, the Commissioner Workmen’s Compensation had treated
the disability suffered by the workman at 100% i.e total disability.
6.

Insurance company has challenged the award limited to

the extent claiming that the disability suffered by the workman was
‘permanent partial disablement’ and therefore the compensation
payable to the workman had to be determined with reference to
Section 4(1)(c) read with Schedule I of the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, 1923.
7.

Before noting the arguments advanced by the learned

counsel for the insurance company it is relevant to have a look at the
scheme of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923.
8.

Chapter II of the Act deals with Workmen's Compensation.

Section 3 provides that if personal injury is caused to a workman by
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, his

FAO No.345/2007

Page 2 of 16

employer shall be liable to pay compensation in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter II. Section 4 provides as to how compensation
should be determined where the injuries have resulted in: (i) death; (ii)
permanent total disablement; (iii) permanent partial disablement,
specified in Part II of Schedule I to the Act; (iv) permanent partial
disablement not specified in Schedule I to the Act; and (v) temporary
disablement. Provisions of Section 4 as are relevant for determination
of the present case are being extracted hereinunder:
4.
Amount of compensation.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this
Act, the amount of compensation shall be as follows, namely:(a)

xxxx xxxx

(b)

Where permanent total
disablement results from
the injury

an amount equal to [sixty per cent]
of the monthly wages of the injured
workman multiplied by the relevant
factor;
or
an amount of [ninety thousand
rupees] whichever is more;

Explanation I.For the purposes of clause (a) and clause (b)
“relevant factor” in relation to a workman means the factor specified in
the second column, of Schedule IV against the entry in the first column
of that Schedule specifying the number of years which are the same as
the completed years of the age of the workman on his last birthday
immediately preceding the date on which the compensation fell due.
Explanation II.Where the monthly wages of a workman exceed
[four thousand rupees], his monthly wages for the purposes of clause
(a) and clause (b) shall be deemed to be [four thousand rupees] only;
(c)

Where permanent
partial disablement
result from the injury

FAO No.345/2007

(i)

in the case of an injury
specified in Part II of
Schedule I, such percentage
of the compensation which
would have been payable in
the case of permanent total
disablement as is specified
therein as being the
percentage of the loss of

Page 3 of 16

earning capacity caused by
that injury; and
(ii)

in the case of an injury not
specified in Schedule I, such
percentage of the
compensation payable in the
case of permanent total
disablement as is
proportionate to the loss of
earning capacity (as
assessed by the qualified
medical practitioner)1
permanently caused by the
injury;

Explanation I.Where more injuries than one are caused by the
same accident, the amount of compensation payable under this head
shall be aggregated but not so in any case as to exceed the amount
which would have been payable if permanent total disablement had
resulted from the injuries.
Explanation II.In assessing the loss of earning capacity for the
purpose of sub-clause (ii), the qualified medical practitioner shall have
due regard to the percentages of loss of earning capacity in relation to
different injuries specified in Schedule I;”
9.

Three types of disabilities are provided under Section 4 i.e.

permanent total disablement, permanent partial disablement and
temporary disablement.
10.

Temporary disablement is dealt with in Section 4(1)(d) and

needs no elaboration as irrespective of whether such disablement is
total or partial, the compensation is the same as per the formula
specified in the Act.
11.

Section 2(1)(l) defines ‘total disablement’ as under:“'total disablement' means such disablement, whether of
a temporary or permanent nature, as incapacitates a
workman for all work which he was capable of performing
at the time of the accident resulting in such disablement;

1 The words “(as assessed by the qualified medical practitioner)” were inserted in Section 4 (1) (c)
(ii) by Act 22 of 1984

FAO No.345/2007

Page 4 of 16

Provided that permanent total disablement shall be
deemed to result from every injury specified in Part I of
Schedule I or from any combination of injuries specified in
Part II thereof where the aggregate combination of the loss
of earning capacity, as specified in the said Part II against
those injuries, amounts to one hundred per cent or more.”
12.

Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of Section 4 deals with

determination
disablement

of

compensation

resulting

from

in

cases

employment

of

injury.

permanent
What

is

total
to

be

determined under Section 4(1)(b) is whether the injuries suffered by
the workman have in fact resulted in permanent total disablement or
not. There is no need to decide the percentage of loss of earning
capacity as a consequence of such permanent total disablement. It is
assumed that the loss of earning capacity is 100% when there is
permanent total disablement. Clause (b) of Section 4(1) does not
contemplate any assessment by a Qualified Medical Practitioner.
13.

Section 2(1)(g) defines ‘partial disablement’ as under: “'partial disablement' means, where the disablement is
of a temporary nature, such disablement as reduces the
earning capacity of a workman in any employment in
which he was engaged at the time of the accident
resulting in the disablement, and, where the disablement
is of a permanent nature, such disablement as reduces his
earning capacity in every employment which he was
capable of undertaking at that time;
Provided that every injury specified in Part II of Schedule I
shall be deemed to result in permanent partial
disablement". (Underlining emphasized)

14.

Clause (c) of Section 4(1) deals with determination of

compensation in cases of permanent partial disablement. Recourse to
Section

4(1)(c)

compensation

FAO No.345/2007

is

warranted either

alleging

that

when the workman claims

employment

injury

has

resulted

in

Page 5 of 16

permanent partial disablement or when the Commissioner does not
accept a claim of permanent total disablement and decides that the
disablement is only partial. Clause (c) makes a distinction between the
extent of physical disability and the extent of loss of earning capacity.
In the case of permanent partial disablement, the compensation
depends not on the extent of permanent partial disablement, but on
the loss of earning capacity resulting from such permanent partial
disablement.

Where

the

injuries

resulting

in

permanent

partial

disablement are those specified in Part II of Schedule I, then the
percentage of loss of earning capacity is as specified in the said
schedule. Where permanent partial disablement has arisen from
injuries which are not specified in Part II of Schedule I, then the
percentage of loss of earning capacity resulting therefrom has to be
determined by the Commissioner on the basis of the assessment made
by the Qualified Medical Practitioner.
15.

First argument advanced by the learned counsel for the

insurance

company

was

that

the

Commissioner

Workmen’s

Compensation erred in assessing disability suffered by the workman on
the basis of his avocation. According to the learned counsel, the words
‘as incapacitates a workman for all work which he was capable of
performing at the time of the accident resulting in such disablement’
employed in the Section 2(1)(l) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act
make it clear that in order to determine whether an injury results in
total disablement, whether of a temporary or permanent nature, all the
work which he was capable of performing at the time of the accident is

FAO No.345/2007

Page 6 of 16

to be seen and not only the work which we was performing at the time
of the accident. Reliance was placed upon the judgment of the Full
Bench of the Karnataka High Court in the decision reported as
Shivalinga Shivanagowda Patil v Erappa Bassapa Bhavihala 2004 ACJ
333.
16.

Learned counsel for the insurance company next argued

that since the injury suffered by the workman falls in Part II of the
Schedule I to the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 the disability
suffered by the workman must be held to be ‘permanent partial
disablement’ as provided in the proviso to the Section 2(1)(g) of the
Workmen’s Compensation Act and compensation payable to the
workman had to be determined as per Section 4(1)(c)(i) of the
Workmen’s Compensation Act.
17.

Learned counsel for the insurance company lastly argued

that even if the injury suffered by the workman is taken to be an
unscheduled injury the compensation payable to the workman had to
be

determined

as

per

Section

4(1)(c)(ii)

of

the

Workmen’s

Compensation Act and the disability certificate issued by the Medical
Board.
18.

The first question i.e. whether disablement has to be

assessed with reference to the work which the workman was
performing at the time of the accident, or with reference to his capacity
to do any other work after he has sustained the disability, in my
opinion stands answered by their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court.

FAO No.345/2007

Page 7 of 16

19.

In the decision reported as Pratap Narain Singh v

Shrinivas AIR 1976 SC 222 it was held as under:“4. It has not been disputed before us that the injury in
question was caused to the respondent by an accident
which arose out of and in the course of his employment
with the appellant. It is also not in dispute that the injury
resulted in amputation of his left arm at the elbow. It has
however been argued that the injury did not result in
permanent total disablement of the respondent, and that
the Commissioner committed a gross error of law in taking
that view as there was only partial disablement within the
meaning of Section 2(1)(g) of the Act which should have
been deemed to have resulted in permanent partial
disablement of the nature referred to in item 3 of Part II of
Schedule I of the Act. This argument has been advanced on
the ground that the amputation was from 8" from tip of
acromion and less than 41/2" below tip of olecranon. As
will appear, there is no force in this argument.
5. The expression "total disablement" has been defined in
Section 2(i)(1) of the Act as follows:
“(1) XXX”
It has not been disputed before us that the injury was of
such a nature as to cause permanent disablement to the
respondent, and the question for consideration is whether
the disablement incapacitated the respondent for all work
which he was capable of performing at the time of the
accident. The Commissioner has examined the question
and recorded his finding as follows:
“The injured workmen in this case is carpenter
by profession…….By loss of the left hand
above the elbow, he has evidently been
rendered unfit for the work of carpenter as he
work of carpentry cannot be done by one
hand only.”
This is obviously a reasonable and correct finding. Counsel
for the appellant has not been able to assail it on any
ground and it does not require to be corrected in this
appeal. There is also no justification for the other argument
which has been advanced with reference to item 3 of Part II
of Schedule I, because it was not the appellant's case
before the Commissioner that amputation of the arm was
from 8" from tip of acromion to less than 41/2" below the
tip of olecranon. A new case cannot therefore be allowed to
be set up on facts which have not been admitted or
established.” (Underlining emphasized).

FAO No.345/2007

Page 8 of 16

20.

The Hon’ble Supreme Court has made it crystal clear that

whether a workman suffered total disablement or not has to be
assessed with reference to the work which the workman was
performing at the time of the accident and not with reference to his
capacity to do any other work after he has sustained the disability. If a
workman becomes incapable of performing duties which he was
engaged to perform before the accident, there is total disablement as
far as the workman is concerned and the mere fact that he may be
capable of performing some other work is totally irrelevant.
21.

The afore-noted ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in

Pratap Narain's case (supra) was followed in under-noted judgments:I

K.P. Hanumantha Gowda & Anr v Devaraju & Anr 1996 ACJ

1253.
II

National Insurance Company v Mohd. Saleem Khan & Anr

1992 II LLJ 377(AP).
III

Punambhai Khodabhai v G. Kennel Construction 1985 1 LLJ

98 (Guj).
22.

In para 25 of the Shivalinga's case (supra) relied upon by

learned counsel for the appellant it was observed as under:“25(iii) Determination of the loss of earning capacity has to
be with reference to "all the work" which the workman was
capable of performing at the time of the accident resulting
in such disablement and not with reference to the work
which the workman was performing at the time of the
accident. However, this is subject to the condition that in
case the workman establishes by acceptable evidence that
after the injury not only he is not able to do the work which
he was performing before the accident but he is not able to
do any other work, the loss of earning capacity could be
assessed on the basis of such evidence.”

FAO No.345/2007

Page 9 of 16

23.

A perusal of the Shivalinga's case (supra) shows that in

para 19 the judgment of the Supreme Court in Pratap Narain's case
(supra) was noted.
24.

Para 11.5 of the Shivalinga's case (supra) reads as under:“The Supreme Court in the case of Amar Nath Singh v
Continental Construction Ltd, 2001 ACJ 643(SC), while
referring to Pratap Narain Singh Deo v Srinivas Sabata,
1976 ACJ 141 (SC), held that the decision turned on its own
facts and, therefore, the principles therein cannot be
extended to the present case”.

25.
Relevant part of para 20 of the Shivalinga's case (supra)
reads as under:“The cases relied upon are not applicable as the Apex
Court has nowhere said that the Commissioner has no
jurisdiction. As discussed, strictly speaking, all the
aforesaid decisions were rendered on facts and no law as
such has been laid down.......”
26.

Probably in coming to the conclusion that no law has been

laid down by the Supreme Court in Pratap Narain's case (supra) Full
Bench of the Karnataka High Court has been influenced by the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Amar Nath's case (supra).
27.

In Amar Nath's case (supra) appellant who had lost his left

eye made a claim as having lost his complete vision in that eye but
medically it was assessed that loss of vision was only 80%. Noting Item
no.4 in Part I of Schedule I Commissioner Workmen's Compensation
assessed the disability suffered by the appellant as 100%. On an
appeal noting Item no.26 in Part II of Schedule I the High Court reduced
the disability suffered by the appellant to 30%. The Hon'ble Supreme
Court noted that the appellant had himself claimed that he was fit for
work and that there was evidence disclosing the same. Thus there was

FAO No.345/2007

Page 10 of 16

a categorical finding that the avocation/job/work which the appellant
was performing before the accident was not effected because of the
disability suffered by him. The ethos of Pratap Narain's case (supra)
was the effect of the disability suffered by a workman on the
avocation/job/work performed by him before the accident. In such
circumstances it was held that Pratap Narain's case (supra) was based
on its own facts.
28.

In

Amar

Nathi's

case

(supra)

the

Supreme

Court

distinguished its earlier decision in Pratap Narain's case and did not
hold that no ratio emerges from the said case.
29.

With all due respect I differ with the decision of the Full

Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Shivalinga's case (supra) as it has
not examined Pratap Narain's case in its correct perspective.
30.

I further note that interpreting the words 'all work which he

was capable of performing at the time of the accident” as referring to
something other than the job or work which a workman was doing at
the time of the accident would lead to strange results. Take for
instance, a driver who has completed his secondary education
becomes a paraplegic on account of injuries sustained by him in an
accident may still be able to move around in a wheel chair and be
capable of doing some work that could be done with his hands such as,
he may be able to work as a clerk or proof reader or even packer in a
factory. Does that mean that employment injury making him a
paraplegic is not total but partial disablement? Even blind persons are
gainfully employed nowadays. If capacity to do “any work” should be
the test, there can be no total disablement at all, in most cases.

FAO No.345/2007

Page 11 of 16

31.

The Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 is a social welfare

legislation enacted for the interest of the workman. It is settled law that
if any particular provision of the Act is capable of two interpretations,
that which is more favorable to the person for whose benefit the
legislature in its wisdom has legislated it, has to be adopted.
32.

In view of the above discussion and particularly in the light

of decision of the Supreme Court in Pratap Narain's case (supra) I find
no merits in the first argument advanced by the learned counsel for the
insurance company.
33.

Second argument advanced by the learned counsel for the

insurance company is that the combined effect of proviso to Section
2(1)(g) and Part II of Schedule I is that the injuries enumerated under
Part II of Schedule I have to be taken as resulting in 'permanent partial
disablement' and therefore compensation has to be determined with
reference to Section 4(1)(c)(i) and percentage of loss of earning
capacity as provided under Part II of Schedule I.
34.

Item no.4 of Part II of Schedule I reads as under:“Loss of hand or of the thumb and four fingers of one hand
or amputation from 11.43 cms below the tip of olecranon”.

35.

Percentage of loss of earning capacity for injuries falling

under Item no.4 is provided as 60%.
36.

In the instant case workman has suffered amputation of his

left hand above the wrist. Therefore, the injury suffered by him falls in
Item no.4 of Part II of Schedule I.
37.

Even if for sake of arguments it is accepted that the

combined effect of proviso to Section 2(1)(g) and Part II of Schedule I is

FAO No.345/2007

Page 12 of 16

that the injuries enumerated under Part II of Schedule I have to be
taken as resulting in 'permanent partial disablement', the question is
whether

the

Commissioner's

Workmen

Compensation

while

determining loss of earning capacity is bound by the percentage of loss
of earning capacity provided under Part II of Schedule I or he can go
beyond the Schedule to determine the loss of earning capacity.
38.

The answer to afore-noted question is to be found in under-

noted judgments:I

Siddappa v General Manager,KSRTC ILR 1988 Kar 136:- In

said case, a driver had suffered an injury which incapacitated him from
driving. The Commissioner found that the injury was one falling under
Part II of Schedule I and accordingly assessed the permanent partial
disablement as 60%. The workman contended before this Court that
even in regard to an injury suffered by workman specified in Part II of
Schedule-I, having regard to the nature of the job in which he was
employed, there was permanent total disablement. It was held that on
proving such permanent total disablement, notwithstanding the fact
that the injury suffered by a workman is one of those specified in Part II
of Schedule I, he would be entitled to the compensation on the basis of
total disablement.
II

National Insurance Company Ltd v Vishnu & Anr ILR 1991

Kar 2406:- In said case, a driver suffered injury in a motor accident
resulting in amputation of left leg below the knee. There was no
dispute that workman became totally disabled for continuing in his
employment as driver. The said injury was described as Item 20 in Part
II of Schedule I for which the percentage of loss of earning capacity to

FAO No.345/2007

Page 13 of 16

the said injury is specified as 50%. The question that was considered
was, whether the workman was entitled to plead and prove that he had
suffered a higher percentage of disability or total disability or whether
the loss of earning capacity should be restricted to 50% mentioned
against Entry 20 in Part II of Schedule I. The Court held that the
question as to whether a particular workman had suffered partial
disablement or total disablement should depend upon the nature of
employment. It was further held that in respect of cases specified in
part II of Schedule I, percentage of loss of earning capacity as specified
therein should be accepted and compensation should be awarded on
that basis where there was no proof to the contrary, but the workman
is not barred from proving that he has suffered a higher percentage of
loss of earning capacity.
III

New India Assurance Company Ltd v Subhas 2005 ACJ

479:- In said case, while examining Section 4(1)(c) of the Workmen's
Compensation Act, 1923 it was held that where the injuries resulting in
the permanent partial disablement are those specified in Part II of
Schedule I, then the percentage of loss of earning capacity is as
specified in the said schedule. But, it is open to the workman, to
establish by evidence, a higher percentage of loss of earning capacity,
than what is specified in the said schedule.
IV

Shivalinga Shivanagowda Patil & Ors v Erappa Bassapa

Bhavihala & Ors 2004 ACJ 33:- In said case, it was held that even if the
injury complained falls within Part II of Schedule I if evidence is
adduced to show that such an injury has resulted in permanent total
disablement, it is open to the Commissioner to consider the loss of

FAO No.345/2007

Page 14 of 16

earning capacity and to hold that notwithstanding what is contained in
Part II of Schedule I, the injury in question has resulted in permanent
total disablement.
39.

In the instant case, admittedly the workman was employed

as a driver and he suffered amputation of his left hand. It cannot be
disputed that it is impossible to drive a vehicle with one hand only.
40.

Noting the judgments referred in para 38 above, the

disability suffered by the workman and his avocation, I can safely hold
that notwithstanding Part II of Schedule I the loss of earning capacity
suffered by the workman is 100%.
41.

In case the compensation is re-calculated as per Section

4(1)(c)(i) and the percentage of loss of earning capacity is taken at
100% the compensation payable would again come to Rs.5,24,328/-.
Therefore second argument advanced by the learned counsel for the
insurance company is of no consequence.
42.

Last argument advanced by the learned counsel for the

insurance company that compensation had to be determined with
reference to the Section 4(1)(c)(ii) and the disability certificate issued
by the Medical Board. Much emphasis was placed by the counsel on
the fact that in the year 1984 Section 4(1)(c)(ii) was amended and that
the decision in Pratap Narain's case was rendered by the Supreme
Court prior to the amendment of Section 4(1)(c)(ii).
43.

As regards the said argument suffice would it be to note

that Section 4(1)(c)(ii) applies only in case of unscheduled injuries. As
already noted injury suffered by the workman is a scheduled injury,
therefore Section 4(1)(c)(ii) has no application whatsoever to the

FAO No.345/2007

Page 15 of 16

present case.
44.

In view of above discussion I find no infirmity in the

impugned award dated 12.07.07.
45.

The appeal is dismissed.

46.

Award dated 12.07.07 passed by the Commissioner

Workmen's Compensation is affirmed.
47.

No costs.

March 10, 2008
sl

FAO No.345/2007

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page 16 of 16

