*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.268/2004
The New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
through:
Mr.Aditya Arora, Adv.

........

Appellant

VERSUS
Smt. Momina Khatum & Ors.
........ Respondents
through:
Ms.Pratima N. Chauhan
for respondents No.1 to 7.
RESERVED ON : 13.03.2008
DATE OF DECISION
19.03.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The present appeal has been preferred by the Insurance

Company under Section 30 of the Workmen's Compensation Act
1923 challenging the award dated 09.06.2004 passed by the
Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation, Delhi.
2.

Vide impugned award respondent Nos.1 to 7 (hereinafter

referred to as the dependents) have been awarded a sum of
Rs.1,98,060/- as compensation along with interest @12% per annum
from the date of the accident.
3.

Two points have been urged in the present appeal. The

FAO No.268/2004

Page 1 of 13

first

point

urged

Compensation

was

is

whether

justified

in

the

Commissioner,

entertaining

the

Workmen
claim

for

compensation instituted by respondents No.1 to 7 in light of the fact
that they did not serve upon the employer the notice of accident as
required under Section 10 of the Workmen's Compensation Act
1923. Second point urged is that whether the Insurance Company is
liable to pay interest and if yes, from what date.
4.

The relevant facts are that Mr.Jafar Ali (hereinafter

referred to as the deceased), the husband of respondent No.1 and
the father of respondents No.2 to 7 was employed by respondent
No.8 Mr.Kuljeet Singh as a driver. On 10.7.2000, while on duty, and
driving

a

truck

bearing

No.DL-1GA-0033

in

respect

whereof

respondent No.8 had obtained an insurance cover, the deceased
died at a road accident.
5.

The legal heirs of the deceased filed a claim petition

before the Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation against the
respondent No.8 and the appellant claiming compensation from
them.
6.

Respondent No.8 admitted that the deceased was

employed as a driver by him and had died at a road accident while
driving a truck owned by him.

The appellant insurance company

admitted its liability as the insurer of the truck.
7.

The Commissioner, Workmen Compensation had taken

the age of the deceased and his last drawn salary as 35 years and
Rs.2,000/- per month respectively.
FAO No.268/2004

Page 2 of 13

8.

Considering the admitted facts, the Commissioner,

Workmen Compensation has applied the relevant factors as per
Schedule IV to Section 4 of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923.
So applying Rs.1,98,060/- has been held payable as compensation
to the dependents.

As already noted, interest @12% per annum

from the date of the accident is also awarded.
9.

As regards the first contention urged by the learned

counsel for the insurance company it is relevant to note the Section
10 of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923 which reads as under:“Section 10 - Notice and claim
(1)No claim for compensation shall be entertained by
a Commissioner unless notice of the accident has
been given in the manner hereinafter provided as
soon as practicable after the happening thereof and
unless the claim is preferred before him within two
years of the occurrence of the accident or in case of
death within two years from the date of death:
Provided that where the accident is the contracting of
a disease in respect of which the provisions of subsection (2) of section 3 are applicable the accident
shall be deemed to have occurred on the first of the
days during which the workman was continuously
absent from work in consequence of the disablement
caused by the disease:
Provided further that in case of partial disablement
due to the contracting of any such disease and which
does not force the workman to absent himself from
work the period of two years shall be counted from
the day the workman gives notice of the disablement
to his employer:
Provided further that if a workman who, having been
employed in an employment for a continuous period,

FAO No.268/2004

Page 3 of 13

specified under sub-section (2) of section 3 in respect
of that employment, ceases to be so employed and
develops symptoms of an occupational disease
peculiar to that employment within two years of the
cessation of employment, the accident shall be
deemed to have occurred on the day on which the
symptoms were first detected:
Provided further that the want of or any defect or
irregularity in a notice shall not be a bar to the entertainment of a claim(a) if the claim is preferred in respect of the death of
a workman resulting from an accident which occurred
on the premises of the employer, or at any place
where the workman at the time of the accident was
working under the control of the employer or of any
person employed by him, and the workman died on
such premises or at such place, or on any premises
belonging to the employer, or died without having left
the vicinity of the premises or place were the accident
occurred, or
(b) if the employer or any one of several employers
or any person responsible to the employer for the
management of any branch of the trade or business
in which the injured workman was employed had
knowledge of the accident from any other source at
or about the time when it occurred:
Provided further that the Commissioner may entertain
and decide any claim to compensation in any case
notwithstanding that the notice has not been given,
or the claim has not been preferred, in due time as
provided in this subsection, if he is satisfied that the
failure so to give the notice or prefer the claim, as the
case may be, was due to sufficient cause.
(2) Every such notice shall give the name and
address of the person injured and shall state in
ordinary language the cause of the injury and the
date on which the accident happened, and shall be
served on the employer or upon any one of several

FAO No.268/2004

Page 4 of 13

employers, or upon any person responsible to the
employer for the management of any branch of the
trade or business in which the injured workman was
employed.
(3) The State Government may require that any
prescribed class of employers shall maintain at these
premises at which workmen are employed a notice
book, in the prescribed form, which shall be readily
accessible at all reasonable times to any injured
workman employed on the premises and to any
person acting bona fide on his behalf.
(4) A notice under this section may be served by
delivering it at, or sending it by registered post
addressed to, the residence or any office or place of
business of the person on whom it is to be served, or,
where a notice book is maintained, by entry in the
notice book.”
10.

A reading of Section 10(1) together with Clause (b) of

fourth proviso makes it clear that failure of the injured workman or
dependents of the deceased workman as the case may be to serve
a notice of the accident upon the employer is not fatal to the claim
for compensation preferred by the workman or dependents if the
employer has the knowledge of the factum of the accident.
11.

At this juncture, it is most important to note the letter

dated 11.7.2000 (the next date after the accident) Ex.AW-1/3
written by the employer of the deceased Mr.Kuljeet Singh and
addressed to SHO, PS Kodrama.
12.

In the afore-noted letter the employer has informed

regarding the accident of his truck bearing No.DL-1GA-0033 on
10.7.20007 and death of the deceased in the said accident.
13.

In view of the letter dated 11.7.2000 Ex.AW-1/3 it is

FAO No.268/2004

Page 5 of 13

clear that the employer of the deceased had knowledge of the
factum of the accident as also the death of the deceased in the said
accident.
14.

In such circumstances Clause (b) of fourth proviso to

Section

10(1)

is

attracted

and

therefore

the

Commissioner,

Workmen Compensation was justified in entertaining claim for
compensation

filed

by

the

dependents

of

the

deceased

notwithstanding that the dependents did not serve a notice of the
accident upon the employer of the deceased.
15.

As regards next contention it is urged by the learned

counsel for the insurance company that in view of the decisions of
the Supreme Court reported as P.J.Narayan vs. Union of India & Ors.
2004 ACJ 52 and New India Assurance Co. Ltd. vs. Harshadbhai
Amrutbhai Modhiya & Anr. AIR 2006 SC 1926 the insurance
company is not liable to pay the interest awarded by the
Commissioner, Workmen Compensation.
16.

The said contention advanced by learned counsel for the

insurance company has to be adjudicated with reference to Section
4-A of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923 which reads as
under:“4A. Compensation to be paid when due and penalty
for default.-(1) Compensation under Section 4 shall be
paid as soon as it falls due.
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept the
liability for compensation to the extent claimed, he shall be
bound to make provisional payment based on the extent of
liability which he accepts, and, such payment shall be
deposited with the Commissioner or made to the workman,
FAO No.268/2004

Page 6 of 13

as the case may be, without prejudice to the right of the
workman to make any further claim.
(3) where any employer is in default in paying the
compensation due under this Act within one month from
the date it fell due, the Commissioner shall(a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to the
amount of the arrears, pay simple interest thereon at
the rate of twelve per cent per annum or at such
higher rate not exceeding the maximum of the
lending rates of any scheduled bank as may be
specified by the Central Government, by notification
in the Official Gazette, on the amount due; and
(b) if, in his opinion, there is no justification for the
delay, direct that the employer shall, in addition to
the amount of the arrears and interest thereon, pay a
further sum not exceeding fifty per cent of such
amount by way of penalty:
PROVIDED that an order for the payment of penalty shall
not be passed under Clause (b) without giving a reasonable
opportunity to the employer to show cause why it should
not be passed.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section,
"scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being
included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).
(3A) The interest and the penalty payable under subsection (3) shall be paid to the workman or his dependant,
as the case may be.”
17.

In the decision reported as Ved Prakash Garg v Premi

Devi & Ors. 1998 (1) ACJ 1 a question arose before the Hon'ble
Supreme Court whether the phrase “liability arising under the
Workmen's Compensation Act” as employed by the proviso to subsection (1) of Section 147 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and as
found under the proviso to clause (i) of sub-section (1) of Section II
of the Insurance Policy would cover only the principal amount of
compensation as computed by the Workmen's Commissioner or
FAO No.268/2004

Page 7 of 13

whether it can also include interest and penalty as imposed on the
insured employer under contingencies contemplated by Section
4A(3)(a) and (b) of the Workmen's Compensation Act.
18.

After

examining the entire scheme of the Workmen's

Compensation Act, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that:I.

Payment of interest and penalty are two distinct
liabilities arising under the Workmen Compensation Act.

II.

Penalty is not a part and parcel of the legal liability of
the employer to compensate his employee and since the
insurer is under contractual obligation to indemnify the
employer for his legal liability the insurer is not liable to
pay the penalty.

III.

Liability to pay interest is part and parcel of legal liability
of the employer to pay compensation upon default of
payment of that amount within one month. Therefore,
claim for compensation payable under the Workmen's
Compensation Act along with interest thereon will have
to be made good by the Insurance Company jointly with
the insured employer.

19.

In the 2 decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for

the insurance company the Supreme Court has held that if there is a
clause in the insurance policy that the insurance company would not
take on the liability for the interest then alone the insurance
company is not liable to pay the interest.
20.

This aspect of the matter was considered by the Hon'ble

FAO No.268/2004

Page 8 of 13

Supreme Court in Ved Prakash's case (supra).
21.

In Ved Prakash's case (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme

Court noted the decision of the Karnataka High Court reported as
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Raju 1994 ACJ 191 wherein a Bench
of 2 learned Judges of the Karnataka High Court after noting the
express terms of the insurance policy in that case took the view that
the policy did not extend to indemnify the insured in respect of any
interest and/or penalty which may be imposed on the insured on
account of his failure to comply with the requirement of the
Workmen's Compensation Act.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court noted

that there was an express exclusion clause qua the liability of the
interest under the insurance policy and therefore the Karnataka
High Court rightly came to the conclusion on the facts of that case
that

liability

arising

under

Section

4-A

of

the

Workmen's

Compensation Act to pay interest on the principal amount as
imposed upon the insured was not required to be met by the
insurance company.
22.

A focussed analysis of the judgment in Ved Prakash's

case (supra) makes it clear that the Hon'ble Supreme Court made a
distinction when there is no clause in the policy excluding the
liability of the insurance company to pay interest vis-a-vis a policy
which excludes the payment of interest by the insurance company.
23.

In the former case the insurance company is liable to

pay the interest as awarded by the Commissioner, Workmen's
Compensation while in the latter case it is not liable to indemnify
FAO No.268/2004

Page 9 of 13

the the insured in respect of the interest as awarded by the
Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation.
24.

In the instant case, in light of the law laid down by the

Supreme Court in Ved Prakash's case (supra) and the categorical
finding by the Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation that the
insurance company has failed to bring on record any clause in the
policy which exonerated it from the payment of the interest, I find
no infirmity in the decision of the Commissioner, Workmen
Compensation in directing the insurance company to pay interest
@12% per annum to the dependents.
25.

Lastly, learned counsel for the insurance company

contended that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court
reported as National Insurance Company Ltd. vs. Mubasir Ahmed &
Anr.

2007

(2)

Scale

455,

the

Commissioner,

Workmen's

Compensation should have awarded interest only from the date of
the adjudication of claim and not from the date of the accident.
26.

Section 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923

deals with 'employer's liability for compensation'.
27.

Section 4 of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923

deals with 'amount of compensation'.
28.

Section 4-A of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923

deals with the time for payment of compensation as computed
under

Section

4.

Sub-section

1

thereof

mandates

that

compensation shall be paid as soon as it falls due. Sub-section 2
contemplates a situation wherein the employer though accepting his
FAO No.268/2004

Page 10 of 13

liability to pay compensation to his workman disputes the extent of
claim of compensation and in such case sub-section 2 enjoins him to
make provisional payment based on the extent of accepted liability
by depositing it with the Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation
or paying it directly to the workman.
29.

In case where provisional payment has to be made by

the insured employer as per Section 4-A(2) of the Workmen's
Compensation Act then the one month period contemplated under
Section 4-A(3) would start running from the date such provisional
payment becomes due.
30.

But, in cases where the employer totally disputes his

liability to pay on the grounds like the injured person being not his
employee or that the accident was caused to him at a time when he
was not in the course of employment or that the accident caused to
him did not arise out of his employment then Section 4-A(2) would
not get attracted and one month's period would start running from
the date on which due compensation payable by the employer is
adjudicated upon by the Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation.
31.

In Ved Prakash's case (supra) after noting the afore-

noted 2 situations the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that in either
case

the

Commissioner,

Workmen's

Compensation

would

be

justified in directing payment of interest not only from the date of
the award but also from the date of the accident concerned.
32.

Therefore a discretion has been vested in Commissioner,

Workmen's Compensation with regard to the date of the payment of
FAO No.268/2004

Page 11 of 13

the interest which he has to exercise judiciously keeping in mind the
nature of the dispute raised by the employer. If a bona fide dispute
is

raised

by

Compensation

the

employer

should

award

then

Commissioner,

interest

from

the

Workmen's

date

of

the

adjudication of the claim. But where a wholly frivolous dispute was
raised

by

the

employer

then

Commissioner,

Workmen's

Compensation should award interest from the date of the accident.
33.

In Mubasir's case (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court

dealt with the specific situation where a workman suffers from an
injury resulting in permanent partial disablement and the injury is
not specified in Schedule I to the Section 4 of the Workmen's
Compensation Act 1923. In such a case, loss of earning capacity
suffered by the workman has to quantified by a qualified medical
practitioner and on the basis of which compensation payable to the
workman is to be computed. Noting that in such cases employer
would not be in a position to either admit or pay compensation
unless loss of earning capacity is quantified by a qualified medical
practitioner,

the

Hon'ble

Supreme

Court

has

held

that

the

compensation becomes due on the date of the adjudication of the
claim.
34.

This decision has no application in cases where a

workman

dies

or

suffers

from

an

injury

resulting

in

total

disablement, permanent partial disablement (injury specified in
Schedule-I) and temporary disablement as a result of an accident
arising out of and in course of his employment because in said cases
FAO No.268/2004

Page 12 of 13

computation of the compensation is based on a formula on
determined indices.
35.

Since the instant case is a case of death of workman the

Commissioner, Workmen's Compensation was justified in awarding
interest from the date of the accident.
36.

I find no merits in the instant appeal.

The same is

dismissed.
37.

The impugned award dated 09.06.2004 is affirmed.

38.

Costs shall follow.

March 19, 2008
d.k.

FAO No.268/2004

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 13 of 13

