*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.180/1996
M/s. Chuni Lal Rajnish Kumar
........ Appellant
through:
Mr. M.L.Bhargava, Advocate
VERSUS
UOI
through:

........ Respondent
Kumar Rajesh Singh, Advocate
DATE OF DECISION:
23.4.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2.

The decision in the instant appeal turns on only one

document, Ex.R-1, i.e. the forwarding note.
3.

Vide impugned order dated 31.1.1996 the Railway

Claim Tribunal has dismissed the claim application. Pertaining
to Ex.R-1 the findings of the Tribunal are as under:“In the light of rival contentions of the parties, the
important question that arises for consideration in
this case is whether the consignment booked for
carriage under the RR, in question, consisted of
gram and jawar mixed as contended by the
respondent or it consisted only of gram as
FAO 180/96

page 1 of 6

contended by the applicant. The respondent has
produced the original Forwarding Note which is
marked as Ex.R-1. The various columns in the first
page of the Forwarding Note were filled by the
sender or his agent as required by Sec.58 of the
Indian Railways Act and Rule 22 (1) of the Goods
Tariff Rules on 1.5.88 and he has put his signature
at the bottom of the first page of the forwarding
note. Against the column 'Description and private
marks', it is specifically mentioned gram and jawar.
The said entry made in Ex.R1 and signed by the
sender's agent supports the contention of the
respondent that what was booked for carriage
under RR, in question, was gram and jawar mixed.
The contention on behalf of the applicant is that
Forwarding Note was tampered and the word jawar
in the first page of Ex.R-1 was subsequently
inserted by some interested parties and that neither
the sender nor his agent entered the word jawar
alongwith
gram
in
the
column
regarding
“description of consignment and private marks.”
We are unable to accept the above contention of
the learned counsel for the applicant. The applicant
has not examined either the sender or the agent of
the sender who prepared Ex.R-1 and signed the
same to say that he never wrote the word jawar
alongwith gram in the column 'description and
private marks.' There is absolutely no necessity for
the respondent to add or to tamper the public
document Ex.R-1.
In these circumstances, the
entry in the first page of Ex.R1 that what was
booked for carriage under Ex.R1 was gram and
jawar must be taken as correct.”
4.

To appreciate the contention suffice would it be to

note that the appellant had admittedly entrusted 117 bags for
carriage from Pachor Road Station to New Delhi Railway
Station vide RR dated 1.5.1988. The goods described in the
RR, Ex.A-2, were gram(channa).
5.
FAO 180/96

The undisputed position is that the consignment
page 2 of 6

offered to the appellant was predominantly jawar with little
content of gram. It would be interesting to note that the gram
contain in the consignment which was offered was about 2%.
6.

The appellant refused to take delivery of the goods

offered alleging that what was offered was not the goods of the
appellant and hence proceeded to lodge a claim for the reason
the railway authorities insisted that what was offered was what
was entrusted to it.
7.

It would also be relevant to note at this stage that

the goods which were booked for delivery at 1.5.1988 were
actually offered for delivery on 31.5.1988. It is evident that the
transportation

of

the

goods

was

inordinately

delayed.

Possibility of tampering is thus in the realm of reality.
8.

Be that as it may, reverting back to Ex.R-1,

according to the appellant the description of the goods was as
per the forwarding note.

According to the appellant the

forwarding note, Ex.R-1, clearly evidenced that the goods
entrusted were gram and somebody had later on interpolated
the word jawar on the forwarding note.
9.

It is not in dispute that the original forwarding note

was handed over to the railway authorities when goods were
entrusted for carriage and the document was proved before
the Tribunal on being produced by the railway authorities.
FAO 180/96

page 3 of 6

10.

The Tribunal has noted that in the forwarding note

the word 'jawar' is also written in the column when goods were
described and that above the word 'jawar' the word 'gram' is
written. The Tribunal had opined that there was no reason for
the railway officials to tamper with the document Ex.R-1. The
Tribunal has opined that the document probablizes that the
word 'jawar' was written by the consignor.
11.

The process of argumentative reasoning or the

process of an analytical or deductive reasoning, in my opinion,
should be resorted to where the situation so arise. A fact is
best perceived by the senses.

Thus, a visual look at a

document reveals much to the court. I have perused Ex.R-1.
The same has been viewed in the court by the counsel for the
railways.

A perusal of Ex.R-1 shows that the word 'jawar'

written in Devnagari script is in a completely different
handwriting viz-a-viz the handwriting in which the remaining
columns of the forwarding note have been filled. Further, the
difference in the colour of the ink also shows that the entire
forwarding note save and except the word jawar has been
filled up by one pen and the word jawar has been written by
use of another pen. It is thus obvious that somebody later on
interpolated the forwarding note.
12.
FAO 180/96

If any corroboration was to be sought, it could easily
page 4 of 6

be sought with reference to the RR, Ex.A-2. As noted above,
the RR noted the description of the goods only as gram.
13.

It is not in dispute that entries are recorded in the

RR pertaining to description of the goods based on the entries
recorded in the forwarding note. What more corroborative fact
can exist other than the recording in the RR that the goods
consigned were gram.
14.

It is an obvious case where the Tribunal has ignored

a material circumstance and has probablized fact ignoring the
said material circumstance.
15.

It is settled law that pertaining to appreciation of

facts, if the court of original jurisdiction eschews material
evidence or ignores a material circumstance, the Appellate
Court would be fully justified in taking corrective action.
16.

There is no dispute between the parties to the

price/value of the goods.
17.

The appeal is accordingly allowed.

18.

Impugned order dated 31.1.1996 is quashed. Claim

petition filed by the appellant is allowed in sum of Rs.70,200/with costs.
19.

The appellant is also held entitled to interest on the

sum claimed in the claim petition i.e. Rs.70,200/-, being the
value of the gram.
FAO 180/96

page 5 of 6

20.

The appellant is also held entitled to pre-suit

interest but not @18% claimed in the claim petition. Pre-suit
interest is awarded @ 9% per annum.

This comes to

Rs.2637.50.
21.

Appellant is also entitled to pendente lite and future

interest @ 9% per annum on the sum of Rs.70,200/- with effect
from 7.10.1988 when suit was filed till date of payment.
22.

Before concluding I may record that initially a suit

was filed by the appellant. With the constitution of the Railway
Claim Tribunal, the same was assigned to the Tribunal for
adjudication.
23.

Cost in the appeal are however not being imposed.

24.

TCR may be returned forthwith.

April 23, 2008
mm

FAO 180/96

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 6 of 6

