*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.388/1996
Shri Madan Lal
through:

........
Appellants
Mr.M.L.Bhargava, Advocate.
VERSUS

Union of India & Anr.
...... Respondent
through: Mr.S.R.Narayan, Advocate.
DATE OF DECISION:
28.04.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (ORAL)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2.

Appellant

claimed

to

have

purchased

18

bales

weighing 11.7 quintals of cotton hosiery yarn from Dawer Woolen
Mills. Appellant claims to be the sole proprietor of M/s Allied Yarn
Agency, Sadar Bazar, Delhi.

Admittedly the goods in question

were delivered to the railway authorities for carriage

from

Howrah to New Delhi vide RR (document not formally exhibited
but at page 139 of the record of the Railway Claim Tribunal). The

FAO No.388/96

page 1 of 6

consignor and consignee named in the RR is Allied Yarn Agency.
3.

The goods were admittedly misappropriated, in that,

delivery thereof was never offered to the consignee. After issuing
the necessary notice under Section 78B of the the Indian Railway
Act 1890 and Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure and
receiving no recompense for the value of the goods lost,
appellant instituted a suit for recovery of the value of the
consignment

i.e.

Rs.1,36,884/-

representing the packaging cost,

together

with

Rs.570/-

Rs.2,420/- being the pre-suit

interest and Rs.126/- being miscellaneous expenses for issuing
the notices etc.
4.

By way of abundant precaution Dawer Woolen Mills the

seller of the goods was also impleaded as a defendant. In the
plaint it was averred that if on account of any technicality
relatable to the title in the goods being passed is raised and it is
found that title remained with M/s Dawer Woolen Mills

decree

may be passed in favour of Dawer Woolen Mills.
5.

Defence taken by the railways was that the appellant

had no locus standi to file the suit.
6.

It may be noted at the outset that on what basis

appellant lacked locus standi was not clarified in the written
statement. But as would be noted hereinafter it appears that the
issue of locus standi was raised with respect to the appellant not
FAO No.388/96

page 2 of 6

being the owner of the goods.
7.

With the constitution of the Railway Claim Tribunal the

suit was transferred for adjudication to the Tribunal.
8.

Madan Lal examined himself as the witness of the

appellant. He proved the bill issued by Dawer Woolen Mills as Ex.
AW-3/2 which records that 1100 kgs. of cotton yarn hosiery have
been sold by Dawer Woolen Mills to the appellant @ Rs.122/- per
kg.

The ex-sale value of the goods disclosed is Rs.1,34,200/-.

CST in sum of Rs.2,684/- has also been billed for.

In

his

evidence, apart from proving the bill, Madan Lal stated that since
goods were purchased on credit, at the time when the same were
entrusted to the railways price thereof had not been paid to the
seller but later on the price was duly paid.
9.

Pawan Kumar, partner of Dawer Woolen Mills appeared

as AW-2 and accepted having sold the goods under the bill Ex.
AW-3/2 on credit. He also stated that thereafter his firm received
Rs.1,36,884/- on various dates as sale price.
10.

No receipt evidencing transfer of money from the

appellant to Dawer Woolen Mills being proved the learned
Railway Claim Tribunal has returned a finding that the appellant
lacked locus standi to maintain the suit for reason appellant did
not prove ownership of the consignment.
11.

All other issues were held in favour of the appellant.

FAO No.388/96

page 3 of 6

The claim failed on account of the finding pertaining to issue No.1
that the appellant failed to prove ownership of the goods.
12.

Section 19 of the Sales of Goods Act 1930 reads as

under:“19. Property pases when intended to pass –
(1) Where there is a contract for the sale of
specific or ascertained goods the property in them is
transferred to the buyer at such time as the parties
to the contract intend it to be transferred.
(2) For the purpose of ascertaining the intention of
the parties regard shall be had to the terms of the
contract, the conduct of the parties and the
circumstances of the case.
(3) Unless a different intention appears, the rules
contained in sections 20 to 24 are rules for
ascertaining the intention of the parties as to the
time at which the property in the goods is to pass to
the buyer.”
13.

Suffice would it be to note that the mandate of law

pertaining to transfer of property in goods is clear. Title in the
goods passed when the seller and the buyer intend the title to
pass.
14.

Merely because goods are sold on a credit would not

mean that until the money is paid for, title would not pass. It all
depends on the intention of the parties and as per the contract.
15.

As noted above, in the instant case the seller and the

buyer spoke in unison in their evidence that goods were sold on
credit.

Both were in harmony with each other that title in the

FAO No.388/96

page 4 of 6

goods passed when delivery thereof was given by the seller to
the purchaser. Thus, whether payment was made to the seller or
not becomes wholly irrelevant.
16.

That apart, the railway receipt clearly mentions that

the appellant was the consignor as well as the consignee.
Railway accepted the goods as a bailee.

The railway receipt

evidences, apart from the nature and description of the goods
entrusted to the railway authorities, the status of the railways as
a bailee. It is trite that the bailee is answerable to the person
who has entrusted the goods under bailment and must account
for the same.
17.

Thus, independent of other issues, as consignor as well

as the consignee of the goods, the appellant had locus standi to
maintain the action.
18.

Noting that no dispute was raised with respect to

the value of the consignment the appeal stands allowed.
Impugned order dated 23.5.1996 passed by the Railway Claims
Tribunal is set aside.
19.

Appellant's claim petition is allowed as follows:

A.

A decree is passed in favour of the appellant in sum of

Rs.1,34,200/- being the value of the consignment + Central Sales
Tax in sum of Rs.2,684/- paid thereon.
B.

Cost of packaging in sum of Rs.570/- is also allowed.

FAO No.388/96

page 5 of 6

Pre-suit interest reckoned from 15 days after service of the notice
under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure till date of suit i.e.
31.7.1989 @ 9% per annum, restricted to Rs.2420/- to pre-suit
interest claimed is also allowed.
C.

Pendente lite and future interest is granted to the

appellant on the sum of Rs.1,36,884/- @ 8% per annum.
D.

Appellant shall also be entitled to cost throughout.

20.

TCR be returned forthwith.

April 28, 2008
mm

FAO No.388/96

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 6 of 6

