IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO No.477/2003
#
!

Shailendra Nigam
through:
Mr.Rakesh Tiku, Adv.

....... Appellant.

VERSUS
$
^

Smt.Santosh Batta & Ors.
through:
Nemo.

%

.......

Respondents

DATE OF DECISION: 22-02-2008

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Appellant is aggrieved by the impugned order dated

21.5.2003 dismissing his application under Order 9 Rule 13
CPC on account of stated inordinate delay in filing the
application.
2.

Appellant was impleaded as respondent No.1 in a

claim petition filed by respondent

No.1 herein in which she

stated that as driver of the offending vehicle, vehicle belonging

FAO No.477/03

page 1 of 6

to respondent No.2 herein, appellant had caused injuries to her
person. The petition which was filed before a Motor Accident
Claim Tribunal was taken cognizance of and a notice was
issued. Appellant was served. He engaged one Manoj Verma
as his counsel. Unfortunately for the appellant the counsel did
not appear in court after initial appearance and even did not
file the written statement which appellant claimed was
prepared and signed by him. The other co-respondent in the
claim petition also did not appear resulting in an ex-parte
award dated 21.12.1999 being passed.
3.

When put into execution, for the reason insurance

company was not impleaded as a respondent by the claimant,
appellant learnt about the award and also learnt that his
counsel had belied his trust.

Appellant thereafter moved an

application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC.

In the application

appellant pointed out, with reference to the testimony of the
witness of the claimant and the testimony of the claimant
herself, that admittedly, the claimant was a pillion rider on a
motor cycle being driven by her son whose age would be less
than 16 years on the date of the accident. Apart from pointing
out to the court the inherent weakness in the case of the
claimant, for purposes of setting aside of the ex-parte award, it
was pointed out that the counsel had belied the trust of the
FAO No.477/03

page 2 of 6

appellant who being a member of the Civil Services had to join
the place where the Central Government or the State
Government posted him and for said reason could not
personally appear at the hearing.
4.

Learned Judge has held against the appellant

holding that limitation would run not from the date of
knowledge of the award but from the date of award for the
reason appellant was admittedly served when claim petition
was filed in the Court.
5.

Shri Rakesh Tiku, learned counsel for the appellant

urges that the view taken by the learned Trial Judge is not
sound in law.

Counsel states that in the application under

Order 9 Rule 13 CPC reason why it was filed much beyond
prescribed period of limitation reckoned from the date of the
ex-parte award was set out and the same constituted sufficient
cause for delay to be condoned in filing the application.
Counsel further urges that failure to adopt extra vigilance by a
litigant is not a ground to non-suit a meritorious claim and that
in such situation exemplary costs can be awarded to the
opposite party for the inconvenience cause.
6.

In the decision reported as (2000) 3 SCC 54

G.P.Srivastava Vs. R.K.Raizada it was held that the words 'was
prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing' under Order
FAO No.477/03

page 3 of 6

IX Rule 13 must be construed liberally and if there is no mala
fide intention of a party not to appear, ex-parte orders should
be set aside.
7.

In the decision reported as 2001 6 SCC 176

M.K.Prasad Vs. Parumugum it was held that failure to adopt
extra vigil is no ground to oust a party from a litigation and
inconvenience to the opposite party could be recompensed
with exemplary costs.
8.

I note that where there is delay in filing the

application under Order IX Rule 13 CPC and no application is
filed under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, if delay in filing the
application is self contained in the application itself, for
reasons stated therein delay in filing the application can be
condoned.
9.

In the instant case, it has to be noted that the

claimant chose not to oppose the application filed by the
appellant and after being served did not bother to appear
before the Tribunal. It has additionally to be noted that the
appellant claimed to have engaged a lawyer, Manoj Verma,
who appeared before the Tribunal on 20.5.1993, a fact
recorded in the order by the Tribunal. It has also to be noted
that the appellant is member of the Civil Services assigned to
Himachal Pradesh Cadre and is on a transferable job.
FAO No.477/03

The

page 4 of 6

appellant alleges that his counsel belied his trust. There is no
reason to disbelieve the appellant.
10.

In my opinion sufficient grounds existed to allow

appellant's application under Order IX Rule 13 CPC.
11.

Before concluding I may note that even in the

instant appeal the claimant chose not to appear. She had to
be served by publication.

The operation of the impugned

award has been stayed.

Unexplainably, the claimant has

chosen to take no steps to oppose the instant appeal.
12.

The conduct of the claimant has left this Court

guessing for the reason the stated owner of the vehicle
impleaded as respondent No.2 who was also ex-parte and who
actually does not own the vehicle is also missing.

The

appellant has got the particulars of the owner of the vehicle
and has disclosed the same in the instant appeal.

The

claimant could have reached out to the insurance company
through the real owner had she appeared in this Court.
13.

Be that as it may, the appeal is allowed.

14.

Impugned order dated 21.5.2003 is set aside.

Appellant's application under Order IX Rule 13 CPC is allowed.
Ex-parte award dated 21.12.1999 is set aside.
15.

I refrain from imposing any costs for the reason the

claimant

has

FAO No.477/03

chosen

not

to

either

oppose

appellant's
page 5 of 6

application before the learned Judge, MACT nor before this
Court.

February 22, 2008
vg

FAO No.477/03

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 6 of 6

