IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM (M) 2309/05
#
!

Smt. Ravi Kanta Bansal
.......Petitioner
through: Mr. Anup Khullar, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Sh. Rakesh Aggarwal
......Respondent
through: Mr. D.K.Rustagi, Adv.
CM (M) 2637-38/05

#
!

Smt. Sangeeta Goel & Ors.
.......Petitioner
through: Mr. Valmiki Mehta, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. R.K.Chaudhary, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Smt. Ravi Kanta Bansal
......Respondent
through: Mr. Anup Khullar, Adv.
RESERVED ON : 12-01-2007

%

DATE OF DECISION:

29-01-2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y
page 1 of 14

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
A common question arises for consideration in all

above captioned petitions and therefore they are being
decided by a common order.
2.

Smt. Sangeeta Goyal and Smt. Bhanu Aggarwal

are the petitioners in CM (M) No.2637-38/05.
3.

Smt. Ravi Kanta Bansal and Sh. Rakesh Aggarwal

are the respondents in said CM (M) No.2637-38/2005.
former is the lone contesting respondent.

The

The latter

supports the petitioners.
4.

Smt. Ravi Kanta Bansal is the petitioner in CM (M)

No.2309-05. Sh. Rakesh Aggarwal is the respondent in the
said petition.
5.

Smt. Sangeeta Goyal and Smt. Bhanu Aggarwal

have challenged the order dated 17.8.2005 passed by
Sh.Babu Lal, ADJ, Delhi rejecting their application under
Order 6 Rule 17 CPC to amend the written statement filed
by them. Smt. Ravi Kanta Bansal challenges the order dated
19.3.2004 passed by Sh. R.S.Arya, ADJ, Delhi allowing a
similar application and the order dated 17.2.2005 dismissing
page 2 of 14

the review application which was filed seeking review of the
order dated 19.3.2004.
6.

The three orders were passed in the same suit

and dealt with similar applications filed by different sets of
defendants.
7.

Smt. Ravi Kanta Bansal had filed a suit for

ejectment of Sh. Rakesh Aggarwal, Smt. Pushpa Devi, Smt.
Sangeeta Goyal and Smt. Bhanu Aggarwal.
8.

She had alleged that the said 4 defendants were

the successors in interest of late Sh. Jai Kishan Dass to
whom she had let out a vacant plot of land forming part of
plot no.69-A (renumbered as 1510), Wazir Nagar, Kotla,
Mubarak Pur by and under a written lease deed dated
13.2.68.
9.

She further alleged that under the deed, late Sh.

Jai Kishan Dass, at his own expense, was permitted to put up
a tin roofed structure for carrying on timber business. That
the deed specifically recorded that the tin roof would be
removed at the time of vacating the plot.
10.

Written statements were filed by the defendants.

Inter alia, a preliminary objection was raised to the
page 3 of 14

maintainability of the suit pleading that since the rent was
less than Rs.3,500/- per month and what was let out was a
premises, the suit was barred under Section 50 of the Delhi
Rent Control Act, 1958.
11.

In the written statement filed, vide preliminary

objection No.2, it has been pleaded that the suit is barred
under Section 50 of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 since
the premises is covered by said Act. In reply to para 1 of
the plaint, it is pleaded as under:-

12.

“1) Para “A” of the Plaint is not admitted.
It is wrong to allege that the Plaintiff is a
Senior Citizen of 60 years. It is wrong to
allege that the Plaintiff in view of her age is
facing difficulties. It is wrong to allege that
there is no one to support the Plaintiff.”
Identically worded applications were filed, one by

defendant no.1 and the other by defendants 2 to 4, seeking
to amend the written statement filed by the defendants to
plead, inter alia, as under:“B-(1)
That the contents of para (1) of
the Plaint are wrong and denied. It is
wrong and denied that Late Shri Jai Kishan
Dass, took on lease/rent a vacant plot of
land. it is submitted that at the time of
letting out the property in question to and
in favour of Shri Jai Kishan Dass, the said
premises were not vacant and were having
a built-up super structure. It is submitted
page 4 of 14

13.

that prior to the creation of tenancy in
favour of the predecessor of the replying
defendants M/s Taj Motor Company were
tenants in the premises on a monthly rent
of Rs.110/-. With a view to save the super
structure from the statutory authorities and
taxes, the husband of the plaintiff procured
the consent on a false premise that the suit
property comprised of vacant land with
provision of construction thereon. The said
false premise was further repeated in the
rent receipts issued in favour of the
predecessor of interest of the plaintiff.
There was no occasion for construction of
the shed as it was already in existence and
as being assessed as such by the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi and the tax was being
paid by the builder/owner of the shop. It is
submitted that the property in question
was let out for running the business of
timber and the said business could not
have been carried out without the
construction and the structures on the
property. It is further submitted that even
otherwise the answering defendants vide
disclaimer
dated
12.7.2002
have
disclaimed their rights with respect to the
tenanted premises to and in favour of the
defendant no.1 and as such the present
suit is not maintainable against the
answering defendants.”
Surprisingly enough, identical defences raised by

the defendants which were sought to be amended by
identically

worded

applications

for

amendment

have

suffered to contradictory decisions.
14.

Whereas, the application filed by Sh. Rakesh

page 5 of 14

Aggarwal impleaded as defendant no.1 has been allowed
vide order dated 19.3.2004, review of which order has filed
vide order dated 17.2.2005.

Application filed by Pushpa

Devi, Sangeeta Goyal and Bhanu Aggarwal has been
dismissed vide order dated 17.8.2005.
15.

Reason which has weighed with Sh. Babu Lal,

learned ADJ who has passed the order dated 17.8.2005 is
that in a proceeding under Section 27 of the Delhi Rent
Control Act 1958, issue, whether under the lease deed a
premises was demised or a vacant land was demised
attained finality when the learned ARC did not grant
permission to the predecessor in interest of the defendants
to deposit rent in court, holding that what was demises was
a vacant plot.
16.

Sh. R.S.Arya, learned ADJ who has passed the

order dated 19.3.2004 has taken a different view being that
even admissions can be withdrawn, provided they were
sufficiently explained.
17.

Additional

reason

given

by

Sh.

R.S.Arya,

Additional District Judge is that the defendants were minors
when their predecessor in interest executed the lease deed
page 6 of 14

and that admissions made by their predecessor in interest
could not bind them.
18.

Another reason given by Sh. R.S.Arya, Additional

District Judge, Delhi is that the plaintiff herself, in cross
examination, admitted that at the time of creation of the
tenancy, there existed a pucca boundary wall on three sides,
which walls were covered to form a room.
19.

Needless to state, learned counsel for the parties

conceded that if CM (M) No.2637-38/05 were to succeed,
inevitable corollary would be the dismissal of CM (M)
No.2309/05 and vice versa.
20.

The law relating to amendment is well settled. If

what is sought to be incorporated by way of amendments to
the existing pleadings is necessary for a proper adjudication
of the dispute between the parties, amendment has to be
allowed.

Further, if the proposed amendment is an

elaboration of the pleas already taken, amendment has to
be allowed. Further, if facts are stated to have come within
the knowledge of a party after original pleading was filed,
said fact can be permitted to be incorporated by way of an
amendment. However, care has to be taken to insure that
page 7 of 14

contradictory case is not set up if amendment is allowed,
contradiction

being

viz.-a.-viz.

the

original

pleading.

Further, nature of the suit and the defence should not
ordinarily be allowed to be altered.
21.

Inconvenience to the opposite party due to delay

which would resulted in disposal of the suit if amendment is
allowed can be recompensed by costs.
22.

Commentaries under Order 6 Rule 17 show that

thousands and thousands of opinions have been rendered
by different judges from time to time. It would be a futile
exercise to refer to the various authorities on the point for
the reason, law pertaining to amendment is well settled.
The decisions would only guide as to how in different set of
circumstances, law has been applied.
23.

A decision on facts can hardly be a precedent. At

best, it can be used a guiding star.
24.

I have briefly noted the defence set up in the

original written statements filed. Categorically defence has
been taken that the suit is barred under Section 50 of the
Delhi Rent Control Act 1958.
25.

Proposed amendment seeks to additionally plead
page 8 of 14

that prior to the tenancy in question when Taj Motors
Company was a tenant, a structure existed evidenced by the
fact that property was assessed to property tax by the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi, not as a vacant plot, but as
built upon.
26.

One of the latest decisions on the point of

amendment is the opinion of the Supreme Court reported as
(2006) 6 SCC 498 Baldev Singh & Ors. Vs. Manohar Singh &
Anr..

Overruling the opinion of the High Court that the

amendment prayed for could not be allowed, after noting
various authorities, Supreme Court allowed the amendment.
27.

Facts as originally pleaded by the defendant and

as proposed to be amended are set out in para 4 of the
report. The same reads as under:“4. The case set up by the plaintiffRespondent 1 was that the sale deeds
executed on 24-6-1968 and 25-6-1968 in
the names of his parents were benami
transactions and the plaintiff- Respondent 1
was the real owner of the same as his
parents had no money to pay the
consideration money of the suit property
and that the sale deeds were executed
pursuant to an oral agreement to sell which
was entered into only by the plaintiffRespondent 1.
The appellants entered
appearance
and
filed
their
written
page 9 of 14

28.

statement, inter alia, denying that there
was any agreement to sell the suit property
or that the suit property was owned and
possessed by the plaintiff-Respondent 1. It
has also been pleaded in the written
statement that the defendant-Appellant 1 is
the actual owner and in possession of the
suit property because he was residing in
India continuously in Village Bhin without
any interruption from any one whereas the
plaintiff is residing permanently in Canada.
During the pendency of the suit, an
application for amendment of the written
statement was filed by the appellants
seeking its amendment in which it was
alleged that the suit was barred by
limitation and that the plaintiff-Respondent
1 had no money to pay the sale price of the
suit property, and that the father of the
parties, who was serving as a Foreman in
the Central Government and their mother
had sufficient income to pay the sale price
of the suit property and on the death of
their parents the names of the plaintiff and
the defendants have been mutated in equal
shares in respect of the suit property.
Accordingly,
the
defendant-appellants
sought for amendment of the written
statement in the manner indicated
hereinearlier. It was further pleaded in the
application for amendment of the written
statement that the amendment sought for
was in fact an elaboration of the case made
out in the written statement. The High
Court as well as the trial court rejected the
application for amendment of the written
statement.”
Noting in para 8 that it was well settled law that

courts should be extremely liberal in granting prayers for

page 10 of 14

amendment unless serious injustice or irreparable loss is
caused to the other side, it was opined that rules are
intended to secure a proper administration of justice and
therefore, it is essential that rules are subordinate to the
main purpose and full power of amendment must be
enjoyed liberally. Only care to be taken, is that one distinct
cause of action cannot be substituted by another nor subject
matter of the suit is changed.
29.

In para 9 of the report, it was observed as under:-

30.

“............. However, the court may allow
amendment if it is satisfied that in spit of
due diligence, the party could not have
raised
the
matter
before
the
commencement of trial. So far as proviso
to Order 6 Rule 17 of the Code of Civil
Procedure is concerned, we shall deal with
it later.”
Objection to the proposed amendment on various

grounds was noted in para 11 of the report as under:“11. A bare perusal of the order rejecting
the application for amendment of the
written statement indicates that while
rejecting the application for amendment of
the written statement, the High Court as
well as the trial court based their decisions
mainly on three grounds. The first ground
was that since the appellants had made
certain
admissions
in
the
written
statement, its amendment cannot be
allowed permitting the appellants to
page 11 of 14

31.

withdraw their admission made in the
same. Secondly, the question of limitation
cannot be allowed to be raised by way of
an amendment of the written statement
and lastly, inconsistent pleas in the written
statement cannot also be allowed to be
raised by seeking its amendment.”
In para 14, inter alia, following was observed:“ ............ It is true that in the original
written statement, a statement has been
made that it is Defendant-Appellant 1 who
is the owner and is in continuous
possession of the suit property, but in our
view, the powers of the court are wide
enough to permit amendment of the
written statement by incorporating an
alternative plea of ownership in the
application for amendment of the written
statement. That apart, in our view, the
facts stated in the application for
amendment were in fact an elaboration of
the defence case. Accordingly, we are of
the view that the High Court as well as the
trial court had erred in rejecting the
application for amendment of the written
statement on the ground that in the even
such amendment was allowed, it would
take away some admissions made by the
defendant-appellants in their written
statement. That apart, in Estralla Rubber
Vs. Dass Estate (P) Ltd. this court held that
even if there were some admissions in the
evidence as well as in the written
statement, it was still open to the parties to
explain the same by way of filing an
application for amendment of the written
statement. That apart, mere delay of three
years in filing the application for
amendment of the written statement could
not be a ground for rejection of the same
page 12 of 14

32.

when no serious prejudice is shown to have
been caused to the plaintiff-Respondent 1
so as to take away any accrued right.”
In para 15, inter alia, following was observed:“15. Let us now take up the last ground on
which the application for amendment of
the written statement was rejected by the
High Court as well as the trial court. The
rejection was made on the ground that
inconsistent plea cannot be allowed to be
taken...................
That apart, it is now well settled that an
amendment of a plaint and amendment of
a written statement are not necessarily
governed
by
exactly
the
same
principle...............

33.

Adding a new ground of defence or
substituting or altering a defence does not
raise the same problem as adding, altering
or substituting a new cause of action.
Accordingly, in the case of amendment of
written statement, the courts are inclined
to be more liberal in allowing amendment
of the written statement than of plaint and
question of prejudice is less likely to
operate with same rigour in the former
than in the latter case.”
Tested on the aforenoted principles

and

observations, the amendments sought have to be allowed
for the reason, what is sought to be incorporated by way of
amendments to the written statements are the elaboration
of the same defence which was taken. Only thing which is
sought to be highlighted is the levy of property taxes by the
page 13 of 14

Municipal Corporation of Delhi pertaining to the super
structure on the land in question and not levy of vacant land
tax, as also letting of the premises to a previous tenant.
34.

CM (M) No.2637-38/2005 is allowed. Order dated

17.8.2005 passed by Sh.Babu Lal, ADJ, Delhi is set aside.
Amendment sought by defendants 2 to 4 is allowed.
35.

CM (M) No.2309/05 is dismissed.

36.

No costs.

January 29, 2007
mm

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 14 of 14

