*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.227/1996
M/s Jai Shree Electrical Store
........Appellant
through:
Mr. M.L.Bhargava, Advocate
VERSUS
UOI
through:

........ Respondent
Mr. R.C.Nangia, Advocate
RESERVED ON:
24.4.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
28.4.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

This

appeal

is

directed

against

the

order

dated

12.3.1996 passed by the learned Railway Claims Tribunal, Delhi.
2.

The appellant M/s. Jai Shree Electric Stores filed a claim

petition against the respondent claiming a compensation of
Rs.18,200/-.
3.

The case set up by the appellant was that on 15.12.1989

a consignment comprising of 2 packages containing PVC wire were
entrusted to the respondent for transport from Delhi to Varanasi.
That the consignment was booked under Parcel Way Bill (PWB)

FAO No.227/1996

Page No. 1 of 6

No.386827. That it was the endorsed consignee of the consignment
in question.

That due to gross negligence and misconduct of the

employees of the respondent, the respondent failed to deliver the
consignment at the destination station.
4.

Defence set up by the respondent was that the appellant

has no locus standi to maintain the present action for the reason
appellant is neither consignor nor consignee of the consignment in
question.
5.

After considering evidence led by the parties in light of

their versions vide impugned order dated 12.3.1996 the learned
Tribunal has held that the appellant has been able to establish that
it was the endorsed consignee of the consignment in question but
has failed to establish that it had paid valuable consideration in
respect of the consignment.

It has been held that an endorsed

consignee can maintain an action for damages in his own right only
when he has paid valuable consideration for the consignment. That
since the appellant has not established that it had paid valuable
consideration for the consignment it has no right to maintain the
present action. The claim application filed by the appellant was thus
dismissed by the Tribunal.
6.

Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that he

does not dispute the proposition of law applied by the Tribunal that
an endorsed consignee can maintain an action for damages only
when it had paid valuable consideration for the consignment.
Learned counsel argued that the appellant had successfully
FAO No.227/1996

Page No. 2 of 6

established by leading positive evidence that it had paid valuable
consideration in respect of the consignment in question.
7.

Thus the controversy in the present appeal turns on the

issue whether the appellant had established that it had paid
valuable consideration for the consignment in question.
8.

To establish that the appellant was an endorsed

consignee for a valuable consideration, the appellant examined one
Mr.Raj Kumar,AW-1 who claimed to be a partner of the appellant
firm. He deposed that on 15.12.89 one Mr.Kaushal Kumar who was
an employee in the appellant purchased the consignment in
question from M/s Poonam Electricals for a sum of Rs.18,200/-. He
proved a bill as Ex.A/13 to evidence the purchase. That the payment
of the consignment was made by him. That after purchasing the
goods Mr.Kaushal Kumar entrusted the goods to the respondent and
made endorsement on the rear of the PWB in question in favour of
the appellant. (Meaning thereby, that Kaushal Kumar was the
consignor and the appellant was the endorsed consignee). He stated
that he had also made the entries pertaining to the payment of the
consignment in the cash book and ledger book of the appellant
(Relevant portions of the cash book and ledger book were produced
on record).
9.

Learned Tribunal disbelieved the testimony of the

witness of the appellant that he had made payment for purchasing
the consignment on the behalf of the appellant. It has been held
that the bill dated 15.12.89, Ex.A/13, purportedly issued by the M/s
FAO No.227/1996

Page No. 3 of 6

Poonam Electricals is not a genuine document evidencing the sale of
goods consigned. Reasons noted by the Tribunal for so disbelieving
are as under:I

The bill Ex.A/13 contains the PWB number and the

weight of the consignment. This is contrary to the testimony of the
witness of the appellant as he had deposed that he had first
purchased the consignment and then entrusted the same to the
respondent. How can a document contain the details of another
document which was not in existence at the time of the preparation
of a document remains a mystery?
II

J.S.Mal, Claims Inspector, Railways, RW-1 had deposed

that he was assigned the task of investigating the genuineness of
the bill Ex.A/13 and he deposed that the shop 'M/s Poonam
Electricals' did not exist at the address written on the bill Ex.A/13.
III

No documents were produced by the appellant to

establish that Mr.Kaushal Kumar was an employee in the appellant
firm at the relevant time.
IV

Neither any employee of M/s Poonam Electricals was

examined nor any documents of M/s Poonam Electricals such as
accounts books etc. were summoned/produced by the appellant to
establish that AW-1 had purchased the consignment from M/s
Poonam Electricals on behalf of the appellant.
V

As per the testimony of AW-1 he had made payment of

the consignment in question to M/s Poonam Electricals and was
present when the bill Ex.A/13 was taken personally by him. If AW-1
FAO No.227/1996

Page No. 4 of 6

who was a partner in the appellant had made the payment and the
bill was taken by him, there was no reason to mention the name of
Mr.Kaushal Kumar in the bill.
VI

Testimony of AW-1 who is an interested witness as also

self-serving account books produced by the appellant does not
inspire any evidence.
10.

Learned counsel for the appellant had contended that

the Tribunal had committed a grave error by holding that the
account

books

produced

by

the

appellant

are

self-serving

documents and thus ignoring the same.
11.

It is settled law that an appellate court cannot re-

appreciate the evidence unless the court of first instance had
ignored a material evidence/circumstance or the conclusions drawn
by the court of first instance from the evidence are perverse in
nature.
12.

Learned counsel for the appellant has not pointed any

evidence/circumstance which was ignored by the Tribunal while
appreciating the evidence.
13.

Conclusions drawn by the Tribunal from evidence I to V

noted in para 9 above are perfectly sound. Indeed the fact that in
the bill Ex.RW-1/1 the PWB No. (Parcel Way Bill) was mentioned
evidences that the bill was created much after the goods were
entrusted to railway authorities for only then the maker of the bill
referred to PWB No. on the bill.
14.

I find no infirmity in the impugned order.

FAO No.227/1996

Page No. 5 of 6

15.

The appeal is dismissed.

16.

No costs.

April 28,2008
sl

FAO No.227/1996

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No. 6 of 6

