IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
C.R.P. No.749/2002
#
!

R.K.K.R. Steel Ltd.
...Petitioner
through: Mr.R.S.Endlaw, Adv. and
Mr.Virendra Goswami, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Northern Steel & General Mills & Anr. ...Respondents
through: Mr.Harish Malhotra, Sr. Adv. with
Mr.Rajat Singh Jain, Adv. and
Mr.Tanuj Khurana, Adv.
RESERVED ON : 19-03-2007

%

DATE OF DECISION:

22-03-2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
A short but interesting question of law arises for

consideration in the present petition.
2.

Whether a prospective purchaser claiming right under

agreement to sell is entitled to be impleaded as a defendant in
the suit filed by the registered owner for recovery of the tenanted
premises against the tenant? Needless to state, the question has

CRP No.749/2002

page 1 of 27

to be answered in light of the provisions of sub rule 2 of Rule 10
of Order 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908.
3.

A brief resume of the relevant facts is always handy

before analyzing the legal position.
4.

The impugned order is dated 30.4.2002. It has allowed

an application filed by Shri Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) through its
Karta Shri Krishan Kumar Daga for being impleaded as a
defendant.
5.

Petitioner's suit is for recovery of possession and mesne

profits.

The material allegations in the plaint are that the

defendant 'Northern Steel & General Mills', a company registered
under the Companies Act 1956 was inducted as a tenant for a
period of one year with effect from 15.9.1985. That the tenant
continued to occupy the tenanted property beyond the period of
lease and vide notice dated 2.4.1998 tenancy was determined
with effect from the midnight between 31.4.1998 and 1.5.1998.
Rent being Rs.5,000/- per month, protection under the Delhi Rent
Control Act 1958 was not available to the property.

Since

possession was not returned, plaintiff was entitled to recover
possession.
6.

In the written statement filed by the defendant it was

pleaded that at one point of time, the defendant was a sole
proprietory concern of M/s.Vikas Fittings Pvt. Ltd. It was denied
that the defendant is a company registered under the Companies
Act 1956. It was pleaded that currently the defendant is a sole
CRP No.749/2002

page 2 of 27

proprietory firm of one Shri Sanjay Daga. It was further pleaded
that the tenancy in question was a camouflage for payment of
Rs.5,000/- per month to the plaintiff by M/s.Virendra Paul Daga
(HUF) to whom plaintiff had agreed to sell the suit property for a
consideration of Rs.4,50,000/- vide agreement to sell dated
25.9.1985. It was stated that M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) had
paid a sum of Rs.50,000/- pursuant to the agreement to sell.
7.

It was further pleaded that since execution of sale deed

would have taken some time it was agreed that on the balance
sale consideration, M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) would pay
interest @15% per annum and would take over possession of the
property.

That, pursuant to the said oral understanding the

tenancy was created in the name of the defendant, then a sole
proprietory unit of M/s.Vikas Fittings Pvt. Ltd., which in turn was
controlled by M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF).
8.

A specific defence was raised in the written statement

predicated on clause 7 of the agreement to sell between the
plaintiff and M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF).

It was specifically

pleaded as under:“The plaintiff had no right to seek possession of the
defendant and in order to secure the right of
M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF), Clause 7 of the said
Agreement provided as under:“7.
That the plot and the super-structure
constructed thereupon is presently rented out by
the First Party to M/s.Northern Steel & General
Mills through its sole proprietor M/s.Vikas Fittings
Pvt. Ltd. of New Delhi at a monthly rental of
Rs.5,000/- Rs.Five thousand only).
The First
CRP No.749/2002

page 3 of 27

9.

Party shall be entitled to realize this rental until
the finalization of the sale in favour of the
Second Party. However, in the event of the
premises being vacated by M/s.Northern Steel &
General Mills or its sole proprietor Vikas Fittings
Pvt. Ltd. then the Second Party shall have the
first option to become a tenant therein on similar
terms and conditions.”
In the written statement filed, it was specifically pleaded

as under:“The
aforesaid Clause 7 was inserted in the
Agreement to Sell with the sole object that the
possession should remain with Shri Virendra Paul
Daga (HUF) either in the name of M/s.Northern Steel
& General Mills or if it is vacated by the said
M/s.Northern Steel & General Mills, the premises
would be let out to M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) at
the same rent. Later on, the defendant became the
sole proprietorship concern of Shri Sanjay Daga and
the amount was paid to the plaintiff at Rs.5,000/- per
month on account of interest on the balance
consideration of Rs.4,00,000/- which was payable by
Shri Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) to the plaintiff.
That after entering into the Agreement to Sell
M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) got the plan sanctioned
of construction of the building on the aforesaid plot of
land and raised construction of a building at a huge
cost on the said plot of land.
The completion
certificate was issued by the Municipal authorities in
the name of the plaintiff M/s.Virendra Paul Daga
(HUF) had been paying the house tax for the said
building. The plaintiff has given a General Power of
Attorney in favour of Shri Prabhat Kumar and Shri Raj
Kumar Daga. Shri Raj Kumar Daga is a relation of
Sh.Virendra Paul Daga being the brother-in-law of
Shri Krishan Kumar Daga son of Sh.Virendra Paul
Daga and Shri Prabhat Kumar is also the grand child
of Shri Virendra Paul Daga being the son of the
daughter of Sh.Virendra Paul Daga. Shri Prabhat
Kumar and Raj Kumar Daga had been prosecuting all
the proceedings on behalf of the plaintiff for the
assessment of property in dispute before the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and also in appeals
before the Addl. District Judge, Delhi. M/s. Virendra
Paul Daga (HUF) had been paying the Municipal taxes
in respect of the property in dispute. As a matter of
CRP No.749/2002

page 4 of 27

10.

fact, although, a tenancy was shown in the name of
the defendants as a camouflage for the payment of
Rs.5,000/- per month, actually, M/s.Virendra Paul
Daga (HUF) remained in possession of the said
property. The building constructed on the said plot of
land is in possession of M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF).
In view of the terms of the agreement to sell
executed between M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) and
the plaintiff, M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) is a
necessary party to the present proceedings. The
rights of the parties cannot be effectually and finally
disposed off in the absence of M/s.Virendra Paul Daga
(HUF).”
Notwithstanding the defence taken in the written

statement, brief contours whereof have been noted herein above,
M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) filed an application through its
Karta Shri Krishan Kumar Daga seeking impleadment by virtue of
the provisions of sub-rule 2 of Rule 10 of Order 1 of the Code of
Civil Procedure 1908.
11.

Substantially, averments made in the said application

are the same as the averments made by the defendant in its
written statement. Clause 7 of the agreement to sell entered into
between the plaintiff and M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) was relied
upon. In para 3 and para 6 of the application it was pleaded as
under:“3.
That the aforesaid Clause No.7 was inserted
in the Agreement to Sell with the sole object that the
possession should remain with the applicant either in
the name of M/s.Northern Steel & General Mills or if it
is vacated by the said M/s.Northern Steel & General
Mills, the premises shall be let out to the applicant at
the same rent.
The property was to remain in
possession of the applicant and is still in possession of
the applicant. The intention of showing M/s.Northern
Steel & General Mills as a tenant under the plaintiff
was to secure payment of Rs.5,000/-. It is further
submitted that a Rent Agreement was executed on
CRP No.749/2002

page 5 of 27

25.9.85 but it was ante dated as 15.9.85. The plaintiff
was entitled to a sum of Rs.5,000/- per month and
was not liable to pay any amount such as is money
and property taxes etc. which become the liability of
the applicant/the tenant nominee of the applicant.
Clause 3 was inserted in the following words:
“That in addition to the rental reserved
hereunder, the Tenant shall also pay annual
lease money for this plot by depositing in the
office of Mohan Cooperative Industrial Estate
Ltd. New Delhi on behalf of the landlord and
shall also pay the property taxes that may be
claimed by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi
from time to time against this property.”
As stated above, M/s.Vikas Fittings Pvt. Ltd. was the
family concern of the applicant.
Later on, the
defendant became the sole proprietorship of Shri
Sanjay Daga one of the members of the applicant
(HUF).
xxx

xxx

xxx

12.

xxx
xxx

xxx

6.
That it will not be out of place to mention
here that it was the intention of the parties that the
plaintiff was only entitled to a sum of Rs.4 lacs or till
the payment of Rs.4 lacs is made an amount of
Rs.5,000/- per month. With that view the plaintiff had
also executed a Power of Attorney dated 25.9.1985 in
favour of S/Shri Raj Kumar Daga and Prabhat Kumar
at the instructions of the applicant. Shri Raj Kumar
Daga is a relation of the applicant being the son of
brother-in-law of Shri K.K.Daga (Krishan Kumar Daga)
the Karta of the applicant and Shri Prabhat Kumar is
also the nephew of Shri Krishan Kumar Daga being
the son of the sister of the applicant. The said Shri
Prabhat Kumar and Raj Kumar Daga had been
prosecuting all the proceedings on behalf of the
plaintiff for the assessment of the property in dispute
before the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and also in
appeals before the Addl. District Judge, Delhi.”
It was pleaded that the applicant was always ready and

willing to perform its obligations under the contract and since
plaintiff was in default a suit for specific performance was filed.
CRP No.749/2002

page 6 of 27

13.

Opposing the application seeking impleadment plaintiff

stated that a simple recovery suit could not be converted into a
title suit and that M/s.Virendra Paul Daga (HUF) has an
independent right to enforce a claim, if any, against the plaintiff
under clause 7 of the agreement to sell dated 25.9.1985. It was
stated that in the suit filed by the plaintiff the main controversy
and the focal point is whether a plaintiff is entitled to the
possession of a suit property as owner thereof if lease is validly
determined. It was stated that the applicant has no direct interest
in the property.

It was further stated that presence of the

applicant was not necessary to enable the Court to completely
and effectually adjudicate upon and settle all the questions
involved in the suit.

It was stated that M/s.Virender Paul Daga

(HUF) can enforce Clause 7 of the agreement, if at all, in the suit
filed by it seeking a decree for specific performance.
14.

After hearing arguments, vide impugned order dated

30.4.2002, the learned Trial Judge has opined that the applicant
has a legal as well as equitable interest in the suit property and is
therefore entitled to be impleaded as a tenant.
15.

Learned counsel for the petitioner and the respondents

have substantially reiterated the respective versions and their
viewpoints on the legal position as have been culled out herein
above from their respective pleadings.

Therefore, I need not

reiterate what the submissions were.
16.

Shri Rajiv Endlaw, learned counsel for the petitioner

CRP No.749/2002

page 7 of 27

relied upon the following authorities:1.

AIR 1977 Orissa 183, Pravat Kumar Misra vs. Prafulla
Chandra Misra & Anr.

2.

AIR 1981 Delhi 291, Jiwan Dass Rawal vs. Narain Dass &
Ors.

3.

AIR 1990 NOC 83 (P & H), Dharam Singh & Anr. vs. Addu
Ram & Ors.

4.

AIR 1992 Calcutta 283, Vithalbhai Pvt. Ltd. vs. Union
Bank of India.

5.

AIR 1994 Calcutta 85, Smt.Sukumari Debi & Anr. vs. Shri
Ramdas Ganguli.

6.

1997 (40) DRJ 250, Evangelical Church of India vs. North
India Outreach Society.

7.

AIR 1998 Rajasthan 150, Talib Hussain vs. Peer Azhar
Hussain & Ors.

8.
17.

1999-CalLT-1-254, Rama Chatterjee vs. Somnath Ghosal.
Shri Harish Malhotra, learned senior counsel for the

respondents relied upon the following authorities:1.

AIR 2005 SC 2209, Amit Kumar Shaw & Anr. vs. Farida
Khatoon & Anr.

2.

118 (2005) DLT 597, S.S.Bakshi vs. P.M.Mathrani.

3.

115 (2004) DLT 300, Jheel Kurenja Milk Producers'
Cooperative Society Ltd. & Anr. vs. D.D.A. & Ors.

18.

Before I proceed to discuss the legal position it would be

important to revisit the statutory provision. Order 1 Rule 10(2) of
CRP No.749/2002

page 8 of 27

the Code of Civil Procedure reads as under:-

19.

“(2)
Court may strike out or add parties.- The
Court may at any stage of the proceedings, either
upon or without the application of either party, and on
such terms as may appear to the Court to be just,
order that the name of any party improperly joined,
whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out, and
that the name of any person who ought to have been
joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose
presence before the Court may be necessary in order
to enable the Court effectually and completely to
adjudicate upon and 'settle all the questions involved
in the suit, be added.”
A reading of the statutory provision shows that the

sweep of the legislative provision is controlled by the expression
'settle all the questions involved in the suit be added'.
20.

Let me clarify. An inquiry under Order 1 Rule 10(2) is

not to focus on whether the applicant is a person who ought to
have been joined as a necessary party to the suit. The focus of
inquiry is limited to the question whether the applicant could be
impleaded as a party on the premise that his presence before the
Court may be necessary in order to enable the Court to effectually
and completely adjudicate upon and settle the questions involved
in the suit.
21.

Shri Rajiv Endlaw, learned counsel for the petitioner

vehemently contended that the applicant was not a necessary nor
a proper party, nor its presence before the Court was necessary in
order to enable the Court to effectually and completely adjudicate
upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit.

Learned

counsel urged that every plaintiff is a dominus litus and cannot be
compelled to litigate against a person qua whom no relief has
CRP No.749/2002

page 9 of 27

been prayed for. Counsel further urged that the expression 'all
the questions involved in the suit' means only the questions or
disputes between the parties to the litigation and do not include a
question or dispute between one or more of the parties and a
third party. Counsel further urged that the alleged agreement to
sell in favour of the applicant does not create any interest in
immovable property. It is a right in personam and remedy of the
applicant is to enforce the rights in a suit of his own for specific
performance, a right stated to have been already been exercised
by the applicant
22.

Rival submission of Shri Harish Malhotra, learned senior

counsel was that by virtue of clause 7 of the agreement to sell, a
right in presenti was created in favour of the applicant and since
the stated tenancy was a mere device for the purchaser to enjoy
possession of the suit property, applicant was entitled to bring to
the notice of the Court its possessory rights under the agreement
to sell so that in equity and in law, possession could be protected.
Counsel further urged that matter in controversy in a suit has to
be considered not only with reference to the case set up in the
plaint but even the defence set up in the written statement. It
was urged that the defendant had categorically pleaded that the
rent agreement was a camouflage and real intention was to pay
15% interest per annum on the balance sale consideration by the
applicant

to

the

plaintiff

with

simultaneous

enjoyment

of

possession by the purchaser. Even on said count, counsel urged
CRP No.749/2002

page 10 of 27

that the applicant was entitled to be impleaded as a defendant, if
not as a necessary party, as a proper party.
23.

Turning to the authorities cited at the Bar by learned

counsel, suffice would it be to note that in Pravat Kumar Misra's
case (supra) a third party claiming rival title to the suit property
was held not entitled to be impleaded as a defendant in a suit
filed by the plaintiff for recovery of possession of the suit
premises from the tenant, on the ground, that a simple suit for
recovery of possession cannot be converted into a complex title
suit.
24.

In Jiwan Dass Rawal's case (supra) it was held that a

party claiming right under an agreement to sell cannot claim any
right, title or interest in the property till sale is finalized for the
reason an agreement to sell does not create a right, title or
interest in the property agreed to be sold.

It is a right in

personam against the seller.
25.

In Dharam Singh's case (supra) applicants claimed

certain rights along with the plaintiff.

It was held that the

applicants cannot be impleaded as defendants.
26.

In Vithalbhai's case (supra) a learned Single Judge of the

Calcutta High Court opined that different rights may arise
amongst different parties based on relationships amongst the
parties inter-se, and that in a suit for possession by the tenant
against the sub-tenant, the sub-tenant cannot resist claim of
possession by disputing title or right to possession of the tenant
CRP No.749/2002

page 11 of 27

against the original landlord.
27.

In Smt.Sukumari Debi's case (supra) it was held that in

an eviction suit by a co-owner who was the landlord, other coowners not being co-landlords cannot be arrayed as co-plaintiffs.
28.

In Evangelical Church's case (supra) it was held that in

an eviction suit by the landlord against the ex-employee for
restoration of possession over premises allotted to the employee
as a term of employment, person claiming to be the owner of the
premises and disputing title of the plaintiff was not entitled to be
impleaded as a party. Similar view was taken by the Rajasthan
High Court in Talib Hussain's case (supra).
29.

In the last authority cited by learned counsel for the

petitioner, Rama Chatterjee's case (supra), in a suit filed by the
plaintiff in his capacity as the managing trustee of a trust against
a defendant alleging possession to be an act of trespass,
applicant who questioned the right of the managing trustee to file
the suit alleging that the property was not trust property was held
not entitled to be impleaded as a defendant.
30.

Turning to the decisions cited by learned counsel for the

respondents, suffice would it be to note that in Amit Kumar
Shaw's case, in a suit for partition, a transferee pendente lite who
had acquired interest from a copartner was held entitled to be
impleaded as a party in the partition suit inasmuch as it was held
that such transferee has an interest in the subject matter of the
litigation.

It was held that addition of a party to a proceeding

CRP No.749/2002

page 12 of 27

does not solely depend on the question whether he has interest in
the suit property. The question to be addressed is, whether the
right of such person may be affected.
31.

In S.S.Bakshi's case (supra), a co-owner was held

entitled to be impleaded as a party in a suit for specific
performance of an agreement to sell. It may be noted that in the
suit filed by the prospective purchaser it was stated that he had
purchased a specific portion of the joint property from a co-owner,
limited to the share of the co-owner in the property.

Party

seeking impleadment was denying any such arrangement inter se
the co-owners.
32.

In Jheel Kurenja's case (supra), in eviction proceedings

initiated under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized
Occupants) Act 1971 initiated by DDA against the person in
possession of land, the person in possession of the land was a
member of the cooperative society and therefore the society was
held entitled to be impleaded as a party in the eviction
proceedings on the ground that all persons who have an interest
in the subject matter of the dispute should be impleaded as a
party in one proceedings so that separate trials are avoided and
all parties are bound by the decision. A caveat was recorded : a
person cannot be impleaded at his asking.

Bona fides of the

applicant, the plausibility of the claim and genuineness of the
interest in the litigation has to be prima facie seen.
33.

It was additionally held that a party would be a proper

CRP No.749/2002

page 13 of 27

party if it is interested in the result of the litigation and has the
right to seek assistance of the Court in coming to a decision on
the point in issue. It is not necessary that a relief is asked against
said party.
34.

Independent of the afore-noted decisions cited by

learned counsel, a perusal of the commentaries under Order 1
Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure reveal a plethora of
decisions which have considered the ambit of the power of the
Court in impleading a person as a proper party. The authorities
have explained the meaning of the phrase 'all the questions
involved in the suit'.
35.

The decisions illustrate a wide spectrum of instances

when intervention was allowed and when refused.
36.

From the decisions, no discernible principle governing

the discretionary power of the Court emerges, for the simple
reason, the spectrum of claims is fairly wide and therefore it
would be inadvisable to cast the discretionary power in a straight
jacket of an inflexible formula. However, one principle emerges,
that the language employed in the rule vests a very wide
discretion in the Court.
37.

Given for myself, I would follow the dictum of Jackson J.

in Chidambaram Chettiar vs. Subramaniam Chettiar AIR 1927
Madras 834: 'Court should deprecate any attempt to diminish that
discretion by substituting special pronouncements in special
cases for the actual language of the rule.'
CRP No.749/2002

page 14 of 27

38.

Really speaking, submission of Shri Rajiv Endlaw,

learned counsel for the petitioner is that the expression 'all the
questions involved in the suit' in sub-rule 2 of rule 10 of Order 1
must have a narrow meaning i.e. questions as between the
parties to the litigation and not questions between any of the
parties to the suit and a third party, even though touching the
property which is the subject matter of the suit.
39.

On the other hand, submission of Shri Harish Malhotra,

learned senior counsel for the respondents is that acceptance of
the narrow view would mean the addition of words which are not
found in the section, namely, 'between the parties to the suit'.

40.

In the opinion reported as 1950-2 All ER 605 Dollfus

Mieget Compagnie S.A. vs. Bank of England the precise nature of
the interest of the party sought to be impleaded in the property in
dispute was pointed out so as to justify his being impleaded as a
party under Order 16 Rule 11 RSC corresponding to Order 1 Rule
10 in India.
41.

In that case 64 identifiable gold bars belonging to a

French company were looted by the Germans during the war on
their occupation of France and were later seized by the allied
armies. The custody of the gold bars was acquired by a tripartite
commission, consisting of the representatives of the Government
of UK, USA and France for the purposes of eventually distributing,
in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty, the gold and
CRP No.749/2002

page 15 of 27

treasure looted by the Germans. The gold bars were conveyed to
England and deposited by the Commission with the Bank of
England.

The French company instituted an action against the

bank claiming delivery of the gold bars. The bank applied for an
order to set aside the writ on the ground that the 2 foreign
Government, USA and France had declined to submit to the
jurisdiction of the English Courts. The claim of the company was
upheld and leave was given to the bank to appeal to the House of
Lords.

At that stage the two governments, USA and France

applied to be added as defendant to the action.
42.

It is significant to note that in the application the

applicants did not assert a title to the bars but they urged that if
they should establish that they have possession of control of the
bars through the bank the French company would fail to obtain an
order from the Court in its favour by reason of the doctrine of
immunity applicable to foreign sovereign states and therefore the
applicants, the Government of USA and France would be entitled
to retain possession and control over the bars and thus be able to
dispose them of.
43.

It was held that whether or not the applicants had a

proprietary right in the subject matter of the action sufficient to
entitle them to be joined as defendants, the true test lay not so
much on an analysis of what were the constituents of the rights,
but rather in what would be the result on the subject matter of the
action if their rights could be established. It was held that the
CRP No.749/2002

page 16 of 27

applicants had a direct interest in the subject matter of the action
which was similar to a proprietary right and was of such a nature
as would entitle them to be joined as defendants as in their
absence their claim could not be eventually put forward.
44.

After referring to the decision in Moser vs. Marsden,

1892-1 Ch 487 in which it was held that the fact that the person's
interest would be commercially affected by a judgment would be
insufficient to make the person a party and that that person
should be directly interested in the subject matter in dispute,
Wynn Parry, J. observed as follows at pages 611-612:“On the other side of the line in Vavassur vs. K.Krupp,
(1878) 9 Ch D 351 to which I had already referred,
which established that a proprietary right of the
proposed defendant in the subject matter of the action
is sufficient. The question here is; on which side of the
line does this case fall? For the purposes of this
application, the applicants do not assert a title to the
property in question, and, therefore it cannot be
asserted that they have a proprietary right as the
phrase is used in (1878) 9 Ch D 351. What they assert
is that if they can establish that they have possession
or control of the property in question through the
defendant bank, then, by virtue of the doctrine of
immunity which apply to foreign sovereign states, 2
results might well follow (i) the plaintiffs must fail to
obtain any order from this Court in their favour and (ii)
the applicants will retain the possession and control
over the remaining bars of gold and will be able to
dispose of them.
In other words, although the
applicants do not assert title to the bars of the gold,
the result of a successful intervention by them would
be that as between the plaintiffs and themselves, they
would for all practical purposes, be the owners. It
seems to me that true test lies not so much in an
analysis of what are the constituents of the applicant's
rights but rather in what would be the result on the
subject matter of the action if those rights could be
established. That is the approach which I have made.
Viewing the matter in this way, it is impossible, in my
CRP No.749/2002

page 17 of 27

45.

judgment, to say that the applicant have only an
indirect interest of the nature which fell to be
considered in 1892-1 Ch 487. They appear to me to
have something more namely, a right which although
may arise indirectly, viz. by the invocation of the
doctrine of immunity and through the defendant bank
as bailee nevertheless results in a direct interest in the
subject matter of this action and is a right merely akin
to the proprietary right which was under consideration
in (1878) 9 Ch D 351. There is no authority directly
bearing on the point but, on the analysis which I have
made of the nature of the applicant's interest in the
matter, I have come to the conclusion that I ought not
to say that I have no jurisdiction to entertain the
application on the short ground which counsel for the
plaintiff puts forward, viz. that the applicants could not
show a proprietary right, and, therefore did not come
within the second of the three classes of cases to
which I have referred but that I am dealing with right
of such a nature as, on an application by the
applicants in the position of the present applicants
should result in an order that they be joined as
defendants, provided it can be shown that in their
absence the claim to the right will not effectually be
put forward.”
The decision brings out that the true test lies not so

much in an analysis of what are the constituents of the applicant's
rights but rather in what would be the result on the subject matter
of the action if those rights could be established.
46.

In the report published as 1956-1 All ER 273 Amon vs.

Raphael Tuck & Sons Ltd., the aforesaid view was followed.

In

that case the plaintiff filed an action against the defendants for
damages and injunction on the ground that the plaintiff was the
first inventor of a new design of adhesive dispenser in the shape
of a pen, that the plaintiff disclosed to the defendant the details of
the invention in the course of negotiations with the defendant for
marketing the pen and that the defendant had wrongfully made

CRP No.749/2002

page 18 of 27

use of the information by manufacturing an adhesive dispenser of
the same design as invented by the plaintiff.

The defendant,

while resisting the claim applied under Order XVI Rule 11 R S C to
join as defendant a third party, urging amongst other things that
the third party was the first inventor of the adhesive dispenser. It
was held that the presence of the third party was necessary to
enable the court to adjudicate completely the subject matter in
dispute as the enjoyment of the legal right of the third party
would be curtailed by the relief asked for by the plaintiff in the
action.
47.

Delvin, J. explained the scope of the rule in these terms

at page 279.
“It is not I think disputed that 'the cause or matter' is
the action as it stands between the existing parties. If
it were otherwise then anybody who showed a cause
of action against either a plaintiff or defendant could
of course say that the question involved in his cause
of action could not be settled unless he was made a
party. Counsel for the defendant does not contend for
so wide a construction as that: but he submits that, if
the intervener has a cause of action against the
plaintiff relating to the subject matter of existing
action the Court has power to join the intervener so
as to give effect to the primary object of the order,
which is to avoid multiplicity of actions. In the present
case he submits that the subject matter of the dispute
between the existing parties is the “ownership”. If I
may so put it, of an invention: the plaintiff claims that
he is the owner of it and the intervener alleges that he
is, and both disputes ought to be determined at the
same time. This construction stresses the amplitude
of the closing words of the passage which I have just
cited from Order 16 Rule 11 'all the questions involved
in the cause or matter.' The alternative construction
treats the opening words as dominant.
'All the
questions involved' is a phrase that unless it is cut
down would be impossibly wide. It is cut down, the
CRP No.749/2002

page 19 of 27

48.

plaintiff submits by the opening words of the passage
which I have cited. The intervener must be a party
whose presence is necessary to enable all questions in
the action to be adjudicated on and settled, but the
question must be one which has to be adjudicated on
in the issue between the existing parties and not in
any new issue raised by an intervener. The criticism
that at once suggests itself of this construction is that
it is impossible narrow. If the adjudication is limited to
something that lies between the plaintiff and the
defendant what parties can be necessary to it except
the plaintiff and the defendant? The court is for this
purpose concerned only with action “in person and in
such actions either the necessary defendant is sued or
the action fails. If all the parties who ought to have
been joined, under the first limb of the rule are joined,
who are the necessary parties contemplated by the
second limb”
Answering the question, Delvin, J. further observed as

follows at pages 289-290:“Counsel for the plaintiff next submits that the
intervener's interests cannot be affected anyway
because if the plaintiff is wrong, there will be no
injunction: and if he is right, the injunction can be
granted only on the basis that the duty of confidence
was owed to the plaintiff and not to the intervener.
This argument in my opinion, misconceives the point.
Whenever a plaintiff seeks to restrain a defendant
from dealing with his property and an intervener
claims that the property is his, the plaintiff can say 'If
I am wrong I shall not get an injunction and the
intervener's right will not be affected: if I am right the
intervener has no rights to be affected anyway.' The
point is that the intervener is entitled to be heard on
the issue whether the plaintiff is right or wrong so
that he may be bound by the order made.
The final submission of counsel for the
plaintiff is more far-reaching than the others. He
submits that the action an the intervener's claim are
concerned with rights in contract and not rights of
property and therefore the case does not come within
the term “proprietary right”as set out in the note in
Annual Practice 1995 at page 232. I am not of course
required to construe the phrase as if it were
contained in a statute. If I were I should see no
reason why rights under a contract should not be
CRP No.749/2002

page 20 of 27

called proprietary rights just as much as rights to
physical property. The phrase, however, is not used
definitely. The three categories formulated in the
note are not exhaustive. Indeed, I do not think that
they should be treated as having been formulated
independently.
There is one common principle
running through them all, and, for my part, I should
prefer to apply a test based on that principle rather
than to enquire whether the case to be determined
falls into one or other of the three classes. There is
not, for example any real distinction between the
cases which related to specific performance and
those which related to proprietary rights. As Wynn
Parry, J. said in 1950-2 All ER 605 at page 611.
It seems to me that the true test lies not so
much in any analysis of what are the constituents of
the appellant's rights, but rather in what would be the
result on the subject matter of the action if those
rights could be established.
I respectfully agree with that. I think that
the test is May the Order for which the plaintiff is
asking directly affect the intervener in the enjoyment
of his legal rights?

49.

It may be true as counsel for the plaintiff
submits that the authorities so far have been dealing
with rights to physical property, but in my judgment
the principle applies equally to contractual rights. I
think that in this case the test is satisfied that I have
jurisdiction to make the Order and that is one which
having regard to the question involved in the action,
it is proper that in the exercise of my discretion I
should make.”
Decision brings out that the principle relating to

impleadment in decisions involving rights to physical properties
are equally capable of being applied to contractual rights.
50.

Turning to the facts of the instant case, in the written

statement filed by the defendant, it has been explained that the
so called tenancy agreement is a camouflage. Real agreement
between the parties was that the plaintiff would sell the suit

CRP No.749/2002

page 21 of 27

property to the applicant and pending finalization of the execution
of the sale deed, possession would be handed over; for the
balance sum of Rs.4 lacs payable by the applicant to the plaintiff
at the time of execution of the sale documents, interest @15%
per annum on the balance sum payable would be paid.

Since

balance sale consideration is Rs.4 lacs, interest @15% per annum
comes to Rs.60,000/- per annum.
Rs.5,000/-.

Monthly interest comes to

This is the rental figure.

In the written statement

filed, specific reference has been made to clause-7 of the
agreement to sell between the plaintiff and the applicant.
51.

At a sports event relating to track and field competition,

in a 400 metres race, it could be insisted that only the
participants to the race have a right to be on the track.

They

must have an unobstructed right to run the race. But, in a relay
race the aforesaid would not hold true.

The baton has to be

passed on. As the first runner reaches the end of his run, the next
runner has to be on the field to receive the baton and run ahead.
52.

Claim

predicated

in

the

defence

as

per

written

statement and by the applicant is akin to a relay race.
53.

The aforesaid illustration can be given a legal shape if

one peruses Section 55 of the Transfer of Property Act 1882. The
said provision deals with the rights and liabilities of buyers and
sellers. Clause (b) of sub section 6 of Section 55 of the Transfer of
Property Act 1882 reads as under:“55.
CRP No.749/2002

Rights and liabilities of buyer and
page 22 of 27

seller.- In the absence of a contract to the contrary,
the buyer and the seller of immoveable property
respectively are subject to the liabilities, and have
the rights, mentioned in the rules next following, or
such of them as are applicable to the property sold:(6)

The buyer is entitled(a)

54.

.............

(b)
unless he has improperly declined to
accept delivery of the property, to a charge on
the property, as against the seller and all persons
claiming under him, to the extent of the seller's
interest in the property, for the amount of any
purchase-money properly paid by the buyer in
anticipation of the delivery and for interest on
such amount; and, when he properly declines to
accept the delivery, also for the earnest (if any)
he properly declines to accept the delivery, also
for the earnest (if any) and for the costs (if any)
awarded to him of a suit to compel specific
performance of the contract or to obtain a decree
for its rescission.”
The buyer is entitled to a charge on the property as

against the seller and all persons claiming under him to the
extent of the seller's interest in the property for the amount of
any purchase money probably paid by the buyer provided the
purchaser has not improperly declined to accept delivery.

The

law on this matter is well settled and it would be sufficient to refer
to only 2 decisions.
55.

In Abdul Hamid Khan vs. Mohamed Ali Humayum, AIR

1952 Bom.67 it was held that the charge under S.55(6)(b) of the
Transfer of Property Act for the pre-paid purchase money comes
into existence the moment the buyer pays part of the purchase
money towards the sale transaction and that the same is
available not only against the seller but also against the
CRP No.749/2002

page 23 of 27

purchaser from the seller irrespective of the question whether the
said purchaser had or had not noticed a charge, in view of the fact
that it is a statutory charge under S.55(6)(b) independent of any
question of notice. The same view was taken by a Bench of the
Bombay High Court in Jibhaoo vs. Ajab Sing, AIR 1953 Bom.145.
In that case, the entire price had been paid to the vendor in
pursuance of a sale which however was found to be invalid. The
purchaser applied under the Bombay Agricultural Debtors' Relief
Act for his claim being upheld as a mortgagee with regard to the
purchase price paid by him and it was held that under S.55(6)(b)
the purchaser was entitled to a charge over the property agreed
to be sold the moment the purchase price was paid by him.
56.

In the report published as 1892 ILR 16 Bom. 608 Sadhoo

vs. Ram Govind, it was observed that in a suit for partition, all
persons interested in the property to be divided must be brought
before the Court and that a purchaser or a mortgagee under a coparcener is a proper and even a necessary party to the suit for
partition.

The reason was that the right of an alienee from an

individual co-parcener, whether as purchaser or as a mortgagee,
though held to be a mere equity to have the property alienated
allotted to the share of the alienating partner, but was in
recognition of a right in such alienee, even a mortgagee, to
successfully challenge the partition on the ground of fraud or
collusion.
57.

If a purchaser or a mortgagee under a co-parcener who

CRP No.749/2002

page 24 of 27

has a mere charge by operation of law to proceed against the
substituting property could be impleaded as a party, as was so
held by the Supreme Court in Amit Kumar Shaw's case (supra), in
the instant case, the crux of the question would be why this
principle should not apply to a person who has got an agreement
to sell in his favour just because such an agreement is merely
executory and does not create an interest in movable property.
58.

The answers are to be found in the passages noted

herein above from the opinions in Amon's case (supra) and
Dollfus Mieget Compagnie's case (supra).
59.

Contractual rights lesser than proprietory rights but

similar to proprietory rights would be sufficient interest attracting
the participation of the applicant in the settlement of all the
questions involved in the suit if there is a possibility that the
decision in the suit is likely to affect the said contractual interest.
Section 55(6)(b) is a sufficient interest, statutorily recognized in
favour of a prospective buyer.
60.

Had there been no clause akin to clause-7 in the

agreement to sell between the parties and had the tenant been a
complete stranger i.e. having no concern with the applicant, issue
would have arisen in a totally different context.

Different

principles would then have applied. But, the peculiar nature of
the agreement to sell in the instant case makes a material
difference.
61.

A passing reference may also be made to the decision of

CRP No.749/2002

page 25 of 27

the Supreme Court reported as 1998 (8) SCC 466 Baldev Singh
vs. P.N.B & Ors. It is a short order. It reads as under:“1.

Special leave granted.

2.

Heard learned counsel for both the sides.

3.
Respondent 2, Santokh Singh has filed a suit
in the Court of Senior Sub-Judge, Jullundur for a
declaration that the sale deed allegedly executed by
Defendant 1, Baldev Singh, in favour of Defendant 2,
Harbhajan Kaur, acting as power of attorney of the
plaintiff is null and void and consequently the lease
deed dated 10.2.1993 is null and void and not binding
on the plaintiff. There are certain other consequential
reliefs also. The question of title may, therefore, arise
for determination in that suit.
4.
The present special leave petition has been
filed by Baldev Singh against the order dated
1.6.1995 in Civil Revision No.2174 of 1995 whereby
the High Court dismissed the revision from the order
of the Additional Rent Controller dated 6.4.1995
allowing the application of Santokh Singh for being
impleaded as a party under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC. The
learned counsel for the appellant herein contends that
the question of title cannot be gone into in the
proceedings before the Rent Controller and the Rent
Controller was in error in allowing the application and
the High Court too was in error in summarily rejecting
his revision. The situation which emerges is that if
Santokh Singh cannot be impleaded in the rent
proceedings, wherein he would certainly raise the
contention in regard to his title to the property, he
would be without a remedy and the rent would be
collected by Baldev Singh and thereafter he may have
to take further proceedings against Baldev Singh,
thus, multiplying the litigation.
Therefore, the
appropriate course would appear to be that rent suit
should await the decision of the civil court on the
question of title but in the meantime the tenant, i.e.,
the Punjab National Bank should go on depositing the
rent/mesne profits in the Rent Control Court and the
question of payment of the amount would be a matter
that may be decided by the appropriate court at the
appropriate point of time. The parties would be at
liberty to move the civil court for an early hearing.

CRP No.749/2002

page 26 of 27

62.

5.
In the meantime, the Rent Controller may,
at such intervals deemed appropriate, invest the rent
in fixed deposits so that it may yield interest. The
proceedings before the Rent Controller will remain
stayed till the suit is disposed of.
The present
proceedings will stand disposed of accordingly.”
The aforesaid short but incisive decision of the Supreme

Court guides how multiplicity of proceedings and futile litigation
has to be avoided.
63.

For the reasons noted herein above the impugned order

is sustained.
64.

The petition is dismissed.

65.

However, keeping in view the nicety of the question

raised in the petition and placing on record my appreciation for
the learned counsel who very ably assisted me at the hearing, it
has to be recorded that the dismissal does not attract any costs.

March 22, 2007
dk

CRP No.749/2002

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 27 of 27

