IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.2343/2005
#
!

Smt.Pratima Sharma
through:

...
Petitioner
Mr.Yogesh Kapoor, Adv.

VERSUS
$
^

M/s.Cartel Finance & Investments
Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.
...
Respondents
through: Mr.Jitender Sarin, Adv.
for respondent No.1.
Crl.M.C. No.2344/2005

#
!

Smt.Pratima Sharma
through:

...
Petitioner
Mr.Yogesh Kapoor, Adv.

VERSUS
$
^

%

M/s.Cartel Finance & Investments
Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.
...
Respondents
through: Mr.Jitender Sarin, Adv.
for respondent No.1.
DATE OF DECISION:

24-10-2007

*

CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioner has been summoned to face trial for an

offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881
read with Section 141 thereof.
2.

It is not in dispute that the petitioner and Ramesh

Bareja are the only 2 partners of the firm M/s.Forgewell
Engineering Corporation.

It is also not in dispute that the

petitioner is not shown as a sleeping partner of the firm as per the
partnership deed.
3.

It is also not in dispute that the cheques forming

subject matter of the complaints were issued from the account of
the firm M/s.Forgewell Engineering Corporation. It is also not in
dispute that the cheques were not honoured by the banker on
whom the cheques were drawn.
4.

In the complaints filed, the partnership firm has been

impleaded as accused No.1. Ramesh Bareja has been impleaded
as accused No.2.

Pratima Sharma i.e. the petitioner has been

impleaded as accused No.3.
5.

Material averments in the complaint which need to be

noted are in para 4 of the complaints.

Save and except the

cheque numbers, date of cheque and the amount, all averments
in para 4 of both the complaints are identical.

I note the

averments in para 4 only in one complaint. It reads as under:“4.

That the accused failed to make the

6.

timely re-payments and consequently a huge
outstanding, including interest, accrued in their
account. After a lot of persuasions and repeated
follow-ups the accused issued a cheque No.819645
dated 15.7.2002 drawn on Punjab & Sind Bank,
Janpath, New Delhi for a sum of Rs.1,00,000/towards part discharge of the aforesaid liability. The
cheque was signed by the accused No.2 Ramesh
Bareja as partner of accused No.1 M/s. Forgewell
Engineering Corporation. The accused Nos.2 and 3
are/were the partners of accused No.1 and are/were
looking after the day-to-day affairs of accused No.1
during the relevant period. Both accused No.2 and
3 are/were in-charge o and responsible for the
conduct of the business of accused No.1 and are
thus jointly and severally liable for the acts.”
It is urged by learned counsel for the petitioner that

actionable averments in the complaint ought to have been that
the petitioner was responsible for the affairs of the partnership
firm with particulars as to how she was responsible for the affairs
thereof. It is urged that in the absence of particulars of how the
petitioner is responsible for the business of the partnership firm,
there are no actionable averments in the complaint and hence
learned Metropolitan Magistrate could not have taken cognizance
of the complaint much less summon the petitioner.
7.

A perusal of para 4 of the complaint shows that the

complainant has averred that accused No.2 i.e. Ramesh Bareja as
partner of accused No.1 i.e the partnership firm had signed the
cheques. Thereafter it has been averred that apart from Ramesh
Bareja, even petitioner was a partner of accused No.1 and that

both were looking after day-to-day affairs of the partnership firm
during the relevant period. There are further averments that both
partners were in-charge of and responsible for the conduct of
business of the accused No.1.
8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner cites (2004) 7 SCC

15 Monaben Katenbhai Shah and Anr. vs. State of Gujarat & Ors.
to urge that a similarly worded complaint was held to be lacking in
material particular and hence summoning order against a partner
was quashed by the Supreme Court.
9.

Averments in the complaint which were considered by

the Supreme Court in Monaben's case (supra) were as under:“(1) The accused in this matter, for the
development of their business had taken amount of
Rs.60,000/- through agent on 8.1.1998 which was
paid by us vide Cheque No.7432109 drawn on
Canara Bank for Rs.60,000/- which is received by
the accused, therefore, the receipt was also issued
on 8.1.1998.
(2)
The said amount was for 2.5 months.
Therefore, the accused had issued us a cheque
No.3358762 dated 23.3.1998 drawn on State Bank
of Saurashtra, Kalanala Branch, Bhavnagar for a
sum of Rs.62,250/-. On presentation of the said
cheque in our account the accused had stopped
payment on the said cheque so it was returned.
Canara Bank was given intimation in this regard by
letter dated 17.9.1998, SBS Kalanala, Bhavnagar.
And, therefore, on 19.9.1998 Canara Bank informed
us, so the notice through advocate dated 28.9.1998
was issued to the accused. And although all of
them are served but no amount is paid.”

The material part of the title of the complaint reads
thus:
“Karta of Himanshu Jayantilal,
HUF
Himanshu Jayantilal Thakkar

...Complainant

Versus
Partners of Sona Fibres

10.

(1) Shah Madhumati Harshadraj
(2) Harshadrai vs. Shah (HUF)
(3) Monaben Ketanbhai Shah
(4) Sonaben R.Shah
(5) Rupaben Harshabhai Shah
...Accused”
A perusal of the averments which were noted by the

Supreme Court in the complaint which was subject matter of
consideration in Monaben's case (supra) revealed that the only
averment against the appellants therein was that they were the
partners of the partnership firm Sona Fibres. It was in relation to
said averment that the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under
in para 6 of the decision:“6.
From the above, it is evident that in the
complaint there are no averments against the
appellants except stating in the title that they are
partners of the firm.
Learned counsel for the
respondent complainants contended that a copy of
the partnership deed was also filed which would
show that the appellants were active in the
business. No such document was filed with the
complaint or made part thereof. The filing of the
partnership deed later is of no consequence for
determining the point in issue. Section 141 does
not make all partners liable for the offence. The

11.

criminal liability has been fastened on those who, at
the time of the commission of the offence, were in
charge of and were responsible to the firm for the
conduct of the business of the firm. These may be
sleeping partners who are not required to take any
part in the business of the firm; they may be ladies
and others who may not know anything about the
business of the firm. The primary responsibility on
the complainant to make necessary averments in
the complaint so as to make the accused vicariously
liable. For fastening the criminal liability, there is no
presumption that every partner knows about the
transaction. The obligation of the appellants to
prove that at the time the offence was committed
they were not in charge of and were not responsible
to the firm for the conduct of the business of the
firm, would arise only when first the complainant
makes necessary averments in the complaint and
establishes that fact. The present case is of total
absence of requisite averments in the complaint.”
In para 7, Hon'ble Supreme Court while noting the

decisions in K.P.G. Nair vs. Jindal Menthol India Ltd. (2001) 10 SCC
218 and Katta Sujatha vs. Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore Ltd.
(2002) 7 SCC 655 observed as under:“7.
In K.P.G. Nair vs. Jindal Menthol India Ltd.
(2001) 10 SCC 218 this Court held that the
substance of allegations read as a whole should
answer and fulfill the requirements of the
ingredients of Section 141. The criminal complaint
was quashed in Katta Sujatha vs. Fertilizers &
Chemicals Travancore Ltd. (2002) 7 SCC 655 since
in the complaint it was not stated that the accused
was in charge of the business and was responsible
for the conduct of the business of the firm nor was
there any other allegation that she had connived
with any other partner in the matter of issue of
cheque.”
12.

It is thus apparent that the sole averment that a

particular person was a partner of a firm was held to be an
insufficient averment to attract liability under Section 138 read
with Section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 against
the partner of a firm.
13.

In the instant case, there are specific averments that

apart from Ramesh Bareja, even petitioner, as partner of the firm
was looking after the day-to-day affairs of the partnership firm
and was along with Ramesh Bareja was in-charge and responsbile
for the conduct of the business of the partnership firm.
14.

I may like to point out that vis-a-vis directors of a

company and partners of a partnership firm, position of law needs
a little clarification.
15.

In law, unless otherwise made liable for the conduct or

action of somebody else, no person would be liable for an offence
committed by somebody else.

For example, under the Indian

Penal Code, vicarious liability can be fastened under Sections 34,
109, 120-B and 149 IPC. In relation to offences under Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881, primary liability is that of
the person who has issued the cheque in question.

Vicarious

liability is attracted by virtue of Section 141 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act 1881 which states that where the offence is
committed

by

a

company,

(a

company

meaning

a

body

incorporated and including a partnership firm), persons who were
in-charge and were responsible to the company (partnership firm)
for the conduct of the business of the company (partnership firm)
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence under Section 138 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881.
16.

Position of directors of a company is distinct from that

of partners of a partnership firm.
17.

A director may or may not be liable for the conduct of

the business of a company unless under the articles of association
of a company it has been provided to the contra or by a board of
resolution a director is made responsible for the conduct of
business of a company. But, in a partnership firm, the rule is to
the contrary.

Unless the partnership deed provides to the

contrary, every partner has a right in law to conduct the business
of the partnership firm.

[See Section 12(a) of the Partnership

Act]. Further, under Section 18 of the Partnership Act a partner is
the agent of the firm for the purposes of the business of the firm.
A director is not treated to be the agent of the company.
18.

With this distinction in mind, decisions pertaining to

liability of directors of a company have to be considered. The said
decisions would not strictly be attracted when the dispute relates
to a partnership firm. Though, I may hasten to add that generic

principles would certainly be attracted.
19.

Having noted the specific averments in para 4 of the

complaint against the petitioner I am satisfied that there was
sufficient material before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate
justifying the passing of the summoning order.
20.

The petitions are dismissed.

21.

No costs.

October 24, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

