IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CRP No.6/2006
#
!
$
^

Manohar Singh
........
Petitioners
through: Petitioner in person
VERSUS
Shri D.S.Sharma & Ors.
........
Respondents
through: Mr.V.P.Dewan, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 21.05.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
This Revision Petition challenges the order dated

27.7.2005.
2.

By the impugned order, suit filed by the plaintiff who is

petitioner herein was dismissed.
3.

Backdrop facts leading to the passing of impugned

order are as follows.
a)

Plaintiff filed suit for damages for defamation against

the defendants who are the respondents herein.
b)

The said case was listed for cross-examination of

CR No.6/2006

Page No.1 of 5

witness S.Josheph, DW-2 on 7.1.2004. On the said date, at
the request of the plaintiff, an adjournment was granted to
cross-examine the witness subject to payment of costs.
c)

However, no steps were taken by the plaintiff to pay

the costs till 1.4.2005. On 1.4.2005, it was directed that
upon deposit of the cost in court, the witness shall be crossexamined on 27.4.2005. Again, no costs were deposited in
the court by the plaintiff. Matter was listed for 27.7.2005.
d)

On 27.7.2005, after noting the provisions of Section

35-B of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and failure of the
plaintiff to pay the costs, his suit was dismissed.
4.
5.

Hence, this present revision petition.
Petitioner contended that the provisions of Section

35-B are directory and that in the event of non-payment of
costs on the next date of hearing, the Court was not
empowered to debar a party from prosecuting the suit or
the defence as the case may be. Petitioner contended that
since cross-examination of DW-2 was allowed subject to
payment of costs, learned Trial Court ought to have declined
only the liberty to cross-examine DW-2 and should not have
dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.

CR No.6/2006

Page No.2 of 5

5.

On the other hand, contention of the learned counsel

for the respondent is that the provisions of Section 35-B of
the Code are mandatory and that in the event of nonpayment of costs by the plaintiff, Trial Court has rightly
dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
6.

In order to effectively deal with the matter, it would be

appropriate to notice the provisions of Section 35-B of the
Code of Civil Procedure which reads as under :'35-B.(1) If, on any date fixed for the hearing of a
suit or for taking any step therein, a party to the
suit(a) fails to take the step which he was required
by or under this Code to take on that date, or
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step
or for producing evidence or any other ground, the
Court may, for reasons to be recorded, make an
order requiring such party to pay to the other party
such costs as would, in the opinion of the Court, be
reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other party
in respect of the expenses incurred by him
attending the Court on that date, and payment of
such costs, on the date next following the date of
such order, shall be a condition precedent to the
further prosecution of (a) the suit by the plaintiff, where the plaintiff
was ordered to pay such costs,
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the
defendant was ordered to pay such costs.'

CR No.6/2006

Page No.3 of 5

7.

A bare scrutiny of provisions of Section 35-B would

show that the legislature has made its intention absolutely
clear and beyond the pale of any doubt, that the provisions
are mandatory in nature in any non-compliance with the
same would result in penal consequences as envisaged
therein.
8.

The expression 'shall be a condition precedent' shows

that the word 'shall' in the Section is qualified by the words
'condition precedent'.
9.

Where a Statute declares that doing of a particular

thing shall be a condition precedent, then obviously the
intention is to make it a premptory mandate.

A condition

precedent is a condition which must be performed. If the
legislature had not intended to make the provisions of the
Section mandatory, then it was not necessary for the
legislature to have qualified the word 'shall' with the words
'condition precedent'.

The words 'condition precedent'

qualifying the word 'shall' appear to be the clincher for
interpreting the provisions of Section 35-B as mandatory.
9.

In my view, a plain reading of the Section shows that

the court is only required to see whether the costs have

CR No.6/2006

Page No.4 of 5

been paid or not and if a party does not pay the costs, then
the only course open to the court is to disallow the
prosecution of the suit or the defence any further.
10.

Similar view was taken by the majority view of the Full

Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the decision
reported as Anand Prakash Vs. Bhushan Rai AIR 1981 P & H
269 (FB).
11.

In view of above discussion, I hold that Trial Court has

rightly dismissed the suit of the petitioner/plaintiff.
12.

No costs.

May 21, 2007
vg

CR No.6/2006

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page No.5 of 5

