IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CRL.M.C.No.644/2005
#
!

M/s. Webcity Infosys Ltd.
........
Petitioner
through: Mr. Neeraj K.Singh, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Registrar of Companies
(Delhi & Haryana)
.......
Respondent
through : Mr. Baldev Malik, Advocate
CRL.M.C.No.646/2005

#
!

M/s. Webcity Infosys Ltd.
........
Petitioner
through: Mr. Neeraj K.Singh, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Registrar of Companies
(Delhi & Haryana)
.......
Respondent
through : Mr. Baldev Malik, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 26.09.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (ORAL)
Facts are not in dispute. Undisputed position is that if

it is not a case of a continuing cause

of

action,

admittedly

complaints being filed beyond a period of 6 months from the date
when actionable knowledge was with the competent authority,
they would be barred by limitation.

2.

Alleging violation of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2)

of Section 205-A of the Companies Act 1956, complaint in
question was filed beyond a period of 6 months from the date
when the offence was completed i.e. reckoned with effect from 6
months after dividend was declared and remained unpaid and
even beyond 6 months when knowledge of the offence was with
the Registrar of Companies.
3.

Whereas petitioners urge that by virtue of sub-section

(8) of Section 205-A of the Companies Act the offence being
punishable with only fine, limitation would be 6 months by virtue
of Section 468(2)(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973,
prosecution states that though limitation would be 6 months but
since it is a continuing cause of action, complaint is not barred by
limitation.
4.

To decide the rival versions it would be relevant to

note sub-section (8) of Section 205-A of the Companies Act. It
reads as under:-

5.

“205-A. (8)
If a company fails to comply with
any of the requirements of the section, the
company and every officer of the company who is in
default, shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees for every day during
which the failure continues.”
Distinction between offences which take place when an

act or remission is committed once for all and a continuing
offence has been pithly drawn in the decision of the Supreme
Court reported as AIR 1973 SC 908 State of Bihar vs. Deokaran

Nenshi & Anr.
6.

In para 5 of the judgment it was opined as under:-

7.

“5.
Continuing offence is one which is
susceptible of continuance and is distinguishable
from the one which is committed once and for all. It
is one of those offences which arises out of a failure
to obey or comply with a rule or its requirement and
which involves a penalty, the liability for which
continues until the rule or its requirement is obeyed
or complied with. On every occasion that such
disobedience or non-compliance occurs and recurs,
there is the offence committed. The distinction
between the two kinds of offences is between an
act or omission which constitutes an offence once
and for all and an act or omission which continues
and therefore constitutes a fresh offence every time
or occasion on which it continues. In the case of a
continuing offence there is thus the ingredient of
continuance of the offence which is absent in the
case of an offence which takes place when act or
omission is committed once and for all.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court were considering

regulation 3 of the Indian Metalliferous Mines Regulations and
Section 66 of the Mines Act 1952. In para 9 of the report it was
opined as under:“9.
Reg.3 read with Section 66 of the Mines
Act makes failure to furnish annual returns for the
preceding year by the 21st of January of the
succeeding year an offence. The language of Reg.3
clearly indicates that an owner, manager etc. of a
mine would be liable to the penalty if he were to
commit an infringement of the Regulation and that
infringement consists in the failure to furnish
returns on or before January 21 of the succeeding
year.
The infringement, therefore, occurs on
January 21 of the relevant year and is complete on
the owner failing to furnish the annual returns by
that day. The Regulation does not lay down that
the owner, manager etc. of the mine concerned
would be guilty of an offence if he continues to
carry on the mine without furnishing the returns or
that the offence continues until the requirement of

8.

Reg.3 is complied with. In other words Reg.3 does
not render a continued disobedience or noncompliance of it an offence. As in the case of a
construction of a wall in violation of a rule or a byelaw of a local body, the offence would be complete
once and for all as soon as such construction is
made a default occurs in furnishing the returns by
the prescribed date. There is nothing in Reg.3 or in
any other provision in the Act or the Regulations
which renders the continued non-compliance an
offence until its requirement is carried out.”
A Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court

considered Section 162 of the Companies Act which deals with a
failure to submit returns. Sub-section (1) of Section 162 of the
Companies Act reads as under:-

9.

“162.
Penalty and interpretation. - (1) If a
company fails to comply with any of the provisions
contained in sections 159, 160 or 161, the
company, and every officer of the company who is
in default, shall be punishable with fine which may,
extend to five hundred rupees for every day
during which the default continues.”
Suffice would it be to note that offence under Section

162 of the Companies Act is a failure to submit a return. Further,
the penalty is up to Rs.500/- for every day during which the
default continues.
10.

Contrasted with the language of sub-section (8) of

Section 205 of the Companies Act, it be noted that the 2
provisions are pari materia. Only difference being that word used
in sub-section (1) of Section 162 is 'default' and the word used in
sub-section (8) of Section 205-A of the Companies Act is 'failure'.
11.

Interpreting Section 162 of the Companies Act, in para

14 of the decision of the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court

reported as 1984 Tax L.R. 2043 National Cotton Mills Ltd. vs.
Assistant Registrar of Companies, it was held as under:“14.
On a careful review of the legal position,
it is difficult for us to agree with the view expressed
by a learned single Judge in the above case. As
pointed out by the Supreme Court, in order to
constitute a continuing offence, the offence must
arise out of a failure to obey or comply with a rule
or its requirement and which involves a penalty, the
liability for which continues until the rule or its
requirement is obeyed or complied with. Section
150 of the Companies Act does not impose any
liability which so continues. The offence on the
breach thereof is complete with the failure to
furnish the return in the manner or within the time
stipulated.
Such an offence is committed once and for all as
and when one commits the default. That provision
does not contemplate that the obligation to submit
such returns continues from day to day until the
return is actually submitted nor does it provide that
continuance of business without filling of such
returns is prohibited so that non-fulfillment of a
continuing obligation or continuing of business
without filing of such returns becomes a continuing
offence. When Section 162 of the Companies Act
prescribed the penalty of fine 'which may extend to
fifty rupees for every day during which the default
continues', it merely prescribed the measure of
penalty – such a prescription being made with the
object of enforcing strict compliance with the
requirement of Section 159 under the threat of
enhanced penalty and getting relief from such
penalty on enhancing scale by early submission of
returns even after the default. That does not
render the initial default a continuous one. It
cannot be said that the offence is repeated or
committed from day to day after the initial default.
It is only where the offence is committed from day
to day that it can be called a continuing offence.
There being no express provision in Section 234,
598 etc. of the Companies Act it will not be proper
to hold that the offence under Section 162 is a
continuing offence.
When the statute itself
provides for continuance of offence irrespective of

initial default in some cases but does not make
similar provisions in respect of some other offences,
it would not be correct to say that the latter class of
cases also would be continuing offences.
I note that the Division Bench of Calcutta High Court

12.

based its decision and heavily relied upon the decision of the
Supreme Court in Deokaran Nanshi's case (supra).
13.

Thus, there is no need for me to explain any

further

save and except to record that the logical conclusion of following
the ratio of law declared in Deokaran Nanshi's case (supra) as
followed and elaborated by the Division Bench of the Calcutta
High Court in National Cotton Mills' case (supra) requires this
Court to hold that offence under Section 205-A of the Companies
Act, as punishable under sub-section (8) thereof, is not a
continuing offence. The offence arises out of a failure to obey or
comply with the rule and involves a penalty.

The liability may

continue until the requirement is obeyed or complied with. It is
not a case where the offence is repeated or committed from dayto-day after the initial default.
14.
was

I thus hold that the complaint against the petitioner
barred

by

limitation

and

hence

learned

Metropolitan

Magistrate could not take cognizance thereof. I also note that in
the summoning order, the learned Magistrate has not condoned
the delay.
15.

Before concluding, a submission made when judgment

was being dictated may be noted.

The submission was by

learned counsel for the respondent. It was urged that limitation
would commence with effect from the date Regional Director
accorded permission for filing of the complaint.
16.

I am afraid, the submission is based on a complete

ignorance of law. Limitation has to commence when actionable
knowledge is gained by the competent authority. In the instant
case, it may be noted that the inspections were completed and
reports were available with the Regional Director, Northern
Region, Kanpur by the end of December 2000.
17.

The complaints in question were filed on 16.5.2002.

18.

The petitions stand disposed of quashing the complaint

as also the summoning order dated 16.5.2002 in both the
complaints, summoning the petitioners to face trial.
19.

No costs.

September 26, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

