IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL.M.C.No.6634-35/2005
#
!

Sh. B.B.Chaudhary & Anr.
.......Petitioners
through: Mr. Rajiv Sharma, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Sh. Govinder Arora & Ors.
.......Respondents
through: Mr. Santosh K.Gupta, Advocate for R-1.
Mr. Atul Kumar Sharma for R-2 and R-3.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 22-10-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)
First respondent had filed a complaint under Section

138 of N.I.Act impleading M/s Rimple Furnishers & Decorators as
accused

No.1 and

one Ravi Malik and Kamaljit Sisodia

as

accused No.2 and 3 alleging that they were directors of accused
No.1.

Petitioners B.B.Choudhary and his wife Neeru Choudhary

were not named as accused persons, much less as directors of the
company.
2.

It was stated in the complaint that Ravi Malik and

Kamaljit Sisodia, directors of accused No.2 had approached and
purchased goods from the complainant and had issued certain
cheques assuring that the cheques would be encashed on
presentation.

That the cheques in questioned were returned

dishonoured by the banker on whom the cheques were drawn
with the remarks “exceeds arrangement”.

That inspite of

service of notice under Section 138 of N.I.Act, no payment was
made.
3.

During pendency of the complaint, an application was

filed on 13.8.2003 requesting the learned Trial Judge to even
summon the petitioners as accused persons. It was stated in the
application that the complainant had learnt that even the
petitioners were the directors of the company impleased as
accused No.1.

The said application was directed to be listed for

hearing on 30.9.2003, the date fixed for consideration of the
complaint. On 30.9.2005, following order was passed :“Application has been moved on behalf of the
complainant disclosing the fresh address of
accused No.2 and the other Directors of the
company.
It is submitted by the Ld. Counsel for the
complainant that a prima facie case is made out
against
the
two
Directors
viz.
Shri
B.B.Choudhary and Mrs.Neeru Choudhary. It is
further submitted that the names and addresses
of the Directors have been disclosed by the

accused. It is submitted that the Directors are
responsible for day to day affairs and the
conduct of the business of the company.
In view of the submissions made by the Ld.
Counsel for the complainant and the averments
made in the application, there is a prima facie
case made out against the accused persons.

4.

Let the accused be summoned for 14.11.2003
and accused No.2 be also served on the fresh
address mentioned in para VIII of the
application.”
Questioning the order dated 30.9.2003 it is urged by

learned counsel for the petitioners that there are no averments in
the complaint against the petitioners.

In the pre-summoning

evidence, not a whisper has been made viz-a-viz the conduct of
the petitioners in relation to the affairs of accused No.1 i.e. the
company.

That on the mere assertion in the application that

petitioners were directors of accused No.1, impugned order has
been passed.
5.

Learned counsel points out that liability of directors of

a company is under Section 141 of the N.I.Act and unless specific
role is assigned to a person stated to be the director of the
company, an order summoning a director would be contrary to
law.
6.

Learned counsel for respondent No.1 states that it is

enough to state

that the accused person

stated to be the

director was the director of the company and was Incharge of the
affairs of the company.
7.

It is not in dispute that in the complaint no reference

whatsoever has been made to the petitioners.

It is also not in

dispute that in the pre-summoning evidence which was recorded
prior to 13.8.2003 not a whisper has been made regarding the
petitioners. In the application in question which has resulted in
the petitioners being summoned, it has been stated in para 3 as
under:-

8.

“3. That the applicant/complainant has come
to know that there are two more director of the
accused company. The said factum was
intimated to the applicant/complainant by
accused No.3.”
In para 4 of the application, names and addresses of

the petitioners have been mentioned. In para 5 it is stated that
petitioners are also responsible for day to day affairs and conduct
of the accused company.
9.

In the decision reported as AIR 2007 SC 1454,

N.K.Wahi Vs. Shekhar Singh & Ors., in para 8, it was observed as
under:“8. To launch a prosecution, therefore, against
the alleged Directors there must be a specific
allegation in the complaint as to the part played
by them in the transaction. There should be
clear and unambiguous allegation as to how
the Directors are incharge and responsible for

10.

the conduct of the business of the company.
The description should be clear. It is true that
precise words from the provisions of the Act
need not be reproduced and court can always
come to a conclusion in facts of each case. But
still in the absence of any averment or specific
evidence
the net result would be
that
complaint would not be entertainable.
Keeping in view the law laid down by the Supreme

Court, suffice would it be to state that neither in the complaint
nor in the pre-summoning evidence

nor in the application in

question has any assertions been made specifying the part played
by the petitioners in the transaction between the accused and the
company. In fact, in the complaint there are specific allegations
that only accused No.2 and 3 were acting on behalf of the
company when the complainant dealt with the company. By the
rule of exclusion, the complaint self-negates the role of any other
person in the conduct and management of the affairs of the
company in question. Thus, I dispose of the petition quashing the
order dated 30.9.2003 summoning the petitioners to face trial in
the complaint filed by respondent No.1 against M/s Rimple
Furnishers & Decorators and its two other directors.
11.

I quash the said complaint against the petitioners.

12.

No costs.

October 22, 2007
pu

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

