IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM(M) No.1690-97/2005
#
!
$
^

Shri Fateh s/o Shri Kure
(Deceased) through his LRs
........ Petitioners
through: Mr.N.S.Vasisht, Advocate
VERSUS
Shri Hukmi & Ors.
....... Respondent
through : Mr.Maheshwar Dayal, Sr. Advocate
with Ms.Chitralekha Sen, Adv.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 20.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
2 points need to be decided. Firstly, whether the instant

petition is maintainable. Secondly, if the instant petition is
maintainable, whether the impugned order dated 23.5.2005
can be sustained.
2.

To appreciate the issues it may be noted that certain

lands were recorded as Bunjar Quadim (waste land) when Delhi
Land Reforms Act, 1954 was promulgated. Under the mandate
of Section 7 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act these lands were
CM(M) No.1690-97/2005

Page No.1 of 7

shown vested in the Gaon Sabha. Consolidation commenced in
the village. Part of Gaon Sabha land was utilized for extending
the village Abadi.

The Consolidation Officer allotted certain

plots to the petitioners for their residence within the extended
Abadi of the village as per notified scheme.

The issue

pertaining to consolidation was fought by the respondents by
way of an appeal before the Additional Collector and finally a
writ petition in this court which was dismissed with an
observation that respondents may seek remedies as available
in law.
3.

Respondents

filed

applications

before

the

revenue

assistant praying that the land being shown as vested in Gaon
Sabha when Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 was promulgated be
set aside. The matter was litigated till the highest authority,
i.e. Financial Commissioner. Respondents lost the battle.
4.

Thereupon respondents filed 2 suits registered as Suit

Nos.391/1980

and

90/1981

seeking

declarations

and

injunctions. Declarations sought were that the orders passed
by the consolidation authorities under the East Punjab Holdings
(Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 1948 be
declared illegal.

In the 2 suits various issues were framed.

Inter alia, an issue was framed whether the jurisdiction of the
CM(M) No.1690-97/2005

Page No.2 of 7

civil courts was barred
Consolidation Act.

in view of Section 44

of the

An issue was framed whether the orders

passed by the revenue authorities were illegal, void or without
jurisdiction?
5.

Other issues were also framed on merits.

6.

Nobody pressed for any issue to be treated as a

preliminary issue.

Evidence was recorded.

But, when final

judgment was pronounced on 4.10.1993, learned Trial Judge
rejected the plaints holding that the orders passed under the
Consolidation Act could not be subjected to a challenge in a
suit.
7.

Respondents filed 2 appeals which were allowed vide

order dated 23.5.2005 holding that the learned Trial Judge
ought to have decided all issues. No opinion was expressed by
the learned Appellate Judge on the maintainability of the suit.
Matter was remanded to the learned Trial Judge to decide all
issues except the issues which had already been decided.
8.

Petitioners have challenged the order dated 23.5.2005.

9.

Placing reliance upon Section 105 of the Code of Civil

Procedure read with Order XLI Rule 1(u) of the Code of Civil
Procedure it is urged that an appeal lies against an order
remanding a case by the appellate court under Order XLI Rule
CM(M) No.1690-97/2005

Page No.3 of 7

23 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
10.

Order XLI Rule 23 of the Code of Civil Procedure reads as

under :-

11.

“23. Remand of case by Appellate Court.Where the Court from whose decree an appeal
is preferred has disposed of the suit upon a
preliminary point and the decree is reversed in
appeal, the Appellate Court may, if it thinks fit,
by order remand the case, and may further
direct what issue or issues shall be tried in the
case so remanded, and shall send a copy of its
judgment and order to the Court from whose
decree the appeal is preferred, which
directions to re-admit the suit under its
original number in the register of civil suits,
and proceed to determine the suit; and the
evidence (if any) recorded during the original
trial shall, subject all just exceptions, be
evidence during the trial after remand.”
Suffice would it be to state that the sine qua non for

exercising power of remand under Order XLI Rule 23 of the
Code of Civil Procedure is when a decree on a preliminary point
is reversed in appeal; meaning thereby that on merits the
Appellate Court has disagreed with the decree of the learned
Trial Judge on a preliminary point.
12.

In the instant case, as noted above, learned Appellate

Judge has not reversed the decree passed by the learned Trial
Judge on the preliminary point.

Operative part of the order

dated 23.5.2005 reads as under :“In view of my above discussion, I am of the
CM(M) No.1690-97/2005

Page No.4 of 7

13.

considered opinion that both the appeals
should be remanded back to the learned trial
court. Thus both th appeals are allowed and
the impugned Judgment and decree dated
4.10.1993 is set aside. The learned trial court
is directed to records its finding after hearing
the parties on all the issues except the issues
which have already been decided and then
dispose of the suit in accordance with law. As
both the suits are of the year 1981, it is
expected that the learned trial court will try
and ensure that both these suits are decided
at the earliest say atleast within period of six
months from today.
Decree-sheet be
prepared accordingly. Parties are directed to
appear before the Ld. Trial court on
03.06.2005. A copy of this order alongwith
trial court records be sent back and the
appeal files be consigned to the record
room.”
Surprisingly, the appeals have been disposed of without

reversing the decree of the learned Trial Judge.

While

remanding the matter, learned Trial Judge has been directed to
decide all issues except the issues which have already been
disposed of in the suit.
14.

The position therefore would be that the reasoning of the

learned Trial Judge and the decree rejecting the plaint would
stand notwithstanding the remand.
15.

The order in question does not stand the scrutiny of Order

XLI Rule 23 CPC. To put it differently, though purportedly in
exercise of power under Order XLI Rule 23 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, the order actually is not one within the confines of
CM(M) No.1690-97/2005

Page No.5 of 7

Order XLI Rule 23 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
16.

The procedural irregularity committed by the learned

Appellate Judge has created an anomalous situation.

On the

one hand the decree of the learned Trial Judge on the
preliminary point has been set aside. But, on the other hand,
the issue decided by the learned Trial Judge has not been
reversed on merits. Further, learned Trial Judge has been
directed to decide the other issues save and except the issues
already decided.
17.

At the remanded stage the decision of the learned Trial

Judge would have to be on the remaining issues. What happens
to the merits of the decision passed by the learned Trial Judge
rejecting the plaints?
18.

I thus hold that keeping in view the peculiar nature of the

order passed by the learned Appellate Judge the instant
petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India is the only
remedy available to the petitioners.
19.

With respect to the second contention urged by learned

counsel for the respondents that learned Trial Judge ought to
have decided all issues, suffice would it be to state that under
Order XIV Rule 2(2) it is permissible to dispose of a suit on an
issue of law provided it relates to the jurisdiction of the court or
CM(M) No.1690-97/2005

Page No.6 of 7

to a bar to a suit created by any law.
20.

Under the circumstances it was open to the learned Trial

Judge to dispose of the suit on the preliminary issues for the
reason they related to the jurisdiction of a civil court to take
cognizance of suits where orders passed by revenue authorities
are challenged.
21.

But, the respondents cannot be left without a remedy.

The procedural irregularity committed by the Appellate Court
needs to be rectified.
22.

The impugned judgment dated 23.5.2005 disposing of

appeals has to be set aside with a direction to the learned
Appellate Judge to revive the appeals and decide the same on
merits.
23.

Ordered accordingly.

24.

Petition stands disposed of quashing the judgment dated

23.5.2005

disposing

No.32/03/1993.

of

RCA

No.31/03/1993

The appeals are restored.

and

RCA

The learned

Appellate Judge is directed to decide the 2 appeals on merits.
25.

No costs.

December 20, 2007

vg

CM(M) No.1690-97/2005

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Page No.7 of 7

