IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CRL.M.C.No.550/2005
#
!

Gajraj Jain

through:

........
Petitioner
Mr. S.N.Mehrotra, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

State & Anr.
through:

........
Respondents
Mr. Mohit Mathur and
Mr. S.S.Chadha, Advocates

RESERVED ON: 23.10.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 29.10.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Gajraj Jain is aggrieved by the order dated 13.7.2004

passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate summoning him to
face trial as an accused for the offence under Section 420 read
with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code in a complaint filed by
Sh. K.K.Gupta as karta of K.K.Gupta & Sons (HUF).
2.

The complainant alleged that for the reasons stated in

the complaint offence under Section 406, 409 and 420 of the
Indian Penal Code were made out.

However, as noted above,

learned Metropolitan Magistrate has summoned the accused
persons to face trial only in respect of the offence under Section
Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

Page 1 of 10

420 IPC.
3.

In his complaint, K.K.Gupta has stated that Hilton

Rubbers Ltd. was a Private Ltd. Company and had invited deposits
from public for a period of one year. That as karta of the HUF he
had submitted the necessary application for making the deposit
enclosing therewith Cheque No. 299424 dated 24.12.1997 in sum
of Rs.7,50,000/-. The company encash the cheque and accepted
his

application on 31.12.1997

27.12.1997.

with retrospective date i.e.

That due date of maturity was 27.12.1998.

The

amount was refundable on maturity in sum of Rs.8,70,750/-.
When date of maturity was approaching, he submitted the original
receipt for encashment of the deposit with accumulated interest.
Amount was not released in his favour. That Gajraj Jain, a director
of the company assured him that the money would be paid
shortly.
4.

It was further stated in the complaint that as no

amount was paid he caused to be served upon the company a
notice of demand dated 9.7.1999. No amount being released he
was compelled to approach the State Consumer Dispute Redressal
Commission under the Consumer Protection Act for payment of
the amount due. That during pendency of the said complaint he
received an assurance that the amount would be refunded in
installments and in respect thereof, Kulbhushan, an Executive
Director of the Company issued to him a letter dated 7.7.2000
informing that if he unconditionally withdrew the complaint before
Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

Page 2 of 10

the State Consumer Dispute Redressal Commission the company
would refund the amount to him with interest but in installments
of Rs.25,000/- per month. Accordingly, he withdrew the complaint
filed by him before the State Consumer Dispute Redressal
Commission, but no amount was paid to him.
5.

It was further alleged that the company made a

reference to BIFR under the Sick Industrial Companies Act 1985
for being declared a sick company and sought restructuring. That
he moved an application before BIFR for refund of the deposit
made but was informed by BIFR vide order dated 8.7.2003 that he
was free to take resort to action available as per law and that no
directions were being issued by BIFR in respect of the deposit.
That BIFR has since recommended winding up of the company.
6.

It was further stated in the complaint that the directors

of the company painted a rosy position of the company viz-a-viz
its management and profit in order to attract depositors to invest
in the company knowingly well that the company had no means to
repay the depositors on maturity of the deposits.

Thus, it was

alleged that the directors of the company namely the petitioner
Gajraj Jain, one Mr. Sanjay S.Kilachand and Sh. C.B.Sharma had
with dishonest intention cheated the complainant.
7.

Before analyzing the respective submission of learned

counsel for the parties an agreed fact may be noted.

The

complainant has admittedly approached the Company Law Board
under the Companies Act 1956 for recovery of the money due to
Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

Page 3 of 10

the HUF as an unsecured creditor.
8.
petitioner

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
had

resigned

from

the

Board

of

Directors

on

29.11.2000. That K.K.Gupta was admittedly the Vice President of
the Company when the deposit was made in December 1997 thus
as a Senior Executive of the Company he was fully aware of the
financial future of the company. That sine qua non for the offence
of cheating is an intention to deceive at the very inception.
Inability to pay due to commercial insolvency or hardship does not
made out an offence of cheating. That it is a general tendency to
invoke the jurisdiction of criminal courts even in respect of the
purely commercial and civil transactions.

That the complainant

was fully aware of the fact that his remedies were before civil
forums inasmuch as he preferred a complaint before the State
Consumer Redressal Dispute Commission under the Consumer
Protection Act followed by an applicant before the Company Law
Board under the Companies Act 1956. The complaint in question
was filed on 24.11.2003 relatable to a cause which had accured
on 27.12.1998.
9.

Responding to the submissions made by learned

counsel for the petitioner, Sh. Mohit Mathur, learned counsel for
the respondent submitted that the offence of cheating took place
when on 7.7.2000 the company induced the complainant to
withdraw the complaint filed before the State Consumer Dispute
Redressal Commission assuring that the amount, with interest,
Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

Page 4 of 10

would be returned in monthly installments of Rs.25,000/-, but not
a single cheque was tendered. On merits, counsel submitted that
though complainant was the Vice President of the company but he
was incharge of the plant i.e. was looking after the production
aspect and therefore had no knowledge of the financial position of
the company.
10.

As observed by the Supreme Court in the decision

reported as JT 2006 (6) SC 474 M/s. Indian Oil Corporation Vs.
NEPC Ltd., a given set of fact may make out: (a) purely a civil
wrong; or (b) purely a criminal offence; or (c) a civil wrong as also
a criminal offence.
11.

A civil transaction or a contractual dispute, apart from

furnishing a cause of action for seeking remedy in civil law, may
also involve a criminal offence. As the nature of scope of a civil
proceeding are different from a criminal proceeding, the mere fact
that the complaint relates to a commercial transaction or breach
of contract for which a civil remedy is available and has been
availed is not by itself a ground to quash the criminal
proceedings. The test is whether the allegations in the complaint
disclose a criminal offence or not.
12.

Since the issue involved in the instant proceedings is of

the offence of cheating, it would be but necessary for this court to
briefly refer to the essential ingredients of the offence of cheating.
They are: (a) deception of a person either by making a false or
misleading representation or by other action or omission; and (b)
Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

Page 5 of 10

fraudulently or dishonest inducement of that person to either
deliver any property or to consent to the retention thereof by any
person or intentionally induce a person to do or omit to do
anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived
and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or
harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property.
13.

Breach of a contractual term would not amount to

cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown right at
the beginning of the transaction. In the decision reported as JT
2000 (3) SC 604 Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma Vs. State of Bihar,
in para 9 it was observed by the Supreme Court as under:“On a reading of the section it is manifest that in the
definition there are set forth two separate classes of acts
which the person deceived may be induced to do. In the
first place he may be induced fraudulently or dishonestly
to deliver any property to any person. The second class
of acts set forth in the section is the doing or omitting to
do anything which the person deceived would not do or
omit to do if he were not so deceived. In the first class
of cases the inducing must be fraudulent or dishonest.
In the second class of acts, the inducing must be
intentional but not fraudulent or dishonest.
In
determining the question it has to be kept in mind that
the distinction between mere breach of contract and the
offence of cheating is a fine one. It depends upon the
intention of the accused at the time to inducement
which may be judged by his subsequent conduct but for
this subsequent conduct is not the sole test. Mere
breach of contract cannot give rise to criminal
prosecution for cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest
intention is shown right at the beginning of the
transaction, that is the time when the offence is said to
have been committed. Therefore it is the intention
which is the gist of the offence. To hold a person guilty
of cheating it is necessary to show that he had
fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of making
the promise. From his mere failure to keep up promise
subsequently such a culpable intention right at the
Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

Page 6 of 10

14.

beginning, that is, when he made the promise cannot be
presumed.”
Tested on the anvil of the legal principles as noted

hereinabove, it would be relevant to note that K.K.Gupta was the
Vice President of the company when on behalf of his HUF, as Karta
he made the deposit in question. He states that he was looking
after the production unit.

But in view of the senior managerial

position which he was holding a strong presumption would arise
that he was aware of the financial position of the company he was
serving.
15.

This fact is relevant while considering whether the

complaint and the pre-summoning evidence brings out dishonest
intention of the company at the very inception when deposits
were invited.
16.

With liberalization of the economy and breaking down

of trade barriers, the commercial world has become highly
volatile. With the sensex going up and down by as many as 8% to
10% on some trading days, wealth is created and dissipated in
seconds. Perfectly healthy units turn sick. Units which are sick
find themselves in very rosy position when governmental policies
change.

Take for example units engaged in exports.

With the

dollar falling by nearly 15% in the last one year, this court has
witnessed large number of export oriented units suddenly turning
sick in the last six months. But prior to the last 6 months these
units were healthy units, making good profits.

Thus, where a

company is unable to pay its debts, to determine the intention of
Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

Page 7 of 10

the directors at the very inception, one has to look to the
surrounding facts at the time when the directors acted in the
name of the company of which they were directors.
17.

It would be difficult to assume that the directors of the

company had intention at the very inception to cheat the Vice
President of the same very company. After all, K.K.Gupta was a
vital functionary of the company. Of his own admission, as Vice
President of the company, K.K.Gupta was incharge of the
manufacturing unit. That apart, it is pleaded in the complaint that
the company was unable to refund the deposit on 27.12.1998.
Though not stated in the complaint but the order passed by the
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction to which
reference has been made in the complaint, being the order by
which complainant was directed to pursue his civil remedies,
reveals that the said order was passed in case No. 362/1999 i.e.
reference was made to BIFR for restructuring of the company
somewhere in early 1999.
18.

K.K.Gupta himself understood that the dispute was

purely a civil dispute is evidenced from the fact that he filed
proceedings before the State Consumer Dispute Redressal
Commission and thereafter before the Company Law Board. For
the cause, i.e. recovery of the amount due, which had accrued on
27.12.1998, the complaint in question has been filed on
24.11.2003 i.e. after 5 years.
19.

The reason is obvious, though unfortunate.

Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

The

Page 8 of 10

complainant has not been able to obtain favourable orders from
the Company Law Board where the matter is still pending even till
today.
20.

As noted by the Supreme Court in the Indian Oil

Corporation's case (supra), people are resorting to criminal
jurisdiction for the reason civil proceedings are taking a little too
long for decisions, thus initiation of criminal complaints is
conceived of by litigants as an alternative remedy.
21.

This is exactly what has happened in the instant case.

22.

I accordingly hold that read meaningfully, and in light

of the surrounding circumstances and especially the fact that
K.K.Gupta was the Vice President of the company when the
deposit was made, there is no material where from a prima facie
opinion can be formed that the Board of Directors of the company
had dishonest intention from the very inception when deposit in
question was made.
23.

As regards the plea that the complainant was induced

to withdraw the complaint filed before the State Consumer
Dispute Redressal Commission and but for the assurance that he
would be repaid the same due, he would have continued with the
complaint, suffice would it be to state that in the complaint after
stating the facts the cause of action for the offence of cheating
has been pleaded in paras 17, 18 and 19 as under:“17.
That it is evidently clear that it is thus for the
attitude of the Directors that the company has gone sick.
The Directors purposely painted a rosy picture of the
Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

Page 9 of 10

position of the company vis-a-vis its management and
profits, in order to attract small investors depositors to
invest in the company, knowing fully well that the
company in future would not be able to repay the
depositors on the maturity of their respective bonds.
18.
It is also pertinent to note that the investment
was made in the year 1997 and the bond matured in
1998 whereas the company approached the BIFR for
declaring sick in 1999 only. That from the above facts it
is clear that the company was in a position to pay the
complainant to maturity of the bond in 1998 as the
company approached BIFR in 1999. Hence the company
was not sick till the maturity of the fixed deposit of the
complainant.

24.

19.
That the complainant most respectfully
submits that the company from the very beginning had
dishonest intentions of cheating the complainant by
attracting investments by way of purchase of bonds, to
be made in the company but had the ulterior motive of
not paying back the returns on the maturity of the bond.
The company along with its directors namely Mr.Gajraj
Jain, Mr.Sanjay S.Khilachand and Shri C.B.Sharma are
liable collectively and individually for offences under
Sections 420, 409, 406 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code.”
The foundation of the complaint has been predicated

on averments made in paras 17, 18 and 19 of the complaint as
aforenoted. It is founded on the initial deposit.
25.

The petition is accordingly allowed.

26.

Order dated 13.7.2004 taking cognizance of the

complaint and summoning petitioner to face trial for the offence
of cheating is quashed.
27.

No costs.

October 29, 2007
MM

Crl.M.C. No.550/2005

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page 10 of 10

