IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM(M) No.1388/2007
#
!

Prem Shankar Gupta & Ors.
........ Petitioners
through: Mr.Kirti Uppal, Adv., Mr.Ajit Dayal, Adv.
and Ms.Anamika Ghai, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Delhi Development Authority & Anr. ........ Respondents
through: Ms.Sangeeta Chandra for DDA.
Mr.Amit Paul for MCD.
CM(M) No.1395/2007

#
!

Rajesh & Ors.
through:

........ Petitioners
Mr.Kirti Uppal, Adv., Mr.Ajit Dayal, Adv.
Ms.Anamika Ghai, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Delhi Development Authority & Anr. ....... Respondents
through: Ms.Sangeeta Chandra for DDA.
Mr.Amit Paul for MCD.
CM(M) No.1622/2007

#
!

Virender Pal & Ors.
........ Petitioners
through: Ms.Suman Chouhan, Adv.
Mr.Jivesh Kumar, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^
%

Delhi Development Authority & Ors. ........ Respondents
through: Ms.Sangeeta Chandra for DDA.
Mr.Ajay Arora & Mr.Kapil Dutta for MCD.
DATE OF DECISION: 21.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.1 of 23

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

By a common order I propose to dispose of CM(M)

Nos.1388/07,

1395/07

and

1622/07

which

have

almost

identical facts and raise similar questions of law.
2.

The petitions have been filed against the common

order dated 12.09.07 passed by Sh. S.S. Handa, ADJ, Delhi in
Appeal No.MCA 7/07 titled “Prem Shankar Gupta & Ors. vs.
DDA & Anr.”, MCA No.8/07 titled “Virender Pal Singh & Ors. vs.
DDA” and order dated 2.3.2007 passed by the Court of
Sh.Brijesh Kumar Garg, Commercial Civil Judge, Delhi in Suit
Nos.1404/05 and 1454/06. It appears that one set of plaintiffs
have chosen to file two different CM (Mains) for the reason in
respect of two proceedings which commenced, three petitions
have reached this court.
3.

The

learned

Trial

Judge

has

dismissed

the

applications filed for interim injunction. The appellate judge
has affirmed the said order passed by the learned trial judge.
4.

Before

proceeding

to

deal

with

the

legal

submissions made in the petitions it would be necessary to set
out the factual matrix.
5.

The petitioners herein filed two civil suits praying

CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.2 of 23

for a decree of permanent and mandatory injunction wherein,
claiming themselves to be hawkers/squatters/running small
and petty business/tehbazari kiosks of tea, eatables and other
food items and daily needs items such as clothes etc. on the
pavements, footpaths, open space in the vicinity of Nehru
Place Commercial Complex, Delhi for the last about 20 years.
It was contended that initially the area fell within the
jurisdiction of MCD and that MCD has transferred the said area
to DDA for maintenance. It was pleaded that the petitioners
have been paying tehbazari fee to the MCD for the site
occupied by them and that MCD has been issuing receipts to
the petitioners, thereby acknowledging their right to carry on
business from the site in respect whereof tehbazari right has
been conferred upon them. It was pleaded that plaintiffs
appeared before the Chopra Committee and made their
representations but the representations have not yet been
decided and no rejections have been received by them till date
of the suit.
6.
order

Petitioners instituted the suit seeking a restraint
from

the

Court

against

the

defendants

from

dispossessing them from the place of business allegedly
occupied by them. They also sought directions to be issued
requiring

defendants

to

allot

alternative

stalls

to

the

petitioners within the Nehru Place Commercial Complex on
payment of nominal amount of money.
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.3 of 23

7.

In the written statement filed by DDA it was pleaded

that Nehru Place District Centre had fallen into disarray and on
18.4.2002, in a meeting held under the Chairmanship of the
Hon'ble Lt. Governor, Delhi it was decided that the Nehru Place
Commercial Complex would be transferred to DDA.

For

improving the conditions at Nehru Place Commercial Complex
the following decisions were taken:(i)

The entire Nehru Place area will be Zero Tolerance
Zone where no violation of law would be permitted.

(ii)

All encroachments whether in right of way or on
piazzas or in common areas to be removed by MCD
(now DDA) immediately and ensure that these do
not come up again.

(iii)

The complex of Nehru Place Commercial Complex
to be transferred back to DDA for its maintenance in
future.

8.

It was further pleaded by DDA that in compliance

with the above decision the maintenance services of the
District Centre was transferred to DDA vide order dated
4.6.2002.

That the Engineer Member, DDA inspected the

Nehru Place Commercial Complex and ordered that all vendors
from the piazza should be removed and not allowed to come
back to avoid obstruction to the pedestrians and visitors in the
complex as well as to keep the complex neat and clean.
9.

It was pleaded that with the help of some of their

CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.4 of 23

leaders, petitioners were entering the complex daily in the
morning along with other hawkers and were encroaching upon
and occupying the open spaces meant for the public on the
main piazza and the adjoining area in the corridors, verandas,
galleries etc. causing obstruction to the pedestrians/visitors
and making the entire complex dirty and unhygienic causing
nuisance to the public.
10.

It

was

pleaded

that

the

petitioners

were

encroachers; having no right or title over the suit land and
were thus liable to be evicted.

That none of the petitioners

had any permission, license or regular tehbazari from MCD and
under the guise of the suit were claiming a decree of
declaration that they were entitled to enter and hawk their
goods. It was pleaded that all the eligible vendors who had
tehbazari rights under MCD or identity cards issued by DDA
had already been allotted platforms/shops at Nehru Place,
Tilak Nagar, Chootti Subzi Mandi and East of Kailash. Since the
petitioners were not entitled, they did not fall under the list of
allottees. In the light of the decisions in Saudan Singh's case
and Gainda Ram's case, it was pleaded that the petitioners
had no right to carry on business in a “Zero Tolerance Zone”
and had no justiciable rights much less any rights for tehbazari
or

an

alternative

site.

It

was

pleaded

that

all

the

encroachments were cleared in 2002, thus, there was no prima
facie case in favour of the petitioners and the suit as well as
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.5 of 23

the interim application were liable to be dismissed.
11.

The MCD had also filed a written statement though

apparently not on record.
12.

After going through the pleadings, documents and

the submissions made by the parties, both the Courts below
have held that the petitioners (plaintiffs in the suit) being
hawkers, squatters running small and petty business have
failed to establish any prima facie case in their favour. It has
been held that they have not been able to show any right to a
specific place or space. It has been held that there exists no
document giving them any right to any specific site. Taking
note of the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported
as (1992) 2 SCC 458 Saudan Singh vs. NDMC; (1993) 3 SCC
178 Gainda Ram & Ors. vs. MCD & Ors. and the final orders
passed by the R.C.Chopra Committee wherein, it was clarified
that the decision by R.C.Chopra Committee shall be treated as
final and binding on the squatters concerned as well as on the
MCD, the learned courts below have held that it was too late in
the day for the petitioners to make fresh representations and
claim that their cases were pending before the said Committee
and have not been considered.
13.

It has been held that the documents filed by the

petitioners indicate that the petitioners were not regular
tehbazari holders and were holding casual tehbazari on weekly
holidays, festivals etc. and that they were not paying licence
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.6 of 23

fee/tehbazari to the respondents on a continuous and regular
basis.

It has been held that in case the petitioners were

occupying the sites in the year 1992 or were doing business or
were squatting or hawking at the Nehru Place complex in the
year 1992, then they should have approached the R.C. Chopra
Committee for redressal of their grievances. It has been held
that since no such documents were placed on record it could
be presumed that none of the petitioner had approached the
Redressal Committee for redressal of their grievances.
14.

CM(M) No.1388/2007 and CM(M) No.1395/2007

came up for hearing on 12.10.2007, on which date this Court
was pleased to issue notice in the petitions and granted a stay
of dispossession in favour of the petitioners.
15.

A reply has been filed by DDA enclosing therewith

documents placed before the learned Courts below, reiterating
that the Nehru Place District Centre Complex was a 'Zero
Tolerance Zone' where no violation of law was permitted. That
demolition was carried out in the entire complex on 8.3.2007
and 9.3.2007 after the vacation of the interim orders on
2.3.2007 by the learned Trial Judge and no hawker was
allowed to squat in the said area. It has been stated that the
petitioners were not regular tehbazari holders and were not
entitled

to

any

alternative

site,

since,

the

eligible

hawkers/squatters had already been given alternative sites by
the DDA and the MCD in the year 2002 when the entire area
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.7 of 23

was cleared of encroachments. It has been pleaded that after
the removal of the unauthorized vendors in the area in
question, nobody was allowed to operate any kind of
stall/tehbazari, kiosks in the open piazzas or on pavements
and that the Fire Officer, Delhi Fire Services has warned that
due to unauthorized vendors on the road it was very difficult to
approach the building located at District Centre, Nehru Place
Complex for fire appliances in case of any emergency.
16.

DDA moved applications seeking a vacation of the

interim order on the ground that after the rejuvenation work at
Nehru Place Commercial Complex was initiated in 2002 the
petitioners have been trying to encroach on the open space
time and again. It is pleaded that the petitioners were again
removed from the site in question after the interim order was
vacated by the Trial Court on 2.3.2007 and that the entire
complex was cleared by DDA on 8.3.2007 and 9.3.2007 with
the help of local police. It was pointed out that after obtaining
the interim orders on 12.10.2007, petitioners of CM(M)
No.1388/2007 and CM(M) No.1395/2007 had re-trespassed
into the site.
17.

In the application it has additionally been pleaded

that pursuant to the transfer of Nehru Place District Centre to
DDA on 18.4.2002 for rejuvenation, the layout plan has also
been

formulated

after

the

administrative

approval

and

expenditure was sanctioned in sum of Rs.3005.47 lacs. It was
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.8 of 23

pointed out that the interim orders are hampering the
development work.
18.

In the reply to the application seeking vacation of

the orders obtained on 12.10.2007, the petitioners have
placed reliance upon the National Capital Territory of Delhi
Laws (Special Provisions) Bill 2007 urging that the petitioners
cannot be dispossessed in view of the same. Reliance has also
been placed on para 11 of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court reported as 2007 (8) Scale 334 Sudhir Madan & Ors. vs.
M.C.D. to urge that unless the National Policy of Urban Street
Vendors becomes operational the petitioners cannot be
removed from the present site.
19.

Points urged above have been controverted in the

rejoinder filed by DDA.

In the rejoinder DDA has placed

reliance on clause 4(b) of the said Bill which states that during
the period of operation of the Bill, no relief would be available
to the hawkers and urban street vendors in case there is a
specific public project for the clearance of land in question duly
approved by the Central Government. DDA submits that the
rejuvenation and redevelopment plan prepared by the DDA
envisages setting up of more than 50 B.O.T. towers and other
facilities in public interest in the piazza of Nehru Place
Complex. Administrative approval and expenditure sanction to
the tune of Rs.3500.47 lacs has been received on 22.11.2004
and that an amount of Rs.5 crores has already been spent on
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.9 of 23

improvement of the piazza area which indicates that there is a
clear public project which is being undertaken by DDA in
respect of the site in question and the said public project is in
the stage of implementation. Hence, it has been pleaded that
no protection can be claimed by the petitioners under the said
Bill.
20.

Afore-noted

pleadings

were

reiterated

during

arguments by learned counsel for the parties.
21.

Ms.Sangeeta Chandra, learned counsel for DDA

urged that the issue relating to the hawkers carrying on
business activity has been considered at length by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the judgments reported as (1992) 2 SCC 458
Saudan Singh vs. NDMC; (1993) 3 SCC 178 Gainda Ram & Ors.
vs. MCD & Ors.

Thereafter, the matter has currently been re-

looked at again by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
'Sudhir Madan & Ors vs. MCD & Ors.' wherein orders dated
6.2.2007 and 17.5.2007 have been passed – reported as 2007
(8) Scale 334 and 339 – the MCD has identified hawking as
well as non hawking zones. The Nehru Place District Centre is
not a part of the hawking zone identified even by the MCD and
therefore, there is no occasion left for there being any
confusion of a no tolerance zone/no hawking zone being
permitted to be used for hawking.
22.

Learned counsel for DDA further submitted that

MCD had framed a scheme called the 'National Policy on Urban
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.10 of 23

Street Vendors-2004'.

The said scheme has been placed

before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and that the same has been
closely examined and scrutinized therein.

It was urged that

after taking note of certain suggestions, final directions were
issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Counsel urged that the
directions issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Sudhir

Madan

also

took

into

consideration

the

various

suggestions and difficulties pointed out on behalf of the
hawkers.

Thereafter, MCD has formulated its scheme for

squatters/hawkers – 2007 for implementation of the National
Policy of Urban Street Vendor 2004 as modified by the orders
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The counsel urged that some
petitioners have applied under the scheme and therefore, it is
not open to the petitioners to contend that hawking and
squatting can be permitted in any manner other than the
manner envisaged under the national policy.
23.

Learned counsel further submitted that a detailed

consideration of this entire scheme has been made by this
Court recently in WP(C) No.8019/2007 Amit Kumar Gupta vs.
MCD & Ors. along with 11 other writ petitions which have been
dismissed by this Court vide order dated 29.11.2007. Counsel
urged that the said decision notes the distinction between
hawkers who have no regular tehbazari rights and regular
tehbazari holders. It was urged that the decision notes that
persons having regular tehbazari rights were already given
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.11 of 23

alternative sites by the DDA as well as by the MCD in the year
2002 when the area in question at Nehru Place was cleared of
all encroachments. Counsel urged that as of today the only
right of a person to claim a hawking site was to apply afresh
under the scheme framed by the MCD and as approved by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court for implementation of the National
Policy of Urban Street Vendors-2004.
24.

Learned counsel categorically urged that none of

the petitioners in CM(M) No.1622/2007 are hawking at the site
in question. Counsel submitted that as the petitioners of the
other two petitions, these petitioners will also encroach on the
piazzas under the guise of the pendency of the instant
petition.
25.

Learned counsel for MCD urged that no tehbazari

rights have been given by the MCD in the Nehru Place area
after 2002. The area is non hawking zone. However, counsel
urged that being a public statutory body, the MCD was
prepared to re-look into the claim of the petitioners who
alleged that they had tehbazari rights and for this, learned
counsel submitted that directions may be issued requiring
petitioners to appear before the Additional Commissioner,
Central Zone, Delhi at 11.00 am on 23.1.2008 with identity
proof and all documents on which petitioners rely.

Counsel

submitted that the officer concerned would grant a personal
hearing to such petitioner who appears before him and a
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.12 of 23

reasoned decision would be taken under communication to the
petitioner who may collect the same on the date notified by
the Additional Commissioner concerned.
26.

It is trite that while deciding on the issue of interim

injunction or stay, the Court must address itself to three
issues; namely, prima facie case, irreparable loss and injury
and lastly balance of convenience.
27.

To obtain an order for interim injunction in his

favour, the applicant must make out a 'prima facie case' in
support of right claimed by the applicant. The existence of a
'prima facie' right and infraction of such right is a condition
precedent for grant of interim injunction.
28.

In the instant case, in order to obtain an injunction

in their favour it is essential for the petitioners to first establish
that prima facie they had a right to carry on the business
under tehbazari in Nehru Place Commercial Complex.
29.

The issue relating to tehbazari rights allegedly

claimed by the petitioners was dealt by the learned Trial Court.
In para 9 of its decision the learned Trial Court has held as
under:“9.
In the present case, the plaintiffs are
alleging themselves to be the hawkers/squatters
running their business/tehbazari etc. in the vicinity
of the Nehru Place Commercial Complex and the
perusal of the case file also shows that the said
area had been declared by the defendants as 'no
tolerance zone', in compliance of the orders of the
Lieutenant Governor of Delhi.
It is further
observed that the plaintiffs are not the regular
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.13 of 23

tehbazari holders and they are not holding casual
tehbazari on weekly holidays, festivals/melas etc.
and the plaintiffs are not paying the licence
fee/tehbazari to the defendants on continuous or
regular basis. They are applying for tehbazari to
the defendants for different periods and different
dates and the perusal of the receipts clearly
indicates that they are not the
regular
squatters/hawkers at Nehru Place Commercial
Complex.
Further more, only a few
of the
plaintiffs have given the representation to the
defendants for consideration of their eligibility
regarding the allotment of the alternative sites.
None of the plaintiffs have
approached the
Chopra Committee for redressal of their
grievances and in the considered opinion of this
court, if the plaintiffs were existing in the year
1992 or were doing their tehbazari business or
were squatting/hawking
at the Nehru Place
Complex in the year 1992 then, they should have
approached the Chopra Committee for redressal
of their grievances.
The contentions of the
counsel for the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs had
approached the defendants cannot be sustained
at this stage, in view of the specific directions of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of “Gainda
Ram & Ors v/s MCD & Ors” (supra), further more,
it is not the case of the plaintiffs that, they have
not applied under the Scheme of 1992 and their
representations were not considered by Sh. R.C.
Chopra Committee, but, on the contrary, they
have claimed that, they have filed their
representations with the defendants but their
representations have not been considered by the
defendants and no intimation about the rejection
of their representations has been made by the
defendants to them till date. Therefore, in the
considered opinion of this court, the plaintiff
should
have
approached
Sh.
R.C.Chopra
Committee for redressal of their grievances
straight away and since, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has already passed the order, from time to
time, monitoring the implement of its earlier
orders in the case of “Gainda Ram & Ors” (supra)
this court is of the considered opinion that the
plaintiffs had miserably failed to establish a prima
facie case in their favour. Further more, sine, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has already issued various
directions regarding the implementation of its
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.14 of 23

directions in the case of “Saudan Singh & Gainda
Ram & Ors” cases and has already directed that,
all the applications, including the petitions of
hawkers/squatters should be filed only in aforesaid
proceedings, it would not be appropriate for this
Court to pass any stay orders in the present suit. It
is pertinent to mention here that, a Civil Writ
Petition No.647/2007 was preferred before the
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi by one Sh. Mangal
Singh on similar facts and the said Writ Petition
has also been dismissed by the Hon'ble High
Court, vide orders dated 24/01/2007, whereby, the
Hon'ble High Court has also rejected the Writ
Petition.”
30.

In appeal, the Appellate Court has also dealt with the

said issue and agreed with the finding returned by the Trial
Court that petitioners have failed to establish that prima facie
they had a right to carry out the business under tehbazari in
Nehru Place Commercial Complex. In paras 10 and 11 of its
decision the appellate court has held as under:“10.
While weighing the suits filed by the
appellants, I find that more or less each of the
appellant has a different case.
Someone is
claiming to be having tehbazari right. Someone
has filed the documents of holding to Mela for a
few days, some of them have fled the receipt of
holding weekly bazar; some of them have filed the
documents about putting up wares for festival
seasons. Some of them have filed the documents
pertaining to holding pheri, secondly, none of the
appellant had laid specific right to any specific
place. Some one claims to run business in kiosks,
someone laid his claim about the stalls, someone
about the shed, someone has claimed tehbazari
site, someone occupying the pavement. Some
claimed to occupy the footpath and someone
open space.
The relief sought for decree of
permanent injunction is to restrain the defendant,
their
agents,
servants,
assignees
from
dispossessing the plaintiffs/appellants from their
present place of business/tehbazari/kiosks/stalls.
Thus, no one claims to have specific place or
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.15 of 23

space.
Similarly, in the mandatory injunction
relief sought for is a decree of mandatory
injunction directing the defendants/respondents
to allow of mandatory injunction directing the
defendants/respondents to allow alternative pucca
kiosks, stalls within Nehru Place on payment of
nominal amount of money on equal monthly
installments. Thus, none of appellant has laid
claim to any specific place or spot.
In this
perspective where the appellants have different
cases, have no specific site or spot to be protected
the very maintainability of the suit is seriously
under doubt. On this could alone, the appellants
seem to behaving no case for grant of interim
relief sought for in the application under Order 39
Rules 1 & 2 CPC.
11.
On the count of prima facie case before
me; only documents pertaining to Mr.Prem Kumar
Gupta and Mr.Virender Gupta were referred to and
it was submitted that the case of other appellants
was also more or less the same. The case of
Mr.Prem Shankar Gupta pertains to the site at
Gobind Puri which is far away from Nehru Place. It
is neither in Nehru Place District Centre Complex
nor in its vicinity. Mr.Virender Gupta had filed
identity card from Pawan Putr Rehri Morcha
Samiti, Delhi Pradesh about a hotel. In fact, no
document was referred from the record showing
that their cases fell within the ambit of criteria as
laid in Saudhan Singh's case supra. In Saudhan
Singh's case the Hon'ble Apex Court came to the
conclusion that right to carry on trade or business
to the eligible persons need be protected. In
Gainda Ram Vs. MCD, Town Hall & Ors., 1993's
case the cases of eligible squatter/hawkers sought
to be verified and considered for allotment of
alternative site but at the same time, all the
appeals/SLPs/Suits etc. pending before the Hon'ble
Apex Court/Hon'ble High Court of Delhi and courts
subordinate were terminated forthwith. It also
specified no other Civil Writ or suit on behalf of
squatters/hawkers pending in the courts at Delhi
shall survive.”
31.

It is settled law that the jurisdiction of this court

under Article 227 of the Constitution of India is not to sit as a

CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.16 of 23

court of appeal over the findings of the courts below and to
reappraise the matter.

Only where it is shown that the

approach or the principles adopted by the Courts below is
contrary to law or that some vital document has been ignored
or legal principles have not been correctly applied, can this
Court exercising power of superintendence under Article 227
of the Constitution of India re-look into the matter.
32.

The

learned

Courts

below

have

categorically

returned a prima facie finding that no plaintiff had placed any
material to show that a site had been allotted to him on
tehbazari at the complex in question. The Courts below have
recorded that the documents filed by the plaintiffs show that
on festival days and weekly mela days, limited to said day,
receipts acknowledging payment received were issued by the
MCD. Learned counsel for the petitioners failed to point out
any document where from it could be gathered that said prima
facie view was incorrect.
33.

In the decision dated 29.11.2007 disposing of 12

writ petitions, lead matter being WP(C) No.8019/2007 Amit
Kumar Gupta & Ors v MCD & Anr. dismissing the writ petitions,
learned Single Judge of this Court noted as under:“1. These writ petitions have been filed by persons
who are contending that they are hawking and so
selling different articles in different areas in the
Nehru Place Commercial Complex. The petitioners
in these writ petitions have claimed that they have
been hawking in the area over different periods.
The petitioner in W.P.(C) No. 8028/2007 has stated
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.17 of 23

that he has been hawking since 1987; the writ
petitioner in W.P.(C) No. 8025/2007 has stated that
he has been hawking since 1990; the writ petitioner
in W.P.(C) No. 8027/2007 has stated that he has
been hawking since 1994; the writ petitioners in
W.P.(C) Nos. 8018/2007, 8020/2007, 8026/2007
have stated that they have been hawking since
1996; the writ petitions in W.P.(C) Nos. 8021/2007,
8022/2007 have stated that they have been
hawking since 1999; the writ petitioner in W.P.(C)
No. 8024/2007 has stated that he has been hawking
since 2000; the writ petitioner in W.P.(C) No.
8023/2007 has stated that he has been hawking
since 2002; while the writ petitioner in W.P.(C) No.
7444/2007 has stated that he has been hawking
since 2001.
These writ petitions have been filed
by the petitioners who have claimed that they have
a fundamental right under Article 19 of the
Constitution of India to do their business in this area
and that the DDA is adopting a pick and choose
policy and is illegally preventing the petitioners from
carrying on their legitimate business.
The
petitioners have submitted that they are all
registered with the Pavanputra Rehdi Patri Khomcha
Sangh as well as the Manushi Sangathan which are
non-governmental organisations looking after the
welfare of the tehbazari holders, hawkers and street
vendors.
The representations of the petitioners
through these organisations have received no
response at all and that, despite the pressure from
the respondents, they continue to do their business
at various spots in the Nehru Place area. The
petitioners place reliance on photographs
to
manifest their contention that they are actually
continuing with the hawking business.
xxx xxx xxx
4.
The receipts placed on record however do not
evidence any permission in continuity and are not in
the nature of tehbazari permission or licence by the
MCD.
The same only evidence that some of the
petitioners at different festivals and on some times
have been permitted to carry on their business of
hawking during different occasions.
The identity
cards issued by the Pavanputra Rehdi Patri Khomcha
Sangh
also
only
evidence
the
petitioners
membership of this organisation and would not by
itself create any rights in favour of the petitioner.
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.18 of 23

xxx xxx xxx
17. It now becomes necessary to examine the
claimed rights of these petitioners.
As noticed
hereinabove the petitioners have placed reliance on
certain receipts issued to them by the MCD. It is an
admitted position that none of these petitioners
have been considered or been granted tehbazari
licences at any location in the Nehru Place. They
appear to have been permitted to sell their wares
from time to time on certain special occasions
including festivals. It may be that they have not
been removed and have so continued to sell their
wares for the period which have been claimed.
However certainly it cannot be held that the
petitioners have a legal right to hawk their wares at
a particular place in the Nehru Place.
34.

Giving reasons in support of the conclusion that the

writ petitions were liable to be dismissed, learned Single Judge
held as under:“18. I find that such an issue was considered by the
Division Bench in its judgment dated 3rd July, 2006
which was passed in W.P.(C) No.10479/2006 entitled
Citizens for Justice vs. Lieutenant Governor (NCT) of
Delhi & Ors. This writ petition had been filed by the
petitioner which is a society seeking a writ of
prohibition against the respondents from giving
effect to a letter of the senior architect of the DDA
dated 15th May, 2006 creating 64 locations for
hawkers place in the Nehru Place District Centre.
This writ petition was dismissed by the court holding
that these locations had been identified by the
respondents on public land and that there was no
conflict between a no tolerance zone and a
regulated and a designated area for hawkers.
xxx xxx xxx
22. In the instant case this court is not concerned
with persons who have any valid allotments on
tehbazari in their favour but is concerned with
persons who have been hawking their wares without
valid allotment and would required to make
applications under the National Policy noticed
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.19 of 23

hereinabove which has been approved by the Apex
Court. I find that the Apex Court is categorically
directed that no licence shall be granted to any
person in no hawking/squatting zones and that the
station house officer of the concerned police station
is required to take immediate steps to remove any
person found hawking/squatting in a nonhawking/squatting area. If an allottee, who has
been allotted a tehbazari/vending site in a
hawking/squatting zone is found carrying on such
activity in a non-hawking/squatting zone, the
Municipal Corporation may consider cancelling his
allotment.
xxx xxx xxx
26. Before this court a vehement plea has been
raised on behalf of the petitioners that they are
entitled to continue to hawk and vend at the same
site. The same plea was placed before the Apex
Court. In the order dated 17th of May, 2007 in
(2007) 8 SCALE 339 it was asserted that the scheme
proposed by the MCD was not satisfactory so far as
survey work to identify hawking zone/non-hawking
zone and sites were concerned. This contention was
answered by the Apex Court thus :“4. It appears that such a question was
raised before this Court in the case of Ramesh
Shah vs. MCD & Ors. (I.A. No. 332-333 in WP(C)
No. 1699/1987) and this court by order dated
6.11.2000 rejected the submission which has
been urged before us, in these words :“So far as identification of squatting and
non-squatting zones are concerned it is
an administrative function of the MCD
which is done by taking into account
various factors namely, public interest
depending mainly upon the congestion
in the area and public safety which are
the
main
considerations
for
any
Government.
No challenge to such
identification of squatting and nonsquatting zones can be permitted under
any
circumstances
when
the
administrative authority has taken all
factors in to account. We are not sitting
in appeal against any decision made by
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.20 of 23

the administrative authority.
We
therefore do not permit any challenge to
the identification of the squatting and
non-squatting zone and to the map as
prepared by the MCD showing Green
shall be treated as final and shall not be
allowed to be questioned.”
In this view of the matter, we cannot accede to
the request of the learned counsel for the
respondents who have contended that fresh
survey
should
be
undertaken
by
an
independent expert body or an independent
organisation to identify the hawking sites and
the existence of hawkers. This is essentially a
matter which the Municipal Corporation of
Delhi has to consider and take a decision. We
cannot issue a writ directing the MCD to do so,
this being a matter of policy.”
xxx xxx xxx
31. It was also submitted that the authorities may
be directed to identify the non-hawking areas only
and rest of the areas should be permitted as
hawking areas. In our view such a course will not be
practicable. In any event, that is a matter for the
concerned authorities to consider and we can
express no opinion in the matter. We may however
observe that since a National Policy on Urban Street
Vendors has been formulated the authorities
concerned will have due regard to the said policy in
the implementation on the schemes regulating
tehbazari/vending sites etc.
xxx xxx xxx
35. It is admitted position that the petitioners are
not hawking on a site designated or allotted to them
by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. Therefore,
the petitioners cannot urge a plea that they have a
vested right to continue to hawk at such site or any
other site unless designated or allotted by the
authorities. The apex court has also so held in the
aforenoticed binding precedents.
The act of
resumption of hawking after removal also does not
create any vested right in the petitioners.”
35.

The issue raised in the instant petitions squarely

CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.21 of 23

arose for consideration in afore-noted decision in Amit Kumar
Gupta's case (supre) and I need not reiterate the reasons
recorded in the order dated 29.11.2007 dismissing the batch
of writ petitions. I adopt the reasoning. Suffice would it be to
state that all contentions urged by learned counsel for the
petitioners before me have been dealt with in the decision
dated 29.11.2007 in Amit Kumar Gupta's case (supra).
36.

Thus, the view taken by the Courts below that the

petitioners have failed to show or make out a prima facie case
in their favour is correct.

Even otherwise, balance of

convenience is against the petitioners for the reason where a
private right comes into conflict with the right of the
community, the former must yield to the latter.

DDA has

brought on record material to show that Nehru Place Complex
is being converted into a no-hawker zone and for which
Rs.3500.4 lacs have been sanctioned for improvements in the
area.
37.

The petitions are thus liable to be dismissed.

38.

I accordingly dismiss the petitions.

39.

However, as conceded by learned counsel for MCD,

I direct that MCD would be bound by the concession made by
its counsel and as recorded in para 25 above.

Since

petitioners have no right to squat at Nehru Place Complex, I
direct that the Additional Commissioner, Central Zone, MCD
would decide the representation submitted to him pursuant to
CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

Page No.22 of 23

the concession made by the counsel for MCD and as recorded
in para 25 above, within 3 weeks from 23.1.2008 and
consequential action would be taken as per the decision.
40.

No costs.

41.

Copy of this order be supplied dasti to learned

counsel for the parties on payment of usual charges.

January 21, 2008
d.k.bainsla

CM(M) Nos.1388, 1395 & 1622 of 2007

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.23 of 23

