*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.99/2005
Smt.Parveen @ Parro
........ Appellant
through: Mr.S.P.Singh Chaudhary, Adv.
VERSUS
Union of India
through : None

%

CORAM:

....... Respondent

DATE OF DECISION:
26.03.2008

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

None appears for the respondent in spite of service.

Proceeded against ex-parte.
2.

The appellant is the mother of an unfortunate young

boy named Salim.

It is not in dispute that Salim received

grievous injuries on 10.3.2003 and as a result of the injuries he
died. It is also not in dispute that the injuries were a result of a
fall from the train.
3.

As per the decision of the Railway Claims Tribunal it

has been held that Salim had a monthly season ticket entitling
him to travel by rail from Shahdara to Ghaziabad and vice
FAO.No.99/05

page 1 of 7

versa and hence was a bona-fide passenger. Said finding has
attained finality. On the issue whether the death was
attributable to an untoward incident the Railway Claims
Tribunal has held against the appellant. Reason for so holding
is the charge sheet presented before the Criminal Court by the
police and the record of investigation.
4.

Opinion arrived at by Railway Claims Tribunal is that

the record of police investigation shows that the deceased and
his friends were the assailants and they have boarded the train
to attack one Yogesh @Bittoo and Rambir and when they did
so, Yogesh and Rambir retaliated. The result was the deceased
being thrown out of the train.
5.

The

Railway

Claims

Tribunal

has

accordingly

concluded by holding that the deceased was responsible for his
own death.
6.

'Untoward incident' has been defined under Section

123(c) of the Railways Act 1989. It reads as under:(c) "untoward incident" means-(1) (i) the commission of a terrorist act within the
meaning of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Terrorist
and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (28 of
1987); or
(ii) the making of a violent attack or the commission of
robbery or dacoity; or

FAO.No.99/05

page 2 of 7

(iii) the indulging in rioting, shoot-out or arson, by any
person in or on any train carrying passengers, or in a
waiting hall, cloak room or reservation or booking
office or on any platform or in any other place within
the precincts of a railway station; or
(2) the accidental falling of any passenger from a train
carrying passengers.”
7.

Suffice would it be to record that a violent attack,

rioting, shooting or arsoning are all untoward incidents. For a
death or injury at an untoward incident, compensation is
payable under Section 124A of the Railways Act 1989. It reads
as under:“124A.
Compensation on account of untoward
incident.– When in the course of working in railway an
untoward incident occurs, then whether or not there has
been any wrongful act, neglect or default on the part of
the railway administration such as would entitle a
passenger who has been injured or the dependent of a
passenger who has been killed to maintain an action and
recover damages in respect thereof, the railway
administration shall, notwithstanding anything contained
in any other law, be liable to pay compensation to such
extent as may be prescribed and to that extent only for
loss occasioned by the death of, or injury to, a passenger
as a result of such untoward incident:
Provided that no compensation shall be payable under
this section by the railway administration if the
passenger dies or suffers injury due to –
(a)

suicide or attempted suicide by him;

(b)

self-inflicted injury;

(c)

his own criminal act;

(d)

any act committed by him in a state of

FAO.No.99/05

page 3 of 7

intoxication or insanity;
(e)

any natural cause or disease or medical or
surgical treatment unless such treatment
becomes necessary due to injury caused by
the said untoward incident.

Explanation.– For the purposes
“passenger” includes –

of

this

section,

(i)
(ii)

8.
(c)

a railway servant on duty; and
a person who has purchased a valid ticket for
travelling by a train carrying passengers, on
any date or a valid platform ticket and
becomes a victim of an untoward incident.”

Suffice would it be to state that because of proviso
to Section 124A of the Railways Act 1989 a person would

not be entitled to compensation on account of a untoward
incident if the cause is his own criminal act.
9.

Question arises whether it stands established that

the deceased was the assailant or is it a case where the
deceased was a bona fide passenger in the EMU train travelling
from Shahdara to Ghaziabad and was the victim of an assault?
10.

The record of the Railway Claims Tribunal shows

that the photocopy of record of investigation conducted by the
police as also the challan was taken on record by the Railway
Claims Tribunal in the form of attested copies thereof being
filed by the Railway Authorities. The challan shows that one
Puneet Kumar Dalmiya is the only eye-witness being listed in
FAO.No.99/05

page 4 of 7

the list of witnesses by the police.

The challan shows that

Puneet Kumar Dalmiya was the complainant on whose report
the FIR was registered.
11.

Puneet Kumar Dalmiya has appeared as a witness

before the Railway Claims Tribunal. He was examined as AW-1
by Tribunal. He categorically deposed in his testimony that on
the date of the incident the deceased had already boarded the
train and after the deceased had boarded the train Rambir and
Yogesh also boarded the train. He stated that there was past
enmity and due to said enmity Rambir and Yogesh attacked
Salim. They dragged him near the gate of the compartment.
When the train was running Salim was thrown out of the train.
12.

Puneet Kumar Dalmiya was cross-examined by the

counsel for the Railways. His entire cross-examination is being
reproduced by me. It reads as under:“Cross-examination by Sh.S.A.Khan, counsel for
the respondent.
The deceased was my friend. I knew him since last 56 years. Sh.Yogesh and Rambir were having enmity
with the deceased since last three years. Before this
incident, the deceased and Rambir and Yogesh had
quarreled three or four times. I did not report to the
police about the alleged incident (volunteer – I had
taken the deceased to the hospital for medical
treatment and from there I had informed his father
about this incident). It is incorrect to suggest that I
was not travelling with Salim on the date of incident.
The police had recorded my statement on this
incident. My statement was recorded by the police on
FAO.No.99/05

page 5 of 7

8th April. It is incorrect to suggest that there was no
quarrel between Salim, Rambir and Yogesh during the
train journey. It is also incorrect to suggest that they
had quarreled near Vivek Vihar police station. I have
not lodged any complaint in any court about this
incident. It is incorrect to suggest that I have made a
false statement in my affidavit.”
13.

It would be relevant to note that no suggestion has

been put to Puneet Kumar Dalmiya that it was the deceased
who had attacked Rambir and Yogesh.

On the contrary

suggestion put to the witness is that no quarrel as alleged by
him ever took place during the journey.
14.

The aforesaid suggestion by the counsel for the

railway authorities itself suggests that the railway authorities
projected a case of disclaimer vis-a-vis the incident and never
cross-examined the witness with respect to the manner in
which the incident took place.

Thus, the testimony of AW-1

remains unshaken.
15.

Unfortunately, the Railway Claims Tribunal ignored

the afore-noted two material circumstances.

Circumstance-

one being that even as per the police record of investigation,
AW-1 was an eye-witness. Thus, his testimony was relevant.
Secondly, no suggestion was given to AW-1 that the deceased
was the assailant and not vice-versa.
16.

Under the circumstances, it has to be held that

there has been a misdirected approach by the Tribunal in
FAO.No.99/05

page 6 of 7

valuating evidence.
17.

The appeal is allowed.

18.

The impugned order dated 24.2.2005 passed by the

Railway Claims Tribunal is set aside.

It is held that the

deceased died at an untoward incident and his mother is
entitled to compensation under Section 124A of The Railways
Act 1989.
19.

Being a case of death, under the compensation rules

applicable, compensation payable is in sum of Rs.4 lacs.
20.

The claim petition is accordingly allowed with a

direction that the railway authorities would pay to the
appellant compensation in sum of Rs.4,00,000/-.
21.

The amount would be paid with interest @7% per

annum from the date of the present order till date of payment.
22.

Since none appears for the respondent to oppose

the appeal, I refrain from awarding costs.
21.

TCR be returned forthwith.

March 26, 2008

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

d.k.bainsla

FAO.No.99/05

page 7 of 7

