IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CM(M) No.1873/2006
#
!

Gyanender Prasad Tewari
........
Petitioner
through: Mr.S.P. Pandey, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Om Prakash & Anr.
through:

........
Respondents
Mr.B.K. Sharma and Mr.Yogesh
Kumar Bhall, Advocates for
respondent no.1.

RESERVED ON : 19.11.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 26.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.
filed

Vide impugned order dated 19.7.06 applications
by

the

petitioner

Gyanendra

Prasad

Tiwari

and

respondent No.2 Subhash Kumar Tiwari under Order I Rule 10
of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking impleadment of the
petitioner as a defendant has been dismissed.
2.

Relevant facts to be noted for the purpose of

adjudication of the matter in issue within the confines of Order I

Page 1 of 18

Rule 10 CPC are that the respondent no.2 (hereinafter referred
to as the plaintiff) filed a suit for specific performance of an
agreement to sell dated 18.6.90 with possession of plot bearing
Muncipal No.325, Deepali, Pitam Pura, Delhi (hereinafter
referred to as the suit property) against the respondent no.2
(hereinafter referred to as the defendant).
3.

Material allegations in the plaint are that the

defendant represented to the plaintiff that he is the sole and
exclusive owner of the the suit property on the basis of a
registered Will dated 13.2.1980 executed by the father of the
defendant bequeathing the suit property in favour of the
defendant and his elder brother i.e. the petitioner and that a
relinquishment deed dated 28.5.90 was executed by the
petitioner relinquishing all his rights and interest in the suit
property in favour of the defendant. That original Will and the
Relinquishment Deed were delivered by the defendant to the
plaintiff. That after delivery of the said documents and
believing the representation made by the defendant pertaining
to the ownership of the suit property to be true the plaintiff
entered into an agreement to sell dated 18.6.90 with the
defendant for the sale of suit property for a total sale
consideration of Rs.4,00,000/-. That pursuant to the said
agreement a sum of Rs.1,95,000/- was paid by the plaintiff to
Page 2 of 18

the defendant. That the balance sale consideration was to be
paid by the plaintiff at the time of the execution and
registration of the sale deed. That the defendant failed to
perform its part of the obligations under the agreement. That
the plaintiff was always ready and willing to perform its
obligations under the agreement.
4.

In the written statement filed by the defendant it

was pleaded that the documents namely agreement to sell
dated 18.6.90, will dated 13.2.80 and relinquishment deed
dated 28.5.90 which formed the basis of the plaintiff's suit are
forged and fabricated. That the defendant was not the sole and
exclusive owner of the suit property. That the defendant and
the petitioner were joint owners of the suit property. Relevant
portions of the written statement of the defendant read as
under :“PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS:
..............
5.
That the present suit has been filed by
the plaintiff on the basis of false and forged
documents
which
were
never
executed/handed over by the defendant to the
plaintiff within his own knowledge, therefore,
the present suit is liable to be dismissed.
...............
7.
That even otherwise the defendant being
only the legal heir of Late Sh. Jagannath
Page 3 of 18

Prasad Tiwari and having only undivided share
in the ancestral suit property, discredit the
grant of relief of specific performance or
possession or damages against him and in
favour of the plaintiff.
REPLY ON MERITS:
..............
5.
That para 5 of the plaint is wrong,
baseless, concoted and emphatically denied. It
is specifically denied that it was represented to
the plaintiff that the elder brother of the
defendant, namely, Sh. G.P. Tiwari had
executed any relinquishment deed and
muchless one dated 28.5.90 in favour of the
defendant or that the defendant became
owner of the suit plot as alleged. It is also
particularly denied that the defendant entered
into any agreement to sell with the plaintiff as
alleged. It is respectfully submitted that no
relinquishment deed was ever executed by Sh.
G.P. Tiwari in favour of the defendant and they
are still joint owners of the suit plot.
5.

...........”
Petitioner

independant

and

applications

respondent
seeking

no.2

filed

impleadment

of

two
the

petitioner as a defendant by virtue of sub-rule 2 of Rule 10 of
Order I of the Code of Civil Procedure.
6.

Substantially, averments in the said applications are

same as the averments made by the defendant in his written
statement.
7.

Paras 4, 5 and 6 of the application filed by the

defendant read as under:-

Page 4 of 18

“4. The defendant/applicant further submits
that the averments made in the plaint in all
and the documents produced by the plaintiff
are all fabricated and concocted. The
defendant is also making a separate
application under Section 340 Cr.P.C. setting
out in detail all the relevant facts necessary for
the adjudication on the issues raised by the
defendant in the present application and the
defense taken in the suit.
5.
That the applicant further submits that
the suit property is an undivided property
wherein the applicant/defendant and the elder
brother of the defendant have got rights over
the suit property as such the defendant cannot
dispose off the property unilaterally and the
plaintiff cannot claim any rights as falsely
made out in the plaint.
6.
That as explained in detail in the
application under section 340 CrPC, that the
applicant and his brother have undivided share
and the defendant's brother has not executed
any relinquishment deed as fabricated by the
plaintiff and the defendant's elder brother has
neither executed any relinquishment deed nor
they have entered into any sort of agreement
with respect to the suit property either among
themselves nor with the plaintiff.
8.

Paras 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the application filed by the

petitioner read as under:“4. That by virtue of above Will, the applicant
is the owner of the one half share of the above
suit property measuring 400 sq. yards as
mentioned and since the above suit is pending
disposal before this Hon'ble Court and
applicant's interest is involved in the above
suit property and applicant is necessary and
interested party in the above noted suit.
5.

That the defendant has secretly and
Page 5 of 18

alone has no right whatsoever to sale the
above suit property without consulting the
applicant and the plaintiff has also no right to
purchase the above suit property in which the
applicant is the owner of the one half share of
the suit property.
6.
That the plaintiff with vested interest has
filed the above suit to commit a fraud on the
defendant as well as with the applicant or they
might be committing fraud in collusion with the
applicant to rob of his valuable property.

9.

7.
That the alleged Relinquishment Deed
dated 28.05.1990 is a forged and the applicant
has never executed any such Relinquish Deed
in favour of the defendant which is produced
by plaintiff which is also on the record.”
After considering the respective stands of the

parties, vide impugned order dated 19.07.06 the learned Trial
Judge had dismissed the said applications.
10.

In support of the petition, learned counsel for the

petitioner had contended that the matter in controversy in a
suit has to be considered not only with reference to the case
set up in the plaint but even the defence set up in the written
statement. It was urged that the defendant has categorically
pleaded that the documents relied upon by the plaintiff are
forged and fabricated and that the defendant and petitioner
are the joint owners of the suit property. That in view of the
defence taken by the defendant the petitioner is a necessary
party and is entitled to be impleaded as a defendant in the suit
as he would be affected by the decision in the suit.
Page 6 of 18

11.

Per

contra,

learned

counsel

for

the

plaintiff/respondent no.1 had contended that a plaintiff is a
dominus litus and cannot be compelled to litigate against a
person qua whom no relief has been prayed for. Counsel
further urged that the expression “all the questions involved in
the suit” means only the questions or disputes between the
parties to the dispute and do not include a question or dispute
between one or more of the parties and a third party. That the
petitioner is neither a necessary nor a proper party, nor his
presence is necessary before the Court in order to enable the
Court to effectually and completely adjudicate upon and settle
all questions involved in the suit.
12.

Learned Counsel for the plaintiff relied upon the

following authorities :i.

Panne Khushali & Anr v Jeewanlal Mathoo Khatik &

Anr AIR 1976 MP 148 (FB) : In said case, it was held that the
strangers to the contract making a claim adverse to the title of
the defendant (vendor) contending that they are the co-owners
of the contracted property are neither necessary nor proper
party and are therefore not entitled to be joined as parties to
the suit.
ii.

Ram Bilash Pandey & Ors v Jai Narayan Gupta & Ors

AIR 1984 Pat 218 : In the said case, a suit for specific
Page 7 of 18

performance of contract for sale entered into by certain
members of a joint Hindu family was filed. Other members of
the family claimed to be impleaded on the ground that the
property which was sought to be sold was joint family property
and that it was acquired with joint family funds. Noting the
decision in Panne Kushali's case (supra) and the fact result of
the decree even if adverse to intervenors shall not bind the
intervenors, it was held that the members claiming to be
impleaded were neither necessary party nor proper party to
the suit and could not be given benefit of Order I Rule 10(2) of
the CPC.
iii.

Anil Kumar Singh v Shivnath Mishra (1995) 3 SCC

147 and Kasturi v Iyyamperumal AIR 2005 SC 2813 : In said
cases, it was held that the intervenors who are not party to the
agreement of sale are not necessary party to the suit for
specific performance for the reason their presence is not
necessary in order to determine the dispute as to specific
performance.
13.

Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the

following judgments :i.

Sumtibai & Ors v Paras Finance Co. JT 2007 (11) SC

749 : In said case, noting the decision in Kasturi's case (supra),
the Supreme Court has observed as under :Page 8 of 18

“9. Learned counsel for the respondent relied
on a three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in
Kasturi v. Iyyamperumal and Ors.. He has
submitted that in this case it has been held
that in a suit for specific performance of a
contract for sale of property a stranger or a
third party to the contract cannot be added as
defendant in the suit. In our opinion, the
aforesaid decision is clearly distinguishable. In
our opinion, the aforesaid decision can only be
understood to mean that a third party cannot
be impleaded in a suit for specific performance
if he has no semblance of title in the
property in dispute. Obviously, a busybody
or interloper with no semblance of title cannot
be impleaded in such a suit. That would
unnecessarily
protract
or
obstruct
the
proceedings in the suit. However, the aforesaid
decision will have no application where a third
party shows some semblance of title or interest
in the property in dispute..........”

ii.

14. In view of the aforesaid decisions we are
of the opinion that Kasturi's case (supra) is
clearly distinguishable. In our opinion it cannot
be laid down as an absolute proposition that
whenever a suit for specific performance is
filed by A against B, a third party C can never
be impleaded in that suit. In our opinion, if C
can show a fair semblance of title or interest he
can
certainly
file
an
application
for
impleadment. To take a contrary view would
lead to multiplicity of proceedings because
then C will have to wait until a decree is
passed against B, and then file a suit for
cancellation of the decree on the ground that A
had no title in the property in dispute. Clearly,
such a view cannot be countenanced.”
Dinesh Kumar Gupta v Manish Kumar FAO

No.545/01 decided on 08.05.02 : In said case, appellants
sought impleadment in a suit for specific performance of an
agreement to sell on the ground that the defendant had
Page 9 of 18

entered into an earlier agreement to sell with them with
respect to same property. Holding that the appellants are
proper parties to the suit, the Division Bench of this Court
allowed the appeal.
14.

Before proceeding to discuss the legal position it is

important to note the relevant statutory provision. Order I Rule
10(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure reads as under :-

15.

“(2) Court may strike out or add parties
:- The Court may at any stage of the
proceedings, either upon or without the
application of either party, and on such terms
as may appear to the Court to be just, order
that the name of any party improperly joined,
whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose
presence before the Court may be necessary
in order to enable the Court effectually and
completely to adjudicate upon and 'settle all
the questions involved in the suit, be added'.”
A reading of the statutory provision shows that the

sweep of the legislative provision is controlled by the
expression 'settle all the questions involved in the suit, be
added'. Meaning thereby, an inquiry under Order I Rule 10(2) is
not to focus on whether the applicant is a person who ought to
have been joined as a necessary party to the suit. The focus of
inquiry is limited to the question whether the applicant could be
impleaded on the premise that his presence before the Court
may be necessary in order to enable the Court to effectually
and completely adjudicate upon and settle the questions

Page 10 of 18

involved in the suit.
16.

A perusal of the commentaries under Order I Rule 10

of the Code of Civil Procedure reveal a plethora of decisions
which have considered the ambit of the power of the Court in
impleading a person as a proper party. The authorities have
explained the meaning of the phrase 'all the questions involved
in the suit'.
17.

The decisions illustrate a wide spectrum of instances

when intervention was allowed and when refused.
18.

From

the

decisions,

no

discernible

principle

governing the discretionary power of the Court emerges, for
the simple reason, the spectrum of claims is fairly wide and
therefore it would be inadvisable to cast the discretionary
power in a straight jacket of an inflexible formula. However,
one principle emerges, that the language employed in the rule
vests a very wide discretion in the Court.
19.

In the leading case of Razia Begum v Anwar Begum

AIR 1958 SC 886 the Supreme Court had laid down the
following principles regarding the power of the Court to implead
parties by virtue of Rule 10(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure :“20. As a result of these considerations, we
have arrived at the following conclusions :(1) That the question of addition of parties
under Rule 10 of Order 1 of the Code of Civil
Page 11 of 18

Procedure, is generally not one of initial
jurisdiction of the court, but of a judicial
discretion which has to be exercised in view of
all the facts and circumstances of a particular
case; but in some cases, it may raise
controversies as to the power of the court, in
contradistinction to its inherent jurisdiction, or,
in other words, of jurisdiction in the limited
sense in which it is used in section 115 of the
Code;
(2) That in a suit relating to property in order
that a person may be added as a party, he
should have a direct interest as distinguished
from a commercial interest in the subjectmatter of the litigation;
(3) Where the subject-matter of a litigation is a
declaration as regards status or a legal
character, the rule of present or direct interest
may be relaxed in a suitable case where the
court is of the opinion that by adding that
party it would be in a better position
effectually and completely to adjudicate upon
the controversy;

20.

(4) The cases contemplated in the last
proposition have to be determined in
accordance with the statutory provisions of
sections 42 and 43 of the Specific Relief Act;
..............”
A reference may also be made to the decision of the

Supreme Court reported as Ramesh Hirachand Kundanmal v
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 1992 (2) SCC 224. In
the said case, the plaintiff was a dealer on the land held by the
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation and was in possession of a
service station. The Municipal Corporation issued a notice to
the plaintiff for demolition of a certain construction alleging

Page 12 of 18

that it was unauthorized. The plaintiff filed a suit for permanent
injunction

against

the

Municipal

Corporation.

Hindustan

Petroleum applied for being impleaded as a defendant on the
ground that it had material to show that the structure was
unauthorized. The prayer was granted by the Courts below. The
plaintiff approached the Supreme Court. Allowing the appeal
and setting aside the order, the Supreme Court held that the
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation was neither necessary nor
proper party to the proceedings. It was held that the person to
be joined must be one whose presence is necessary as a party.
The test is not whether his presence is necessary for the
correct solution of the dispute before the Court but whether the
order would affect him or his interest would be prejudiced.
Relevant discussion is being noted herein below:“6. Sub-rule(2) of Rule 10 gives a wide
discretion to the Court to meet every case of
defect of parties and is not affected by the
inaction of the plaintiff to bring the necessary
parties on record. The question of impleadment
of a party has to be decided on the touch stone
of Order I Rule 10 which provides that only a
necessary or a proper party may be added. A
necessary party is one without whom no order
can be made effectively. A proper party is one
in whose absence an effective order can be
made but whose presence is necessary for a
complete and final decision on the question
involved in the proceeding. The addition of
parties is generally not a question of initial
jurisdiction of the Court but of a judicial
discretion which has to be exercised in view of
Page 13 of 18

all the facts and circumstances of a particular
case.
8.
The case really turns on the true
construction of the Rule in particular the
meaning of the words "whose presence before
the Court may be necessary in order to enable
the Court effectually and completely to
adjudicate upon and settle all the questions
involved in the suit." The Court is empowered
to join a person whose presence is necessary
for the prescribed purpose and cannot under
the Rule direct the addition of a person whose
presence is not necessary for that purpose. If
the intervener has a cause of action against
the plaintiff relating to the subject-matter of
the existing action, the Court has power to join
intervener so as to give effect to the primary
object of the order which is to avoid multiplicity
of actions.
14. It cannot be said that the main object of
the rule is to prevent multiplicity of actions
though it may incidentally have that effect.
But that appears to be a desirable
consequence of the rule rather than its main
objectives. The person to be joined must be
one whose presence is necessary as a party.
What makes a person a necessary party is not
merely that he has relevant evidence to give
on some of the questions involved; that would
only make him a necessary witness. It is not
merely that he has an interest in the correct
solution of some questions involved and has
thought of relevant arguments to advance.
The only reason which makes it necessary to
make a person a party to an action is that he
should be bound by the result of the action
and the question to be settled, therefore, must
be a question in the action which cannot be
effectually and completely settled unless he is
a party. The line has been drawn on a wider
construction of the rule between the direct
interest or the legal interest and commercial
interest. It is, therefore, necessary that the
Page 14 of 18

person must be directly or legally interested in
the action in the answer, i.e. , he can say that
the litigation may lead to a result which will
affect him legally that is by curtailing his legal
rights. It is difficult to say that the rule
contemplates joining as a defendant a person
whose only object is to prosecute his own
cause of action. Similar provision was
considered in Amon v. Raphael Tuck & Sons
Ltd. (1956) 1 All E.R. 273, wherein after
quoting the observations of Wynn-Parry, J. in
Dollfus Mieg et Compagnie S.A. v. Bank of
England (1950) 2 All E.R. 611, that the true
test lies not so much in an analysis of what are
the constituents of the applicants' rights, but
rather in what would be the result on the
subject-matter of the action if those rights
could be established, Devlin, J. has stated:

21.

The test is 'May the order for which the
plaintiff is asking directly affect the intervener
in the enjoyment of his legal rights.'
The test which is to be applied while considering an

application under Order I Rule 10(2) of the Code of Civil
Procedure for impleadment of a party has been summarised in
the decision of the Madhya Pradesh High Court reported as
Sampatbai v Madhusingh Gambhirji AIR 1960 MP 84 :“The test is not whether the joinder of the
person proposed to be added as a defendant
would be according to or against the wishes of
the plaintiff or whether the joinder would
involve an investigation into a question not
arising on the cause of action averred by the
plaintiff. It is whether the relief claimed by the
plaintiff will directly affect the intervener in
the enjoyment of his rights. It is not enough
that the plaintiff's rights, and rights which the
person desiring to be made a defendant
wishes to assert should be connected with the
same subject-matter. The intervener must be
directly and legally interested in the answers
Page 15 of 18

to the questions involved in the case. A person
is legally interested in the answer only if he
can say that it may lead to a result that will
affect him legally -- that is by curtailing his
legal rights. This is the test which has been
applied in Amon v. Raphael Tuck and Sons
Ltd., 1956-1 All ER 273, in connection with R.
S. C. Order 16, Rule 11 which is similar to
Order 1, Rule 10, C. P. C. Again as pointed out
in Dollfus Mieg et Compagnie S. A. v. Bank of
England, 1950-2 All ER 605 at p. 611, in
determining whether or not an applicant has a
proprietary right in the subject matter of an
action sufficient to entitle him to be joined as
a defendant

22.

"the true test lies not so much in an analysis
of what are the constituents of the applicant's
rights, but rather in what would be the result
on the subject-matter of the action if those
rights could be established".
Turning to the facts of the instant case, it is the

pleaded in the plaint that the defendant represented to the
plaintiff that he is the sole and exclusive owner of the suit
property. In support whereof, reliance has been placed on the
Will dated 13.2.80 and the Relinquishment Deed 28.5.90.
23.

As already noted, in the written statement filed by

the defendant, a categorical plea has been taken that he and
the petitioner are the joint owners of the suit property. That the
defendant never executed any agreement to sell in respect of
the suit property. That the petitioner never executed any
Relinquishment Deed relinquishing his rights and interest in the
suit property in favour of the defendant.

Page 16 of 18

24.

Thus, the instant suit revolves around the following

two issues :i.

Whether the defendant executed the agreement to

sell dated 18.6.90?
ii.

Whether the defendant was the sole and exclusive

owner of the suit property? As regards decision on this issue, it
is necessary to determine whether the petitioner executed the
Relinquishment Deed date 28.5.90 relinquishing all his rights
and interests in the suit property in favour of the defendant.
25.

An analysis of the allegations in the plaint and the

defence taken in the written statement shows that the issue of
ownership of the suit property is the subject-matter of the suit
or in other words is a 'question involved in the suit'.
26.

Issue of ownership of the suit property is the

subject-matter of the suit and that since petitioner is claiming
to be the co-owner of the suit property to the extent of ½ share
in the suit property he would be affected by the decision in the
suit and hence is a necessary party.
27.

If the impleadment sought for by the petitioner is

allowed, neither the nature of the suit would be changed nor
the controversy in the suit would be widened.
28.

In view of the above discussion I hold that the

petitioner is entitled to be impleaded as a defendant in the
Page 17 of 18

present suit.
29.

The impugned order dated 19.07.06 is set aside.

Application for impleadment of the petitioner is allowed.
30.

No costs.

November 26, 2007
NANDRAJOG)
sl

(PRADEEP
JUDGE

Page 18 of 18

