*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.631/2001
Central Pollution Control Board
through: None.

........ Appellant

VERSUS
M/s.Modern Decorators & Anr.
....... Respondents
through : Mr.S.K.Sharma for respondent No.1.
DATE OF DECISION:
26.03.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

By way of the instant appeal exception is taken to

an order dated 19.9.2001 dismissing objections to an award
passed by the learned arbitrator being the award dated
20.5.1997. The impugned order is a short and cryptic order. I
reproduce the same in its entirety:“Pr. Counsels for the parties.
Heard the arguments addressed on behalf of counsels
for the parties and perused the material on record.

FAO.No.631/01

page 1 of 5

Earlier the award passed by the Ld.Arbitrator was set
aside by the order of my Ld.Predecessor vide order
dt.18/10/96 and award was illegible 18/10/96 U/s.16
of the Arbitration Act 1940 for giving reasons for the
award within 4 months. Arbitrator sought extension in
time for giving award after giving reasons for the
award within four months.
Counsel for the objector respondent has raised the
objections that the reason given by the arbitrator are
not sufficient reasons.
However, counsel for the
claimant has filed 2000 VII AD (Delhi) 545 judgment of
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi wherein it was held that,
“Where award was remanded back with
respect to fresh consideration on escalation
and interest awarded, arbitrator complied
with the order of escalation and interest
scaled down. Fresh objections filed. These
objections are barred by the principle of res
judicata.”
Counsel for the objector argues that as the award was
set aside he has right to file fresh objection. However,
counsel for the claimant submits that in view of
judgment cited above as the decisions on the
objection become res judicata no fresh objection can
be filed as the arbitrator has given the reasons for
passing his award, and he was directed to give the
reasons for the award only while remitting the award
to him. He has duly complied with the directions of
the court and no fresh objections can be filed to the
award, in view of the judgment of Hon'ble High Court
of Delhi reported in 2000 VII AD (Delhi) 545.
Accordingly objections of the objector are dismissed
as not being made out and award of the arbitrator dt.
20/5/97 is made rule of the court specially when court
cannot go into the merits of the award.
Decree sheet be prepared.
record room.”

FAO.No.631/01

File be consigned to

page 2 of 5

2.

Suffice would it be to record that the learned

arbitrator had published an award dated 13.10.1994 which was
challenged on various grounds.

One of them being that the

arbitration agreement between the parties required a reasoned
award to be pronounced.

It was urged that since the award

dated 13.10.1999 was sans a reasoning it was contrary to law.
3.

Vide order dated 18.10.1996 objections filed to the

award dated 13.10.1994 succeeded. Learned Judge held that
since reasons were not given in the award it was illegal on said
count alone. The matter was remitted to the arbitrator to give
reasons.
4.

It may be noted that since the award dated

13.10.1994 was without reasons the learned Judge did not deal
with the merits of the award pertaining to the challenge to the
claims allowed.
5.

At the second stage when the reasoned award came

it was challenged.

The learned Judge has dismissed the

challenge vide afore-noted order.
6.

The perversity is writ large on the face of the order

itself.
7.

A claim or an objection would be barred on the

principles of res judicata only where a Court of competent
jurisdiction has dealt with the same issue on merits.
FAO.No.631/01

page 3 of 5

8.

The decision of the learned Single Judge of this

Court reported as 2000 (VII) AD 545 Subhash & Co. vs. DDA
relied upon by the learned Trial Judge does not hold what has
been interpreted by the learned Trial Judge. Perusal of the said
decision shows that an earlier award which under challenge
resulted in a decision of this Court rejecting challenge to a
substantial part of the award. Matter was however remitted to
the learned arbitrator to re-decide on claim No.5 and 7.
9.

When the learned arbitrator re-decided claims No.5

and 7 a fresh set of objections were filed and while so doing a
challenge was raised to certain claims which were allowed
under the first award and in respect whereof the first round of
challenge resulted in a failure.

It was in said context it was

held that no fresh challenge could be raised to the claims
which were allowed by the learned arbitrator at the first stage
and in respect whereof the challenge failed.
10.

In the instant case it has to be noted that at the first

round of litigation the objections were not decided on merits
with respect to the various claims allowed by the learned
arbitrator.

The award was set aside and the matter was

remitted to the arbitrator on account of the award being a nonreasoned award. Thus, when a reasoned award came it was
permissible to challenge the findings in the award relatable to
FAO.No.631/01

page 4 of 5

each and every claim.
11.

The appeal is allowed. The impugned order dated

19.9.2001 is quashed.

The objections are restored for fresh

adjudication by the learned Additional District Judge.
12.

Since none appears for the appellant the successor

court before whom the matter would be revived is directed to
issue notice to the parties and thereafter re-decide the
objections in accordance with law, guided by the present
decision.
13.

No costs.

14.

TCR be returned forthwith.

26th March, 2008

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

d.k.bainsla

FAO.No.631/01

page 5 of 5

