*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.108/2008
UOI

through:

........ Appellant
Mr.V.S.R.Krishna, Adv.
VERSUS

Maimum Nisha & Ors.
through : None

....... Respondent

DATE OF DECISION:
26.03.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

CM No.4440/2008
1.

There is a 93 days delay in filing the appeal.

Vide

CM No.4440/2008 delay in filing the appeal is prayed to be
condoned.

I am considering prima facie the merits of the

appeal while considering condonation of delay for the reason
law is that if a claim is otherwise meritorious it should not be
thrown out on account of limitation. I am also considering the
cause shown for delay to be condoned.
2.

Law pertaining to condonation of delay as it has

FAO.No.108/08

page 1 of 7

grown in this country has inter mingled with prima facie case
to be considered while considering the sufficiency of the cause
shown for delay to be condoned.
3.

Mohd. Aarif, held to be a bona fide passenger in a

train, a finding not challenged in the instant appeal, had
boarded a train to undertake journey from Sarai Rohilla Railway
Station to Barauni Junction.

The journey was undertaken by

the young boy on 6.4.2005.
4.

The next date i.e. on 7.4.2005 the train reached

Dalsinghsarai Station.
grievous injuries.

He fell off the train.

Unfortunately, he died.

He received

AW-2, a stated

eyewitness and a fellow passenger entered the witness box
and gave a graphic version of as to what happened when
Mohd. Aarif fell from the compartment when the train was in
motion.

AW-2 stated in his testimony that he and the

deceased were co-passengers in the same compartment. That
the compartment was over crowded and when it was about to
reach Dalsingsarai Railway Station he got off from the seat to
go near the door as the train was to halt at the said station
only for a minute. When he reached near the door the train
suddenly jerked and the deceased who was near the door fell
down from the train. He stated that he informed the said fact
to the Station Master.
FAO.No.108/08

page 2 of 7

5.

After noting the testimony of AW-2, the Tribunal has

returned a finding that AW-2 was cross-examined but nothing
could be elicited from the said witness which could detract
from his creditworthiness. The Tribunal has also recorded that
the contemporary record produced by the applicants i.e. the
investigation report etc. substantially supports the version of
AW-2.
6.

The Tribunal has further noted Section 123 of the

Railways Act, 1989.

Suffice would it be to note that under

Clause 2 of Sub-clause 'c' of Section 123 the accidental falling
of a passenger from a train carrying passengers is treated as
an untoward incident and compensation for death of injury
relating to an untoward incident is provided under Section 124A of the Railways Act, 1989. The Tribunal has accordingly held
that once a bona fide passenger of a train is proved to have
suffered injuries or death as a result of fall from a train, prima
facie case would be made out to hold that the injury or the
death is as a result of an untoward incident and hence
compensation is payable under Section 124-A.
7.

The appellant had projected a defence under the

Proviso to Section 124-A. The defence projected was that if it is
established that the injury was self inflicted or the death was a
result of an act of the deceased, under the proviso no
FAO.No.108/08

page 3 of 7

compensation would be payable.
8.

The learned Tribunal has held that in the instant

case the respondent (appellant) did not adduce any evidence
to show that the incident in question is covered by the proviso
to Section 124-A.
9.

Learned counsel for the appellant urges that the

said finding of the Tribunal is wrong for the reason evidence
has come on record that the deceased was standing at the
door of the bogey. Meaning thereby, he was negligent on said
account the inevitable conclusion has to be that the deceased
died due to his own act of negligence.
10.

No doubt, the Tribunal has not dealt with the

submission as is projected at the hearing today but that does
not vitiate the impugned order for the simple reason in his
testimony, AW-2 has clearly deposed that the train was over
crowded and that the train was to halt for only one minute at
Dalsingsarai Station. The inevitable conclusion from the said
testimony of AW-2 (which has not been challenged in crossexamination) has to be that passengers who had to disembark
got hardly a minute to do so.

Within the same time the

passengers who had to board the train had also to do so.
Obviously, there would be jostling.
11.

Thus it would be the duty of the Railway authorities

FAO.No.108/08

page 4 of 7

to ensure that only such number of passengers enter a bogey
who can be accommodated.

It is a matter of common

knowledge that tickets are issued in unreserved bogies to one
and all. Even in reserved bogies passengers having no valid
tickets entitling them to travel in the reserved compartments
do enter in the compartment.

Further, why should the

Railways run trains where doors can be opened when the train
is in motion? Pneumatic doors are currently in vogue all over
the world in not only trains but all passenger transport
vehicles. It is thus a case of deficiency in service and also lack
of reasonable foresight on the part of the railways.
12.

In any case, a passenger in an over crowded bogey

cannot be fastened with the act of self inflicted injury if he falls
from the over crowded bogey when the train is approaching
the Railway station and people have to jostle to de-board on
account of inadequate time provided for de-boarding.
13.

Looked at from any angle prima facie no case exists

in favour of the appellant and hence by not condoning the
delay it cannot be said that a meritorious claim is being thrown
out.
14.

With respect to the delay, suffice would it be to note

that the delay is of 93 days. The usual explanation given is
that the file had to move from desk to desk before
FAO.No.108/08

page 5 of 7

administrative decision was taken to file the appeal. The only
worthwhile averments are in para 3 and 4 of the application
which reads as under :“3. That in this connection it is submitted
that immediately on receipt of the impugned
order from the learned Tribunal the concerned
opinions were taken from the respective
persons as is the vogue in railway
departments.
4.
That the matter was examined in the
office of the petitioner in consultation with the
legal advisers and it was later on decided to
challenge the impugned order by way of a
First Appeal Order.
The petition was
accordingly got drafted and filed. The above
process of the consideration of the orders of
the learned Tribunal which process is
mandatory in a government department like
the Railways led to 93 days delay in filing the
present FAO. The delay thus caused is purely
bonafide and is due to administrative
formalities to be gone into before the filing of
the FAO.”
15.

No particular of the officer who dealt with the file

has been disclosed.

On what date was the file dealt with?

None has been disclosed. What is the administrative hierarchy
in the Railways to deal with legal matters? None has been
disclosed. The sufficient cause is as vague as vagueness can
be.
16.

Thus, no sufficient cause has been shown entitling

appellant to have the delay condoned.
17.

The application is accordingly dismissed in limine.

FAO.No.108/08

page 6 of 7

FAO No.108/2008
Since delay in filing the appeal has not been
condoned the appeal is dismissed as not maintainable.

March 26, 2008
vg

FAO.No.108/08

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 7 of 7

