*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

RSA No.131/2004
Tara Chand & Anr.
........
through: Mr. N.S.Dalal, Advocate

Appellants

VERSUS
Kumari Rajni Jain & Ors
........ Respondents
through: Mr. Dinesh K.Gupta, Advocate for R-1
None for respondents 2 to 5
DATE OF DECISION:
28.04.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

The

substantial

question

of

law

which

arises

for

consideration in the instant appeal is whether the finding by the
learned Trial Judge pertaining to issue No.1 and 2 is sustainable in law.
2.

On 5.7.2002 learned Trial Judge framed the following

issues:“1.

Whether the suit is maintainable in the form as filed and
presented before this Court? OPP.

2.

Whether the suit by the plaintiff is barred under the
provision of law, particularly those of Specific Relief Act
and Delhi Land Reforms Act? OPP.

FAO No.141/04

page 1 of 6

3.
4.
3.

Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get the relief of
mandatory injunction as prayed for? OPP.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to relief of permanent
injunction as prayed for? OPP.”
In the suit, appellants who were the plaintiffs, had pleaded

that they were in possession of the suit land which was hithertofore
shamlat land and on consolidation of the village Rajokri in the year
1954-55 was assigned khasra No.2052-2056.

They pleaded that

notwithstanding plaintiffs being in possession of the suit land through
their ancestors it was wrongly declared as vested in the gaon sabha
but notwithstanding said entry in the revenue record, plaintiffs
continued to remain in cultivatory possession of the land. It was stated
that adjoining lands belonged to one Chandi Ram and Samay Singh
who sold off the same to Rajni Jain, defendant No.1. That defendant
No.1 has carved out small portions of the adjoining land and sold the
same to defendants No.2 to 5.
4.

Claiming easementary rights through the said adjoining

lands and alleging that a strip having width of 1-½ gatthas was the
passage in question it was stated that the defendants cannot deprive
the plaintiffs of their easementary rights.

Thus, an injunction was

prayed for to restrain the defendants from blocking or putting
impediments in the passage. Mandatory injunction was prayed for to
direct the defendants to remove the building material stacked at the
site.
5.

Pertaining to issue No.1 learned Trial Judge held that before

a party can seek injunction it must plead and establish a legal right and
FAO No.141/04

page 2 of 6

that there was an invasion of said right. Noting that the plaintiffs had
pleaded that in the revenue records the land comprised in the khasra,
possession whereof was claimed by the plaintiffs, were vested in the
Gaon Sabha it was held that the plaintiffs have no right to maintain the
suit and hence issue No.1 was decided against the plaintiffs.
6.

Pertaining to issue No.2 it was held that the plaintiffs were

disentitled to an injunction under Section 41(h) of the Specific Relief
Act.
7.

The consequence of the decision in issue No.1 and 2 was

an automatic finding against the plaintiffs pertaining to issue No.3 and
4.
8.

The first appeal against the judgment and decree of the

learned Trial Judge failed.
9.

At the outset I may note that the counsel for the appellants

i.e. the plaintiffs states that since defendant No.1 has admittedly sold
the adjoining land through which easementary right of passage is
claimed by the appellants they seek no relief against respondent No.1
and if the instant appeal is allowed they would delete the name of
respondent No.1 from the array of defendants.
10.

Reverting to the controversy at hand, suffice would it be to

note that issue of maintainability of a suit in a particular form has to be
decided with reference to pleadings in the plaint. The defence has not
to be considered.
11.

A perusal of the plaint shows that the plaintiffs i.e. the

appellants claimed possession of the suit land which hithertofore was
FAO No.141/04

page 3 of 6

shamlat land and stated that they were in continuous cultivatory
possession thereof. They pleaded that notwithstanding the land being
wrongly shown in the revenue record as belonging to the gaon sabha
land they were in possession of the suit land. Qua the defendants no
adverse rights qua the land in respect whereof possession was stated
was claimed. Qua the defendants an easementary right was prayed
for.
12.

Averments were made in the plaint as to how this

easementary right is claimed.
13.

Thus, as framed, the suit was clearly maintainable.

14.

Pertaining to the findings on issue No.2 suffice would it be

to note that under Section 185 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954
only such suits are not maintainable before Civil Courts remedy
whereof is not available before a revenue court.
15.

Pertaining to agricultural land no remedy is available to a

party before a revenue authority to seek a relief of injunction.
16.

Pertaining to Section 41(h) of the Specific Relief Act it

has to be noted that an injunction may be refused when a party has an
equal efficacious remedy except in case of breach of trust.

I fail to

understand as to what efficacious other remedy would be available to
the plaintiffs on the cause pleaded other than a suit for injunction.
17.

A perusal of the decisions of the Trial Court and the First

Appellate Court shows that both learned Judges who have pended the
respective judgment have been coloured by the fact that the plaintiffs
have themselves pleaded that the suit land was recorded as vested in
FAO No.141/04

page 4 of 6

the gaon sabha.
18.

Both Courts have failed to appreciate that the plaintiffs

categorically pleaded that said entry was contrary to law.
19.

Be that as it may, the subject matter of the suit was a right

of easement claimed by the plaintiffs through the adjoining lands so as
to reach the lands which were in possession of the plaintiffs.
20.

I hold that the suit filed by the plaintiffs was maintainable.

I hold that the suit is neither barred under the provisions of the Specific
Relief Act or the Delhi Land Reforms Act.
21.

I may note a short order passed by their Lordships of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as 2008 AIR SCW 1965 Rajender
Singh vs. Vijay Paul & Ors.
Lordships

of

In somewhat similar circumstances their

the Supreme Court held that suits for injunctions

pertaining to agricultural land have to be decided after trial by the Civil
Courts and not before the revenue authorities.
22.

Instant appeal accordingly stands disposed of allowing the

same and as a consequence thereof allowing RCA No.25/03.

The

judgment and decree dated 16.4.2004 passed by the learned Appellate
Judge is set aside. As a consequence, impugned judgment and decree
dated 7.8.2003 passed by the learned Civil Judge is set aside.
23.

Since the suit of the plaintiffs stands restored, the learned

Trial Judge would re-decide the suit after framing appropriate issues.
Needless to state, evidence would be recorded.
24.

As noted herein above plaintiffs would give up relief against

respondent No.1 impleaded as defendant No.1.
FAO No.141/04

page 5 of 6

25.

No costs.

26.

TCR be returned forthwith.

April 28, 2008
dk

FAO No.141/04

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 6 of 6

