IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA No.67/2007
#
!

S. Puran Singh
........
through: Mr.Daljinder Singh, Adv.

Appellant

VERSUS
$
^

Sh. Shyam Lal
........
through: Mr. R.C. Chopra, Adv.

Respondent

RESERVED ON: 18.12.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 20.12.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Following substantial question of law needs to be

answered in the above captioned second appeal :“Whether the conclusions arrived at by the
courts below are vitiated on account of nonconsideration of relevant evidence?”
2.

Above captioned second appeal arises out of the

judgment and decree dated 5.9.2006 passed by the learned
Additional District Judge, Delhi whereby the judgment and
decree dated 15.2.2003 passed by the learned Civil Judge,
Delhi

which

partly

decreed

the

suit

for

possession,

damages/mesne profits and permanent injunction filed by the
appellant was set aside.
RSA No. 67/2007

Page 1 of 17

3.

Case pleaded by the appellant in the plaint filed by

him was that he was the owner of the property bearing
municipal No.3407, Gali No.249, Hansa Puri, Tri Nagar, New
Delhi. (here-in-after referred to as the suit property). That in
the year 1996 on the request of the respondent,

appellant

gave a room in the suit property to the respondent to reside
therein for a period of one year. After expiration of period of
one year again on the request of the respondent the period
was extended by a further period of six months.

Thereafter

even after repeated requests by the appellant the respondent
failed to vacate the suit property. In the meantime appellant
fell ill and had bypass surgery and did not pursue the matter
with the respondent for about 2 years on account of his illness.
That during the said period respondent started running a
kiryana shop from the said room without taking permission
from the appellant.

That when the appellant recovered from

his illness he issued a legal notice dated 11.7.2001 directing
him to vacate the premises.
4.

On the basis of afore-noted averments the plaintiff

filed the suit praying:i)

A decree for possession of the suit property.

ii)

A decree for damages/mesne profits @ Rs.2000/-

per month on the basis that market rate of rent of the
properties of similar nature situated in the same locality is
RSA No. 67/2007

Page 2 of 17

Rs.2000/- per month.
iii)

A decree for permanent injunction to restrain the

respondent from creating any third party interest in respect of
the suit property.
5.

Defence set up by the respondent was that he was

the tenant in respect of one room in the suit property. That the
said room was let out by the appellant to him in the year 1985
at a monthly rent of Rs.150/-. That from the said shop he was
running a kiryana shop.

That in the year 1995 rent was

enhanced to Rs.200/- per month.

That he has paid rent till

June, 2001. That appellant never issued any rent receipt.
6.

In response to the defence set up by the respondent

the appellant in the replication pleaded as under :“2. Para No.2 is also false, wrong and denied
and that of the petition is reafirmed. It is
wrong that the defendant came in the shop in
or about the year 1985 as a tenant at the rate
of Rs.150/- per month and the defendant
started a shop of kiryana. It is further wrong
that in or about 1995 the rent of shop had
been increased to Rs.200/- and the defendant
has paid rent upto June, 2001 and he is ready
and willing to pay the rent that may be legally
payable. It is stated the earlier one shri
Sumair Chand was tenant upto July 1992 in
the premises and after vacation of the said
premises plaintiff had given this portion to the
defendant at his request. It is further wrong
that the correctness of the plan is denied. It is
further wrong that copy of the plan has not
been supplied to the defendant.” (underlining
emhasized).

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 3 of 17

7.

In support of his case appellant examined himself as

PW-1 and one Mr.R.K.Gupta, Assistant Zonal Inspector, Keshav
Puram Zone, MCD as PW-2.
8.

Relevant part of the testimony of the appellant

reads as under :“Shyam Lal is occupier of one room of
property at above said no. as also shown in
the site plan. The site plan is Ex. PW1/2 which
is correct as per site. Prior to occupation of
Shyam Lal his brother was tenant in this
portion as shown in the site plan.
xxxx
I have brought the original counter file of the
rent receipt which 7.7.92 issued to Sh. Sumer
Chand who was the brother of the defd. The
original counter file receipt is Ex. PW1/7.
(original has been removed from the rent
receipt book today). The rent receipt bears
the sig. Of Sumer Chand at point 'A' on the Ex.
PW 1/7 which had been done in my presence.
xxxxxxxxx by the counsel for the defendant
It is incorrect to say that Sumer Chand was
never my tenant in my premises shown in
orange in the site plan. It is wrong to say that
signature appearing on Ex. PW1/7 at point 'A'
does not of Sumer Chand. It is incorrect to say
that Sumer Chand was illiterate. It is further
incorrect to say that Ex. PW1/7 is a forged
document. I know the defd. even prior to
1992 as he used to visit the brother Sh. Sumer
Chand. Sumer Chand left the premises in 1992
and this portion was given to the defd in the
year 1996.
xxxx
I never demanded any rent or any damages
from the defd for the portion occupied by the
RSA No. 67/2007

Page 4 of 17

defd. I never took even charges of electricity
consumption.
xxxx
Sumer Chand was my tenant since 1985-86
and he was paying the rent @ 300/- continuing
till the vacation of the property. Sumer Chand
was also running a shop of Kiryana.
9.

PW-2 proved the house tax assessment report of the

suit property for the year 1999 as Ex.PW2/1.
10.

A conjoint reading of the plaint and replication filed

by the appellant and testimony of the appellant makes it clear
that the case set up by the appellant is that :A.

In the year 1985 appellant has inducted one

Mr.Sumair Chand as a tenant in respect of one room of the suit
property at a monthly rent of Rs.300/-.
B.

Sumair Chand was running a kiryana shop from the

said tenanted premises.
C.

In the year 1992 Sumair Chand vacated the

tenanted premises.
D.

In the year 1996 defendant Shyam Lal who was the

brother of Sumair Chand requested the appellant to let him
reside in the said room.
E.

Appellant agreed to the request of the respondent

and allowed the respondent to occupy the said room for a
period of one year.

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 5 of 17

F.

Appellant had given the room to the respondent

without taking any consideration, monetary or otherwise from
the respondent.
G.

When appellant directed the respondent to vacate

the room he failed to do so.
11.

In order to establish that Sumair Chand was a

tenant in the suit property appellant produced a rent receipt
book.

One rent receipt was removed from the book and

marked as Ex.PW1/7.

Ex. PW1/7 purportedly bears the

signatures of Sumair Chand. The signatures of Sumair Chand
have been appended in the English language. Ex. PW1/7
pertains to the rent received by the appellant for the month
7.7.1992 to 6.8.1992. As per the rent receipt rent @ Rs.300/per month was received by the appellant.
12.

On behalf of the respondent, respondent and one

Smt. Bimla Jain w/o of Sumair Chand were examined as DW-1
and DW-2 respectively.
13.

In his testimony as DW-1 respondent deposed on

the lines of defence taken by him in his written statement. He
categorically denied that his brother Sumair Chand was a
tenant in the suit property between the years 1985 and 1992.
He also denied that rent receipt Ex. PW1/7 bears the signatures
of Sumair Chand. He deposed that Sumair Chand did not know

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 6 of 17

English and used to sign in Hindi. He deposed that the rent
receipt Ex. PW1/7 is a forged and fabricated document.
14.

Smt. Bimla Jain DW-2 was the widow of Sumair

Chand. She also denied that her husband Sumair Chand was a
tenant in the suit property.

She also deposed that Sumair

Chand did not know English and used to sign in Hindi.
15.

The first question before the learned Trial Court was

whether the rent receipt Ex. PW1/7 was duly proved or not.
16.

As regards the afore-noted question the learned

Trial Court has opined as under :“In regard to rent receipt Ex. P.W.-1/7 is
concerned, as per defendant, the said rent
receipt is not genuine and forged and fabricated
document as it does not bears signatures of
Late Sumer Chand. In this regard it is pertinent
to mention here that the burden to prove this
issue was on the defendant and it was the plea
of the defendant that Ex. P.W.-1/7 does not bear
signatures of Late Sumer Chand. But the
defendant has not produced any document to
compare the signatures of Late Sumer Chand on
Ex.P.W.-1/7. It is basic law that a person who
desires in Court to give findings in his favour
then burden to prove lies on him but in the
instant case as stated above the defendant has
not produced any document to compare the
signatures of Sumer Chand on rent receipt Ex.
P.W.-1/7. It is not disputed that Sumer Chand is
already died. In these circumstances, it is hold
that rent receipt Ex.P.W.-1/7 is duly proved. I
have carefully gone through the above said
judgments on which ld. Counsel for defendant
has relied and found that the findings of the
judgments are not applicable to the facts of the
instant case.”

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 7 of 17

17.

Having held that the appellant has duly proved the

rent receipt Ex.PW1/7 the next question before the learned
Trial Court was that whether from the testimony of the
appellant and rent receipt Ex. PW1/7 a conclusion can be
drawn that the respondent was in unauthorized occupation of
the suit property. As regards this issue the learned Trial Court
has opined as under :“Now the question arises whether rent receipt
Ex.P.W.-1/7 is helpful to the plaintiff or not? From
rent receipt Ex. P.W.-1/7 it is proved that earlier
Late Sumer Chand brother of defendant was tenant
in the property in question @ of rent of Rs.300/- per
month. The said rent receipt is dated 07.07.92. As
per case of the plaintiff Sumer Chand has left the
premises in question in the year 1992. But it is
pertinent to mention here that during crossexamination of D.W.-1, a specific suggestion was
put to D.W.-1 that Sumer Chand remained tenant in
the property in dispute from 1985 to till his death in
the year 1995.
On further explanation by
ld.counsel for plaintiff D.W.-1 has stated that Sumer
Chand died towards end of 1995. Therefore, in
these circumstances it is found that the plaintiff has
given self contradictory statements as on one hand
he has stated that Sumer Chand left the shop in the
year 1992 and during cross-examination of D.W.-1
he put a specific suggestion to D.W.-1 that Sumer
Chand remained tenant in the property in dispute
from 1985 till his death 1995.”
18.

After disbelieving the case set up by the appellant

the learned Trial Court has proceeded to consider whether the
respondent successfully established the defence taken by him
in his written statement.

As regards this the learned Trial

Court has held as under :-

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 8 of 17

“On the other hand as per the case of the defendant,
defendant is in possession of the shop since 1985
and late Sh. Sumer Chand brother of defendant
never remained in possession of the property in
question as tenant but as stated above the rent
receipt dated 07.07.92 Ex. P.W.-1/7 issued by
plaintiff in favour of late Sh. Sumer Chand is duly
proved which shows that Sumer Chand was earlier in
possession of suit property in 1992. It also casts
suspicion
regarding
the
trustworthiness
of
testimonies of D.W.-1 and even D.W.-2 in this
regard. Therefore, it is found that both the parties
are sailing in the same boat as per admissibility of
their evidence is concerned on the above said
grounds.”
19.

Having disbelieved the versions of both the parties

the learned Trial Court had no option but to base its decision
upon the conduct of the parties and other surrounding
circumstances.
20.

After considering the case in its entirety the learned

Trial Court concluded as under :“But now the question arises whether the defendant is
licencee of the plaintiff or not? As per the case of the
plaintiff, on this score I am not inclined to agree with
the plaintiff as it does not appeal to the commonsence
that a person shall give possession of the property to
licencee without any consideration when earlier
brother of the licencee was tenant in the same
property @Rs.300/- per month and kept on sleeping
for 5 years. Though it is submitted that the plaintiff
was not in a position to issue any legal notice etc. to
the defendant on the ground of his ill health but no
medical document has brought on record that he was
totally unable to start any legal proceedings against
the defendant. Further the plaintiff has not brought
on record any cogent reason that why and on what
relation he has given the property in question to the
defendant without any consideration. As matter of
proved record and evidence earlier late Sumer Chand
brother of defendant was tenant in the suit property
who remained in possession till his death till 1995. It is
RSA No. 67/2007

Page 9 of 17

also not disputed that late Sumer Chand was running
a shop in the suit property and it is further also not
disputed that at present defendant is also running a
kiryana shop in the property in question.
All these eventualities transpires that after death of
Sumer Chand the defendant kept on running the shop
earlier run by his brother late Sumer Chand. The
preponderance of probabilities lies in favour of the
defendant, in these circumstances.
In these
circumstances it is found that the defendant is in
possession of the property as tenant of the plaintiff. At
no stretch of time it came on record that rate of rent
of premises in dispute is more than Rs.3,500/- per
month. Therefore, the jurisdiction of this Court is
barred in the light of Section 50 of Delhi Rent Control
Act.”
21.

The decision of the learned Trial Court may be

summarized as under :A.

Holding that the possession of the respondent in

respect of the suit property was in the capacity of a tenant and
not a trespasser and that rate of the tenanted premises was
less than Rs.3500/- per month the learned Trial Court
dismissed the suit of the appellant in so far it prayed for a
decree of possession and mesne profits.
B.

Holding

that

the

appellant

has

successfully

established that he was the owner of the suit property the
learned Trial Court passed a decree of permanent injunction in
favour of the appellant restraining the respondent from
creating any third party interest in the suit property or
otherwise parting with the possession of the suit property.
22.

Aggrieved by the decision of the Trial Court in

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 10 of 17

refusing to grant a decree for possession and mesne profits in
his favour the appellant filed an appeal before the Court of
Addl. District Judge, Delhi.
23.

The learned Appellate Court concurred with the view

taken by the learned Trial Court that possession of the
respondent in respect of the suit property was in capacity of a
tenant and not a trespasser. In coming to the said conclusion
the learned Appellate Court has opined as under :“The appellant also placed on record the counter foil
of the rent receipt Ex. PW1/7 bearing his signatures.
The signatures on the counter foil was denied by the
widow of deceased Sh. Sumer Chand (who appeared
in the witness box as DW2) first and then, in the cross
examination when confronted with the said receipts,
she could not say whether the said signatures were of
Late Sh. Sumer Chand or not. If it is to be believed
that the appellant had been issuing rent receipts
regularly to his tenants, then, there is no reason why
he has placed on record only one counter foil of the
rent receipt(s) issued in seven years of his tenancy
allegedly to the said Sh. Sumer Chand............. He
could have filed all the counter foils of the rent
receipts issued by him to the said Sh. Sumer Chand to
show that he occupied the said premises as a tenant
and was running a shop there.”
24.

However further holding that rent of the tenanted

premises was less than Rs.3500/- per month and therefore the
jurisdiction of the civil court is barred by virtue of Section 50 of
the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 the learned Appellate Court
has held that the learned Trial Court was not justified in
granting a decree of permanent injunction in favour of the
appellant. Thus, vide the judgment dated 5.9.2006 the learned
RSA No. 67/2007

Page 11 of 17

Appellate Court set aside the judgment and decree dated
15.2.2003 passed by the learned Trial Court in so far it granted
a decree of permanent injunction in favour of the appellant.
25.

The learned counsel for the appellant has urged

following 2 grounds in support of the present appeal:A.
tax

That the courts below failed to take note of house
assessment

report

Ex.

PW2/1

which

conclusively

established that the respondent was not a tenant in the suit
property.
B.

That the courts below have not attached due

importance to the rent receipt Ex. PW1/7 which established
that brother of the defendant i.e. Sumair Chand was a tenant in
the suit property. As a limb to this ground, the counsel further
urged that the Appellate Court was wrong in holding that
appellant filed only one rent receipt.
26.

As already noted Ex.PW2/1 is the house tax

assessment report of the suit property for the year 1999. Said
report shows that when the property was inspected in the year
1999 the ground floor of the suit property was under the self
occupation of the appellant. This in my opinion is of no use to
the case of the appellant as it is contrary to the case of the
appellant itself.

It was the case of the appellant that there

were various tenants in the suit property whereas as per the

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 12 of 17

said inspection report the entire suit property i.e. ground floor,
first floor and second floor is shown to be under the self
occupation of the plaintiff/appellant.
27.

A perusal of the judgment as also record of the Trial

Court shows that the appellant has produced the entire receipt
book and not just one rent receipt.

For the sake of

convenience the entire rent receipt book was not exhibited but
rent receipt was removed from the book and marked as
Ex.PW1/7.

Thus I agree with the learned counsel that the

Appellate Court was wrong in basing its decision on the fact
that the appellant has produced only one rent receipt.
28.

The controversy in the present case revolves around

the fact that whether the respondent was a tenant in the suit
property or a lawful occupier who subsequently became a
trespasser.
29.

There is no document such as lease agreement, rent

receipt etc. to establish the relationship between the parties.
30.

The relationship of the parties thus has to be

gathered

from the

conduct

of

the parties

and

overall

circumstances.
31.

Following circumstances need to be noted :-

A.

Appellant has pleaded in the replication that the

disputed premises were first let out to Sumair Chand who was
RSA No. 67/2007

Page 13 of 17

running a kiryana shop therein from the period 1985 to 1992.
That Sumair Chand vacated the shop in the year 1992 and that
till 4 years premises were lying vacant. That thereafter in the
year 1996 the same were allowed to be occupied by the
brother of Sumair Chand, i.e. respondent without taking any
consideration/charges from him.
B

It is highly improbable that the premises which were

first let out to one Sumair Chand for commercial purposes were
allowed to be occupied by his brother without taking any
charges initially for a period of one year and thereafter
extended by a further period of 6 months.
C

Appellant has deposed that there were three other

tenants in the suit property. It is highly improbable that the
appellant allowed the respondent to occupy a portion of the
suit property without taking any charges from him particularly
when other portions of the suit property were let out by the
appellant.
D

As per the case of the appellant the disputed

premises remained vacant for a period of 4 years. It is difficult
to believe that the premises which were lying vacant for 4
years were allowed to be occupied by the respondent free of
cost.
E

Appellant has also not explained in his testimony or

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 14 of 17

else where as to why and in what circumstances Sumair Chand
vacated the suit propety having been in the possession of the
suit property for a considerable long period of 7 years.
F

Appellant has deposed that even the charges of

electricity consumption in respect of portion occupied by the
respondent were paid by him.
G

Appellant has not placed on record documents

showing his medical condition.
H

Appellant has not pleaded or deposed that the

respondent was his friend or a relative. He has merely deposed
that he knew the respondent as he was the brother of his
tenant Sumair Chand. It is difficult to believe that even though
there was no special relationship between the parties yet the
appellant allowed the respondent to occupy the disputed
premises free of cost for a period of 1 ½ years.
32.

Afore-noted

circumstances

when

considered

together lead to a very strong inference that the possession of
the respondent in respect of the suit property was in the
capacity of a tenant and not a trespasser, probably the
appellant allowed him to continue the business after Sumair
Chand died.
33.

Noting

the

evidence

on

record

and

peculiar

circumstances of the case the view taken by the learned Trial

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 15 of 17

Court is quite probable that Sumair Chand was a tenant in the
disputed premises and that after the death of Sumair Chand in
the year 1995 the respondent kept on running the kiryana
shop which was earlier run by his brother Sumair Chand. This
was with the consent of the appellant.
34.

I need not speculate. A case is decided as is

projected by the parties in their pleadings and evidence
brought on record. No evidence or pleading was led on the
aspect by either of the parties that the tenancy of disputed
premises was inherited by the widow of Sumair Chand. Yet the
view taken by the Trial Court is the only possible and probable
view that emerges from the pleadings of the parties and
evidence brought on the record. I need not discuss any further
else it would be open a can full of worms. I conclude by holding
that the onus to prove that the respondent was trespasser in
the suit property was on the appellant which he failed to
discharge.
35.

I find no infirmity in the decision of the courts below

in not granting a decree of possession and mesne profits in
favour of the appellant.
36.

However since ownership of the suit property was

established by the appellant the learned Appellate Court was
not justified in setting aside the decree of permanent
injunction granted by the learned Trial Court in favour of the
RSA No. 67/2007

Page 16 of 17

appellant. The bar created by virtue of Section 50 of the Delhi
Rent Control Act 1958 only comes into play when relief claimed
for relates to fixation of standard rent or ejectment/eviction of
a tenant.
37.

I thus restore the judgment and decree dated

15.02.03 passed by the learned Trial Court in so far it granted
permanent injunction in favour of the appellant and restraining
respondent from creating any third party interest or otherwise
parting with the possession of the suit property.
38.

Appeal in terms of para 37 above.

39.

No costs.

40.

LCR be returned.

December 20, 2007

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

vg

RSA No. 67/2007

Page 17 of 17

