IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRP No.131/2005
#
!

GNB Bros. Pvt. Ltd.
....... Petitioner
through: Mr. Anil Goel, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Sudhir Gensets Ltd.
...... Respondents
through: Mr. Jayant Mehta, Advocate with
Mr. Manish Kumar, Advocate

%
*
1.

DATE OF DECISION: 28-05-2007
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

A short issue arises for consideration in the present

petition.

The

issue

predicates

itself

on

the

scope

and

interpretation of Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996. The provision of law reads as under :“8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where
there is an arbitration agreement.-(1) A
judicial
authority before which an action is brought in an
matter which is the subject of an arbitration
agreement shall, if a party so applies not later than
when submitting his first statement on the substance
of the dispute, refer the parties to arbitration.

(2) The application referred to in sub-section (1)
shall not be entertained unless it is accompanied by
the original arbitration agreement or a duly certified
copy thereof.

2.

(3) Notwithstanding that an application has been
made under sub-section (1) and that the issue is
pending before the judicial authority, an arbitration
may be commenced or continued and an arbitral
award made.”
The phrase 'not later than when submitting his first

statement on the substance of the dispute', in Sub-Section 1 of
Section 8 needs to be interpreted.
3.

A brief backdrop of the relevant facts would be

necessary to appreciate the contours of the legal debate by
learned counsel for the parties.
4.

Petitioner filed a suit for recovery of Rs.5,02,200/-. The

suit sought damages.

The origin of the dispute was a jural

relationship between the parties pursuant to a written contract.
5.

Respondent was served with summons in the suit

returnable for 4.1.2001. It sought for and was granted time to file
a written statement. After adequate opportunities were granted
for filing a written statement and noting that the patience of the
court

ran

down,

on

17.2.2003,

i.e.

after successfully

delaying trial of the suit for over 2 years, respondent was visited
with the penalty of closure of its statement of defence i.e. right to
file written statement was closed. Petitioner was called upon to

lead its evidence. Matter lingered on till 2.4.2004. On said date,
an application was filed by the respondent under Section 8 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
6.

Petitioner opposed the application as not maintainable.

Petitioner stated that having obtained adequate opportunities for
filing the written statement; none being filed; resulting in right to
file written statement being closed, led to the inevitable
consequence that the first statement on the substance of the
dispute

would

be

deemed

as

having

closed

resulting

in

extinguishing the right to invoke Section 8.
7.

Respondent contended on the other hand that there being

no limitation prescribed for filing an application under Section 8;
notwithstanding that it was served on 4.1.2001 and suffered a
penal order of right to file written statement being closed on
17.2.2003, it had a right to file the application. It was pleaded by
the respondent that as long as the first statement on the
substance of the dispute is not filed, whatsoever may be the
span of time consumed, application under Section 8 could be
filed.
8.

Learned Trial Judge has held that the principles under

Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 were not imported in
Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. Learned

Trial Judge has held that the decisions under the Arbitration Act,
1940 which foreclosed the right to file an application under
Section 34 thereof on a defendant participating in the proceedings
by seeking time for filing a written statement were inappropriate
for adjudicating an application under Section 8 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996.
9.

Learned Trial Judge has opined that the use of the word

'shall' in Sub-Section 1 of Section 8 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 renders the said statutory provision as a
mandatory provision.

Learned Trial Judge has held that the

moment it is shown to the court that there exists an arbitration
clause between the parties and that the subject matter of the
dispute brought before the court is an arbitrable dispute, parties
have to be referred to arbitration.
10.

Learned counsel for the respondent urges that if contention

of learned counsel for the

petitioner were to be accepted,

the expression 'not later than when submitting his first statement
on the substance of the dispute' would have to be re-read as 'not
later than when or when time has lapsed for submitting his first
statement on the substance of the dispute.'
11.

Counsel urges that this would be impermissible for the

reason this would require insertion of the 6 words 'or when time

has lapsed for' in Sub-Section 1 of Section 8 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.
12.

The argument of the learned counsel for the respondent may

appear attractive at the first blush, if one were to hold that a
courts cannot legislate.

But the sheen is lost from the argument

if one considers the expression in the context in which SubSection 1 of Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, stands enacted. Particularly keeping in view the underlying
philosophy of Sub-Section 1 of Section 8 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.
13.

It is settled law that where no time is prescribed for doing of

an act, performance of the act cannot be postponed indefinitely
and it has to be performed within a reasonable period of time.
Alternatively, if no other provision of the Limitation Act 1963 is
attracted, Article 137 of the Limitation Act 1963 which provides
for a limitation of 3 years would be attracted. Thus in any case,
an application under Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 which is filed beyond a period of 3 years when right to
file the application accrues would be barred by the Statute.
14.

As noted above, respondent was served for 4.1.2001.

Reckoned with effect from said date 3 years would expire on
4.1.2004. As noted above, the application in question was filed on

2.4.2004.
15.

But, I have more fundamental reasons to hold that

notwithstanding Article 137 of the Limitation Act, an application
invoking

remedy

under

Section

8

of

the

Arbitration

and

Conciliation Act, 1996 cannot be postponed beyond a reasonable
period.
16.

The reason is that where the party brings a civil suit and the

opposite party seeks resolution of the dispute through the
medium of arbitration,it must do so with utmost dispatch.

The

legislative intent is to have the application filed at the earliest,
meaning thereby, before submitting the first statement on the
substance of the dispute. No doubt, the language of Section 8 of
the

Arbitration

and

Conciliation Act, 1996 is materially

different than the language of Section 34 of the Arbitration Act,
1940, but the underlying principle of both enactments, namely,
promptness in invoking the right exists.
17.

Where a party seeks repeated opportunities for filing a

written statement and files none and right to file a written
statement is foreclosed, inevitable consequence would be a
deemed legal fiction. The deemed legal fiction would be that the
right to file the written statement being closed would result in
foreclosure of any right to predicate an application under Section

8 which requires invocation of the right before submitting the first
statement on the substance of the dispute.
18.

Thus, I need not re-interpret and rephrase Sub-Section 1 of

Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and need
not introduce the words 'or when time has lapsed for' in SubSection 1 of Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996.
19.

As it is said, the life of law is not logic but experience.

Statutes have to be interpreted purposively and to give effect to
the legislative intent and not in derogation thereof.
20.

The petition accordingly stands disposed of quashing the

impugned order dated 6.10.2004 passed by Shri V.K.Yadav, ADJ,
Delhi and as a consequence thereof, I dismiss the respondent's
application under Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996. Suit filed by the petitioner is restored.
21.

Parties are directed to appear before the learned Trial Judge

on 9.7.2007. On a formal application being filed by the petitioner
and copy of the present order shown, suit would be restored and
adjudicated as per law.
22.

Costs of Rs.10,000/- is imposed on the respondent and in

favour of the petitioner.
23.

Copy of this order be supplied dasti to counsel for the parties

on payment of usual charges.

May 28, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

