IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No.2161/2007
#
!
$
^

Diksha Dhingra
through:

........
Petitioner.
Mr.Prashant Mendiratta, Adv.
VERSUS

State

through:

........
Respondent
Mr.Pawan Sharma for the State.
Mr.S.S.Gandhi, Senior Advocate
with Mr.R.K.Aggarwal and
Mr.Pramod Sharma for complainant.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 23.10.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

FIR No.713/2007 dated 5.8.2007
under Sections 420/409/120/34 IPC
PS Najafgarh.
Petitioner is in judicial custody since 14.8.2007.

She

has thus remained in judicial custody for 71 days.
2.

Petitioner is aged 43 years.

She is employed as a

teacher in the nursery section of DAV Public School, West Patel
Nagar, Delhi. She is an accused in the afore-noted FIR.

3.

FIR has been registered on the complaint lodged by

G.Somasekhar on behalf of the Institute of Chartered Accountants.
4.

As per the FIR, the common proficiency test of

chartered accountancy course was to be held all over India on
5.8.2007. 82,000 candidates were appearing in said examination.
About 15,000 candidates were to take the exam at Delhi at 20
centres. DAV Public School, West Patel Nagar was one out of the
20 centres earmarked for conducting exam at Delhi. Before the
examination commenced, on 5.8.2007 at 8.30 A.M. 'India TV'
aired a sting operation showing that the paper had leaked and
one Sudesh Kumar who was carrying on business from premises
No.37, Prem Nagar, Najafgarh was behind the whole episode.
5.

Investigation

revealed

that

on

behalf

of

the

management of the school Bhavna Malik, the Headmistress of the
school had nominated the petitioner as the superintendent of the
centre i.e. the overall in-charge for conduct of the exam. Question
papers, in 3 sets, were handed over by the representative of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants to one Arti, another nursery
school teacher, who kept the same in an almirah in the staff room
on 31.7.2007.

According to Arti she had done so inasmuch as

petitioner was not present in the school to receive the question
papers on 31.7.2007.

6.

The almirah in question had a lock.

were available.

2 keys thereof

One was with Arti and the other was with the

petitioner. It was found that 1 question paper had leaked out of
the three sets which were prepared and that the same had leaked
from the centre in question of which petitioner was the
superintendent.
7.

Needless to state, petitioner was made answerable for

what had happened.
8.

In her disclosure statement, petitioner informed that

she had been directed by the headmistress of the school to
function as the supervisor. That Sudesh Kumar was known to the
headmistress Bhavna Malik. That she was instrumental in leaking
out the paper at the instance of the headmistress.
9.

Much

after

the

petitioner

was

arrested,

headmistress had also been arrested on 19.10.2001.
disclosure

statement,

the

headmistress

has

the

In her

admitted

her

complicity with Sudesh Kumar.
10.
her

Another relevant fact which needs to be noted is that in
disclosure

statement,

petitioner

has

disclosed

to

the

investigating officer that on 28.7.2007, at the asking of the
headmistress, she had supplied to Sudesh Kumar the attendance
sheet of the students who were to take the examination.

11.

Relevance of the said fact is that this would have made

known to any person the seat assigned to a particular candidate.
12.

As noted above, 3 sets of question papers were

prepared. They were to be given to the candidates for answering
in sequential pattern i.e. 1, 2, 3 - 1, 2, 3 .............. Thus knowledge
of the seating pattern would have facilitated the person who was
in possession of one out of the three questions papers to sell the
same or utilize the same for benefit of those candidates who were
assigned the particular seat(s) at the time of the examination.
13.

For conduct of the exam, the Institute of Chartered

Accountants had paid money in the name of DAV Public School. It
was obviously intended that not only the school building but the
school staff would be utilized for providing supervisors for conduct
of the examination.
14.

But, this did not happen.

The headmistress of the

school outsourced the service of providing invigilators at the
school centre to Sudesh Kumar who provided the invigilators to
invigilate when the students were taking the exam.

The

investigation has revealed that some of the invigilators were just
senior secondary.
15.
serious

Prima facie, the conduct of the headmistress casts a
suspicion

qua

her

behaviour.

Surprisingly,

the

headmistress outsourced the invigilation duties to Sudesh Kumar,
the person from whose custody a question paper was recovered.
16.

In the aforesaid backdrop, submission of learned

counsel for the petitioner that his client could well be a victim of
conspiracy and not the conspirator has to be considered.
17.

Relevant would it be to note that as of today the police

has no evidence that petitioner received any money from either
Sudesh Kumar or the headmistress of the school.
18.

It surprises me that the headmistress chose a junior

school teacher to be the supervisor of the examination centre. As
noted above, petitioner is in-charge of the nursery classes. It is
urged by learned counsel for the petitioner that being an
employee of a private school, if petitioner refused to function as
the supervisor, she would have probably lost the job.

Counsel

further submits that admittedly, the sealed envelope containing
the question papers were received by Arti on 31.7.2007.
were kept in an almirah in the staff room.

They

In the almirah,

attendance registers of the teachers were kept. The school had
functioned on 1.8.2007 and 3.8.2007.

On said 2 dates,

attendance registers were taken out from the almirah, meaning
thereby anybody could have an access to the almirah. Counsel
concedes that as the supervisor of the centre and entrusted with

the question papers, petitioner ought to have been more vigilant
and was answerable if some third party accessed the question
paper from the sealed envelopes.
19.

Given the evidence collected by the prosecution, it is

difficult to say that the petitioner is innocent. Equally, it is difficult
to form a conclusive opinion with respect to evidence that there is
a strong case against the petitioner for the reasons the
confessional statements of the accused to the police are
inadmissible evidence as no recovery pursuant thereto has been
effected.
20.

However, I would hasten to add that even on grave

suspicion not only can a person be booked as an accused but
even a charge can be framed on grave suspicion.
21.

But, notwithstanding the aforesaid legal position I am

inclined to release the petitioner on bail on account of the fact
that she has remained in judicial custody for 72 days and is not
required for any further investigation. Being a lady, there is no
apprehension of the petitioner threatening any witness of the
prosecution. The petitioner is married. She has a family. There
are 2 minor daughters who are studying in the same school where
petitioner was working, meaning thereby, petitioner has her roots
in Delhi.

22.

But before concluding I must caution the Institute of

Chartered Accountants to be careful in future. Least they could
have done was to deliver the question papers a day prior to the
examination day and additionally have had ensured that only
teachers of the school functioned as invigilators and not high
school graduates.
23.

Petition accordingly stands disposed of directing the

learned Trial Judge to release the petitioner on bail on the
petitioner furnishing a personal bond in sum of Rs.20,000/- with
one surety in the like amount to the satisfaction of the learned
Trial Judge.
24.

Dasti.

October 23, 2007
dk

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

