IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No.1468/2007
#
!

Smt.Sudesh & Anr.
through:

........ Petitioners
Mr.R.N.Sharma, Advocate.
VERSUS

$
^

State of NCT of Delhi
through :

%

....... Respondent
Mr.Jaideep Malik, Advocate
for the State.
Mr.R.D.Sharma, Advocate
for the complainant.

DATE OF DECISION: 21.09.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

FIR No.561/07 dated 7.7.2007.
under Sections 498-A/304-B/34 IPC.
PS Nangloi.
Petitioners are the married sister-in-laws of Indu who was

married to their brother Surender on 21.4.2007.

It was the second

marriage of Surender as also of Indu.
2.

Indu died on 4.7.2007. FIR has been registered pursuant to

information received at the police station at 6.15 hours on 7.7.2007.
The informant is one Jyoti, the wife of the brother of Indu.
3.

The FIR has been registered on the basis of the statement

recorded by B.P.Mishra, Tehsildar of village Nangloi to whom powers of

Executive Magistrate were delegated inasmuch as the Executive
Magistrate was on leave.
4.

As per Jyoti, deceased was being troubled for dowry by her

husband, both parents of the husband and the petitioners.

That

deceased used to tell her i.e. Jyoti that her husband was demanding
Rs.10 lacs.

That on 30.6.2007 parents-in-law of Indu came to their

house and on not being given money left disappointed.

That on

21.7.2007, she i.e. Jyoti accompanied with her husband went to the
matrimonial house of Indu where her parents-in-law and both
petitioners abused them stating that if Rs.10 lacs was not given it was
better that they take back Indu to their house. She further stated that
on 4.7.2007, from 11.00 am onwards, she was repeatedly trying to
contact Indu on her mobile phone but receiving no reply telephoned
her husband informing that Indu was not responding to the call. That
she rang up father-in-law of Indu to enquire why Indu was not
responding to the telephone ring.

That Indu's father-in-law told her

that he was not at home and on reaching home would put her through
to Indu. That around 4.00 pm when she rang up Indu's father-in-law he
told her that Indu was not opening the door. That she spoke to Indu's
husband who likewise told her that Indu had bolted the door and was
not opening it. That as conversation was on, father-in-law of Indu told
her that Indu had committed suicide.
5.

It appears that on 4.7.2007 itself, information was available

with the police pertaining to the death of Indu evidenced by the fact
that the Tehsildar, exercising powers of the Executive Magistrate
recorded statements of Rattan Lal, father of Indu; Roshan Lal, maternal

uncle of Indu and Anand, brother of Indu. As recorded by the learned
Tehsildar, the father, brother and the uncle of the deceased have
exonerated the in-laws of Indu. The statements categorically record
that Indu never informed them of being harassed on account of dowry.
6.

Apprehending arrest in the afore-noted FIR, petitioners

sought pre-arrest bail by filing Bail Application No.1468/2007.
7.

On 20.7.2007 interim protection was granted to the

petitioners.
8.

On

25.7.2007

police

recorded

the

supplementary

statement of the father, brother and uncle of the deceased.

All the

three made statements to the police implicating the husband, fatherin-law,

mother-in-law

as

also

sisters-in-law

(petitioners)

of

the

deceased.
9.

It is urged by learned counsel for the petitioners that the

initial statements of the father, brother and uncle of the deceased as
recorded by the Tehsildar are correct and are voluntary statements.
Counsel urges that the statements were made immediately after the
unfortunate incident when Indu committed suicide at around 4.00 pm.
Counsel urges that when petitioners were granted interim protection
by this Court vide order dated 20.7.2007, within 5 days thereafter, to
frustrate the order dated 20.7.2007, the police has recorded incorrect
statements purportedly made by the father, brother and uncle of the
deceased.
10.

Counsel further urges that first petitioner is a teacher

under the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and that on 4.7.2007 she was
in the school assigned to her namely M.C.Primary School, Kavita

Colony-I, Nangloi. Learned counsel places reliance upon a certificate
issued by the Principal of the school certifying that first petitioner was
in school on 4.7.2007 from 7.20 am till 12.50 pm.

Learned counsel

urges that after the school hours were over, first petitioner, being
married went to her matrimonial house.
11.

As regards the second petitioner, learned counsel urges

that she too being married, was in her matrimonial house at
Peeragarhi. Counsel informed that the matrimonial house of petitioner
No.2 is at a distance of approximately 3 kms from the house where the
deceased died.
12.

Counsel further urges that this being the second marriage

of the deceased as also the brother of the petitioners, it was a simple
affair. There was no demand of dowry. Lastly, counsel submitted that
being married, petitioners would not be the beneficiary of any dowry
which would be brought to her matrimonial house by the deceased.
13.

Learned counsel for the State and learned counsel for the

complainant responded by urging that the SDM of the area was a good
friend of the father of the petitioners and for said reason he impressed
upon the Tehsildar to incorrectly record the statements of the father,
brother and uncle of the deceased. Learned counsel drew attention of
the Court to a letter addressed by the father of the deceased to the
Lt.Governor, Delhi on 25.7.2007 informing that the police was not
correctly investigating the matter. Counsel informed that letters were
even received by the Commissioner of Police and only thereafter local
police was jolted into taking corrective action.
14.

Learned counsel for the State further points out that the

postmortem of Indu was conducted on 5.7.2007 at 10.30 am.

The

cause of death opined was a combined effect of spinal shock and
asphyxia as a result of pressure over throat structure produced by
ligature and the time since death was stated to be 22 hours.
15.

Counsel urged that if postmortem report was to be

accepted as correct, the approximate time of death of Indu would be
around 12.00 noon of 4.7.2007. Thus, counsel urges that it appears to
be a case of homicidal death and not suicide. Learned counsel for the
State points out that guilt of the in-laws of the deceased can be
inferred from the fact that when Jyoti i.e. bhabhi of the deceased was
attempting to contact the deceased and was inquiring from the fatherin-law of the deceased as to why deceased was not responding to her
phone, Jyoti was being fed lies by informing her that when father-in-law
of the deceased would reach home he would try and ensure a
communication between Jyoti and Indu.

Counsel submits that

informing the family members of Indu that she had died at 4.00 pm,
evidences that the in-laws of Indu were hiding or at least attempting to
hide the truth.
16.

Indeed, if postmortem report is accepted as correct, Indu

was no more in the world of living after around 12.00 noon on
4.7.2007. Further, the cause of the death opined in the postmortem
report prima facie suggests that the death was homicidal and probably
not suicidal.
17.

Another relevant fact may be noted. In the supplementary

statement of Anand, brother of the deceased and the statement of
Navneet, the other brother of the deceased, it is apparent that both

stated that when they reached the house of the deceased the door was
opened by a mere push. This belies the version of the father-in-law of
the deceased as communicated to Jyoti over the telephone that Indu
had bolted the door from inside and was not responding to them.
18.

I may note that the photographs of the scene of the crime

where deceased was apparently found hanging show that both legs of
the deceased are resting on the floor. I am informed that the height of
the ceiling from the floor level was 7' and 3” only.
19.

I eschew from probablizing the real nature of offence for

the reason investigation is still on.
20.

But, the postmortem report of Indu suggests that Indu was

no longer in the world of living at around 12.00 noon.
21.

This becomes very material as far as the petitioners are

concerned.
22.

As noted herein above, first petitioner, being employed in a

municipal school was at the school at around 1.00 pm.

She was

obviously not in the house where Indu died.
23.

As regards petitioner No.2, there is no evidence that she

was in her matrimonial house.

But, at the same time there is no

evidence that she was in the house of her parents i.e. the matrimonial
house of Indu.
24.

Second petitioner is married and resides in her matrimonial

house in a colony which is about 3 kms away from the house of the
deceased.
25.

Being married sisters, petitioners would in all probability

not be the beneficiaries of any dowry.

26.

In my opinion case is made out to grant protection to the

petitioners who seek pre-arrest bail but limited till a week after the
challan is filed.
27.

My reason for granting pre-arrest bail to the petitioners is

the peculiar features which have emerged and in particular the cause
of the death opined in the postmortem report and the time of death of
Indu coupled with the fact that there is evidence to show that first
petitioner was in the school where she was employed till 1.00 pm and
qua petitioner No.2 there is no evidence that she was in the house of
her parents.
28.

My reason for limiting the duration of pre-arrest bail is that

investigation is still being conducted and complete and full evidence
has not been gathered. Needless to state, full contours of the case of
the prosecution would be unfolded in the charge-sheet which would
ultimately be filed.
29.

The petition accordingly stands disposed of directing that

on the petitioners cooperating with the investigating officer and
responding to the summons issued by the investigating officer, in the
event of being arrested by the investigating officer, petitioners would
be released on bail by the investigating officer on petitioners furnishing
a persona bond in sum of Rs.20,000/- each with one surety each in the
like amount to the satisfaction of the investigating officer in the aforenoted FIR.
30.

Duration of the bail would be co-terminus 7 days after

charge-sheet would be presented in the Court.

31.

Copy of the order be supplied dasti to learned counsel for

the petitioners.

September 21, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

