* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : 20th January, 2009

%
+

CRL.A. 810/2005
KARAN MANDAL
Through:

..... Appellant
Mr.Bhupesh Narula, Advocate.
versus

STATE

Through:

..... Respondent
Ms.Richa Kapoor, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

: PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)
1.

It is not in dispute that the deceased Daljeet Kaur,

along with her husband Harjit Singh PW-11, were residing in Flat
No.43, Gole Market, New Delhi. PW-11 was carrying on business
from a shop bearing No.63, Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
New Delhi. The distance between the flat and the shop is about
1 kilometer.
2.

Process of law swung into action when at 12.44 noon

DD Entry No.5-A, Ex.PW-17/A was recorded by HC Gopi Chand
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 1 of 13

PW-17 on 27.4.2000, to the effect that he had received
information from a PCR to the effect a thief had entered 109
Gupta Restaurant, Bhagat Singh Marg, Gole Market, New Delhi.
3.

SI Brijesh Malik, PW-2 took the copy of the DD Entry

and accompanied by Const. Sarvesh PW-21, and Const. Roop
Kishore PW-16, left for 109 Gupta Restaurant, Bhagat Singh
Marg, Gole Market, New Delhi.

At the same time Inspector

Ishwar Singh PW-23, who had also been informed about a thief
being caught in Bhagat Singh Marg reached the spot.
4.

By the time police reached the spot, PW-11 Harjit

Singh the husband of the deceased had already reached the
spot since Gaurav Chadha PW-4, who has an office in front of
the flat of the deceased had informed him over the telephone
that a thief has entered his house. Pawan Soni PW-1, and Inder
Mohan PW-9, were also found by the police at the site.
5.

On noticing that the door of the flat was bolted from

within Harjit Singh PW-11, with the help of a key with him
attempted to open the door but failed. The door was pushed. It
was forcibly opened. The accused was apprehended at the spot.
His clothes were having blood stains. A bag containing certain
valuables was seized.
6.

This in a nutshell is the case of the prosecution while

Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 2 of 13

charging the appellant for having connived with Paras (declared
proclaimed offender) for having murdered the deceased; both
having entered the house with the intention to commit robbery.
7.
the

Reverting back to the action taken by the police at
spot,

Inspector

Ishwar

Singh

PW-23

seized

a

knife

purportedly used for committing the offence vide memo Ex.PW1/B and thereafter a sketch thereof, Ex.PW-1/B, was drawn by
him. From the spot, blood, blood earth and piece of floor were
seized vide seizure memo Ex.PW-2/C. The body of the deceased
Daljeet Kaur was sent to RML Hospital where Dr.Atsung Aiyer
declared her brought dead and penned the MLC recording the
following external injuries:(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Incised wound approximately 5” x 0.5” extending
from right side chin up to the right side jaw.
Incised wound in front of the neck 6” x 2” with
exposure of underlying muscles and vessels.
Incised wound 4” in length in left mastoid region.
Lacerated wound in the left supra-tla-vascular and
clavicular region approximate size 0.5”.
Abrasion over the left shoulder region.
An injury around the neck.

The blood-stained clothes and the under-garments of the
deceased were seized by the police.
8.

Const. Kulbeer PW-12, working as a photographer

was summoned who took photographs of the scene of crime,
Ex.PW-12/1-21, negatives whereof were Ex.PW-21/21.
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 3 of 13

The

investigating officer drew a rough sketch of the site where the
offence was committed and on 14.6.2000, SI Mahesh Kumar PW15, prepared the site–plan to scale, Ex.PW-15/A.
9.

The dead body was sent for post-mortem to Lady

Hardinge Medical College where Dr.Yashoda Rani PW-18,
conducted the autopsy and submitted the report Ex.PW-18/A
recording the following 6 injuries on the person of the
deceased:(i)

(ii)

Incised wound 13 x .5 cm. bony deep, horizontally
placed over right side of the chin up to right side of
jaw.

(iii)

Incised wound 6 x .5 cm. over left side neck 3 cm.
below left ear.

(iv)

3 superficial lacerated wound of 2 x 1.5 cm and one
incised wound of 2 x 1.5 x .5 cm present interia of 8 x
2 cm over left supraclavicular and clavicular region.

(v)

Linear abrasion 6 x .2 cm over left side of the neck.

(vi)

10.

Incised wound 12 x 3 x 1.5 cm over the middle front
of the neck. 5 cm below the chin cutting the sub
cutaneus muscles and the trachea.

Linear abrasion 4 x .2 cm over right side of neck.
Both five and six are transveras placed.”
Internal injuries recorded that the larynx and pharynx

contained blood.

The trichia contained blood.

It was opined

that the death was due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 4 of 13

injuries to the neck and that injury No.1 to 4 could have been
caused by a sharp-edged cutting weapon and that injury No.1
was sufficient to cause death.
11.

The accused who was apprehended at the spot was

stated to have been beaten by the public. He was taken to RML
Hospital where he was examined by a duty doctor who noted on
the MLC that the accused was injured and his pant and shirt
were stained with blood.

The same were handed over to the

police.
12.

The blood-stained clothes of the deceased, the

accused and the other blood-stained objects lifted from the
scene of the crime were sent to the forensic science laboratory
and report Ex.PA and Ex.PB was obtained from A.K.Srivastava,
Sr.Scientific Officer as per which the same blood group i.e. „A‟
was detected on the clothes and under-garments worn by the
deceased and from the shirt and pant of the appellant.
13.

The police recorded statements of persons present at

the spot who inculpated the appellant and one Paras, engaged
as a driver by PW-11, the husband of the deceased and the
deceased.
14.

Paras could not be apprehended and was declared a

proclaimed offender.
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Charge-sheet was filed against the
Page 5 of 13

appellant.
15.

At the trial various police officers associated with the

investigation were examined. The doctor who recorded the MLC
of the deceased as also who conducted the post-mortem were
examined.

The report of the forensic science laboratory was

tendered in evidence.
16.

PW-1, Pawan Kumar Soni the business partner of

Inder Mohan Singh, PW-9 stated in evidence that on 27.4.2000
he and Inder Mohan Singh had gone to Miturishi Bank at
Parliament Street to withdraw money and were returning to
their shop at Karol Bagh via Shaheed Bhagat Singh Marg. They
reached Bhagat Singh Marg at around 12/12.30 noon and on
noticing a crowd gathered there asked the persons gathered as
to what the matter was and were informed that the cries
„bachao bachao‟ were being heard from the flat on the first floor.
He stated that he went to the first floor of the house and found
the door bolted from inside. He tried to open the door but could
not do so. He came down and with the help of a ladder reached
up from the back lane and on peeping through the window
found the deceased lying on the floor. He came down and by
that time the husband of the deceased had reached the spot.
Somebody had informed the police who reached the spot. The
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 6 of 13

husband of the deceased could not open the door in the front
with a key and hence the door was broken open and on entry
inside the accused was caught with a carry bag and a knife in
his hand. The public gave a beating to the accused. He stated
that the knife was seized in his presence and a sketch was
prepared in his presence.
17.

Inder Mohan PW-9, deposed in harmony with the

deposition of PW-1 till PW-1 deposed of having broken the door
of the flat and having entered inside. In other words, PW-9 did
not depose of having witnessed the arrest of the accused from
the spot. Sardar Harvinder Mohit PW-3, the son of the deceased
deposed that on 27.4.2000 he received a call on his mobile
informing him that a robbery was on at his house and therefore
he should rush there. He rushed to his residence and when he
reached he found his mother lying in a pool of blood and the
accused apprehended by the police.
18.

Saurabh Chadha PW-4 stated that he has his office in

front of the house of the deceased, and that at around 12.20
noon he saw the driver of the deceased running with blood spots
on his shirts. He learnt that a robbery had been committed in
the house of the deceased. Avinash Chander PW-5 stated that
when he was conducting business at his shop 82 Bhagat Singh
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 7 of 13

Marg he saw Paras, the driver engaged by the deceased running
away with blood stains on his shirt.
19.

Harjit Singh PW-11, the husband of the deceased

deposed that at 12.15 PM he was at his shop at Connaught Place
and received a telephonic call from one Gaurav Chadha, his
neighbour, informing that a thief had entered his house.

He

immediately reached the house and saw a crowd having
gathered outside the house. He reached the door of the flat and
found it locked from inside. He tried to open the lock with a key
but could not do so. With the aid of public persons present the
door was pushed and upon entering the flat he saw the accused
standing with a knife in his hand and a polythene bag in the
other hand. He stated that the public persons gave beating to
the accused and since somebody had informed the police, the
police reached the spot. He deposed that the knife was seized
in his presence and that the items seized vide seizure memo
Ex.PW-2/C were seized in his presence.

He deposed that the

accused was apprehended in his presence.
20.

Noting that the FIR was recorded promptly and that

there was no tampering with the various articles seized, with
reference to the testimony of the witnesses, learned Trial Judge
has held that the following chain of facts has been proved
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 8 of 13

beyond reasonable doubt:(1)

Cries of deceased „Bachao-bachao‟ are heard by PWs.

(2) A crowd of people goes upstairs and finds the door
closed.
(3) Door of the house is pushed open by husband of
deceased with help of crowd.
(4) Accused is found with a blood stained knife inside the
room where deceased has been brutally murdered.
(5)

Accused is beaten by the crowd.

(6) The knife recovered from accused, as per the doctor
is the knife with which injuries could have been inflicted on
deceased.
(7) The injuries caused were sufficient in ordinary course
of nature to cause death.
(8) The robbed articles were found in hand of accused in
a polythene bag, when crowd pushed opened the door.
21.

Learned Judge has held that the charge under

Section 302 IPC for murder of Daljeet Kaur and under Section
397 IPC for committing robbery has been established. Holding it
not to be the rarest of the rare case appellant has been inflicted
with imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.10,000/- in default to
undergo RI for six months for the offence of murder.

For the

offence under Section 397 IPC similar sentence has been
imposed.

Both

sentences

have

been

directed

concurrently.
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 9 of 13

to

run

22.

At the hearing today, Shri Bhupesh Narula, learned

counsel for the appellant has urged that PW-9 was the son-inlaw of the deceased and PW-1 was a friend of PW-9 and hence
their testimony requires to be considered with a pinch of salt as
according to the learned counsel they are interested witnesses.
Same is the case of the testimony of PW-11, the husband of the
deceased, urges Shri Bhupesh Narula. It is urged that presence
of PW-1 and PW-9 at the spot is unnatural. Counsel urges that
the conduct of PW-9 who is the son-in-law of the deceased is
unnatural because if he was present at the site, it was he and
not his friend who would be expected to go upstairs to the first
floor flat and try and open the door.

Counsel urges that why

would PW-1 take the risk of going up, knowing fully well that a
robber was inside the flat.
22.

The afore-noted submissions are neither here nor

there. How a particular witness reacts in a given situation can
never be predicted. We find nothing unnatural in PW-1 taking a
pro-active role and not PW-9. That PW-1 and PW-9 were present
at the spot is evidenced by the fact that PW-1 is a witness to the
seizure memo Ex.PW-1/B.

His statement Ex.PW-1/D was

recorded at the spot and this statement forms the basis of the
FIR being registered. The FIR has been registered at 12.45 PM.
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 10 of 13

The rukka from the spot was dispatched at 2.30 PM as recorded
in the rukka.

The circumstances under which PW-1 and PW-9

were at the spot has been disclosed by PW-1 in his statement,
contents whereof have been noted by us in para 16 above. The
presence at the spot has been satisfactorily explained.
23.

No infirmity has been pointed out to us by learned

counsel for the appellant in the testimony of the public
witnesses who were present at the spot. Indeed, each one of
them had satisfactorily explained his presence.
24.

It is urged by learned counsel that it is strange that

the police personnel reached the flat without knowing its
number.

Counsel urges that as recorded in the DD entry,

Ex.PW-17/A the information received by the police was that a
thief had entered 109 Gupta Restaurant, Bhagat Singh Marg,
Gole Market.
25.

The submission has to be noted and rejected for the

reason, as noted by the learned Trial Judge, Gupta Restaurant is
on the ground floor and right above is the flat where the
deceased was injured and murdered.
26.
by him.

The presence of the appellant at the site is admitted
In his statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C.,

when questioned did he have anything else to say, the appellant
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 11 of 13

answered:“I had come to Delhi from Tomilla Village West Bengal by
train on 26.4.00 and reached Delhi in the night of 26.4.00.
On 27.4.00 after depositing my luggage in the luggage
room I went to Birla Mandir at about 10 am by bus. I was
coming from Birla Mandir on foot as I wanted to see Delhi.
I had asked people for the way to station. I had spent
about 1/ one and half hour at Birla Mandir. While I was
going towards station I found crowd in a gali. Seeing
crowd I also went towards the crowd. When reached near
the crowd people were saying that some thief is there.
The people downstairs were saying “Pakdo Pakdo” so I
went upstairs. Other people followed me. I pushed the
door of a room and it got opened so I went in. The other
people also came inside the room. When I went inside the
room I do not know what happened to me but I fell down.
Again said I fell down because somebody had hit me on my
back side of the head. Again said when I fell down I
received injuries on my forehead and back side of head. I
do not know what happened to other people. I lost
consciousness and I regained consciousness in the
hospital. I have one mother and brother and elder sister in
West Bengal. I had taken Rs.4800 when I started from
village. From village I had come to Midnapur station and
purchased a ticket of Rs.150/200. I purchased ticket of
Rs.300/400 for train. Nobody was knowing me in Delhi. I
deposited luggage but no receipt was given to me. I had
spent my night on the station. This is a false case against
me. Police had assured me that police will leave me.”
27.

We concur with the chain of facts held to be proved

by the learned Trial Judge, contents whereof have been noted by
us in para 20 above.

One vital fact in the chain has been

omitted to be noted by the learned Trial Judge. The same is the
opinion recorded in the FSL report Ex.PA and Ex.PB to the effect
that the blood group on the pant and the shirt worn by the
Crl.A.No.810/2005

Page 12 of 13

appellant when he was arrested matched that of the deceased.
28.

We find no infirmity in the impugned decision.

29.

The appeal is dismissed.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

JANUARY 20, 2009
dk

Crl.A.No.810/2005

ARUNA SURESH, J.

Page 13 of 13

