IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C.No.882/2005
#
!

Phoola Kaul
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr. T.N.Razdan, Ms. Smriti Razdan &
Mr. P.P.N.Razdan, Advocates
VERSUS

$
^

State & Ors.
through:

........
Respondents
Mr. Manoj Sharma, Advocate
for complainant.
Mr. Jaideep Malik, Advocate
for State.

RESERVED ON: 21.09.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 27.09.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioner, Phoola Kaul is the mother-in-law of the

complainant, Neeru Kaul.
2.
charge

The present petition is directed against the order on
dated

5.7.2004

passed

by

the

learned

Metropolitan

Magistrate whereby the petitioner was charged with the offences
under Section 498-A, 406 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal
Code.
3.

Backdrop facts giving rise to the present petition are

that the marriage between Neeru and Abhimanyu (son of the
page 1 of 11

petitioner) was solemnized on 2.11.2000 as per Hindu rites and
ceremonies. Abhimanyu was employed at Canada and after the
marriage he left for Canada while Neeru continued to reside with her
in-laws. Unfortunately, the marriage turned sour and Neeru left her
matrimonial home.
4.

On 22.4.2002, Neeru got a legal notice served upon her

husband and father-in-law, Chaman Kishan Kaul through Ravinder
Zadoo, Advocate. In the said legal notice it was alleged that her
husband had deserted her and that her husband and father-in-law
had subjected her to cruelty. Additionally, it was also alleged that
her husband and father-in-law had illegally retained her istridhan
and that she was tortured by both of them for dowry. It is pertinent
to note that the said legal notice contained no allegations against
the present petitioner.
5.

Thereafter on 27.5.2002, Neeru lodged a complaint with

the Crime Against Women Cell, Moti Bagh against her husband and
father-in-law. In the said complaint, allegations as contained in the
afore-noted legal notice were reiterated. Again, no allegations were
levelled against the present petitioner save and except an incidental
reference to her at the end of the complaint which reads as under:-

6.

“The above said persons and my mother in
law have committed the above said offences
for which the proper investigation be made
and guilty persons be punished.”
Subsequently, in her statement dated 28.8.02 under

Section 161, Cr.P.C. dated 28.8.02 Neeru stated that her husband,
father-in-law and mother-in-law used to

harass her for bringing
page 2 of 11

more dowry and had illegally retained her istridhan.
7.

Pursuant to the afore-noted complaint and statement of

the complainant, on 28.8.02 a FIR no.554/02 was registered against
the husband and father-in-law of Neeru as also the present
petitioner.
8.

On 1.10.03 statements of parents of Neeru were

recorded. Apart from allegations of dowry harassment and illegal
retention of istridhan, they stated that their daughter was sexually
harassed by her father-in-law and that her mother-in-law i.e. the
present petitioner used to force her to do indecent acts with her
father-in-law.
9.

Taking a cue from her parents, in her supplementary

statement dated 27.10.03 Neeru also levelled the allegations of
sexual harassment against her father-in-law and mother-in-law.
10.

On 29.1.04, a charge sheet under Sections 498-A, 406

read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code was filed against the
three accused persons.
11.

Noting the afore-noted documents and holding that at

the stage of framing of charge the court has to only see whether a
prima facie case is made out against an accused or not, vide order
dated 5.7.2004, learned Metropolitan Magistrate framed charges
under Sections 498-A, 406 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal
Code against Neeru's father-in-law and mother-in-law i.e. the
present petitioner.
12.

At

the

outset,

learned

counsel

for

the

page 3 of 11

respondent/complainant raised a preliminary objection against the
maintainability of the present petition. Counsel urged that as the
order framing charge is an interlocutory order, a revision to the High
Court is barred by virtue of sub-section (2) of Section 397 of Cr.P.C.,
1973. And as the revision is barred, the court cannot exercise
powers under Section 482 to quash the order framing charge. In
support of his contention, counsel relied upon the decision of the
Supreme Court in the report published as Amar Nath & Ors v State
of Haryana & Anr., AIR 1977 SC 2185. In the said decision, it was
held as under:“3. While we fully agree with the view taken
by the learned Judge that where a revision
to the High Court against the order of the
Subordinate Judge is expressly barred under
Sub-section (2) of Section 397 of the 1973
Code the inherent powers contained in
Section 482 would not be available to defeat
the bar contained in Section 397(2). Section
482 of the 1973 Code contains the inherent
powers of the Court and does not confer any
new powers but preserves the powers which
the High Court already possessed. A
harmonious construction of Sections 397
and 482 would lead to the irresistible
conclusion that where a particular order is
expressly barred under Section 397(2) and
cannot be the subject of revision by the High
Court, then to such a case the provisions of
Section 482 would not apply. It is well
settled that the inherent powers of the Court
can ordinarily be exercised when there is no
express provision on the subject-matter.
Where there is an express, provision,
barring a particular remedy, the Court
cannot (sic) to the exercise of inherent
powers.”
13.

Decision afore-noted has to be understood in the light of
page 4 of 11

law declared in the report published as Madhu Limaye v The State
of Maharashta, AIR 1978 SC 47.
14.

In the report published as Madhu Limaye v The State of

Maharashta, AIR 1978 SC 47, a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court examined the decision in Amar Nath's case (supra) and held
as under:“11. As pointed out in Amar Nath's case
(supra) the purpose of putting a bar on the
power of revision in relation to any
interlocutory order passed in an appeal,
inquiry, trial or other proceeding is to bring
about expeditious disposal of the cases
finally. More often than not, the revisional
power of the High Court was resorted to in
relation to interlocutory orders delaying the
final disposal of the proceedings. The
Legislature in its wisdom decided to check
this delay by introducing Sub-section (2), in
Section 397. On the one hand, a bar has
been put in the way of the High Court (as
also of the Sessions Judge) for exercise of
the revisional power in relation to any
interlocutory order, on the other, the power
has been conferred in almost the same
terms as it was in the 1898 Code. On a plain
reading of Section 482, however, it would
follow that nothing in the Code, which would
include Sub-section (2) of Section 397 also,
"shall be deemed to limit or affect the
inherent powers of the High Court". But, if
we were to say that the said bar is not to
operate in the exercise of the inherent
power at all, it will be setting at naught one
of the limitations imposed upon the exercise
of the revisional powers. In such a situation,
what is the harmonious way out ? In our
opinion, a happy solution of this problem
would be to say that the bar provided in
Sub-section (2) of Section 397 operates only
in exercise of the revisional power of the
High Court, meaning thereby that the High
Court will have no power of revision in
page 5 of 11

relation to any interlocutory order. Then in
accordance with one of the other principles
enunciated above, the inherent power will
come into play, there being no other
provision in the Code for the redress of the
grievance of the aggrieved party. But then,
if the order assailed is purely of an
interlocutory character which could be
corrected in exercise of the revisional power
of the High Court under the 1898 Code, the
High Court will refuse to exercise its
inherent power. But in case the impugned
order clearly brings about a situation which
is an abuse of the process of the Court or for
the purpose of securing the ends of justice
interference by the High Court is absolutely
necessary, then nothing contained in
Section 397 (2) can limit or affect the
exercise of the inherent power by the High
Court..........”.
15.

It is thus obvious from the decision of the Supreme Court

in Madhu Limaye's case (supra) that the High Court in exercise of its
powers under Section 482, Cr.P.C. can quash an order framing
charge.
16.

Having decided the preliminary objection raised by the

learned counsel for the respondent the issue pertaining to legality of
the order framing charge needs to be considered on merits.
17.

Counsel for the petitioner seeks quashing of the order

dated 5.7.2004 on the ground that the allegations contained in the
complaint dated 27.5.02 do not disclose that offences under Section
498-A, 406 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code has been
committed by the petitioner. He further urged that the statements
subsequent to complaint dated 27.5.2002 wherein allegations has
been levelled against the petitioner are an after-thought. To
page 6 of 11

establish the same, counsel relied upon the fact that the legal notice
dated 22.4.2002 which is the starting point of the present
proceedings does not contains any allegation against the petitioner.
18.

In the decision reported as Superintendent of Police, CBI

& Ors.v Tapan Kumar Singh, 2003 SCC (Cri) 1305, Supreme Court
has observed as under:“20. It is well settled that a first information report is
not an encyclopaedia, which must disclose all facts and
details relating to the offence reported. An informant
may lodge a report about the commission of an offence
though he may not know the name of the victim or his
assailant......... At this stage it is also not necessary for
him to satisfy himself about the truthfulness of the
information.........
The question as to whether the
report is true, whether it discloses full details regarding
the manner of occurrence, whether the accused is
named, and whether there is sufficient evidence to
support the allegations are all matters which are alien
to the consideration of the question whether the report
discloses the commission of a cognizable offence.
Even if the information does not give full details
regarding these matters, the investigating officer is not
absolved of his duty to investigate the case and
discover the true facts, if he can.”
19.

In the decision reported as Rajesh Bajaj v State & Ors,

1999 Cri LJ 1833, Supreme Court has observed as under:“9. It is not necessary that a complainant
should verbatim reproduce in the body of his
complaint all the ingredients of the offence
he is alleging. Nor is it necessary that the
complainant should state in so many words
that the intention of the accused was
dishonest or fraudulent. Splitting up of the
definition into different components of the
offence to make a meticulous scrutiny,
whether all the ingredients have been
precisely spelled out in the complaint, is not
the need at this stage. If factual foundation
page 7 of 11

for the offence has been laid in the
complaint the court should not hasten to
quash
criminal
proceedings
during
investigation stage merely on the premise
that one or two ingredients have not been
stated with details........”
20.

In the decision reported as Mohd. Yousuf v Smt. Afaq

Jahan & Anr, 2006 (1) JCC 189, Supreme Court has observed as
under:“There is no particular format of a
complaint. A petition addressed to the
magistrate containing an allegation that an
offence has been committed, and ending
with a prayer that the culprits be suitably
dealt with as in the instant case, is a
complaint.”
21.

The reason is that generally FIR's are registered

immediately and promptly after an offence is committed and the
informant has no cooling period to frame the complaint or ponder
over its language. But where a FIR is lodged with a cooling period
and the complainant has taken the help of a legal expert,
subsequent additions of facts becomes relevant.
22.

In a matrimonial dispute, generally wives resort to

criminal remedy as a last resort. The parties thus file criminal
complaints consciously well knowing the specific role played by
each accused person in the commission of an offence.
23.

In the decision reported as Majhar @ Papoo & Ors v

State, 96(2002) DLT 566, noting that the FIR in question did not
contain allegations constituting the offence under Section 498-A, IPC
against the petitioners and that liability for the offence under
page 8 of 11

Section 498-A, IPC was sought to be fastened against the petitioners
on the basis of second supplementry statement of the complainant,
a learned Single Judge of this court quashed the FIR in question. As
regards supplementary statement, it was observed as under:"In my view, this statement could be considered when
some allegations was made in the FIR/complaint against
the petitioner and not otherwise.”
24.

In the decision reported as Anand R.Kalwani v State of

Maharashtra & Anr, I (2006) DMC 177, quashing the FIR in question,
the Court observed as under:“12. Besides, prima facie the contents of the
supplementary statement relating to the dowry
demand by the petitioner ex facie appears to be
inconsistent and improbable as compared to the
contents of the FIR and the other materials on record.
As already stated above, the FIR does disclose the
name of the petitioner. However, it nowhere refers to
any act of harassment or demand of dowry by the
petitioner though various details of the demand of
dowry and harassment at the instance of the other
family members have been stated therein. The letter
dated 14.10.2004 by the respondent No. 2 does not
contain any allegation against the petitioner. The letter
dated 14.10.2004 by the parents of the respondent No.
2 refers to such demand specifically by the father-inlaw of the respondent No. 2 with specific reference to
the date of 10.7.2004. It speaks of such demand by
phone call. The specific statement of the respondent
No. 2 in her supplementary statement refers to such a
demand by the petitioner with her parents by calling
them at his office on 10.7.2004. There is no reference
to any act on the part of the petitioner in the letter
dated 14.10.2004 either by the respondent No. 2 or by
her parents. Being so, the allegations in the
supplementary statement prima facie appear to be
totally improbable, besides being after-thought.”
25.
138

In the decision reported as Smt. Sangeeta Kalra v State,
(2007)

DLT

535,

noting

the

allegations

in

FIR

and

page 9 of 11

supplementary statement of the complainant, a learned Single
Judge of this Court while quashing the FIR in question observed as
under:“5. It is true that while considering the quashing of
criminal proceedings under Section 482 Cr. P.C, the Court
should not embark upon an enquiry into the truthfulness
of the allegations made by complainant but where the
charges are framed by the lower court without considering
the material, with closed mind and charges amount to
gross misuse of criminal justice system and trial is an
abuse, it becomes the duty of the High Court to intervene
in such cases, under Section 482 Cr. P.C so that there is
no miscarriage of justice and faith of people remains intact
in the judicial system. In this case, charges have been
framed against the petitioner, sister of the husband,
without their being an iota of evidence of any cruelty or
entrustment of any property by the complainant in the
intial complaint or in the later complaint. Even in
subsequent complaint made by the complainant herself
there are no specific allegations and only vague
allegations are there involving every family member.
xxxxx
7. I consider that while framing charges, the Trial Court
must take into account the entirety of the case, all
documents which are brought to its notice including the
correspondence between the parties and thereafter should
decide whether there was case made out or the court was
being used as a tool. I consider it is a fit case where
criminal
proceedings
against
the
petitioner
be
quashed......”
26.

Lastly, I note decision of the Supreme Court in the report

published as Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi v Jitendra Bhimraj,
AIR 1990 SC 1962 wherein after considering provisions of Sections
227 and 228, Cr.P.C., 1973, it was observed as under:“From the above discussion it seems well settled that at
the Sections 227-228 stage the court is required to
evaluate the material and documents on record with a
view to finding out if the facts emerging therefrom
taken at their face value disclose the existence of all
page 10 of 11

the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. The
court may for this limited purpose shift the evidence as
it cannot be expected even at the initial stage to accept
all that the prosecution states as gospel truth even if it
is opposed to common sense or the broad probabilities
of the case.”
27.

In the instant case, from a plain reading of the complaint

dated 27.5.2002, it is apparent that grievance of the complainant in
relation to demand of dowry and harassment was essentially against
her husband and father-in-law and not against the present
petitioner. Likewise, is the position in the legal notice dated
22.4.2002.
28.

In the result, the petition is allowed and order dated

5.7.2004 in so far it frames charges against the petitioner is set
aside.
29.

No costs.

September 27, 2007
sl

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

page 11 of 11

