IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.627/2003
#
!

National Insurance Co. Ltd.
....... Appellant
through: Mr. Pankaj Seth, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Smt. Jasbir Kaur & Ors.
through: None

%

.......

Respondents

DATE OF DECISION: 27.02.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Two points have been urged in the memorandum of

appeal. The first point is whether the Commissioner Workmen's
Compensation was justified in computing compensation with
reference to minimum wages notified under the Workmen
Compensation Act when same was amended on 8.12.2000 or
whether compensation had to be computed as per wages notified
in the Act when accident took place i.e. 19.4.2000. The second
point urged is whether insurance company is liable to pay
interest and if yes at what rate.

FAO No.627/03

page 1 of 9

2.

Vide impugned order interest has been awarded @

12% per annum with effect from 20.4.2000 i.e. the date next
after the accident.
3.

As

regards

the

first

contention

urged

in

the

memorandum of appeal suffice would it be to state that in view of
the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as

Oriental

Insurance Company vs Khajuni Devi 2002(10) SCC 567

and

Kerela State Electricity Board and Anr. vs. Valsala K.and Anr. JT
1999 (7) SC 292 compensation has to be determined with
reference to the statutory provisions in force when the accident
took place.
4.

Thus,

computation

of

compensation

in

sum

of

Rs.3,45,765/- is faulted for the reason the same has been
computed with reference to the Act as amended in the year
2000.

I note that the amendment relates to clause 'A' of Sub

Section 1 of Section 4 of the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923.
Compensation payable has to be as per statutory provisions when
accident took place.
5.

As regards the plea that the insurance company is not

liable to pay the interest it is relevant to note Section 4A if the
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 which reads as under:4A. Compensation to be paid when due and
penalty for default.-(1) Compensation under
Section 4 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept
FAO No.627/03

page 2 of 9

the liability for compensation to the extent
claimed, he shall be bound to make provisional
payment based on the extent of liability which he
accepts, and, such payment shall be deposited
with the Commissioner or made to the workman,
as the case may be, without prejudice to the right
of the workman to make any further claim.
(3) where any employer is in default in paying the
compensation due under this Act within one
month from the date it fell due, the Commissioner
shall(a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to
the amount of the arrears, pay simple interest
thereon at the rate of twelve per cent per annum
or at such higher rate not exceeding the
maximum of the lending rates of any scheduled
bank as may be specified by the Central
Government, by notification in the Official
Gazette, on the amount due; and
(b) if, in his opinion, there is no justification for
the delay, direct that the employer shall, in
addition to the amount of the arrears and interest
thereon, pay a further sum not exceeding fifty per
cent of such amount by way of penalty:
PROVIDED that an order for the payment of
penalty shall not be passed under Clause (b)
without giving a reasonable opportunity to the
employer to show cause why it should not be
passed........”
6.

In the decision reported as Ved Prakash Garg v Premi

Devi & Ors. 1998 (1) ACJ 1 a question arose before the Supreme
Court whether the phrase “liability arising under the Workmen's
Compensation Act” as employed by the proviso to sub-section (1)
of Section 147 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and as found
under the proviso to clause (i) of sub-section (1) of Section II of
the Insurance Policy would cover only the principal amount of
FAO No.627/03

page 3 of 9

compensation as computed by the Workmen's Commissioner or
whether it can also include interest and penalty as imposed on
the insured employer under contingencies contemplated by
Section 4A(3)(a) and (b) of the Workmen's Compensation Act.
7.

After examining the entire scheme of the Workmen's

Compensation Act, the Supreme Court has held that:I.

Payment of interest and penalty are two distinct

liabilities arising under the Workmen Compensation Act.
II.

Penalty is not a part and parcel of the legal liability of

the employer to compensate his employee and since the insurer
is under contractual obligation to indemnify the employer for his
legal liability the insurer is not liable to pay the penalty.
III.

Liability to pay interest is part and parcel of legal

liability of the employer to pay compensation upon default of
payment of that amount within one month. Therefore, claim for
compensation payable under the Workmen's Compensation Act
along with interest thereon will have to be made good by the
Insurance Company jointly with the insured employer.
8.

Relevant discussion is to be found in paras 14 and 19

of the said decision which are being reproduced herein below:“14. On a conjoint operation of the relevant
schemes of the aforesaid twin Acts, in our view,
there is no escape from the conclusion that the
insurance companies will be liable to make good
not only the principal amounts of compensation
payable by insured employers but also interest
thereon, if ordered by the Commissioner to be
FAO No.627/03

page 4 of 9

paid by the insured employers. Reason for this
conclusion is obvious. As we have noted earlier
the liability to pay compensation under the
Workmen's Compensation Act gets foisted on
the employer provided it is shown that the
workman concerned suffered from personal
injury, fatal or otherwise, by any motor accident
arising out of and in the course of his
employment. Such an accident is also covered
by the statutory coverage contemplated by
Section 147 of the Motor Vehicles Act read with
the identical provisions under the very contracts
of insurance reflected by the Policy which would
make the insurance company liable to cover all
such claims for compensation for which
statutory liability is imposed on the employer
under Section 3 read with Section 4-A of the
Compensation
Act.
All
these
provisions
represent a well-knit scheme for computing the
statutory liability of the employers in cases of
such accidents to their workmen. As we have
seen earlier while discussing the scheme of
Section 4-A of the Compensation Act the
legislative intent is clearly discernible that once
compensation falls due and within one month it
is not paid by the employer then as per Section
4-A(3)(a) interest at the permissible rate gets
added to the said principal amount of
compensation as the claimants would stand
deprived of their legally due compensation for a
period beyond one month which is statutorily
granted to the employer concerned to make
good his liability for the benefit of the claimants
whose bread-winner might have either been
seriously injured or might have lost his life. Thus
so far as interest is concerned it is almost
automatic once default, on the part of the
employer in paying the compensation due, takes
place beyond the permissible limit of one month.
No element of penalty is involved therein. It is a
statutory elongation of the liability of the
employer to make good the principal amount of
compensation within permissible time limit
during which interest may not run but otherwise
liability
of
paying
interest
on
delayed
compensation will ipso facto follow. Even though
the Commissioner under these circumstances
FAO No.627/03

page 5 of 9

can impose a further liability on the employer
under
circumstances
and
within
limits
contemplated by Section 4A(3)(a) still the
liability to pay interest on the principal amount
under the said provision remains a part and
parcel of the statutory liability which is legally
liable to be discharged by the insured employer.
Consequently such imposition of interest on the
principal amount would certainly partake the
character of the legal liability of the insured
employer to pay the compensation amount with
due interest as imposed upon him under the
Compensation Act. Thus the principal amount as
well as the interest made payable thereon would
remain part and parcel of the legal liability of
the insured to be discharged under the
Compensation Act and not dehors it. It,
therefore, cannot be said by the insurance
company that when it is statutorily and even
contractually liable to reimburse the employer
qua his statutory liability to pay compensation
to the claimants in case of such motor accidents
to his workmen, the interest on the principal
amount which almost automatically gets foisted
upon him once the compensation amount is not
paid within one month from the date it fell due,
would not be a part of the insured liability of the
employer. No question of justification by the
insured employer for the delay in such
circumstances would arise for consideration. It is
of course true that one month's period as
contemplated under Section 4A(3) may start
running for the purpose of attracting interest
under Sub-clause (a) thereof in case where
provisional payment has to be made by the
insured employer as per Section 4A(2) of the
Compensation Act from the date such
provisional payment becomes due. But when the
employer does not accept his liability as a whole
under circumstances enumerated by us earlier
then Section 4A(2)would not get attracted and
one month's period would start running from the
date on which due compensation payable by the
employer
is
adjudicated
upon
by
the
Commissioner
and
in
either
case
the
Commissioner would be justified in directing
payment of interest in such contingencies not
FAO No.627/03

page 6 of 9

only from the date of the aw ard but also from
the date of the accident concerned. Such an
order passed by the Commissioner would remain
perfectly justified on the scheme of Section
4A(3)(a)of the Compensation Act. But similar
consequence will not follow in case where
additional amount is added to the principal
amount of compensation by way of penalty to
be levied on the employer under circumstances
contemplated by Section 4A(3)(b) of the
Compensation Act after issuing show cause
notice to the employer concerned who will have
reasonable opportunity to show cause why on
account of some justification on his part for the
delay in payment of the compensation amount
he is not liable for this penalty. However if
ultimately the Commissioner after giving
reasonable opportunity to the employer to show
cause takes the view that there is no
justification for such delay on the part of the
insured employer and because of his unjustified
delay and due to his own personal fault he is
held responsible for the delay, then penalty
would get imposed on him. That would add a
further sum up to 50% on the principal amount
by way of penalty to be made good by the
defaulting employer. So far as this penalty
amount is concerned it cannot be said that it
automatically flows from the main liability
incurred by the insured employer under the
Workmen's Compensation Act. To that extent
such penalty amount as imposed upon the
insured employer would get out of the sweep of
the term ' liability incurred' by the insured
employer as contemplated by the proviso to
Section 147(1)(b) of the Motor Vehicles Act as
well as by the terms of the Insurance Policy
found in provisos (b) and (c) to Sub-section (1)
of Section II thereof. On the aforesaid
interpretation of these two statutory schemes,
therefore, the conclusion becomes inevitable
that when an employee suffers from a motor
accident injury while on duty on the motor
vehicle belonging to the insured employer, the
claim for compensation payable under the
Compensation Act along with interest thereon, if
any, as imposed by the Commissioner Sections
FAO No.627/03

page 7 of 9

3 and 4A(3)(a) of the Compensation Act will
have to be made good by the insurance
company jointly with the insured employer. But
so far as the amount of penalty imposed on the
insured
employer
under
contingencies
contemplated by Section 4A(3)(b) is concerned
as that is on account of personal fault of the
insured not backed up by any justifiable cause,
the insurance company cannot be made liable to
reimburse that part of the penalty amount
imposed on the employer. The latter because of
his own fault and negligence will have to bear
the entire burden of the said penalty amount
with proportionate interest thereon if imposed
by the Workmen's Commissioner.
19. As a result of the aforesaid discussion it
must be held that the question posed for our
consideration must be answered partly in the
affirmative and partly in the negative. In other
words the insurance company will be liable to
meet the claim for compensation along with
interest as imposed on the insured employer by
the Workmen's Commissioner under the
Compensation Act on the conjoint operation of
Section 3 and Section 4-A Sub-section (3)(a) of
the Compensation Act. So far as additional
amount of compensation by way of penalty
imposed on the insured employer by the
Workmen's
Commissioner
under
Section
4A(3)(b) is concerned, however, the insurance
company would not remain liable to reimburse
the said claim and it would be the liability of the
insured employer alone.(emphasis supplied)
9.

Learned counsel for the appellant relied upon the

judgment of the Supreme Court in the decision reported as New
India Assurance Co Ltd v Harshadbhai Amrutbhai Modhiya & Anr
(2006) 5 SCC 192 in support of his contention that the insurance
company is not liable to pay the amount of interest.
10.

In Harshadbhai's case (supra) the Supreme Court

FAO No.627/03

page 8 of 9

noted the policy of insurance which inter-alia contained a term
that the insurance company would not be liable to pay the
interest. Noting that the term of the policy of insurance itself
excluded the payment of interest by the insurance company the
Supreme Court held that the insurance company is not liable to
pay the amount of interest.
11.

In the instant case since the policy of insurance is not

proved, the decision of the Supreme Court in Harshadbhai's case
(supra) is not applicable.
12.

In view of law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ved

Prakash's case, it is held that the appellant is liable to pay
interest @ 12% per annum with effect from 20.04.2000.
13.

The instant appeal accordingly stands disposed of

modifying the impugned order in so far it has determined the
compensation payable. The same is reduced to Rs.1,86,900/-. It
shall be paid with interest @ 12% p.a. from the date of the claim
petition till date of payment.
14.

No costs.

15.

LCR, if received, be returned.

February 27, 2008
mm

FAO No.627/03

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 9 of 9

