IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) No.837/2007
#
!

National Highways Authority of India .... Petitioner
through: Mr.Rajiv Nayyar, Sr. Adv. with
Ms.Divya Jain, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Shri Sudhir Haryal
.... Respondent
through: Mr.Sanjay Jain, Sr. Adv. with
Mr.Sanjiv Bahl, Adv. and
Mr.Arjun Mitra, Adv.

%

DATE OF DECISION:

20-06-2007

CORAM:
*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Petitioner NHAI is aggrieved by the order dated

30.5.2007 followed by the order dated 2.6.2007 passed by Shri
Sanatan Prasad, Senior Civil Judge, Delhi.
CM(M) No.837/07

Pg. No.1 of 8

2.

The said 2 orders have been passed by the learned

Judge in a suit filed by the respondent seeking a decree for
permanent

injunction

against

the

petitioner

restraining

petitioner from taking possession of bus shelters, toilet blocks
etc. right whereon for displaying advertisements was vested in
the respondent under the agreement dated 31.12.2001.
3.

Vide order dated 30.5.2007, at the preliminary

hearing of the suit an ex-parte ad interim injunction was issued
against the petitioner. Further, respondent's application under
Section 80(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure was allowed.
4.

Vide order dated 2.6.2006, petitioner's request to

vacate the injunction was declined on the ground that unless a
formal application under Order 39 Rule 4 of the Code of Civil
Procedure was filed, there was no question of even considering
a request for vacating the injunction.
5.

Relevant backdrop facts are that along National

Highway No.2 between milestone No.9 and 36, NHAI identified
sites for bus shelters, toilet blocks, kiosks etc. It also proposed
to erect tree guards for protection of plants.

CM(M) No.837/07

NHAI intended

Pg. No.2 of 8

that the sites be taken on a license and the licensee, with its
own funds, would erect the bus shelters, toilet blocks etc. and
to earn profits as also recover the capital cost would be
permitted to display hoardings containing advertisements on
the structures erected.
6.

Respondent was a successful tenderer and on

31.12.2001 a formal licence deed was executed. Duration of
the licence was 5 years for sites excluding toilet blocks.
Duration of the licence for toilet blocks was 9 years.
7.

The licence deed envisaged an extension of the

licence on mutually agreed terms.

It contains an arbitration

clause if there was any dispute between the parties.
8.

Pertaining to sites other than toilet blocks, period of

licence being over, petitioner intended to resume possession of
the licensed sites save and except toilet blocks. Respondent
filed a suit for permanent injunction.
9.

In paras 17, 21 and 22 of the plaint following

averments have been made:“17.
That the plaintiff suffered huge
financial losses in terms of money and time
CM(M) No.837/07

Pg. No.3 of 8

during this period for no fault of his own. Plaintiff
further submits that the licence agreement dated
31.12.2001 could not be executed in its entirety
due to the disputes being raised by the MCD
regarding the said sites and future by the DTC.
The plaintiff has been pursuing the same with
the defendant, MCD and the DTC for sorting out
the said matter almost for the period of two
years and has been running around from pillar to
post.
xxx xxx xxx xxx
21.
That the plaintiff submits that he has
spent around Rs.2.5 crores towards designing,
construction, fabrication and erection of the work
already carried out from and out of his own
personal funds and resources besides having
taken a loan from the State Bank of India for the
said purposes. The plaintiff has also entered into
various commitments with its clients for display
of their advertisements on the sites so
constructed and has also taken advances for the
purposes
in
as
much
as
such
agreements/arrangements
for
display
of
advertisements have to be made in advance.
22.
That the plaintiff has spent huge
amount in the designing, construction and
erection of bus shelters, (with coffee kiosks and
STD booths), toilet blocks, tree guards and over
head directional road signages etc. with the
expectation that he would continue to display
commercial
advertisement
on
the
same
uninterruptedly at least till the period of five
years from the date of actual taking over of the
possession and further would be able to get the
renewal of the licence agreement dated
CM(M) No.837/07

Pg. No.4 of 8

10.

31.12.2001 for another term as per the
performance of the plaintiff which has remained
very position so far. The plaintiff has been
regularly paying the licence fee to the defendant
as agreed under the licence agreement dated
31.12.2001 and the defendant has accepted the
same till date without any objection.”
While granting ex-parte ad interim injunction on

30.5.2007, learned Senior Civil Judge, Delhi has recorded as
under:“Heard.
Learned counsel has drawn my
attention to the copy of agreement dated
31.12.2001 also to the copies of order dated
17.9.02 also 24.3.03, passed in suit No.1454/03,
and his submission is that interim order passed
in respect of the defendant No.1, i.e. MCD, is still
continuing as of today and now the suit is
presently pending in the Court of Shri V.K.Yadav,
learned ADJ, Delhil, his further submission is that
the period stipulated under the agreement dated
31.12.01 is still to expire, in respect of toilet
blocks, in numbers 20 and though the period of
five years have elapsed as per clause 12 of the
agreement in respect of bus shelters, yet the
plaintiff had received the possession of
respective sites after a delay of two years and
this fact has been found to be reasonably by the
project director of the defendant and a copy of
letter dated 16.5.06 is relied on in this respect.
Under the circumstance, the application moved
under Section 80(2) CPC is allowed on the
ground of urgency and the defendant is
restrained from taking the possession of bus
shelter/toilet blocks etc. covered under the
terms of the agreement dated 31.12.01.”
CM(M) No.837/07

Pg. No.5 of 8

11.

Being served with summons in the suit, petitioner

filed an application under Section 8 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act 1996 and simultaneously prayed that in
respect of the licensed sites save and except toilet blocks,
since period of licence has expired, ex-parte injunction be
effected.

As noted herein above, vide order dated 2.6.2007

request for vacation of the ex-parte ad interim injunction
granted was declined holding that till application under Order
39 Rule 4 CPC was filed, said request could not be considered.
12.

Shri Sanjay Jain, learned senior counsel for the

respondent urged that till the Court decides on petitioner's
application under Section 8 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act 1996, it was fully empowered to take a decision on an
interim measure in the suit filed by the respondent. Counsel
further urged that in view of the fact that possession of certain
sites was handed over late, 5 years period was not over. Thus,
counsel urged that there was a strong prima facie case in
favour of the respondent.
13.

I have perused the plaint. There is no averment in

CM(M) No.837/07

Pg. No.6 of 8

the plaint as to possession of which site was handed over late.
There are no averments stating the dates with reference to the
site in respect whereof possession being handed over belatedly
is being urged. On the contrary, the foundation of the suit are
the averments in paras 17, 21 and 22, contents whereof have
been noted in para 9 above. Case made out by the plaintiff i.e.
the respondent is that he has not been able to recoup his
investment.
14.

Prima facie, reasons recorded by the learned Senior

Civil Judge to sustain the finding of a prima facie case in favour
of the respondent is contrary to the pleadings made by the
respondent in the plaint.
15.

As noted above, I fail to note any averment in the

plaint with sufficient particulars disclosing as to what site was
given possession of on a particular date and with reference
thereto I find no pleading that 5 years period of licence has yet
to expire.
16.

Prima facie findings have to be returned with

reference to the case pleaded and not otherwise.

CM(M) No.837/07

Pg. No.7 of 8

17.

Be that as it may, it is not the case pleaded by the

respondent that possession of all sites was handed belatedly. I
fail to appreciate as to how an omnibus injunction order could
have been issued.
18.

Further, if petitioner is found to be in breach of

contract, damages would be sufficient recompense to the
respondent.
19.

Sine qua non for grant of an injunction is that injury

caused to the plaintiff if injunction is not granted is not capable
of being recompensed with monetary compensation.
20.

The petition stands disposed of vacating the ex-

parte ad interim injunction granted vide order dated 30.5.2007
in favour of the respondent and against the petitioner.
21.

No costs.

20th June, 2007
dk

CM(M) No.837/07

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
VACATION JUDGE

Pg. No.8 of 8

