IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005
#
!

Satyam Chugh
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr.K.K.Sud, Senior Advocate with
Mr.A.A.Aron, Mr.Anish Shreshta and
Mr.Atul Sahi.
VERSUS

$
^

State & Anr.
through:

........
Respondents
Mr.Jaideep Malik for the State.
Mr.Arvind Kumar Shukla,
Ms.Sriparna Chatterjee,
Mr.Atul Kumar and
Ms.Soumita Chatterjee for
the complainant.

RESERVED ON : 28.09.2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 23.10.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Satyam Chugh prays that FIR No.265/05 under Section

376 IPC PS Nabi Karim be quashed and compensation be awarded
to him as per guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court in the
decision reported as 1994 (4) SCC 260 Joginder Kumar vs. State
of Uttar Pradesh.

Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.1 of 20

2.

In support of the petition, during arguments Shri

K.K.Sud, learned senior counsel for the petitioner relied upon the
6 under noted decisions:(1)

Uday vs. State of Karnataka (2003) 4 SCC 46.

(2)

Deelip Singh @ Dilip Kumar vs. State of Bihar (2005) 1
SCC 88.

(3)

Yedla Srinivasa Rao vs. State of A.P. 2006 (4) Crimes
281.

(4)

Manish Kumar Jayant vs. State & Anr. 2005 (3) JCC
1611.

(5)

Abhoy Pradhan vs. State of West Bengal 1999 Cri.L.J.
3534.

(6)

Sansar Chand vs. State of Himachal Pradesh 1999
Cri.L.J. 3538.

3.

Opposing the plea, Shri Jaideep Malik, learned counsel

for the State assisted by Mr.Arvind Kumar Shukla, learned counsel
for the complainant urged that no case is made out for quashing
the FIR.
4.

I may point out that investigation is complete and a

charge sheet has been filed.

Thus, as agreed between the

learned counsel for the parties matter was considered strictly
within the confines of power which this Court can exercise under
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure while considering a
FIR. Meaning thereby, learned counsel for the parties restricted
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.2 of 20

submissions to the FIR and eschewed any reference to the chargesheet which has been filed.
5.

The FIR was registered pursuant to a complaint lodged

by the prosecutrix RM aged 34 years when she filed the
complaint.
6.

RM appears to be an unfortunate lady.

She was

married in 1996. Her husband went missing. She obtained an exparte divorce in the year 2002.
7.

Her alleged ordeal with the petitioner started, as per

the FIR, when she placed an advertisement in a matrimonial site
on the inter-net in July 2002. She states in the FIR that she gave
her particulars on the website as a 30 years old divorcee.

In

August 2002 she received a marriage proposal from the petitioner
who though was just 24 years, a fact which was learnt
subsequently, disclosed his age as 29 years. He informed that he
was born in the year 1974. He proposed a matrimonial alliance.
That Satyam started calling her daily from September 2002 and
stated that though he was about 2 years younger to her, it hardly
mattered.

Since Satyam was at Delhi she reached Delhi in

December 2002 and stayed at a guest-house in Malviya Nagar.
Satyam used to meet her daily. They spoke to each other in the
presence of each other.

She returned back to Nagpur on

5.1.2003. The two would talk daily for hours together. In March
2003 Satyam told her to come to Delhi to finalize the marriage
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.3 of 20

plans. He arranged stay for her at Hotel Ajanta in Paharganj. She
came to Delhi to finalize the marriage proposal. Satyam told her
that his sister was to get married and therefore he had to
postpone their marriage plans.

She returned back to Nagpur.

They continued to interact daily with each other. He called her
once again to visit him at Delhi in May.

Saying that he would

marry her, she was enticed into a physical relationship. She was
made to stay once again at Hotel Ajanta, Paharganj. She talked
about the marriage. Satyam told her that his younger brother's
senior secondary result had just been announced. His brother has
not done too well. He had to make arrangements for his brother
to be admitted in a good college. On said pretext he postponed
the marriage plan. That in July 2003 Satyam came to Nagpur and
stayed at Hotel Amrita.

He assured her with marriage and

persuaded her for another physical encounter.
that he would marry her in August 2003.

He assured her

That he took her

consent by fraud and on false assurance of marriage.

That in

August 2003 Satyam told her to reach Bangalore so that they
could marry in an Arya Samaj Mandir. That she inquired as to why
he was marring contrary to social customs in the absence of his
parents and that too at a far off place in Bangalore. That he told
her that his parents had left the choice of a life-partner to him.
That her parents would accept her.
Rama in Bangalore.
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

That they stayed at Hotel

That for a third time they had physical
Page No.4 of 20

relations. She gave her consent as she was assured of marriage.
That at Bangalore he kept on postponing the day of the marriage.
They stayed at Bangalore for about 15 days. She went back to
Nagpur and he to Delhi. In September 2003 she found that she
was pregnant.

Satyam was informed.

terminate the pregnancy.

She did so.

He coerced her to
That by October 2003

Satyam was introduced to her mother and sister. He told them
not to worry. That they continued to speak to each other. She
was assured that he would marry her. That Satyam postponed
the marriage on the ground that he had suffered some financial
losses. That soon he started avoiding her. That she managed to
find out that Satyam had shifted residence to Ghaziabad.
found out his telephone number.

She

When she called, his mother

responded. She told Satyam's mother as to what had happened.
That Satyam's mother abused her. That on 7.8.2004 she came to
Delhi and contacted Satyam. He refused to marry her. But soon
thereafter assured her that all would be fine. That on 21.9.2004
Satyam came to her hotel room and once again forced her into
sex persuading her that he would get married to her. That soon
thereafter Satyam told her to go back home and forget about
everything.
8.

Picking on the FIR, Shri K.K.Sud, learned senior counsel

for the petitioner urges that from a bare reading of the FIR it is
apparent that the complainant was in deep love with Satyam and
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.5 of 20

aged 30 years was a matured person to understand the moral
worth of her actions. Being a divorcee, she was aware of what is a
matrimonial bond.

That it was not any assurance of marriage

which led complainant into the sexual relationship with his client
but it was love which drove the two to the bed.
9.

Learned senior counsel analyzed the FIR as under:(a)

The statements in the FIR that the complainant and
Satyam spoke to each other daily from September
2002 and continued to do so till January 2003
evidences a deep love bond.

(b)

That the physical relationship between the parties was
stated to be in May.
met.

But, twice earlier, the two had

If intention of Satyam was to cheat the

complainant and sex was on his mind, he would have
seduced/induced the complainant into sex when the
two met for the first time in December 2002.
(c)

That when the two went to Bangalore, as per the
complainant the visit was with the intention of getting
married at Bangalore.

Admittedly, marriage did not

took place, yet the couple had sex at Bangalore. The
complainant has stated that she told Satyam that it
was unusual for the marriage to take place away from
the presence of the family members and in a remote
city,
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

meaning

thereby,

the

complainant

had

Page No.6 of 20

apprehensions that the marriage would not materialize.
Coupled with the fact that the complainant had
mentioned in the FIR that she was aware of her being
elder and also a divorcee as also the fact that in the
Indian society such marriage may not be acceptable to
the parents of Satyam had

expressed to Satyam

whether she would be acceptable in his family.

The

apprehension of the complainant as expressed in the
FIR was prima facie sufficient to infer that while giving
consent for sex, complainant was aware that marriage
between the two was a distant possibility, meaning
thereby consent for sex was motivated by the deep
love bond.
10.

With reference to the decision of the Supreme Court in

Uday's case (supra) learned senior counsel pointed out that in
said case, Hon'ble Supreme Court noted that as per the
prosecutrix of said case, she was aged 19 years, meaning
thereby, was a mature person. That the prosecutrix was aware
that she and the accused came from different castes and
marriage may not be possible. In any event, their marriage was
bound to be seriously opposed by the family members and yet
prosecutrix went into a sexual encounter with the accused. That
she was sufficiently intelligent to understand the significance and
moral guilt of the act she was consenting to.
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.7 of 20

11.

Counsel pointed out that from afore-noted facts,

Supreme Court opined that the prosecutrix freely exercised a
choice

between

resistance

and

assent.

She

knew

the

consequences of her act. Under the circumstances, it was held
that the prosecutrix freely, voluntarily and consciously consented
to having sexual intercourse with the accused. That it was held
that her consent was not in consequence of any misconception of
fact.
12.

Learned senior counsel urged that ratio of Uday's case

(supra) was followed with approval by the Supreme Court in
Deelip Singh's case (supra). That it was consistently followed in 4
other cases noted in para 2 above.
13.

In Uday's case (supra), Supreme Court considered the

definition of rape as defined under Section 375 IPC with reference
to circumstance second out of six circumstances as enumerated in
Section 375 IPC having regard to Section 90 of IPC which deals
with consent given under fear or misconception.
14.

It would be useful to note Section 375 and Section 90

of the IPC. They read as under:“375.
Rape.– A man is said to commit “rape” who,
except in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual
intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling
under any of the six following descriptions:First.

-

Secondly. -

Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Against her will.
Without her consent.

Page No.8 of 20

Thirdly.

-

With her consent, when her consent has
been obtained by putting her or any person
in whom she is interested in fear of death or
of hurt.

Fourthly.

-

With her consent, when the man knows that
he is not her husband, and that consent is
given because she believes that he is
another man to whom she is or believes
herself to be lawfully married.

Fifthly.

-

With her consent, when, at the time of
giving such consent, by reason of
unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the
administration by him personally or through
another of any stupefying or unwholesome
substance, she is unable to understand the
nature and consequences of that to which
she gives consent.

Sixthly.

-

With or without her consent, when she is
under sixteen years of age.

Explanation.–

Penetration is sufficient to constitute the
sexual intercourse necessary to the offence
of rape.

Exception.–

Sexual intercourse by a man with his own
wife, the wife not being under fifteen years
of age, is not rape.”

“90. Consent known to be given under fear or
misconception.– A consent is not such a consent as it
intended by any section of this Code, if the consent is given
by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of
fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to
believe, that the consent was given in consequence of such
fear or misconception; or
Consent of insane person.– if the consent is given by a
person who, from unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is
unable to understand the nature and consequence of that to
which he gives his consent; or
Consent of child.– unless the contrary appears from the
context, if the consent is given by a person who is under
twelve years of age.”
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.9 of 20

15.

Dealing with the submission of learned counsel for the

accused and as noted in para 10 in the decision in Uday's case
(supra) that a belief that the promise of marriage was meant to be
fulfilled is not a misconception of fact and that the question of
misconception of fact will arise only if the act consented to is
believed by the person consenting to be something else and on
that pretext sexual intercouse is committed, the Hon'ble Judges of
the Supreme Court referred to consent as defined in Stroud's
Judicial Dictionary and as explained and applied in certain
decisions.
16.

It was noted by their Lordships in paras 10 to 16 of the

report in Uday's case (supra) as under:“10.
......................... In Stroud's Judicial Dictionary (5th
Edn.) p.510 “consent” has been given the following
meaning:
“Consent is an act of reason, accompanied with
deliberation, the mind weighing, as in a balance, the
good and evil on each side.”
It refers to the case of Holman v. R. 1970 WAR 2 wherein it
was held that:“there does not necessarily have to be complete
willingness to constitute consent. A woman's consent
to intercourse may be hesitant, reluctant or grudging,
but if she consciously permits it there is consent”.
Similar was the observation in R. v. Olugboja (1981) 3 WLR
585 wherein it was observed that “consent in rape covers
states of mind ranging widely from actual desire to reluctant
acquiescence, and the issue of consent should not be left to
the jury without some further direction”. Stephen J. in R. v.
Clarence (1888) 22 QBD 23 observed: (All ER p.144 C-D)

Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.10 of 20

“It seems to me that the proposition that fraud vitiates
consent in criminal matters is not true if taken to apply
in the fullest sense of the word, and without
qualification.
It is too short to be true, as a
mathematical formula is true.”
Wills, J. observed: (All ER p.135 I)
“That consent obtained by fraud is no consent at all is
not true as a general proposition either in fact or in law.
If a man meets a woman in the street and knowingly
gives her bad money in order to procure her consent to
intercourse with him, he obtains her consent by fraud,
but it would be childish to say that she did not
consent.”
11.
Some of the decisions referred to in Words and
Phrases, Permanent Edition, Vol.8A at p.205 have held:
“that adult female's understanding of nature and
consequences of sexual act must be intelligent
understanding to constitute 'consent'. Consent within
penal law, defining rape, requires exercise of
intelligence based on knowledge of its significance and
moral quality and there must be a choice between
resistance and assent. Legal consent, which will be
held sufficient in a prosecution for rape, assumes a
capacity to the person consenting to understand and
appreciate the nature of the act committed, its
immoral character, and the probable or natural
consequences which may attend it”.
12.
The courts in India have by and large adopted
these tests to discover whether the consent was voluntary or
whether it was vitiated so as not to be legal consent. In Rao
Harnarain Singh Sheoji Singh v. State AIR 1958 Punj. 123 it
was observed: (AIR p.126, para 7)
“7. A mere act of helpless resignation in the face of
inevitable compulsion, quiescence, non-resistance, or
passive giving in, when volitional faculty is either
clouded by fear or vitiated by duress, cannot be
deemed to be 'consent' as understood in law. Consent,
on the part of a woman as a defence to an allegation of
rape, requires voluntary participation, not only after
the exercise of intelligence, based on the knowledge,
of the significance and moral quality of the act, but
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.11 of 20

after having freely exercised
resistance and assent.

a

choice

between

Submission of her body under the influence of
fear or terror is no consent. There is a difference
between consent and submission.
Every consent
involves a submission but the converse does not follow
and a mere act of submission does not involve consent.
Consent of the girl in order to relieve an act, of a
criminal character, like rape, must be an act of reason,
accompanied with deliberation, after the mind has
weighed as in a balance, the good and evil on each
side, with the existing capacity and power to withdraw
the assent according to one's will or pleasure.”
13.
The same view was expressed by the High Court
of Kerala in Vijayan Pillai v. State of Kerala (1989) 2 Ker. LJ
234. Balakrishnan, J., as he then was, observed: (Ker.L.J.
pp.238-39, para 10)
“10. The vital question to be decided is whether the
above circumstances are sufficient to spell out consent
on the part of PW 1. In order to prove that there was a
consent on the part of the prosecutrix it must be
established that she freely submitted herself while in
free and unconstrained possession of her physical and
mental power to act in a manner she wanted. Consent
is an act of reason accompanied by deliberation, a
mere act of helpless resignation in the face of
inevitable compulsion, non-resistance and passive
giving in cannot be deemed to be 'consent'. Consent
means active will in the mind of a person to permit the
doing of the act of and knowledge of what is to be
done, or of the nature of the act that is being done is
essential to a consent to an act. Consent supposes a
physical power to act, a moral power of acting and a
serious and determined and free use of these powers.
Every consent to act involves submission, but it by no
means follows that a mere submission involves
consent. In Jowitt's Dictionary of English Law, IInd
Edn., Vol.I explains 'consent' as follows:'An act of reason accompanied with deliberation,
the mind weighing, as in a balance, the good or
evil on either side.
Consent supposes three
things – a physical power, a mental power and a
free and serious use of them. Hence it is that if
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.12 of 20

consent be obtained by intimidation, force,
mediated imposition, circumvention, surprise, or
undue influence, it is to be treated as a delusion,
and not as a deliberate and free act of the
mind.'”
14.
In Anthony, In re AIR 1960 Mad. 308, Ramaswami,
J. in his concurring opinion fully agreed with the principle laid
down in Rao Harnarain Singh case AIR 1958 Punj. 123 and
went on to observe: (AIR pp.311-12, para 21)
“A woman is said to consent only when she agrees to
submit herself while in free and unconstrained
possession of her physical and moral power to act in a
manner she wanted. Consent implies the exercise of a
free and untrammelled right to forbid or withhold what
is being consented to; it always is a voluntary and
conscious acceptance of what is proposed to be done
by another and concurred in by the former.”
15.
The same view has been reiterated by the Punjab
High Court in Arjan Ram Naurata Ram v. State AIR 1960
Punj. 303, by the Rajasthan High Court in Gopi Shanker v.
State of Rajasthan AIR 1967 Raj. 159 and by the Bombay
High Court in Bhimrao Harnooji Wanjari v. State of
Maharashtra 1975 Mah. L.J. 660.
16.
The High Court of Calcutta has also consistently
taken the view that the failure to keep the promise on a
future uncertain date does not always amount to
misconception of fact at the inception of the act itself. In
order to come within the meaning of misconception of fact,
the fact must have an immediate relevance. In Jayanti Rani
Panda v. State of W.B. 1984 Cri.L.J. 1535 the facts were
somewhat similar. The accused was a teacher of the local
village school and used to visit the residence of the
prosecutrix. One day during the absence of the parents of
the prosecutrix he expressed his love for her and his desire
to marry her. The prosecutrix was also willing and the
accused promised to marry her once he obtained the
consent of his parents.
Acting on such assurance the
prosecutrix started cohabiting with the accused and this
continued for several months during which period the
accused spent several nights with her. Eventually when she
conceived and insisted that the marriage should be
performed as quickly as possible, the accused suggested an
abortion and agreed to marry her later. Since the proposal
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.13 of 20

was not acceptable to the prosecutrix, the accused disowned
the promise and stopped visiting her house. A Division
Bench of the Calcutta High Court noticed the provisions of
Section 90 of the Indian Penal Code and concluded: (Cri.L.J.
p.1538, para 7)

17.

“The failure to keep the promise at a future uncertain
date due to reasons not very clear on the evidence
does not always amount to a misconception of fact at
the inception of the act itself. In order to come within
the meaning of misconception of fact, the fact must
have an immediate relevance. The matter would have
been different if the consent was obtained by creating
a belief that they were already married. In such a case
the consent could be said to result from a
misconception of fact. But here the fact alleged is a
promise to marry we do not know when. If a full-grown
girl consents to the act of sexual intercourse on a
promise of marriage and continues to indulge in such
activity until she becomes pregnant it is an act of
promiscuity on her part and not an act induced by
misconception of fact. Section 90 IPC cannot be called
in aid in such a case to pardon the act of the girl and
fasten criminal liability on the other, unless the Court
can be assured that from the very inception the
accused never really intended to marry her.
In para 21 of the report in Uday's case (supra) it was

held as under:“21.
It therefore appears that the consensus of
judicial opinion is in favour of the view that the consent
given by the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse with a
person with whom she is deeply in love on a promise that
he would marry her on a later date, cannot be said to be
given under a misconception of fact. A false promise is
not a fact within the meaning of the Code. We are
inclined to agree with this view, but we must add that
there is no straitjacket formula for determining whether
consent given by the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse is
voluntary, or whether it is given under a misconception of
fact. In the ultimate analysis, the tests laid down by the
courts provide at best guidance to the judicial mind while
considering a question of consent, but the court must, in
each case, consider the evidence before it and the
surrounding circumstances, before reaching a conclusion,
because each case has its own peculiar facts which may
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.14 of 20

have a bearing on the question whether the consent was
voluntary, or was given under a misconception of fact. It
must also weigh the evidence keeping in view the fact
that the burden is on the prosecution to prove each and
every ingredient of the offence, absence of consent being
one of them.”
18.

It was with reference to the afore-noted observations of

the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Uday's case (supra), Shri K.K.Sud,
learned senior counsel for the petitioner urged that as held in
Uday's case (supra) it usually happens when 2 young persons
were madly in love that they promise to each other several times
that come what may they will get married, but when there is
evidence to show that the young couple overcome with emotions
and passion find themselves in circumstances where they, in a
weak moment, succumb to the temptation of having sexual
intercourse, promise of marriage loses all significance.
19.

Referring to the factual matrix of the FIR, and as noted

in para 9 above, counsel urged that ex-facie this is what appears
to have happened in this case.

That the complainant willingly

consented to having sexual intercourse with Satyam with whom
she was deeply in love not because he promised to marry her but
because she also desired it.
20.

In my opinion, learned senior counsel for the petitioner

ignored some very vital observations made by the Supreme Court
in Uday's case (supra) and the latter decision of the Supreme
Court in Deelip Singh's case (supra) where in certain wide

Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.15 of 20

observations in Uday's case (supra) have been explained and
clarified.
21.

In para 24 of the report in Uday's case (supra), their

Lordships of the Supreme Court noted a categorical fact.

The

same, to quote from the judgment is as under:-

22.

“24.
There is another difficulty in the way of the
prosecution. There is no evidence to prove conclusively
that the appellant never intended to marry her.”
This is a very vital observation in Uday's case (supra).

The Hon'ble Supreme Court found that there was no evidence to
prove conclusively that Uday never intended to marry the
prosecutrix.
23.

Their Lordships noted that perhaps Uday wanted to

marry the prosecutrix but that was not enough. That there was no
evidence to prove conclusively that he never intended to marry
the prosecutrix.
24.

In Deelip Singh's case (supra), Section 90 of the IPC

was analyzed with reference to the point of view of the victim and
the accused. It was noted that the Section could be bifurcated
into 2 parts.

It was further noted that Section 90 cannot be

construed as an exhaustive definition of consent for the purposes
of the Indian Penal Code.

In para 19 and 20 of the report in

Deelip Singh's case (supra) it was observed as under:“19.
The factors set out in the first part of
Section 90 are from the point of view of the victim.
The second part of Section 90 enacts the
corresponding provision from the point of view of
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.16 of 20

the accused. It envisages that the accused too has
knowledge or has reason to believe that the consent
was given by the victim in consequence of fear of
injury or misconception of fact. Thus, the second
part lays emphasis on the knowledge or reasonable
belief of the person who obtains the tainted
consent. The requirements of both the parts should
be cumulatively satisfied. In other words, the court
has to see whether the person giving the consent
had given it under fear of injury or misconception of
fact and the court should also be satisfied that the
person doing the act i.e. the alleged offender, is
conscious of the fact or should have reason to think
that but for the fear or misconception, the consent
would not have been given. This is the scheme of
Section 90 which is couched in negative
terminology.

25.

20.
Section
90
cannot,
however,
be
construed as an exhaustive definition of consent for
the purposes of the Indian Penal Code. The normal
connotation and concept of “consent” is not
intended to be excluded. Various decisions of the
High Court and of this Court have not merely gone
by the language of Section 90, but travelled a wider
field, guided by the etymology of the word
“consent”.
Noting that observations in para 21 in Uday's case

(supra) appear to be wide and needed some explanation, in para
28 of the decision in Deelip Singh's case (supra), their Lordships
of the Supreme Court categorically held as under:“28.
The first two sentences in the above
passage need some explanation.
While we
reiterate that a promise to marry without anything
more will not give rise to “misconception of fact”
within the meaning of Section 90, it needs to be
clarified that a representation deliberately made by
the accused with a view to elicit the assent of the
victim without having the intention or inclination to
marry her, 'will vitiate the consent'. If on the facts it
is established that at the very inception of the
making of promise, the accused did not really
entertain the intention of marrying her and the
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.17 of 20

26.

promise to marry held out by him was a mere hoax,
the consent ostensibly given by the victim will be of
no avail to the accused to exculpate him from the
ambit of Section 375 clause secondly. This is what
in fact was stressed by the Division Bench of the
Calcutta High Court in the case of Jayanti Rani
Panda v. State of W.B. 1984 Cri.L.J. 1535 which was
approvingly referred to in Uday's case (supra). The
Calcutta High Court rightly qualified the proposition
which it stated earlier by adding the qualification at
the end (Cri.L.J. p.1538, para 7) - “unless the court
can be assured that from the very inception the
accused never really intended to marry her”.
(emphasis supplied) In the next para, the High
Court referred to the vintage decision of the
Chancery Court which laid down that a
misstatement of the intention of the defendant in
doing a particular act would tantamount to a
misstatement of fact and an action of deceit can be
founded on it. This is also the view taken by the
Division Bench of the Madras High Court in Jaladu
case (vide passage quoted supra). By making the
solitary observation that “a false promise is not a
fact within the meaning of the Code”, it cannot be
said that this Court has laid down the law
differently.
The observations following the
aforesaid sentence are also equally important. The
Court was cautious enough to add a qualification
that no straitjacket formula could be evolved for
determining whether the consent was given under a
misconception of fact. Reading the judgment in
Uday case as a whole, we do not understand the
Court laying down a broad proposition that a
'promise to marry' could never amount to a
misconception of fact.
That is not, in our
understanding, the ratio of the decision. In fact,
there was a specific finding in that case that initially
the accused's intention to marry cannot be ruled
out.”
Indeed, submissions made by Shri K.K.Sud, learned

senior counsel for the petitioner focussed on the first two
sentences of para 21 of the report in Uday's case (supra), which 2
sentences I may note read as under:-

Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.18 of 20

27.

“21.
It therefore appears that the consensus
of judicial opinion is in favour of the view that the
consent given by the prosecutrix to sexual
intercourse with a person with whom she is deeply
in love on a promise that he would marry her on a
later date, cannot be said to be given under a
misconception of fact. A false promise is not a fact
within the meaning of the Code.”
These two sentences have to be understood as

explained by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Deelip
Singh's case (supra) (para 28 : quoted above).
28.

Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Deelip Singh's

case (supra) were at pains to explain that where, from the very
inception the accused never really intended to marry the
complainant, issue would take entirely different colouration
pertaining to consent and misconception of fact as elaborated in
Section 90 of the Indian Penal Code.
29.

It is in this context, I have specifically noted herein

above the finding by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in
Uday's case in para 24 where their Lordships have returned a
categorical finding that there is no evidence to prove that Uday
never intended to marry the complainant.
30.

A perusal of the FIR shows that the complainant has

categorically stated that Satyam had lied to her about his age.
Why did he do so? Probably he was aware that if he had truthfully
disclosed his age, the complainant would never have consented
to even continue the dialogue with him.

Probably he found a

woman who had lost her first love and was emotionally disturbed.
Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

Page No.19 of 20

He played with her.
31.

I need not and for that matter should not speculate on

the issue for the reason I am not dealing with a case where trial
has concluded.

Suffice would it be to state that intention of

Satyam is alleged to be dishonest from the very inception. Issue
would therefore need trial.
32.

Under the circumstances, since the issue arises for

consideration viz whether from the very inception Satyam never
intended to marry the complainant the matter would require a
trial.
32.

For the law as explained in para 28 in Deelip Singh's

case (supra), the petition requires to be dismissed.
33.

The petition is dismissed.

34.

However, I require to pen a post script. Nothing stated

in the present order would be construed as an expression on the
merits of the controversy. I have dealt with the issue limited to
whether the FIR disclosed no cognizable offence; and no more.
Since charge sheet has been filed, learned Trial Judge would
consider the issue pertaining to framing of charge at the relevant
stage in light of the material placed by the prosecution.

October 23, 2007
dk

Crl.M.C. No.5023/2005

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.20 of 20

