IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
RSA No.228/2004
#Manchanda Boot House
........
Appellant
!
through: Mr.Inderjeet Sharma, Adv.
VERSUS
$M/s. Maharaja Marketing
........ Respondent
^
through: Mr.V.K.Saini, Adv.
%

DATE OF DECISION: 20.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)
The appeal is pending after notice without any substantial

question of law being framed till date.
2.

Question arises whether the appeal raises a substantial

question of law or not. For the reason if no substantial question of
law arises for consideration appeal has to be dismissed.

If

substantial question of law arises for consideration, same would be
required to be framed.
3.

Petitioner is the defendant.

The respondent is the

plaintiff.

Suit was filed for recovery of Rs.76,377/- alleging that the

defendant is engaged in the business of sale of footwear. That the
page 1 of 6

plaintiff is a distributor of branded footwear. That a representative
of the plaintiff visited the defendant and the defendant agreed to
purchase the footwear. That footwear were supplied against bills
raised and delivery reflected in delivery challans. That the bills and
the challans were duly accepted by the defendant evidenced by the
signatures of the sole proprietor of the defendant thereon. That the
terms and conditions of the sale were as printed in the bills.
4.

Defendant sought leave to defend inter alia pleading as

under :“D. That the main allegation in the plaint against the
defendant is that the defendant made regular orders and
the supply was made to the defendant by the plaintiff
firm that the defendant was habitual defaulter of
payment, that the plaintiff firm started maintaining
running account with the defendant and the defendant
made partial payment in small instalments. It may
however, be stated that the Bills filed by the plaintiff
with the plaint nowhere suggest that the said bills have
been received by the defendant. In fact the plaintiff had
supplied defective shoes which were of no use to the
defendant and the defendant had asked the plaintiff to
take the shoes back and replace the same. The said
defective shoes have neither been taken back by the
plaintiff nor have their defects been removed by the
plaintiff and thus, the defendant is not liable to pay any
amount to the plaintiff towards the defective lots of
shoes which had been sent by the plaintiff to the
defendant. The same are lying with the defendant and
the plaintiff be ordered to remove the same from the
defendant's shop.
E.
That it is then alleged in the plaint that on each
and every supply made to the defendant, the defendant
acknowledged the challan as well as the bill of the
aforesaid supply but the defendant despite receipt of the
Bills failed to make the payment to the plaintiff firm. The
said challans have not been signed by the defendant or
page 2 of 6

5.

any of his employees as the same are forged and
fabricated documents. Moreover, the defendant had
time and again requested the plaintiff to remove the
defective shoes supplied to the defendant but in spite of
repeated requests he has not removed the same. Thus,
on the one hand the plaintiff supplied lots of defective
shoes to the defendant and on the other he has placed
on record forged and fabricated documents in support of
his claim.”
It was also pleaded that the suit was not maintainable

under Order 37 CPC.
6.

Dealing with the plea that the suit was not maintainable

under Order 37 CPC learned Trial judge held that a suit for recovery
of a

liquidated sum is maintainable if it is based on a written

contract. The learned Judge opined that the bills if accepted would
be evidence of a written contract.

Thus, it was held that the suit

was maintainable under Order 37 CPC.
7.

In respect of the plea that goods received were defective

and that no bills

or challans were received by the defendant

learned Trial Judge noted that the bills raised are between 7.4.2002
to 27.6.2002 and that neither had the defendant pleaded nor shown
any document that till plaintiff served a legal notice upon the
defendant on 28.7.2003 the defendant had intimated the defects
and rejection of the goods. Qua the plea whether the bills and the
challans bore

signatures of the sole proprietor of the defendant

learned Trial Judge held that the bills show the signatures of the sole
proprietor of the defendant thereon.
8.

So holding, leave to defend was declined.

Appeal was
page 3 of 6

filed. First Appellate Court concurred with the view taken by the
learned Trial Judge.
9.

Suffice would it be to record that a bill or delivery challan

is a written contract between the parties if it is shown that under the
bill the buyer received the goods.
10.

A perusal of the application filed by the defendant

seeking leave to defend shows that the defendant admitted receipt
of the goods but alleged that the goods were defective. It would be
relevant to note that the defendant did not place on record much
less plead

that the plaintiff had raised some other bills on the

defendant when goods were supplied.
11.

In commercial transactions bills are raised not only for the

purpose of maintaining accounts but even as per the requirement of
income tax laws, sale tax laws and excise laws.
12.

Thus the plea that the bills and the challans are fabricated

documents is nothing but moonshine.
13.

Section 42 of the Sale of Goods Act reads as under :“42. Acceptance.- The buyer is deemed to have
accepted the goods when he intimates to the seller that
he has accepted them, or when the goods have been
delivered to him and he does any act in relation to them
which is inconsistent with the ownership of the seller, or
when, after the lapse of a reasonable time, he retains
the goods without intimating to the seller that he has
rejected them.”

14.

It is apparent that where rejection

of goods is not

intimated to the seller within a reasonable time the goods are
page 4 of 6

deemed to be accepted.
15.

Goods in question are footwear. Last supply was effected

on 27.6.2002. There is neither a plea nor any document to show
that till plaintiff served a legal notice on 28.7.2003 goods were
rejected under intimation to the plaintiff. Thus, the goods would be
deemed to be accepted.
16.

Consequences of law have to flow.

17.

No question of law much less substantial question of law

arise for consideration.
18.

Before concluding I may note that the petitioner has filed

CM.No.2306/2005

bringing

to

the

notice of this court certain

further events which have transpired.
19.

The

appellant has not been granted any stay in the

instant proceedings.

Decree was

put into execution.

Objections

under Section 47 CPC were filed. The objections were dismissed as
frivolous by the Executing Court vide order dated 1.10.2004. While
dismissing the application cost of Rs.2,000/- was imposed.

For

unexplainable reasons learned Executing Court amended the decree
by adding in the decree the cost of Rs.2,000/- which was imposed
vide order dated 1.10.2004.
20.

Vide CM.No.2306/2005 it is prayed that the amended

decree be quashed for the reason the Executing Court

cannot

amend the decree.
page 5 of 6

21.

Learned Executing Court has acted illegally in amending

the decree. If objections under Section 47 CPC were dismissed with
cost said cost has to be recovered independently as a decree. But
the original decree cannot be tinkered with. Thus, I clarify that the
decree which would have to be executed is as originally drawn. Cost
of Rs.2,000/- can also be recovered by an independent execution.
22.

The appeal is dismissed.

November 20, 2007
pu

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 6 of 6

