IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No.3137/2005
#
!

Sanjay Dhillon
through:

........
Petitioner
Mr. Ramesh Gupta, Mr. Sumit Arora
Mr. Ankur Singhal, Advocates
VERSUS

$
^

State

.......
Respondent
through : Mr. Ranjit Kapoor, Advocate
Bail Application No.3201-06/2005

#
!

Krishana & Ors.
through:

........
Petitioners
Mr. Ramesh Gupta, Mr. Sumit Arora
Mr. Ankur Singhal, Advocates
VERSUS

$
^

State

.......
Respondent
through : Mr. Ranjit Kapoor, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 26.09.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (ORAL)

1.

FIR No. 134/2005 dated 17.11.2005
U/S: 498A/306/34 IPC
PS: Jaffarpur Kalan.
Rajesh was married to Sanjay Dhillon on 11.2.1997.

Unfortunately, she committed suicide on 17.11.2005.
2.

Sanjay Dhillon and his parents, brothers, sisters and

brother in law seek pre-arrest bail in aforenoted FIR.
3.

Rajesh was in the house of her parents when she

committed suicide.

A suicide note was purportedly recovered

from the house of her parents after she died. The suicide note is
scribed in Devanagari script. Signatures of Rajesh are appended
in English.
4.

As per opinion of the handwriting expert, whereas

writing on the suicide note has been opined to be that of Rajesh,
signatures in English of Rajesh have been opined as not tallying
with the admitted writing of Rajesh in English language.
5.

In the suicide note, Rajesh has penned her thoughts as

under:“I do not want to live. Life has come to an end for me
because of compulsions of some persons. I have tried
my level best to find a home. But my in-laws which
include my sisters-in-law, a husband of my sister-in-law
namely Surender Kapur and my husband Sanjay have
compelled me to embrace death. My world has ended.
I went with hope to the women cell but even nothing
happened there. I was compelled to abandon my child.
In front of my eyes my world has collapsed. I have lost
the will to live.

6.

Father please forgive me. Mother please forgive me. I
just don't want to live.”
It is urged by learned counsel for the petitioners that

sine qua non for the applicability of Section 306 IPC is abetment in
the commission of suicide. Referring to Section 107 IPC learned
counsel urges that abetment is complete when one or more of 3
acts envisaged by Section 107 IPC are committed. Firstly, if the
person is instigated or a person engages in any conspiracy for the

doing of a thing which results in commission of a offence and
lastly when a person intentionally aids by an act or illegally
omission the doing of an offence.
7.

It is urged that assuming there is harassment and as a

result of harassment the person harassed commits suicide, mere
harassment by itself would not amount to an offence under
Section 306 IPC.
8.

Learned counsel for the State with reference to the

language of the suicide note strongly opposes the grant of prearrest bail.
9.

I need not note a catena of authorities on the point

save and except a decision of the Supreme Court reported as
2002 (2) RCR Crl. 687 Sanju Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh.

In

paras 9 to 12 of the said decision, 3 judgments of the Supreme
Court were noted and with reference to a suicide note, contents
whereof as noted in para 14 of the judgment were as under:“Suicide Note
Dainik Bhaskar
581 South Civil Lines
Jabalpur.
Agent Name, Sengar New Agency
Place, Goshalpur
No. of copies, 409 Date
Name of the person who prepared label
Gosalpur Sengar has threatened to report under Dowry
demand and threatened to involve family members due
to this I am writing in my full senses that Sanjay Sangar
is responsible for my death. Sanjay Sangar also Mukraj
commander Loota Tha Sanjay Ki.
Sengar New Agency
Gosalpur

I was threatened therefore I am dying
Sangar Gosalpur
My name Chander Bhushan Singh Gouram
Chander Bhushan Singh Goutam
Babloo Gotuam
In my senses
Sengar responsible for my death.
My moti
Darling my moti. You look after my Chukho. My darling
Moti Neelam Sengar @ Chander Bhushan Singh Goutam
Gandhigram Budhagar.
Sengar is responsible for my death
Sanjay Sengar is responsible for my death
Sanjay Sengar is responsible for my death
Chander
Bhushan
Singh
Goutam
Gandhigram
Budhagar.”
It was concluded in para 15 as under:“A plain reading of the suicide note would clearly show
that the deceased was in great stress and depressed.
One plausible reason could be that the deceased was
without any work or avocation and at the same time
indulged in drinking as revealed from the statement of
the wife – Smt. Neelam Sengar. He was a frustrated
man. Reading of the suicide note will clearly suggest
that such a note is not a handy work of a man with
sound mind and sense, Smt. Neelam Sengar, wife of the
deceased made a statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
before the Investigation Officer. She stated that the
deceased always indulged in drinking wine and was not
doing any work. She also stated that on 26th July, 1998
her husband came to them in an inebriated condition
and was abusing her and other members of the family.
The prosecution story, if believed, shows that the
quarrel between the deceased and the appellant had
taken place on 25th July, 1998 and if the deceased came
back to the house again in 26th July, 1998, it cannot be
said that the suicide by the deceased was the direct
result of the quarrel that had taken place on 25th July,
1998.
Viewed from the aforesaid circumstances
independently, we are clearly of the view that the
ingredients of 'abetment' are totally absent in the
instant case for an offence under Section 306 IPC. It is
in the statement of the wife that the deceased always
remained in a drunkened condition. It is a common
knowledge that excessive drinking leads one to
debauchery. It clearly appeared, therefore, that the

10.

deceased was a victim of his own conduct unconnected
with the quarrel that had ensued on 25th July, 1998
where the appellant is stated to have used abusive
language. Taking the totality of materials on record and
facts and circumstances of the case into consideration,
it will lead to irresistible conclusion that it is the
deceased and he alone, and done else, is responsible
for his death.”
3 earlier decisions which were noted in paras 9 to 12

are as under:“9. In Swamy Prahaladdas v. State of M.P. &
Anr., 1995 Supp. (3) SCC 438, the appellant was
charged for an offence under Section 306 IPC on the
ground that the appellant during the quarrel is said to
have remarked the deceased 'to go and die'. This
Court was of the view that mere words uttered by the
accused to the deceased 'to go and die' were not eve
prima facie enough to instigate the deceased to
commit suicide.
10. In Mahendra Singh v. State of M.P., 1995
Supp. (3) SCC 731, the appellant was charged for
an offence under Section 306 IPC basically based
upon the dying declaration of the deceased, which
reads as under:
“My mother-in-law and husband and sister-in-law
(husband's elder brother's wife) harassed me.
They beat me and abused me. My husband
Mahendra wants to marry a second time. He has
illicit connections with my sister-in-law. Because
of these reasons and being harassed I want to die
by burning.”
11. This court, considering the defintion of
'abetment' under Section 107 IPC found that the
charge and conviction of the appellant for an offence
under Section 306 is not sutainable merely on the
allegation of harassment to the deceased. This Court
further held that neither of the ingredients of the
abetment are attracted on the statement of the
deceased.
12. In Ramesh Kumar v. State of Chattisgarh,
(2001) 9 SCC 618: 2001 (4) RCR (Crl.) 537 (SC),
this Court while considering the charge framed and

the conviction for an offence under Section 306 IPC
on the basis of dying declaration recorded by an
Executive Magistrate, in which she had stated taht5
previously there had been quarrel between the
deceased and her husband and on the day of
occurrence she had a quarrel with her husband who
had said that she could go whereever she wanted to
go and that thereafter she had poured kerosene on
herself and had set fire. Acquitting the accused this
Court said:

11.

“A word uttered in a fit of anger or emotion
without intending the consequences to actually
follow cannot be said to be instigation. If it
transpires to the court that a victim committing
suicide
was
hypersensitive
to
ordinary
petulance, discord and differences in domestic
life quite common to the society to which the
victim belonged and such petulance, discord and
differences, were not expected to induce a
similarly circumstanced individual in a given
society to commit suicide, the conscience of the
court should not be satisfied for basing a finding
that the accused charged for abetting the
offences of suicide should be found guilty.”
Thus, case is made out to grant benefit of pre-arrest

bail to the petitioners for the reason the suicide note does not
establish abetment. It merely establishes harassment.
12.

Petition stands disposed of directing that in the event

of being arrested by the IO, petitioners would be released on bail
on their furnishing a personal bond in sum of Rs. 15,000/- with
one surety each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the IO.
13.

Needless to state, petitioners would join investigation

as and when required by the IO.
14.

Dasti.

September 26, 2007

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

mm

