IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.153/2004
#
Shri Mugeem Ahmad
........
Appellant
!
through: Mr.Sandeep Sharma, Adv.
VERSUS
$
^

State of Uttar Pradesh
.
through: Mr.Anil Mittal, Adv.

%

........ Respondent

DATE OF DECISION: 23.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
*
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)
Heard learned counsel for the parties. Record of the learned

Additional District Judge perused. Record of the Arbitrator which
forms part of record of the learned ADJ has also been perused. A
short question arises for consideration.
2.

In response to a notice inviting tender issued by the

respondent, as per tender documents prescribed, appellant
submitted the offer.
3.

The tender specified the quantities to be executed but vide

clause 16 stipulated as under:page 1 of 8

4.

“Clause 16. The Engineer-in-charge shall have power
to make such alteration or in additions to the original
specification, drawing designs and instructions as
may appear to him to be necessary or additional work
which the contractor may be so directed to do shall
be bound to carry out the work in accordance with
any instructions which may be given to him in writing
signed by the Engineer-in-charge, and such
alterations shall not invalidate the contract, and any
additional work which the contractor may be so
directed to do shall be carried out by the contractor
on the same conditions all respects on which he
agreed to do the main work and at the same rates as
are specified in the tender for the main work. The
time for the completion of the work shall be extended
in the proportion that the additional work bears to the
original contract work, and the certificate of the
Engineer-in-charge shall be conclusive as to such
proportions. If the additional work includes any item
for which no rate is specified hereunder, than the
contractor shall carry out the work at the rate entered
in the Schedule of Rates of the District but if the
Schedule does not contain any rate for such work,
then the contractor shall not begin such work until a
rate in respect of such work has been settled by
mutual agreement between him and the Engineer-incharge with the approval of the officer accepting the
contract, and if they are unable to agree upon a rate
within two weeks from the date when the contractor
received the order, the Engineer-incharge may by a
notice in writing cancel the order for such work, and
carry it out in such manner as he may think best. In
the event of a dispute the decision of the
Superintending Engineer shall be final and binding on
the contractor.”
A perusal of Clause-16 shows that if the additional work

related to a work for which a rate was specified, additional work
would be paid for at the same rate. In relation to additional work
for which no rate was provided 3 alterations were stipulated as
per which payment had to be made.
5.

After offer as per tender documents was submitted by the
page 2 of 8

appellant, the Department sought variation of, amongst others
Clause-16. Unfortunately for the respondent the same was done
under cover of its letter dated 7.1.1986 accepting the tender. In
said letter it was intimated to the respondent that he was to offer
security in sum of Rs.20,500/-.

That extra work would have to

with the prior permission of the Engineer Incharge and that extra
work would be paid as per departmental rate or agreed rate
whichever is less.
6.

The appellant responded to the said letter vide his reply

dated 8.1.1996. He agreed only to one variation, in that, agreed
to give/offer security deposit in sum of Rs.20,500/- but requested
that a fixed deposit in sum of Rs.20,000/- pertaining to contract
No.H6-85 dated 27.12.1985 be treated as deposit pertaining to
instant contract and further deposit in sum of Rs.500/- be
received from him.
7.

At the rear of said letter the department noted the

acceptance thereof.
8.

Letter dated 7.1.1986 written by the respondent as also

appellant's letter dated 8.11.996 as also departmental noting
were bound in a formal contract bond.
9.

Pertaining to a work for which rate was submitted under the

contract i.e. as per offer made by the appellant a dispute arose.
Whereas

appellant

relied

upon

Clause-16

of

the

tender
page 3 of 8

documents, the respondent relied upon its letter of acceptance
dated 7.1.1986 to urge that since departmental rates were less
than the agreed rates, pertaining to extra work over and above
the scheduled quantity, for the work in question, notwithstanding
rate being agreed, appellant would be entitled to be recompensed
at the departmental rates for the excess work.
10.

There being an arbitration clause, dispute was referred to an

Arbitrator.
11.

The

contractor

urged

before

the

Arbitrator

that

the

respondent could not vary the tender at the time of the
acceptance. Secondly, at best, letter dated 7.1.1986 was a
counter offer. Appellant accepted only one term in its letter dated
8.1.1986. Writing at the rear of the letter written by the appellant
by the department accepted the conditional acceptance by the
appellant meaning thereby contract stood concluded minus 2 out
3 counter offers as per letter dated 7.1.1986.

Lastly appellant

urged that right throughout when running bills were cleared for
payment and payment made, department paid money as per
agreed rates. Only at the final stage when final bill was being
settled did the department raised said issue.
12.

Vide his award, learned Arbitrator has expressed the view

and has concluded as under :“From the award letter No. 81/Head Works/T-3 dated
7.1.86 of the Executive Engineer, it is evident that the
page 4 of 8

date of tender was 27.12.85. Except condition No. 16
of Form III no other condition was notified/prescribed
till the date of tender. So the condition in the letter
dated 7.1.86 to the effect that if the quantities exceed
the agreement quantities the payment will be made
at the department or agreement rate whichever is
less, was added after the issue of tender and
submission of the same on 27.12.85.
Every
agreement is made in accordance with the terms and
conditions of form III. In case any special condition is
required to be put/provided then the same was to be
provided/put before the issue of tender and the date
of the submission of the same. Any condition put
after the aforesaid is invalid. Further this special
condition put later on has also no approval of the
higher authority/officer.
The contractor in response to the aforesaid letter of
the Executive Engineer accepted only the condition
regarding security deposit and the stamp duty and no
other condition. To this effect there is office note also
at page 10 of the agreement. Even in this note also
there is no mention of this condition.

13.

In case the contractor executes the work with his own
sweet will then it is upto the Executive Engineer to
make the payment of the same or not. But this work
has been executed by the contractor according to the
requirement of the department and paid in this
running bills. The payment is also entered in the
measurement book payable @ Rs. 780/- per cum.
Thus the claim of the contractor is allowed. He is
entitled for the balance payment and is awarded
accordingly.”
In the objections filed under Section 30/33 of the Arbitration

Act

1940,

learned

Additional

District

Judge

before

whom

objections were filed has taken a contrary view.
14.

Learned Trial Judge has held has under :7.
As regards claim no.1, it is an admitted case that
quantity of work executed by the petitioner was
525.25 cubic meter and the agreed rate for this item
was Rs.7.80 per CM. It is also not in dispute that
page 5 of 8

initially quantity of this item as mentioned in the
agreement was only 100 CM. It is also an admitted
case that tender submitted by the petitioners was
accepted vide letter dated 7.1.86. Condition no. 3 of
this letter specifically provided that in case of
excessive work, contractor will be paid at
departmental rate or contract rate, whichever is lower.
It is also not in dispute that the objector paid to the
petitioner at departmental rate for the excess quantity
of this work. The case of the petitioner is that this
condition was unilateral imposed by respondent no.2
vide letter dated 7.1.86 and it was never accepted by
him, and therefore, he is to be paid at the contract
rate and not at the departmental rate.
8.
Admittedly clause 16 of the agreement provided
that any additional work which the contractor may be
directed to do shall be carried by him on the same
conditions in all respect on which he agreed to do the
main work. Admittedly this clause was not deleted
from the agreement when it was signed by the parties.
9.
The tender submitted by the petitioner has only
an offer to the respondent. The offer given by the
petitioner was accepted vide letter dated 7.1.86.
Admittedly letter dated 7.1.86 was received by the
petitioner and formed part of the contract executed
between the parties. If any offer is accepted with a
modification or a condition, that modification/condition
shall form part of the contract and shall be binding
upon the parties to the contract. It is not as if the
petitioner didn't accept the condition no.3 stipulated in
the letter of acceptance dated 7.1.86. It was very
much open to the petitioner not to agree to the
condition stipulated in the letter dated 7.1.86 by
writing to the respondent that the condition was not
acceptable to him. But the petitioner didn't do so and
after receiving their letter dated 7.1.86 he entered into
a contract and the letter dated 7.1.86 formed part of
that contract.
Therefore, to my mind conditions
stipulated in the letter dated 7.1.86 are binding upon
both the parties being part of the contract executed
between them. It is true that the condition stipulated
in the letter dated 7.1.86 is contrary to clause 16 of
the tender document. But, when the offer of the
petitioner was accepted vide letter dated 7.1.86 it
page 6 of 8

15.

amounted to modification of clause 16 of the tender
document and the petitioner is bound by it.”
I agree with learned counsel for the appellant that the

learned

Additional

District

Judge

has

acted

with

material

irregularity in as much as the view taken is that respondent's
letter dated 7.1.1986 was not refuted by the appellant.
16.

As noted hereinabove, the appellant duly replied to the

letter dated 7.1.1986 by his letter dated 8.1.1986. Brief contours
of appellant's letter dated 8.1.1986 have been noted by me
hereinabove.

Not only that , learned ADJ has ignored the

departmental noting at the rear of appellant's letter dated
8.1.1986.
17.

I note that the learned Arbitrator has duly noted

appellant's response to the letter dated 7.1.1986 and as also
noted office note penned down at the rear of the said letter. It
appears that the learned ADJ was misled into not considering the
said letter for the reason learned Arbitrator, while referring to the
letter has not mentioned the date.
18.

The learned Arbitrator has noted the contents of the

letter and the departmental noting in the following words :“The contractor in response to the aforesaid letter of
the Executive Engineer accepted only the condition
regarding security deposit and the stamp duty and no
other condition. To this effect there is office note also
at page 10 of the agreement. Even in this note also
there is no mention of this condition.”
19.

For the reasons noted hereinabove, the view taken by
page 7 of 8

the learned ADJ which has modified the award cannot be
accepted.
20.

The appeal is allowed.

21.

The impugned order dated 9.2.2004 in so far it has

modified the award pertaining to claim No.1 is set aside.
Pertaining to claim No.1 award is made a rule of the Court. For
clarification, rest of the award as made rule of the court by the
learned Addl. District Judge stands.
22.

On Claim No.1, appellant would be entitled to interest

@ 9% p.a. from date of decree till date of realisation.
23.

LCR be returned.

24.

No costs.

November 23, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 8 of 8

