*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

RSA 24/1985
Suresh Dutt
........ Appellant
through:
Mr.P.N.Bhardwaj with Mr.Ashutosh Bhardwaj, Adv.
VERSUS
Harbans Lal & Ors.
........ Respondent
through:
Ms.Chanchal Biswal for Mr.Rajiv Tyagi
for respondent No.3
Mr.G.D.Chopra with Mr.P.K.Bajaj, Mr.R.N.Malik
for respondent No.4
RESERVED ON: 19.03.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
24.03.2008
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

On 17.9.1985 following question of law was framed in

the instant appeal:“Whether there was presumption of continuity of
possession on the basis of that finding and
whether on the evidence on record the said
presumption has been rebutted.”
2.

Before proceeding to pen the judgment I must record

that the expression 'that finding' in the question of law framed
RSA No.24/1985

Page No.1 of 11

appears to refer to the observation by the learned Additional District
Judge that the plaintiff/appellant was in possession of the land in
dispute in the year 1975.

Indeed, as framed the question of law

suffers from an error of syntax.
3.

The appellant was the plaintiff. He had sued for a decree

for permanent injunction against the respondent alleging that he
was the original resident of Village Jharoda Mazra Burari and was in
possession of the suit land evidenced by a certificate of the Pradhan
and an affidavit dated 1.5.1975.

That the suit land ad-measuring

400 sq. yards was sought to be possessed by the defendants on the
basis of some certificate obtained by them from the Custodian. That
the defendants were attempting to forcibly occupy the land. Decree
for injunction was prayed for to restrain the defendants from
dispossessing the plaintiff from the suit land.
4.

In their written statement the defendants/respondents

predicated a defence of having acquired title to the suit property
vide a letter of allotment Ex.DW-1/1 dated 20.1.1977 issued by the
Custodian of Evacuee Properties and being put in possession of the
land vide possession report Ex.DW-1/2.
5.

According to the respondents they had acquired title to

the land through the custodian of the evacuee properties and that
the Managing Officer-cum-Custodian had conveyed title in their
favour.

RSA No.24/1985

Page No.2 of 11

6.

Through the testimony of PW-2 the plaintiff proved

Ex.PW-2/1, Ex.PW-2/2, Ex.PW-2/3 and Ex.PW-2/4, all documents
relating to an application filed by the plaintiff while applying for a
loan in the year 1975. PW-1, PW-3, PW-4 and PW-5 corroborated the
testimony of PW-2 and stated that the plaintiff had indeed filed
those documents. The witness deposed on the factum of possession
of the plaintiff with reference to his acts of storing cow dung, placing
agricultural implements and tethering cattle on the suit land.
However, it came on evidence that the suit land was a vacant parcel
of land.
7.

Ex.DW-1/1 being a certificate dated 20.1.1977 issued by

the Managing Director, Department of Rehabilitation reads as under
:“No.LAO/KGO/Jarodha Mazra Burari/D/59
DEPARTMENT OF REHABILITATION
(SETTLEMENT WING),
JAISALMIR HOUSE, NEW DELHI.
Dated: 20-1-2007
S/Shri Shmt. Bhagwani Devi, Harbans Lal, Tulsi
Nath, Shmt. Durga Devi, Ram Nath, Shri Laxman
Dass, Shri Ramesh Chander & Shri Rajinder Kumar
legal heirs of Shri Jhanda Ram deceased land
allottee is allotted plot No.1 measuring 400 Sq. yds
owned by Shri Mumtaz Ud Din in Village Jharoda
Mazra Buarai U/R 57.
(DHARAM SINGH)
MANAGING OFFICER (RURAL)

RSA No.24/1985

Page No.3 of 11

Shmt. Bhagwani Devi wd/o Shri Jhanda Ram,
H.No.144/H, Huds on Lines, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi.”
8.

Ex.DW-1/2 is a possession report dated 3.2.1977. It is in

urdu but records that at site, vacant physical possession of the land
detailed in Ex.DW-1/1 has been handed over to the purchasers.
9.

DW-1, the Patwari, who was produced as a witness by

the defendants and was present when possession was handed over
and Ex.DW-1/2 was drawn up deposed that the land was vested in
the Custodian of the Evacuee Properties and was allotted to the
respondents. He stated that the plot was vacant and none raised
objections at the time of delivery of possession. He further deposed
that the proclamation of delivery of possession was made in the
village through one Nathu son of Chote Lal. The witness was crossexamined with respect to how he had identified the land possession
whereof was recorded as having been handed over in Ex.DW-1/2.
He stated that he took the fixed point for reference from the SouthEastern corner of Khasra No.29/10/2. He stated that he located the
plot with the help of Shajra of the village. He further deposed that he
was the Patwari of the Village since 1950. He further deposed that
one Mumtaz-ud-din owned the land and on being declared evacuee
property was taken possession of by the Custodian and was allotted
to the defendants.
10.

Vide judgment and decree dated 11.10.1979 the learned

RSA No.24/1985

Page No.4 of 11

Trial Judge with reference to Ex. PW-2/1 to Ex. PW-2/4 held as
under:“He proved the application Ex.PW2/1 and plan
Ex.PW2/2 and that the recommendation of the
Pardhan is Ex.PW2/3 and report is Ex.PW2/4. Now,
the question arises as to how the evidence of this
witness helps the plaintiff. If the plaintiff has
obtained some loan, how it can be said that the
loan was obtained on the basis of the suit land.
Even if the loan has been obtained by the plaintiff,
then it would not confer the ownership rights on
the plaintiff. PW3 stated that he had been Pardhan
of the village. He deposed to the fact that owner
of the suit land is the plaintiff and that the
custodian is not having any land in site the Abadi
as there were not Mohammedans residing there.
He proved his signatures on Ex.PW2/3 at mark A.
Bow, looking at Ex.PW2/3, it is nothing but a
certificate regarding taking loan given by the
B.D.O on the recommendation made by this
witness.
Now, PW4 is Ram Narain.
It is
understood, whether this Ram Narain is the father
of the plaintiff for some other Ram Narain but he
has not stated anything about the fact if the land
was divided among the brothers. He has stated
that custodian was not having any land inside the
Abadi and that he has seen the disputed property
and that it owned and possessed by the plaintiff.
PW5 is the Patwari who has stated that Ex.PW2/3
was issued by him and bears his signatures and he
has verified the said plot.
In his cross
examination, he has stated that the plot was lying
vacant and that there is no indication in the record
whether any Mohmmedan was the owner of the
land. He has not stated as to what were the basis
of his verification and how he has arrived to the
conclusion that the land is owned by the plaintiff
when it was lying vacant. PW6 has stated that the
land IS OWNED by the plaintiff and prior to that
father of the plaintiff was in possession. PW7
stated that he is partner to F.P.Shop No.4845,
Village Burari and that the plaintiff lives in village
Jarodha. Now, the evidence of this witness does
not help much. Plaintiff may be living in the
RSA No.24/1985

Page No.5 of 11

village but the question is whether he is the owner
of the plot in question or not.”
11.

The learned Trial Judge has discussed the evidence of

DW-1, the Patwari and the documents Ex.DW-1/1 and Ex.DW-1/2 as
also 2 other documents Ex.DW-1/3 and Ex.DW-2/4 as under :“No DW1 Jhanji Ram has been examined by the
defendant. He is the patwari, custodian. He proved
allotment letter Ex.DW1/1. He stated that he went
to the village and gave actual physical possession
to one of the allottees Sh. Tulshi Nath who was
present at the spot and that he gave the
possession of plot no.1 which measures 60' x 60'.
Nobody raised any objection. His original report is
on the file and certified copy is Ex.DW1/2. In his
cross examination he stated that he took only
fixed points for preparation of the plan. He denied
that there is no custodian land in the village. DW2
is Tulsi Nath who stated that he was allotted land
measuring 25 bighas for agricultural purposes in
village Jarodha. He was also allotted residential
plot and the land was allotted to him by the
custodian. They were delivered possession on
3.2.77. He proved Ex.DW1/1 and Ex.DW1/2 and
that they have purchased bricks from Balwan
Singh vide challan Ex.DW2/1 to Ex.DW2/4. They
are in possession of the suit premises. In his cross
examination, he has stated that they have not
kept any account of the expenditure incurred on
construction.
DW3 stated that defendant was
delivered the possession of the plot. He was
present on the spot when the possession was
given and the Mundai was carried out by Sh.Nathu
Ram Harijan. He has seen the defendant raising
the construction. Now, looking at the Ex.DW1/1
and Ex.DW1/2. It is revealed that the plot
measuring 400 sq. yds. owned by Sh. Mumatuzud-din in village Jarodha Mazra was allotted to the
defendants and as per report Ex.DW1/3, the
possession was given to one of the defendants.”
12.

The finding returned is that the evidence on record

RSA No.24/1985

Page No.6 of 11

establishes that the suit property was a vacant piece of land vested
in the Custodian and ownership thereof was transferred to the
respondents with delivery of vacant physical possession. Thus, claim
of the plaintiff of being in possession was negated.

Needless to

state, since plaintiff did not have title to the suit land, the injunction
was refused.
13.

In the first appeal the challenge was predicated with

reference to the appreciation of evidence.

It was urged in the

memorandum of appeal that Ex.DW-2/1 and Ex.DW-2/2 were
inadmissible in evidence not being proved in accordance with law. It
was urged that if said documents were ignored the defendants had
no case.

It was urged that the learned Trial Judge was wrong in

disbelieving the testimony of the witnesses of the plaintiff.
14.

Before the learned Appellate Judge an application under

Order 41 Rule 27 was filed praying that a Lal Dora certificate may be
permitted to be brought on record and proved. Said application was
allowed and the Lal Dora certificate was taken on record.
15.

Considering the said Lal Dora certificate and the

evidence on record, learned Appellate Judge concurred with the view
taken by the learned Trial Judge and held that Ex.DW-1/1 as also
Ex.DW-1/2 concluded the issue in favour of the defendants vis-a-vis
their ownership.
16.

The learned Appellate Judge concurred that Ex.PW-2/1 to

RSA No.24/1985

Page No.7 of 11

Ex.PW-2/4 did not relate to the land as they were mere documents
relating to a loan application submitted by the plaintiff and at best it
disclosed that the plaintiff was a resident of the Village. Relevant
findings of the first appellate court are as under:-

“The appellant had tried to establish his possession
over the suit plot on the date of the filing of the suit
by the oral statements of the PWs as well as by the
documents Ex.PW2/1, Ex.PW2/2, Ex.PW2/3 and
Ex.PW2/4.
All these documents relate to an
application for the grant of loan moved by the
appellant in the year 1975. The evidence of PW1,
PW2, PW3, PW4 and PW5 corroborating these
documents is also on record. However, a perusal of
these documents and the statements of the witnesses
merely establishes the appellant's possession much
prior to the filing of the suit. This evidence does not
establish the appellant's possession of the suit plot at
the time of the filing of the suit........
.........Oral evidences that at the time of the filing of
the suit, the appellant was in possession of the suit
land is not believable.......
.........The other witnesses who spoke about the
appellant's possession on the basis of the storage of
cow dung cakes etc., cannot be relied upon for the
reason that in the vacant land anybody can keep such
things. The Lal-Dora certificate which was allowed to
be place on record in the appeal is in respect of the
whole of the plot of 600 Sq. Yds. and is not an
evidence of possession but the evidence of the fact
that the suit plot falls in Lal Dora during the
settlement operation of the village. It is specifically
mentioned in this certificate that it does not confer
any right of ownership/licence on the certificate
holder.........
.........It also cannot be over-looked that in case of
vacant lands the possession normally follows the title.
RSA No.24/1985

Page No.8 of 11

The person having title is presumed to be in
possession unless shown otherwise........
.........If after that date the appellant or any other
resident of the village had kept some cow dung cages
or agricultural implements or had tied his animals on
the suit plot, that cannot have the effect of ousting
the respondents from their lawful possession. For all
practical purposes, the respondents continued to be
in possession of the suit plot since 3.2.1977. As such
the ld. Trial Judge was also justified in holding that the
appellant was not in possession of the suit plot........”
17.

Pertaining to the Lal Dora certificate learned Appellate

Judge recorded as under :“The Lal-Dora certificate which was allowed to be
placed on record in the appeal is in respect of the
whole of the plot of 600 Sq.Yds and is not an
evidence of possession but the evidence of the
fact that the suit plot fell in Lal-Dora during the
settlement operation of the village. It is
specifically mentioned in this certificate that it
does not confer any right of ownership/licence on
the certificate holder.”
18.

Suffice would it be to record that the Lal Dora certificate

merely certifies that the land delineated therein falls in the Village
Abadi. As noted by the learned Appellate Judge it records a specific
disclaimer that it has not to be treated as a document of title in
favour of the holder of the certificate.
19.

The learned Appellate Judge concluded the judgment by

dismissing the appeal.
20.

The question of law framed and as noted above has

therefore to be considered in light of the aforesaid findings of fact

RSA No.24/1985

Page No.9 of 11

concurrently recorded by both courts.
21.

It is thus apparent that the appellant hoodwinked the

learned Judge who framed question of law on 17.9.1985, as if the
learned Additional District Judge accepted appellant being in
possession of the suit land in the year 1975. Indeed, reference to
the year 1975 in the decision of the learned Trial Judge and the
learned Appellate Judge is in relation to Ex.PW-2/1 to Ex.PW-2/4,
being the loan documents submitted by the appellant when he
applied for a loan in the year 1975.

Probably an inappropriate

expression used by the learned Appellate Judge is the cause. The
learned Appellate Judge has recorded :'If in the year 1975 the appellant had been applying
for loan etc. claiming himself to be the owner in
possession of the suit plot, all his rights and interests
ceased as soon as the Custodian of evacuee
Properties allotted this plot in the name of the
respondents and handed over physical possession
thereof to them.'
22.

The word 'if ' makes it clear that the learned Appellate

Judge dealt with the issue on the assumption as recorded in the
subsequent part of the sentence. It needs hardly any explanation
that where a person explains a circumstance or a fact prefacing the
same by the word 'if ', it is explanatory of what would be the
consequence if a fact is assumed to exist.
23.

Thus, looked at from any angle the question of law as

framed requires to be answered by holding that the evidence on

RSA No.24/1985

Page No.10 of 11

record did not establish appellant being in possession of the suit
land. The evidence on record does not establish appellants
possession over the suit land. The evidence on record establishes
not only title but even possession of the defendants on land being
allotted to them by the Custodian of the Evacuee Property.
24.

The documents Ex. DW-1/1 and DW-1/2 are certified

copies of the sale certificate and possession report which were
proved by the Patwari DW-1 on basis of original record.

The

documents have been proved as required by law.
25.

Before concluding I may note that if a person tethers

cattle or places cow dung or farm implements on a vacant land the
said fact does not constitute possession.
26.

I find no merits in the appeal.

27.

Dismissed.

28.

Costs shall follow.

29.

LCR be returned.

24 March, 2008
vg

RSA No.24/1985

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page No.11 of 11

