*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.227/2002
Jaspal Singh & Anr.
through:

........
Appellants
Mr.O.P.Gaggar, Advocate.
VERSUS

Municipal Corporation of Delhi
& Ors.
...... Respondent
through: Mr.O.P.Saxena, Advocate.
DATE OF DECISION:
28.04.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (ORAL)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2.

Order

dated

18.1.2002

passed

by

the

learned

Additional District Judge dismissing application of the appellants
under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 CPC is under challenge.
3.

It is unfortunate that the counsel appearing before the

learned Trial Judge as also the learned Trial Judge, all have
remained extremely non focused.

Though not relevant for the

purposes of the present order a discussion thereon it would be
FAO No.227/02

page 1 of 8

otherwise relevant for the purposes of disposal of the suit and
this is my justification for penning a few words on said aspect of
the matter.
4.

Before dealing with the relevant facts relatable to the

issue or grant or denial of interim injunction it may be noted that
due to the non-focused approach wholly inappropriate issues
have been framed by the learned Trial Judge. The issues framed
are as under:“1. Whether suit is bad for want of notice under
Section 477/478 of DMC Act? OPD-1
2.
Whether the suit is bad for want of notice under
Section 53B of DD Act? OPD-3
3.
Whether Civil Court has jurisdiction to try this suit
in view of preliminary objection No.2 and 3? OPD-1
4.
Whether plaintiff is entitled for the relief of
injunction as prayed for? OPP
5.

Plaintiff's suit for a decree of perpetual injunction

pleaded that plaintiffs are owner in possession of 200 sq. yds. of
land bearing No.G-10 comprised in part of land of khasra
No.74/75, Village Sarai Peepal Thala.

It was pleaded that an

unauthorized colony called Mahindra Park has come up on the
agricultural lands of Village Sarai Peepal Thala and that the same
has been regularized by the MCD vide order No.3/Bldg./HQ/87 on
9.3.1987. It was pleaded that officers of MCD came to the site to
take possession. Pleading that MCD could not take possession of
FAO No.227/02

page 2 of 8

the site as MCD had neither a title nor a right to possess the suit
land, the suit was filed.
6.

Apart from MCD, Director (Slum) as also DDA were

impleaded as defendants.
7.

In the written statement filed by MCD it was stated

that vide award No.102A/72/73 dated 23.3.1977 land comprised
in khasra No.74 and 75 of Village Sarai Peepal Thala was
acquired and that possession thereof was handed over to DDA
which in turn handed over possession of the acquired land to the
Slum and J.J. Department on 27.12.1984. It was further pleaded
that the Slum and J.J. Department was transferred from DDA to
MCD on 1.9.1992. Averments were made that the suit was not
maintainable on account of non service of the statutory notice
upon MCD contemplated by Section 477 and 478 of the DMC Act.
It was further pleaded that possession of the land had to be with
MCD and that the plaintiffs had encroached upon a part of the
land and when construction was noted, the same being without
any sanction, show cause notices were issued to the

plaintiffs

requiring plaintiffs to show cause as to why the unauthorized
constructions be not demolished.
8.

In the written statement filed by DDA it was disclosed

that land comprised in khasra No. 74 and 75 Village Sarai Peepal
Thala were acquired vide award No.102A/72/73 and pursuant
FAO No.227/02

page 3 of 8

thereto vide notification issued under Section 22 of the Delhi
Development Act on 12.9.1978 possession of part of the acquired
land was taken over by the Land Acquisition Collector and
handed over to DDA who in turn gave possession to its Slum and
J.J. Wing and that on 27.12.1984 the Slum and J.J. Wing of DDA
got transferred to MCD. Being relevant it may be noted that in
the written statement DDA specifically averred:Rest of the land of khasra No. 74 min 2 bigha has
not been taken possession by DDA due to built
upon. The suit land is part of the two bigha.”
9.

Why did I preface my order by noting that it is a

meaningless exercise by all?
10.

From the pleadings of the parties it is apparent that 2

bigha of land in respect whereof an award was made was not
taken possession of by the Land Acquisition Collector much less
handed over to DDA. This is apparent from the admissions made
by DDA in the written statement filed by it. Further, 2 bigha of
acquired land was not taken possession of due to it being heavily
built upon.

The further admission of DDA is that the suit land

forms part of the 2 bigha of land, possession whereof was not
taken over.
11.

Since parties were not at variance of MCD acquiring

title under DDA, since DDA admitted not to have taken
possession of the land, much less handed over the same to its
FAO No.227/02

page 4 of 8

Slum and J.J. Wing, question of MCD exercising control over the
land as owner thereof does not arise.
12.

But, apparent from the written statement filed by the

MCD is the fact that officers of MCD, noting unauthorized
construction being carried on, proceeded to take action in
accordance with law.
13.

Under the DMC Act 1957, for areas falling under the

territorial jurisdiction of MCD no person can carry out construction
without a municipal sanction obtained from the Commissioner.
14.

Thus, the only issue on which parties had to fight it out

was whether MCD was entitled to proceed in accordance with law
pertaining to the unauthorized constructions which were noticed
by MCD.
15.

Rightly, MCD pleaded in the written statement that it

proceeded under law i.e. under Section 343 of the DMC Act which
mandates the corporation to proceed against unauthorized
constructions.
16.

For unexplainable reasons the parties went on to

litigate at the stage of interim injunction on the issue of title.
17.

That apart, the manner in which the issues have been

framed is most unsatisfactory.
18.
bad.

I do not understand as to how a suit can be good or
Suits are either maintainable or not maintainable.

FAO No.227/02

Issue

page 5 of 8

No.1 and 2 are framed in a most inappropriate language. Under
Order 6 Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure any condition
precedent, the performance or occurrence of which is intended to
be contested has to be distinctly and specifically stated in the
pleadings.
19.

According to the MCD before a suit can be filed against

MCD a statutory notice under Section 478 of the DMC Act has to
be served.
20.

Thus, the issue which required to be framed, if at all

was:“Whether the suit is not maintainable on account of
non service of a notice under Section 477/478 of the
DMC Act.”
21.

With respect to issue No.3,

the issue

as

framed

does not clearly bring out as to on what count the Civil Suit is not
maintainable. But, from the facts noted hereinabove it becomes
apparent that the maintainability of the suit is being questioned
on

account

of

MCD

taking

action

against

unauthorized

constructions under Section 343 of the DMC Act and a statutory
right of appeal available before a Tribunal constituted under the
Act.
22.

If the Trial Court was a little careful it would have

dawned on the Trial Court that probably the suit was not
maintainable on account of the plaintiff having a statutory
FAO No.227/02

page 6 of 8

remedy to challenge the demolition order by filing an appeal
against the same.

The Trial Court had a limited jurisdiction to

entertain the suit only where the plea in the plaint was that MCD
had proceeded to pass the demolition order without serving upon
the plaintiff a show cause notice.
23.

Courts are faced with docket explosions.

24.

Not only is the larger number of suits being filed

create a problem, but as in the instant case, inappropriately
drafted plaints and responses thereto, coupled with a non
focused approach by the Trial Judges, are compounding the
problem.

Instant suit filed in the year 1995 is continuing to

languish in the records of

the

learned

Trial

Judge due to

nobody realizing as to what are the real issues which need to be
adjudicated upon.
25.

I hope and trust that the learned Trial Judge would

take corrective action in light of the present order and in future
would be careful while framing issues.
26.

Reverting back to the issue of interim injunction, the

learned Trial Judge has declined injunction in view of the written
statement filed by MCD that the land was acquired under an
award.

But, the learned Trial Judge failed to appreciate the

written statement filed by DDA wherein DDA categorically
admitted that 2 bigha of land which was acquired was not taken
FAO No.227/02

page 7 of 8

possession of due to being heavily built upon. The learned Trial
Judge failed to note that MCD was pleading title under DDA and
hence once DDA took a categorical stand that it never took
possession of 2 bigha of land and that the suit land was part of
said 2 bigha of land, that was the end of the matter as regards
title dispute.
27.

Thus, the impugned order is not sustainable.

28.

However,

if

plaintiffs

were

raising

unauthorized

constructions without a municipal sanction, MCD would certainly
be entitled to proceed in accordance with law.
29.

The appeal accordingly stands disposed of deciding

appellant's application under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 CPC by
restraining MCD from taking possession of the suit property
treating title thereof being prima facie not vested in MCD.
However, MCD would be free to take action for demolition if it has
issued

a

show

cause

notice

pertaining

to

unauthorized

constructions and has passed a demolition order, subject to the
order attaining finality.
30.

No costs.

31.

TCR be returned forthwith.

April 28, 2008
mm

FAO No.227/02

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 8 of 8

