*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.221/1997
Net Ram Pal
through his LRs
Smt.Raj Rani & Ors.
........Appellant
through:
LR No.1 and 2 of deceased appellant in person
VERSUS
State & Ors.
........ Respondents
through:
Ms.Gita Dhingra for respondent No.4(b)
Thakur Virender Pratap Singh Charak for
respondent No.4(c)
Respondent No.3(ii) in person
DATE OF DECISION:
25.03.2008
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

CM No.13307/2007
1.

Appellant died on 9.8.2007. His wife, daughter and

son pray to be brought on record as his legal heirs. It is not in
dispute that right to sue survives.
2.

The application is allowed.

3.

Amended memo of parties filed along with the

FAO No.221/97

page 1 of 10

application is taken on record.
FAO No.221/1997
1.

The matter had been called out for the first time

when LR No.1 and LR No.2 of the appellant appeared and made
a request to pass over the matters stating that their counsel
was on the way.

The matter is shown at Serial No.4 in the

admission list. After exhausting the admission list the matter
has been called out for a second time. It is still stated that the
counsel is still on the way.
2.

Learned counsel for the respondents points out that

the instant appeal has remained pending for 11 years and a
frivolous cause is being continued by the appellant. Learned
counsel for the respondents states that counsel's absence is
just a ploy to delay the matter.
3.

It is unfortunate that the counsel has not appeared

in the matter even at the second call notwithstanding courtesy
being extended to the counsel to await his appearance.

LR

No.1 of deceased appellant states that he has spoken twice
with the lawyer and has explained to him the urgency of
reaching the court.
4.

With the assistance of the learned counsel for the

respondent I have gone through the impugned order passed by
the learned Addl. District Judge dismissing Probate Petition
FAO No.221/97

page 2 of 10

No.67/1995 (Old No.164/1984).
5.

Amar Pal Singh was a bachelor. He was the paternal

uncle of Net Ram Pal. Dhan Singh and Puran Singh were his
other two nephews. Amar Pal Singh died on 30.1.1984. Net
Ram Pal predicated a will dated 28.6.1983 alleging that the
said will was the legal and valid testament of his uncle. The
will in question is purportedly registered with the Sub
Registrar.

The endorsements of the Registrar on the will

evidences that it was presented for registration on 28.6.1983
and was returned by the Registrar on 29.6.1983.
6.

2 persons PW-2, Raj Pal and PW-3 Sh. Gandhi are

the stated attesting witnesses to the will.

PW-1, Dr. Ravi K.

Sharma has ostensibly made an endorsement on the will
certifying that the testamentary capacity of the testator who
admittedly was aged approximately 90 years when the will was
executed.
7.

Following reasons have been given by the learned

Probate Court to dismiss the probate petition :(i)

There are material contradictions in the testimony

of PW-2 and PW-3 pertaining to the preparation and execution
of the will.
(ii)

Lack of credibility in the testimony of PW-1 in light

of the testimony of PW-2 and PW-3.
FAO No.221/97

page 3 of 10

(iii)

An admitted earlier will dated 28.6.1983 making an

equitable bequest in favour of all the nephews being altered by
the will propounded which makes a disproportionate bequest
coupled with an active participative role of Net Ram Pal in the
execution of the will.
(iv)

Lastly, there being no positive evidence that the

testator, aged 90 years, was conscious of the contents of the
documents.
8.

Law relating to appreciation of evidence when a will

is propounded is well crystallized.

Where the testator is

illiterate or is physically or mentally infirm, mere evidence of
testator appending his signatures to the document is not
enough. Positive evidence has to come on record to establish
that the testator was conscious of the contents of the
documents.

Further, a disproportionate bequest is a cause

enough for eye brows to be raised, but slightest evidence on
record to establish a conscious disposition is enough to drop
the raised eye brows. The reason is obvious.

A bequest is

normally made by a person to alter the rule of ordinary
succession.

Lastly, where a will purportedly executed by an

old or an infirm person is brought before the court, extra vigil
has to be shown by the court to see and ensure that
satisfactory evidence has been brought on record to establish
FAO No.221/97

page 4 of 10

due execution.
9.

In this regard it is relevant to note the decision

reported as Smt Jaswant Kaur v Smt Amrit Kaur AIR 1977 SC 74
wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has described the nature
and standard of evidence required to prove a Will. In para 10 of
the decision, the Supreme Court has observed as under:“10. There is a long line of decisions bearing on the
nature and standard of evidence required to prove a
will. Those decisions have been reviewed in an
elaborate judgment of this Court in R. Venkatachala
Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma and Ors. [1959]
Supp. 1 S.C.R. 426. The Court, speaking through
Gajendragadkar J., laid down in that case the
following propositions:1. Stated generally, a will has to be
proved like any other document, the test
to be applied being the usual test of the
satisfaction of the prudent mind in such
matters. As in the case of proof of other
documents, so in the case of proof of
wills, one cannot insist on proof with
mathematical certainty.
2. Since Section 63 of the Succession Act
requires a will to be attested, it cannot be
used as evidence until, as required by
Section 63 of the Evidence Act, one
attesting witness at least has been called
for the purpose of proving its execution,
if there be an attesting witness alive and
subject to the process of the court and
capable of giving evidence.
3. Unlike other documents, the will
speaks from the death of the testator and
therefore the maker of the will is never
available for deposing as to the
circumstances in which the will came to
FAO No.221/97

page 5 of 10

be executed. This aspect introduces an
element of solemnity in the decision of
the question whether the document
propounded is proved to be the last will
and testament of the testator. Normally,
the onus which lies on the propounder
can be taken to be discharged on proof of
the essential facts which go into the
making of the will.
4. Cases in which the execution of the
will
is
surrounded
by
suspicious
circumstances stand on a different
footing. A shaky signature, a feeble mind,
an unfair and unjust disposition of
property, the pro-pounder himself taking
a leading part in the making of the will
under which he receives a substantial
benefit and such other circumstances
raise suspicion about the execution of
the will. That suspicion cannot be
removed by the mere assertion of the
pro-pounder that the will bears the
signature of the testator or that the
testator was in a sound and disposing
state of mind and memory at the time
when the will was made, or that those
like the wife and children of the testator
who would normally receive their due
share in his estate were disinherited
because the testator might have had his
own reasons for excluding them. The
presence of suspicious circumstances
makes the initial onus heavier and
therefore,
in
cases
where
the
circumstances
attendant
upon
the
execution of the will excite the suspicion
of the court, the propounder must
remove all legitimate suspicions before
the document can be accepted as the
last will of the testator.
5. It is in connection with wills, the
execution of which is surrounded by
suspicious circumstance that the test of
FAO No.221/97

page 6 of 10

satisfaction of the judicial conscience has
been evolved. That test emphasies that
in determining the question as to
whether an instrument produced before
the court is the last will of the testator,
the court is called upon to decide a
solemn question and by reason of
suspicious circumstances the court has to
be satisfied fully that the will has been
validly executed by the testator.
6. If a caveator alleges fraud, undue
influence, coercion etc. in regard to the
execution of the will, such pleas have to
be proved by him, but even in the
absence of such pleas, the very
circumstances surrounding the execution
of the will may raise a doubt as to
whether the testator was acting of his
own free will. And then it is a part of the
initial onus of the propounder to remove
all reasonable doubts in the matter.”
10.

The will Ex.P-1 was introduced in the testimony for

the first time when PW-1 Dr. Ravi Kr. Sharma entered the
witness box. He stated that he was at his house on 28.6.1983
and that the endorsement on the will mark 'X' was made by
him after physically examining the testator and certifying his
testamentary capacity.

He categorically stated that the will

Ex.P-1 had not been executed when the same was brought to
him to append an endorsement on the will that the testator
was in a sound state of mind. It would be relevant to note that
PW-2 and PW-3 stated that both of them were present along
with the testator in the office of the Sub Registrar. Whereas

FAO No.221/97

page 7 of 10

PW-2 stated that the will was drafted by a typist to whom
instructions were given by the testator, PW-3 stated that a
lawyer had drafted the will. But, both stated that immediately
after the will was prepared it was got registered.
11.

As noted above, the endorsement of the Registrar

shows that the will was presented for registration on 28 th June
and remained with the Registrar on 29th June when post
registration it was returned. The learned Trial Judge has opined
and in my opinion correctly: 'Where was the occasion for every
body to go back to a doctor and obtain his endorsement on the
will certifying that the testator was in a sound testamentary
mind?'
12.

This casts a serious doubt on the testimony of PW-1

when he deposed that when he appended the endorsement on
the will on the point mark 'X' the same was not executed.
Obviously, the question of registration pre-execution does not
arise.
13.

It would also be relevant to note that PW-2, Raj Pal,

in cross-examination stated that endorsement on mark 'X' was
not there when the will was executed and presented for
registration.

It is thus obvious that PW-1 had made the

endorsement after the will was got registered with the SubRegistrar. He obviously did not speak the truth when he stated
FAO No.221/97

page 8 of 10

that he gave the certification on the point mark 'X' before the
will was executed.
14.

As noted here-in-above, PW-2 and PW-3 have

spoken with material contradictions in the manner in which the
will was prepared. One states that a lawyer drafted the will.
The other states that a typist typed the same on being
instructed by the testator. Their testimony lacks credence.
15.

I would be failing if I do not note that the testimony

of the witnesses PW-2 and PW-3 evidenced a participative role
of Net Ram Pal when the will was got registered. It is trite that
where a beneficiary under a will has a major participative role
to play in the execution of the will it is a suspicious
circumstance and unless evidence is brought on record to
dispel the suspicion, the same remains.
16.

The evidence of the objectors has established that

the testator was aged 90 years when the document was
created. The fact that the creator of the document went to a
doctor for a certification that the testator was in a sound mind
itself is evidence to show that even the propounder was
conscious that an issue pertaining to the mental health or the
physical health of the testator could be raised and therefore
managed to obtain an endorsement from a doctor whose
testimony has been found to be of no creditworthiness.
FAO No.221/97

page 9 of 10

17.

Before concluding, I may note that there is a

confusion whether PW-3 was Sh. Gandhi or whether he was
PW-4.

Vice versa there is a confusion whether Net Ram Pal

was PW-3 or PW-4. In the impugned judgments there are over
writings.

However, from the record it is obvious that Shri

Gandhi was actually PW-4 and Shri Net Ram Pal was PW-3.
18.

I find no infirmity in the view taken by the learned

Trial Judge.
19.

The appeal is dismissed.

20.

Costs shall follow.

March 25, 2008

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

vg

FAO No.221/97

page 10 of 10

