IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No.1711/2007
#
$

Smt.Surjit Kaur Chopra

........ Petitioner

VERSUS

State & Anr.

....... Respondents

Bail Application No.1716/2007
#
$

Sh.Harbhajan Singh Chopra
VERSUS

State & Anr.
Present:

%

........ Petitioner
....... Respondents

Mr.K.T.S. Tulsi, Senior Advocate with
Mr.Karan Singh, Mr.Santosh Chaurihar,
Mr.Miraj Kain and Mr.Ravinder Singh,
Advs. for the petitioner.
Mr.Anil Soni for the State.
Mr.K.K.Manan, Mr.Tarun Goomber,
Mr.Rishikesh Choudhary and
Mr.Gaurav Goswami for respondent No.2.

DATE OF DECISION: 21.08.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
FIR No.6/2007 dated 3.1.2007
under Section 498-A/406 IPC
PS Hazrat Nizamuddin.

1.
Chopra

Vide Bail Application No.1711/2007, Smt.Surjit Kaur
seeks

anticipatory

bail.

Vide

Bail

Application

No.1716/2007, Sh.Harbhajan Singh Chopra seeks anticipatory
Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.1 of 17

bail.

The 2 applicants are the mother-in-law and father-in-law

respectively of the complainant, Arti.
2.

At the outset, I must refer my displeasure at the

manner in which Bail Application No.1711/2007 has been drafted
by learned counsel for the petitioner.
3.

The same is a verbatim copy of Bail Application

No.1716/2007.
4.

Use

of

computers

does

not

mean

that

learned

members of the Bar would not apply their mind. Human beings
cannot become computers and start operating themselves by
clicking a mouse.
5.

Little realizing that in Bail Application No.1716/2007

reference to the applicant was made as father of the husband of
the complainant i.e. as father-in-law of the complainant, even
Smt.Surjit Kaur Chopra has been referred to as father of the
husband of the complainant i.e. father-in-law of the complainant.
6.

In the instant case, the misdescription may be trivial.

But in large number of cases I notice that the misdescription is not
trivial, more so, when disputes relate to complaints under Section
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881.

In said cases

description of the accused with reference to the role assigned
becomes relevant. Precious judicial time is wasted in identifying
who is being referred to and in what context reference is being
made pertaining to persons accused of offence and who have filed
quashing petitions challenging the summoning order.

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.2 of 17

7.

It is hoped and expected that learned members of the

Bar would justify them being referred to as 'learned counsel'.
Their being learned must be reflected in their pleadings.
8.

Referring to the facts, why else would a father-in-law

and mother-in-law be seeking bail?

Of course, when their

daughter-in-law has filed a complaint resulting in registration of
FIR under Section 498-A/406/34 IPC.

This has happened in the

instant case.
9.

Since issue of anticipatory bail has to be decided,

reference to the FIR becomes necessary.
10.

Touching

upon

the

salient

features

of

the

FIR,

complainant Arti, stated that she met Jitender Singh Chopra, son
of the applicants in London in July 2004 through common friends.
She states that the two met a number of times and around 3rd
week of September 2004 decided to get married in Dubai on
30.9.2004. She stated that she and Jitender Singh Chopra came
to Delhi and got engaged.

That at the time of engagement

presents worth Rs.15 lakhs were gifted by her parents to the inlaws and relatives of Jitender. That her in-laws gave her jewellery
worth Rs.40 lakhs. That at the asking of her prospective motherin-law, for relatives who were not present at the engagement, her
mother sent additional gifts worth Rs.5 lakhs.

That marriage

between the complainant and Jitender was solemnized at Dubai
on 27.10.2004 as per Hindu rites and customs.

At the time of

marriage her mother, relatives and friends gave gifts worth Rs.70

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.3 of 17

lakhs. Her in-laws gifted her jewellery worth Rs.90 lakhs. Next
day her mother-in-law took away the jewellery for safe keeping.
She and her husband came to Delhi on 3.11.2004 and stayed at
the farm house of the in-laws. The couple celebrated their first
Deepawali. On said function her relatives gave gifts worth Rs.40
lakhs to her husband. That her mother and her relatives gave her
ancestral jewellery worth Rs.1.75 lakhs at said function. That her
in-laws gave her expensive gifts and jewellery worth Rs.80 lakhs.
That when they were at Delhi her brother-in-law tried to force
himself upon her. That she was disgraced by the family of her inlaws who stated that they expected that she would bring a
Mercedes car in her dowry. That when the couple left for their
honeymoon her husband compelled her to drink excessively as
also to indulge in vulgar sexual acts. That since it was her second
marriage she did not speak to anyone.

That on 18.1.2005 she

and her husband went back to Dubai. For said trip her husband
demanded Rs.25 lakhs from her mother.

Her mother arranged

Rs.5 lakhs and gave the same to her husband. That her husband
demanded more money. Her mother paid Rs.15 lakhs. That she
came back to Delhi on 29.12.2005 and in spite of requests to
hand over her jewellery, none was being returned to her. That her
father-in-law wanted her parents to transfer ownership rights of 2
floors of their house in name of her husband. That her mother-inlaw had retained her jewellery.
11.

According to the petitioners the marriage at Dubai was

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.4 of 17

financed by the petitioners. Entire stay of the family of the bride
was paid for by the petitioners. That after the wedding, the newly
wed came to Delhi to celebrate their first Deepawali and went
back to Dubai in February 2005. They took on rent a villa and
resided separately from the petitioners.
separated due to temperamental differences.

That the couple
That their son

sought divorce in London due to irreconcilable differences. That
the FIR was a counter blast to the divorce petition filed by their
son.
12.

Before dealing with the rival submissions on the issue

whether petitioners should be granted anticipatory bail or not, it
has to be noted that petitioners as also their second son i.e. the
brother-in-law of the complainant sought anticipatory bail before
the learned Additional Sessions Judge.

Attempts were made to

compromise the matter and in full and final satisfaction of all
claims of the complainant not only the FIR be withdrawn but the
couple could agree for an amicable settlement.

Order dated

29.3.2007 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge
records that a settlement was arrived at pursuant whereto
complainant would be paid Rs.4 crores in cash and a flat at DLF
Gurgaon worth Rs.60 lacs would be transferred in her name.
Thereafter, the talks broke down inasmuch as offer was reduced
to Rs.2 crores.
13.

Petitioners when charged with attempting to wriggle

out of an agreed settlement explained that their younger son was

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.5 of 17

briefing the counsel and he was receiving instructions from the
husband of the complainant for the reason any payment under
the settlement had to be financed by the husband of the
complainant.

That unfortunately, their son i.e. husband of the

complainant could not firm up his mind and for said reason
settlement failed.
14.

Shri K.T.S. Tulsi, learned senior counsel for the

applicants urged that proceedings for grant of anticipatory bail
cannot be converted into a recovery proceedings. Learned senior
counsel urged that the anxiety of the Court to try and effect a
settlement between the warring couple may be a laudable act but
is alien to the exercise of jurisdiction while deciding an application
seeking grant of anticipatory bail. Learned senior counsel urged
that the well known parameters viz. gravity of the offence,
seriousness of the allegations constituting the offence, possibility
of the accused absconding or threatening witnesses of the
prosecution, inherent probabilities, for and against the accused
are some of the factors which have to be considered by the Court
while deciding an application for grant of anticipatory bail.
15.

Expanding

the

argument,

learned

senior

counsel

submitted that documents annexed as Annexure-C to the
petitions conclusively establish that the petitioners paid the entire
bill at Dubai when marriage took place.
Annexure-D,

learned

senior

counsel

Drawing attention to

urged

that

the

same

evidences that the newly married couple set up separate

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.6 of 17

residence in Dubai.

As regards the petitioners, learned senior

counsel urged that they were residents of Delhi. Their son was
settled abroad. Except for participating in the joyous occasion of
the marriage of their son and showering their blessings and gifts
upon the newly wed as also to finance the marriage, the two had
no role to play in the matrimonial life of the couple.

Learned

senior counsel further urged that allegations in the FIR are alien to
the social norms of the society from which complainant, her family
and the petitioners come from. Learned senior counsel explained
that main items are gifted to the couple at the time of their
marriage. Thereafter, as and when festive occasions occur, small
gifts are exchanged.

Learned senior counsel urged that it was

unbelievable that at the time of Deepawali celebrations after the
couple got married, complainant's family members would gift to
their daughter and her in-laws, gifts worth Rs.1.75 crores.
Learned senior counsel further submitted that the allegations of
dowry demand are against the husband i.e. the son of the
petitioners. Allegations of mental and physical cruelty are against
the husband save and except a vague allegation that on one
occasion father-in-law threw a plate at the complainant and
abused her as a bitch. Learned senior counsel stated that the two
allegations pertaining to dowry demand against the father-in-law
viz that he expected his daughter-in-law to bring a Mercedes car
and a demand for ownership rights of 2 floors in her parent's
house at Sunder Nagar are false.

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Learned senior counsel

Pg.No.7 of 17

submitted that the gravement of the allegation against the
mother-in-law

is

that

she

retained

the

jewellery

of

the

complainant.
16.

Learned senior counsel urged that in view of the fact

that the complainant and her husband had set up their
matrimonial house at Dubai, a residence separate from that of the
petitioners, considering the social background of the family of the
complainant as also the petitioners it was unbelievable that the
complainant would have handed over her jewellery to her motherin-law.
17.

Fulcrum of opposition by learned counsel for the

complainant centered around the orders passed by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge regarding a settlement between the
parties from which petitioners back tracked.

Learned counsel

submitted

evidenced

that

the

said

settlement

the

acknowledgment by the petitioners that the complainant had to
be recompensed. Learned counsel submitted that the jewellery
articles of the complainant have yet to be recovered.

Counsel

submitted that the complainants have started dissipating their
assets. Thus, counsel urged that no case is made out to grant
anticipatory bail to the petitioners.
18.

It is not in dispute that the instant marriage was the

second marriage of both parties. Thus, both would be presumed
to be aware of not only their matrimonial obligations but even the
matrimonial laws. Judicial authorities are replete with a caution

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.8 of 17

by the Courts that the unfortunate tendency to rope in all family
members of the in-laws is a growing trend which has two side
effects. Firstly, innocent persons suffer the trauma of a criminal
prosecution and secondly, even the accused get acquitted for the
reason, false implication of innocent persons is followed by
presentation of fabricated evidence before the Court.

So

inextricably interwoven is truth with lies that truth cannot be
segregated from lies resulting in benefit of doubt being given
even to the accused persons.
19.

More often than not, pertaining to dowry, Courts are

faced with a dilemma inasmuch as tax avoidance is the norm in
India. Huge volume of black money in circulation finds expression
in ostentatious marriages. But when called upon to prove that the
family had enough assets to justify the stated gifts gifted at the
time of marriage, family members of the girl side have no
answers.

They cannot establish the means to justify their

capacity to shower gifts worth crores.
20.

In

the

instant

case,

before

the

in-laws

of

the

complainant can be called upon to account for the gifts given by
the parents of the girl, the parents of the girl would have to
establish their means and their capacity to gift items worth Rs.3
crores to their daughter and her in-laws.
21.

As noted above, gravement of the allegations are

directed principally against the husband.

No doubt, there is

reference against the petitioners pertaining to dowry demand and

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.9 of 17

retention of jewellery, but, as noted above, allegations of dowry
demand are against the father-in-law and not against the motherin-law.

Vice versa, allegations pertaining to retention of the

jewellery of the complainant is against the mother-in-law and not
the father-in-law. Thus, if at all, father-in-law may be answerable
to a charge under Section 498-A IPC. If at all, mother-in-law may
be answerable for a charge under Section 406 IPC.
22.

Qua the mother-in-law a circumstance which stands out

is that her son and her daughter-in-law had a separate residence
at Dubai. The couple was married at Dubai. Whatever may be
the jewellery gifted to the complainant at the time of marriage,
there is no material on record that when she along with her
husband came to India they made a declaration to the Customs
Authority that personal jewellery worth crores was being brought
by her i.e. the complainant to India. Greater probability would be
that either jewellery of the value alleged to be gifted to her by the
complainant was not gifted to her, or if gifted, the same was in
her custody at Dubai.
23.

Pertaining to the father-in-law I find that the allegations

are general. It is not stated in the complaint that because fatherin-law desired that the complainant should bring a Mercedes car
he i.e. the father-in-law took vengeance against the complainant.
What is stated in the FIR is that the father-in-law commented that
he expected that the complainant would bring as part of dowry a
Mercedes car.

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.10 of 17

24.

Prima facie, it is one thing to have a desire and express

the same. It is altogether another thing to raise a demand as per
the desire.
25.

Allegation of mental cruelty against the father-in-law

pertains to an alleged incident when according to the complainant
she served cold food to her father-in-law.

Prima facie, said

allegation of cruelty does not relate to a dowry demand.
26.

The only other allegation pertaining to transfer of 2

floors in the house of the complainant's parents at Sunder Nagar
is without any particulars i.e. the day or the month when said
demand was raised.
27.

In the report published as 2006 (6) SCC 736 Indian Oil

Corporation vs. NEPC India Ltd. in para 13 the Hon'ble Supreme
Court lamented as under:-

28.

“13.
While on this issue, it is necessary to take
notice of a growing tendency in business circles to
convert purely civil disputes into criminal cases. This is
obviously on account of a prevalent impression that civil
law remedies are time consuming and do not adequately
protect the interests o lenders/creditors.
Such a
tendency is seen in several family disputes also, leading
to irretrievable breakdown of marriages/families. There is
also an impression that if a person could somehow be
entangled in a criminal prosecution, there is a likelihood
of imminent settlement. Any effort to settle civil disputes
and claims, which do not involve any criminal offence, by
applying pressure through criminal prosecution should be
deprecated and discouraged.”
In para 19 of the report published as (2005) 6 SCC 281

Sushil Kumar Sharma vs. Union of India, the Supreme Court
observed as under:“19.
The object of the provision is prevention of the
dowry menace. But as has been rightly contended by the
Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.11 of 17

petitioner many instances have come to light where the
complaints are not bona fide and have been filed with
oblique motive. In such cases acquittal of the accused
does not in all cases wipe out the ignominy suffered
during and prior to the trial. Sometimes adverse media
coverage adds to the misery. The question, therefore, is
what remedial measures can be taken to prevent abuse
of the well-intentional provision. Merely because the
provision is constitutional and intra vires, does not give a
licence to unscrupulous persons to wreak personal
vendetta or unleash harassment.
It may, therefore,
become necessary for the legislature to find out ways
how the makers of frivolous complaints or allegations can
be appropriately dealt with. Till then the courts have to
take care of the situation within the existing framework.
As noted above the object is to strike a the roots of dowry
menace. But by misuse of the provision a nw legal
terrorism can be unleashed. The provision is intended to
be used as a shield and not as an assassin's weapon. If
the cry of “wolf” is made too often as a prank, assistance
and protection may not be available when the actual
“wolf” appears. There is no question of the investigating
agency and courts casually dealing with the allegations.
They cannot follow any straitjacket formula in the matters
relating to dowry tortures, deaths and cruelty. It cannot
be lost sight of that the ultimate objective of every legal
system is to arrive at the truth, punish the guilty and
protect the innocent.
There is no scope for any
preconceived notion or view. It is strenuously argued by
the petitioner that the investigating agencies and the
courts start with the presumptions that the investigating
agencies and the courts start with the presumptions that
the accused persons are guilty and that the complainant
is speaking the truth. This is too wide and generalized a
statement. Certain statutory presumptions are drawn
which again are rebuttable. It is to be noted that the role
of the investigating agencies and the courts is that of a
watchdog and not of a bloodhound. It should be their
effort to see that an innocent person is not made to suffer
on account of unfounded, baseless and malicious
allegations. It is equally undisputable that in many cases
no direct evidence is available and the courts have to act
on circumstantial evidence. While dealing with such
cases, the law laid down relating to circumstantial
evidence has to be kept in view.”
29.

In

the

decision

dated

23.2.2007

in

Crl.M.C.

No.7262/2006 Neera Singh vs. State & Ors. a learned Single Judge

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.12 of 17

of this Court had pains to note as under:“4.
Now-a-days, exorbitant claims are made about
the amount spent on marriage and other ceremonies and
on dowry and gifts. In some cases claim is made of
spending crores of rupees on dowry without disclosing
the source of income and how funds flowed. I consider
time has come that courts should insist upon disclosing
source of such funds and verification of income from tax
returns and police should insist upon the compliance of
the Rules under Dowry Prohibition Act and should not
entertain any complaint, if the rules have not been
complied with.
Rule 2 of the Dowry Prohibition
(Maintenance of List of Presents to the Bride and
Bridegroom) Rules, 1985 reads as under:
2.
RULES IN ACCORDANCE WITH WHICH LISTS OF
PRESENTS ARE TO BE MAINTAINED.- (1) The list of
presents which are given at the time of the
marriage to the bride shall be maintained by the
bride.
(2) The list of presents which are given at the
time of the marriage to the bridegroom shall be
maintained by the bridegroom.
(3) Every list of presents referred to in Sub-rule
(2)(a) shall be prepared at the time of the
marriage or as soon as possible after the
marriage;
(b)

shall be in writing;

(c)

shall contain:

(i)

a brief description of each present;

(ii)

the approximate value of the present;

(iii) the name of the person who has given
the present; and
(iv) where the person giving the present is
related to the bride or bridegroom, a
description of such relationship.
(d) shall be signed by both the brides and the
bridegroom.

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.13 of 17

30.

5.
The Metropolitan Magistrate should take
cognizance of the offence under the Act in respect of the
offence of giving dowry whenever allegations are made
that dowry was given as a consideration of marriage,
after demand. Courts should also insist upon compliance
with the rules framed under the Act and if rules are not
complied with, an adverse inference should be drawn. If
huge cash amounts are alleged to be given at the time of
marriage which are not accounted anywhere, such cash
transactions should be brought to the notice of the
Income Tax Department by the Court so that source of
income is verified and the person is brought to law. It is
only because the Courts are not insisting upon
compliance with the relevant provisions of law while
entertaining such complaints and action is taken merely
on the statements of the complainant, without any
verification that a large number of false complaints are
pouring in.”
Admittedly, neither complainant nor her family

members have complied with Rule 2 of the Dowry Prohibition
(Maintenance of List of Presents to the Bride and Bridegroom)
Rules 1985.
31.

Since allegations in the complaint are to the effect that

jewellery and gifts worth crores were given by the parents and
relatives of the complainant, instant case would require a prior
investigation by the investigating officer before petitioners are
made to account for the gifts, whether at all the family of the
complainant had the means to shower gifts of such magnitude.
32.

I note that the husband of the complainant is paying to

her a monthly maintenance of Rs.1 lakh.
33.

Learned counsel for the State did not urge that the

petitioners are not cooperating with the IO.
34.

The special circumstances of the case may be

summarized:-

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.14 of 17

(a)

Marriage is a love marriage and took place at Dubai.
There is prima facie evidence that marriage expenses
were borne by the in-laws of the complainant.

(b)

The young couple took up separate residence at Dubai
and stayed their after the marriage till they came to
India to celebrate their first Deepawali festival.

The

complainant stayed with her in-laws for about 10 days.
The couple departed for their honeymoon.
(c)

Allegations in the FIR are primarily directed against the
husband.

Prima facie it appears to be a case of

temperamental difference between the husband and
the wife.
(d)

There are no allegations of dowry demand against the
mother-in-law.

Allegation against her is of retaining

the jewellery gifted by her parents as stated by the
complainant to be in the value of over Rs.2 crores.
There is no evidence that jewellery of such magnitude
was gifted.
(e)

Allegations of dowry demand against the father-in-law
only relate to transfer of ownership rights of 2 floors in
a property at Sunder Nagar in the name of the
husband of the complainant.

The allegation is of a

general nature. The time, date and month of demand
has not been specified.
(f)

The couple separated at Dubai. The petitioners did not

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.15 of 17

have a joint residence with the complainant and thus
could not be in possession of her jewellery.
35.

Case is thus made to admit petitioners to anticipatory

bail. While so directing, I am conscious of the failed compromise
talks before the learned Additional Sessions Judge but I cannot
ignore the fact that proceedings for bail cannot be converted into
recovery proceedings.

I find prima facie justification of the

petitioners that their younger son was briefing the counsel and
was informing the counsel what was being consented to by the
son of the petitioners. If the son of the petitioners back tracks
from his commitment, petitioners cannot be faulted with.
36.

I additionally note that the complainant is being paid a

monthly maintenance of Rs.1 lakh by her husband.
37.

Petition stands disposed of directing that on the

petitioners surrendering their passport to the Investigating Officer
and

cooperating

at

the inquiry

to

be

conducted

by

the

Investigating Officer, in the event of the petitioners being arrested
by the IO, the petitioners would be released on bail by the IO on
the petitioners furnishing a personal bond of Rs.1,00,000/- each
with one surety each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
IO in the above captioned FIR.
38.

Needless to state, the petitioners would join the

investigation as and when required by the IO.
39.

Copy of the order be supplied dasti to learned counsel

for the petitioners.

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

Pg.No.16 of 17

21st August, 2007
dk

Bail Appl. Nos.1711/07 & 1716/07

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Pg.No.17 of 17

