*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.223/1996
M/s Jai Shree Electrical Store
........Appellant
through:
Mr. M.L.Bhargava, Advocate
VERSUS
UOI
through:

........ Respondent
Mr. R.C.Nangia, Advocate
RESERVED ON:
24.4.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
28.4.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

This

appeal

is

directed

against

the

order

dated

12.3.1996 passed by the learned Railway Claims Tribunal, Delhi.
2.

The appellant M/s. Jai Shree Electric Stores filed a claim

petition against the respondent claiming a compensation of
Rs.16,548/-.
3.

The case set up by the appellant was that on 16.12.1989

a consignment comprising of 2 packages containing PVC wire were
entrusted to the respondent for transport from Delhi to Varanasi.
FAO No.223/2006

Page No.1 of 6

That the consignment was booked under Parcel Way Bill (PWB)
No.662337. That it was the endorsed consignee of the consignment
in question. That due to gross negligence and misconduct of the
employees of the respondent, the respondent failed to deliver the
consignment at the destination station.
4.

Defence set up by the respondent was that the

appellant has no locus standi to maintain the present action for the
reason appellant is neither consignor nor consignee of the
consignment in question.
5.

After considering evidence led by the parties in light of

their versions vide impugned order dated 12.3.1996 the learned
Tribunal has held that the appellant has been able to establish that
it was the endorsed consignee of the consignment in question but
has failed to establish that it had paid valuable consideration in
respect of the consignment.

It has been held that an endorsed

consignee can maintain an action for damages in his own right only
when he has paid valuable consideration for the consignment. That
since the appellant has not established that it had paid valuable
consideration for the consignment it has no right to maintain the
present action. The claim application filed by the appellant was thus
dismissed by the Tribunal.
6.

Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that he

does not dispute the proposition of law applied by the Tribunal that

FAO No.223/2006

Page No.2 of 6

an endorsed consignee can maintain an action for damages only
when it had paid valuable consideration for the consignment.
Learned counsel argued that the appellant had successfully
established by leading positive evidence that it had paid valuable
consideration in respect of the consignment in question.
7.

Thus the controversy in the present appeal turns on the

issue whether the appellant had established that it had paid
valuable consideration for the consignment in question.
8.

To establish that the appellant was an endorsed

consignee for a valuable consideration, the appellant examined one
Mr.Raj Kumar,AW-1 who claimed to be a partner of the appellant
firm. He deposed that on 16.12.89 he purchased the consignment in
question from M/s Suraj Traders for a sum of Rs.16,548/-. He proved
a bill Ex.RW-1/1 to evidence the purchase.

He stated that after

purchasing the goods he went to Shahdra City Booking Agency
where he entrusted the goods to the respondent and made
endorsement at the rear of the PWB in favour of the appellant.
(Meaning thereby, that Raj Kumar was the consignor and the
appellant was the endorsed consignee). He stated that he had also
made the entries pertaining to the payment of the consignment in
the cash book and ledger book of the appellant (Relevant portions of
the cash book and ledger book were produced on record).
9.

Learned Tribunal disbelieved the testimony of the

FAO No.223/2006

Page No.3 of 6

witness of the appellant that he had made payment for purchasing
the consignment on the behalf of the appellant. It has been held
that the bill dated 16.12.89, Ex.RW1/1, purportedly issued by the
M/s Surjit Traders is not a genuine document evidencing the sale of
the goods consigned.

Reasons noted by the Tribunal for so

disbelieving are as under:I

The bill Ex.RW1/1 contains the PWB number and the

weight of the consignment. This is contrary to the testimony of the
witness of the appellant as he had deposed that he had first
purchased the consignment and then entrusted the same to the
respondent. How can a document contain the details of another
document which was not in existence at the time of the preparation
of a document remains a mystery?
II

J.B.Mal, Claims Inspector, Railways, RW-1 had deposed

that he was assigned the task of investigating the genuineness of
the bill Ex.RW1/1 and he deposed that the shop 'M/s Surjit Traders'
did not exist at the address written on the bill Ex.RW1/1.
III

No documents were produced by the appellant to

establish that Mr.Raj Kumar was a partner in the appellant firm.
IV

Neither

any

employee

of

M/s

Surjit

Traders

was

examined nor any documents of M/s Surjit Traders such as accounts
books etc. were summoned/produced by the appellant to establish
that AW-1 had purchased the consignment from M/s Surjit Traders

FAO No.223/2006

Page No.4 of 6

on behalf of the appellant.
V

Testimony of AW-1 who is an interested witness as also

self-serving account books produced by the appellant does not
inspire any evidence.
10.

Learned counsel for the appellant had contended that

the Tribunal had committed a grave error by holding that the
account

books

produced

by

the

appellant

are

self-serving

documents and thus ignoring the same.
11.

It is settled law that an appellate court cannot re-

appreciate the evidence unless the court of first instance had
ignored a material evidence/circumstance or the conclusions drawn
by the court of first instance from the evidence are perverse in
nature.
12.

Learned counsel for the appellant has not pointed any

evidence/circumstance which was ignored by the Tribunal while
appreciating the evidence.
13.

Conclusions drawn by the Tribunal from evidence I to IV

noted in para 9 above are perfectly sound. Indeed the fact that in
the bill Ex.RW-1/1 the PWB No. (Parcel Way Bill) was mentioned
evidences that the bill was created much after the goods were
entrusted to railway authorities for only then the maker of the bill
referred to PWB No. on the bill.
14.

I find no infirmity in the impugned order.

FAO No.223/2006

Page No.5 of 6

15.

The appeal is dismissed.

16.

No costs.

April 28,2008
sl

FAO No.223/2006

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.6 of 6

