IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) No.864/2007
#
!

Sh. Abhishek Khanna
....... Petitioner
through: Mr.Madan Lal Sharma, Advocate
and Mr.Varun Nischal, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^
%

*
1.

Smt. Ritika Seth
through:

....... Respondent
Mr.Munish Tyagi, Advocate

DATE OF DECISION: 26-11-2007
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y
To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Vide the present petition petitioner(husband) has

challenged the order dated 21.5.2007 passed by the learned
Matrimonial Judge deciding respondent (wife) application under
Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, granting interim monthly
maintenance of Rs.10,000/- with effect from the date of her
application. Litigation expenses in sum of Rs.25,000/- have been
awarded in addition.
2.

Parties were married as per Hindu rites and custom on

26.1.04. The marriage turned sour. Petitioner filed a petition
page 1 of 8

under Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act seeking
dissolution of the marriage. During pendency of the said petition,
the respondent filed an application under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act for interim maintenance.
3.

Seeking interim maintenance respondent stated that

she has no source of income.
4.

In support of her claim respondent pleaded that the

petitioner was having a monthly income of Rs.1,20,000/-. She
further stated that the petitioner was having an income from the
following sources:i.

Petitioner is a partner in a Leather Factory being run at

D-1/17, Raghu Nagar, Syndicate Enclave, Dabri Mor, Janakpuri,
New-Delhi.
ii.

Petitioner is a partner in a firm carrying its business

under the name and style of 'Maya Express”.
iii.

Petitioner is a partner in a firm engaged in the

business of sale and purchase of cars.
iv.

Petitioner is a shareholder in the business of his father

of the construction of housing societies. The income of the
petitioner from the said business is Rs.75,000/- per month.
v.

Petitioner is the co-owner of the first floor of the

property bearing Municipal No.A-103, Derawal Nagar, Delhi and
having a rental income of Rs.20,000/- from the said property. It
page 2 of 8

was further stated in the application that the second floor of the
aforesaid property was purchased in the joint name of respondent
and her father-in-law and that entire sale consideration of Rs.40
lakhs was paid by father of the respondent.
5.

Opposing the application, petitioner stated that he is

unemployed and has no source of income and that he is totally
dependent on his father. He further pleaded that the respondent
is engaged in the business of jewelery designing and her income
from the said business is Rs.2 lakhs per annum. In support
whereof, he filed two income tax returns purported to have been
filed by the respondent for the assessment years 2001-02 and
2003-04 respectively.
6.

After noting the rival versions, vide order dated

21.5.07 the learned Matrimonial Judge has granted monthly
maintenance in sum of Rs.10,000/- in favour of the respondent.
7.

While deciding the application, the learned Matrimonial

Judge has noted following two facts which according to the
learned Judge suggest that the petitioner had tried to conceal his
true income from the Court.
i.

A receipt filed by the respondent evidencing that the

petitioner had paid a sum of Rs.5,000/- towards premium of some
policy. The learned Judge has noted that the petitioner has not
been able to explain as to how he paid a sum of Rs.5,000/- if he is
page 3 of 8

unemployed and earning nothing.
ii.

Petitioner had admitted that the second floor of the

property bearing Municipal No.A-103, Derawal Nagar, Delhi was
purchased in the joint name of the respondent and his father but
has further stated that his father paid the sale entire sale
consideration. Learned Judge has noted that the petitioner has
pleaded that his father is a retired person and pension in sum of
Rs.7,000/- is his only source of income. Learned Judge has further
noted that the petitioner has not explained as to how his father
was able to purchase a property in a posh colony of North Delhi.
8.

As regards the income tax returns purported to have

been filed by the respondent, the learned Matrimonial Judge has
opined that the said income tax returns pertain to period prior to
respondent's marriage and thus do not show that respondent is
engaged in the business of jewelry designing even after her
marriage.
9.

Assailing the order dated 21.5.07, the present petition

has been filed invoking the remedy provided under Article 227 of
the Constitution of India.
10.

While considering a claim for interim maintenance, it is

important to insure that the maintenance awarded to the
applicant is sufficient to enable the applicant to live in somewhat
the same degree of comfort as in the matrimonial home, but it
page 4 of 8

should not be so exorbitant that the non applicant is unable to
pay.
11.

Maintenance awarded cannot be punitive.

It should

aid the applicant to live in a similar life style she/he enjoyed in
the matrimonial home. It should not expose the non applicant to
unjust contempt or other coercive proceedings.

On the other

hand, maintenance should not be so low so as to make the order
meaningless.
12.

As opined in various judicial decisions it is usual

tendency to not truthfully disclose one's income when a dispute
between husband and wife surfaces. For self employed persons or
persons employed in the unorganized sector, truthful income
never surfaces. Tax avoidance is the norm. Tax compliance is
the exception in this country. Therefore, in determining interim
maintenance, there cannot be mathematical exactitude.

The

court has to take a general view.
13.

Unfortunately in India people buy properties benami in

somebody's else name. As in the instant case the second floor of
the property bearing Municipal No.A-103, Derawal Nagar, Delhi
was purchased in the joint name of the father of the petitioner
and

the

respondent

none

of

whom

had

paid

the

sale

consideration.
14.

As held in the decision dated 18.04.07 in CM(M)
page 5 of 8

No.40/05 titled as 'Bharat Hegde v Saroj Hegde', the following are
the guiding factors which have to be taken into consideration
while adjudicating claims under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage
Act:1.

Status of the parties.

2.

Reasonable wants of the claimant.

3.
The independent income and property of the
claimant.
4.
The number of persons, the non applicant
has to maintain.
5.
The amount should aid the applicant to live
in a similar life style as he/she enjoyed in the
matrimonial home.
6.

Non-applicant's liabilities, if any.

7.
Provisions for food, clothing, shelter,
education, medical attendance and treatment etc.
of the applicant.
8.

Payment capacity of the non applicant.

9.
Some guess work is not ruled out while
estimating the income of the non applicant when
all the sources or correct sources are not
disclosed.
10. The non applicant to defray the cost of
litigation.

15.

11. The amount awarded u/s. 125 Cr.PC is
adjustable against the amount awarded u/s. 24 of
the Act.”
The income of an individual can be inferred from the

social status enjoyed by him.
16.

Marriage is a religious function but in modern times
page 6 of 8

has become a social event. The manner in which parties marry,
the plan and number of functions held gives good guidance about
the social status of an individual.
17.

A perusal of the invitation card of the marriage of the

parties shows that the sagan ceremony of the parties was held at
the Convention Hall, Ashoka Hotel, mehndi ceremony was held at
the farmhouse Invitation Ceremonial, Delhi, wedding ceremony
was held at the farmhouse Woodstock Garden, Vasant Kunj and
reception was held at the farmhouse Invitation Green, Ali Pur,
Delhi.
18.

One of the venue is a five star hotel and remaining 3

venues are farmhouses of five star standard.
19.

It can reasonably be estimated that parties must have

spent between Rs.8-10 lakhs in each function.
20.

In the light of the fact that the parties had spent

atleast Rs.8-10 lakhs on food, beverages and entertainment
expenses on each of the 4 functions, it is difficult to believe that
the petitioner does not have the requisite means to support his
wife a monthly maintenance of Rs.10,000/-.
21.

As regards the respondent, there is no proof of she

having any income after her marriage.
22.

I find no merits in the petition.

23.

No costs.
page 7 of 8

November 26, 2007
sl

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

page 8 of 8

