IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
CRL.M.C.No.4255/2006
#
!

M.P.Goenka

........

$
^

Inspector, Custom

#
!

Anil Jatia

$
^

Inspector, Custom

Petitioner

........

Respondent

VERSUS

CRL.M.C.No.6404/2006
........

Petitioner

........

Respondent

VERSUS

through:

%

Mr. Rakesh Tikku, Advocate
for the petitioner
Mr. Satish Aggarwal, Advocate
for the respondent

DATE OF DECISION: 21.08.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Petitioners are co-accused in a complaint filed by Sh.

Chander Pal, Inspector Preventive Custom, New Delhi under
Section 135 (1) (b) of the Customs Act 1962.
2.

In a nut shell, gravement of the allegations in the

complaint against the petitioners and other co-accused are that
premises of M/s. Prakash Transport were searched which resulted

Crl.M.C. No.4255/06 & 6404/06

Page No.1 of 6

in seizure of imported fabric, in respect whereof documents of
legal import were not available. Names surfaced of Annapoorna
Textiles and Aaditya Trading Company the stated sole proprietory
firms of Anil Jatia and Mahabir Prasad the petitioners of Crl.
M.C.Nos. 4255/2006 and 6404/2006 respectively.

It is alleged

that out of 206 bails in the godown, 136 bails were accounted for
under bill of entry 70 bails could not be accounted for. According
to the complaint the goods in the godown were stated by the
transporter to be belonging to Aaditya Trading Company. It was
further stated that Annapoorna Textiles, the sole proprietory firm
of Anil Jatia had acted as the purported importer.
3.

Petitioners filed applications praying that they should

be discharged for the reason in the adjudication proceedings,
adjudication order dated 4.5.2000 passed by the Commissioner
Custom of ordering confiscation of the seized goods was set aside
by CEGAT vide order dated 2.7.2003.
4.

Vide impugned order dated 24.4.2006 learned Trial

Judge has held that in view of the latest pronouncement on the
issue by the Supreme Court in Writ Petition (Criminal) No.
165/2004

Standard

Chartered

Bank

Vs.

Directorate

of

Enforcement decided on 24.2.2006, criminal proceedings had to
be proceeded further.
5.

Arguments of the petitioners before the learned MM

was that since petitioners were discharged in the adjudication
proceedings, on the same cause they could not be prosecuted

Crl.M.C. No.4255/06 & 6404/06

Page No.2 of 6

before a criminal court.
6.
each

Learned counsel for the parties are not at variance with
other,

namely

that,

it

is

permissible

to

proceed

departmentally under the Customs Act if a violation is alleged and
additionally to proceed under the penal law. However, the point
of variance is, whereas petitioners state that if adjudicatory
proceedings result in a discharge, criminal proceedings have to
be dropped. Respondent urges that it is only when departmental
proceedings have resulted in matter being dropped as evidence
on record requires no confiscatory order to be passed would alone
criminal proceedings be liable to be quashed for the reason, if on
the same evidence a lower standard of proof has not been
achieved, it would be an exercise

in futility to continue with

proceedings where a higher standard of proof has to be reached.
6.

The decision of the Supreme Court in Standard

Chartered Bank's case was considered and interpreted by a
learned Single Judge of this court in the decision reported as Sunil
Gulati Vs. R.K.Vohra 2007 (1) JCC 220.
7.

The learned Single Judge, after noticing various

judgments referred to in Standard Chartered Bank's case, opined
that though seemingly there was a facial conflict in the different
strands of reasoning, yet on deeper analysis, it was apparent that
it was one thing to say that two proceedings could be maintained
as a matter of law, but entirely another to say that after suffering
an adjudication order on the same facts, the department or the

Crl.M.C. No.4255/06 & 6404/06

Page No.3 of 6

prosecuting agency ought not to be allowed to prosecute the
accused having failed to establish the basic and necessary facts.
8.

Suffice would it be to record that the issue is not about

existence of a power to prosecute but is one relating to the
foundational facts which would justify prosecution.
9.

In Sunil Gulati's case, legal position was summarized

as under:“In fact, various cases of the Supreme Court, not
whereof is taken above, deal with different
situations. The principles which can be culled out
from the aforesaid judgments, when all these
judgments are read out harmoniously, would be
the following:
1.
On the same violation alleged against a
person, if adjudication proceedings as well as
criminal proceedings are permissible, both can be
initiated simultaneously. For initiating criminal
proceedings one does not have to wait for the
outcome of the adjudication proceedings as the
two proceedings are independent in nature.
2.
The findings in the departmental proceedings
would not amount to res-judicata and initiation of
criminal proceedings in these circumstances can
be treated as double jeoparty as they are not in
the nature of “prosecution”.
3.
In case adjudication proceedings are decided
against a person who is facing prosecution as well
and the Tribunal has also upheld the findings of
the adjudicators/assessing authority, that would
have no bearing on the criminal proceedings and
the criminal proceedings are to be determined on
its own merits in accordance with law, uninhibited
by the findings of the Tribunal. It is because of the
reason that in so far as criminal action is
concerned, it has to be proved as per the strict
standards fixed for criminal cases before the
criminal court by producing necessary evidence.
4.
In case converse situation namely where the
accused persons are exonerated by the competent
Crl.M.C. No.4255/06 & 6404/06

Page No.4 of 6

10.

authorities/Tribunal in adjudication proceedings,
one will have to see that reasons for such
exoneration to determine whether these criminal
proceedings could still continue.
If the
exoneration in departmental adjudication is on the
technical ground or by giving benefit of doubt and
not on merits or the adjudication proceedings were
on different facts, it would have not bearing on
criminal proceedings. If, on the other hand, the
exoneration in the adjudication proceedings is on
merits and it is found that allegations are not
substantiated at all and the concerned person(s)
is/are innocent, and the criminal prosecution is
also on the same set of facts and circumstances,
the criminal prosecution cannot be allowed to
continue.
The reason is obvious criminal
complaint is filed by the departmental authorities
alleging violation/contravention of the provisions
of the Act on the part of the accused person.
However,
if
the
departmental
authorities
themselves, in adjudication proceedings, record a
categorical and unambiguous finding that there is
no such contravention of the provisions of the Act,
it would be unjust for such departmental
authorities to continue with the criminal complaint
and say that there is sufficient evidence to foist
the the accused persons with criminal liability
when it is stated in the departmental proceedings
that ex-facie there is no such violation.
The
yardstick would, therefore, be to see as to whether
charges in the departmental proceedings as well
as criminal complaint are identical and the
exoneration of the concerned persons in the
departmental proceedings is on merits holding
that there is no contravention of the provisions of
any act.”
A perusal of the order passed by CEGAT setting aside

the adjudication order reveals that the Tribunal has held that due
to violation of principles of natural justice, order of confiscation
could not be sustained. Thereafter, merits of the controversy has
been considered.

Learned counsel for the petitioner concedes

that inextracibly linked in said discussion is the non-admissibility
of certain evidence on the ground that it was procured behind the

Crl.M.C. No.4255/06 & 6404/06

Page No.5 of 6

back of the accused.
11.

Unfortunately, the learned Metropolitan Magistrate has

short circuited the issue by holding that in view of the decision of
the Supreme Court in Standard Chartered Bank's case, the
complaint was maintainable.
12.

Learned Metropolitan Magistrate failed to consider that

the issue was not of the power to file a complaint, the issue was
whether in view of the order passed by CEGAT, any useful
purpose would be served in continuing with the criminal
prosecution.
13.

The learned Metropolitan Magistrate was thus obliged

to refer to the material dealt with by the CEGAT and consider
whether the complaint was predicated on the same material or
whether the order passed by CEGAT dealt with the totality of the
evidence and resulted in a clean discharge.
14.

Since the learned Metropolitan Magistrate has not

dealt with the issue as was required to be dealt with as per law, I
quash the impugned order dated 24.4.2006 and restore the
applications filed by the petitioners seeking discharge.
15.

I direct the learned Metropolitan Magistrate to redecide

the application seeking guidance from the decision of the learned
Single Judge of this court in Sunil Gupta's case (supra).
16.

No costs.

August 21, 2007
mm
Crl.M.C. No.4255/06 & 6404/06

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Page No.6 of 6

