IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No. 388-89/2005
#
!

Mr. Maman Chand & Anr.
........
Appellants
through:
Mr. S.K.Rout, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Deputy Labour Commissioner & Anr.........
Respondents
through:
Mr. P.D.Gupta, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 29.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Appellants are aggrieved by the order dated 4.10.05

passed by the Commissioner Workman's Compensation, Delhi.
2.

Vide

impugned

order

dated

4.10.05

learned

Commissioner has dismissed an application filed by the appellants
under Workmen Compensation Act 1923 seeking compensation on
account of death of Sh. Rakesh Kumar (hereinafter referred to as
the deceased).
3.

In

the

application

for

compensation

filed

by

the

appellants under Section 10 of the Workmen Compensation Act it
was inter-alia averred that:-

FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 1 of 18

A

Appellant no.1 Maman Chand is the father of the

deceased and appellant no.2 Leelawati is the mother of the
deceased.
B

Deceased died on 20.03.96 (the date has been wrongly

mentioned as 30.03.96 in the application) due to an accident which
occurred during the course of his employment with the shop 'Billa
Steel Works' (hereinafter referred to as the Shop) and that the
accident resulting in death of the deceased was caused due to the
owner of the Shop Mr. Ramesh Kumar Billa (respondent).
C

The Shop was engaged in the business of welding.

D

Deceased was working as a welder in the Shop at a

salary of Rs.1800/- per month.
E

The welding set provided to the deceased by the Shop

was defective.
F

On various occasions deceased informed respondent

Ramesh Kumar about the defect in the welding set and asked him to
rectify the said defect.
G

Respondent did not pay any heed to the request of the

deceased.
H

On 20.03.96 deceased was directed to work at the

premises bearing no.1/33, Sunder Vihar, Delhi.
I

On said date deceased died in the afore-noted premises

during the course of his employment with the Shop because of an
accident which had occurred due to the defective welding set
provided to the deceased by the Shop.
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 2 of 18

J

Deceased was aged 21 years at the time of his death.

K

Family of the deceased consisted of his parents i.e. the

appellants, two married and two unmarried sisters.
L

Deceased was the sole bread earner of the family and

thus the family was dependent upon the earnings of the deceased.
4.

On receiving the application for compensation filed by

the appellants respondent Ramesh Kumar informed the learned
Commissioner that the owner of the Shop is his father Om Prakash
and that he has no concern whatsoever with the said Shop.
5.

Accordingly application for compensation was amended

and Om Prakash was impleaded as respondent in place of Ramesh
Kumar.
6.

Om Prakash filed his written statement wherein it was

emphatically asserted that:A

Deceased

did

not

die

during

the

course

of

his

employment with the Shop.
B

Deceased was never employed in the Shop.

C

Defective welding set which was the cause of the death

of the deceased does not belong to Om Prakash or the Shop.
7.

It is relevant to note para 14 of the written statement

which is being quoted herein-under:“14. That para 14 of the claim petition is wrong and
denied. It is wrong to say that the said Rakesh Kumar
was the only bread earner for the claimant and family
members.
It
is
submitted
that
both
the
claimants/petitioners are working in Horticultural
department in DDA Division III, Sub Division-I, at B-2/B,
Janakpuri, New Delhi and are getting more than
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 3 of 18

Rs.3000/- per month. It is a matter of record that both
the claimants aged about 55 years and 50 years
respectively. It is denied for want of knowledge that
both the claimants are having four daughters. It is
wrong to say that the claimants and their daughters
were dependent upon the deceased.”(underlining
emphasised)
8.

In the replication filed to the written statement of Om

Prakash appellants reiterated that the deceased was employed in
the Shop. That the deceased died on 20.03.96 at the premises
bearing no.1/33, Sunder Vihar, Delhi. That the death of the
deceased occurred during the course of his employment with the
Shop and that the cause of the death of the deceased was defective
welding set provided to the deceased by the Shop. In reply to the
para 14 of the written statement contents whereof has been noted
in para 7 above appellants averred as under:“14. Para No.14 of the claim petition is right to our
knowledge that it is truly to say that Rakesh Kumar was
the only bread earner for the claimant as family
member. It is matter of record that both the claimants
are aged about 55 or 60 years respectively, and it is
further truly to say that we are not concerned about the
family members of the claimant that who is not earner
and who is not this only a claim case which is pending
before this Hon'ble court for compensation, and the
court may decide on merits.”
9.

During

the

pendency

of

the

application

for

compensation, Sh. Om Prakash died and his legal representatives
i.e. his two sons Ramesh Kumar Billa and Praveen were substituted
as respondent no.1 and respondent no.2 respectively.
10.

On behalf of the appellants appellant no.1 Maman

Chand (father of the deceased), one Mr. Nabab Singh and one Mr.

FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 4 of 18

Ved Ram who were the neighborers of the father of the deceased
were examined as CW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 respectively.
11.

Maman

Chand

(appellant

no.1)

tendered

his

examination-in-chief by way of an affidavit which was exhibited as
Ex.CW-1/A. In the affidavit Ex.CW-1/A appellant deposed on the lines
of the pleadings filed by him. He again reiterated that the death of
the deceased had taken place at the premises bearing no.1/33,
Sunder Vihar, Delhi.
12.

Along with the affidavit Ex.CW-1/A appellant no.1

produced true copies of four documents namely, FIR bearing
no.214/96, Post-mortem report of the deceased, statement of one
Mr.Kalicharan and report prepared by one Mr.RajBir Singh, SubInspector.
13.

The true copy of the statement of one Mr.Kalicharan

dated 20.03.96 is exhibited as Ex.CW-1/3. In the said statement
allegedly made by one Mr. Kalicharan it has been stated that he was
working as a chowkidar in the premises bearing no.1/33, Sunder
Vihar, Delhi. That the owner of the said premises was Mr.Rahul
Duggal. That on 20.03.96 at about 10 AM one Mr. Ramesh Kumar
who was owner of a shop situated in Asha Park and who had
contracted to do welding work in the said premises brought the
deceased to the said premises. That Ramesh Kumar directed the
deceased to do welding work in the said premises. That deceased
asked Ramesh Kumar to check electricity wires, switches etc. That
Ramesh Kumar told the deceased that he had checked everything
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 5 of 18

and asked him to complete the work as soon as possible. That
thereafter Ramesh Kumar left the premises and deceased started
the welding work. That around 1.30 PM deceased received electric
shock while working on the welding set. That owner of the premises
Rahul Duggal took the deceased to the hospital. That the accident
in question occurred due to the negligence and carelessness of
Ramesh Kumar.
14.

On the basis of the afore-noted statement allegedly

made by Kalicharan, Sub-Inspector prepared a report, true copy of
which is exhibited as Ex.CW-1/4.
15.

On the basis of afore-noted two documents FIR bearing

no.214/96 under Section 304 A IPC was registered against Ramesh
Kumar (respondent no.1), true copy of which is exhibited as Ex.CW1/1.
16.

Post-mortem report of the deceased is exhibited as

Ex.CW-1/2. The report records that the 'cause of death due to
electrocution cannot be ruled out'.
17.

In his cross-examination appellant no.1 Maman Chand

deposed as under:“I was employed in DDA in Horticulture Deptt. I was
getting salary of Rs.3,000.- p.m. My wife was employed
with Horticulture Deptt. She was also getting Rs.3,000/approx. as salary.”
18.

When questioned about the wife of the deceased

appellant no.1 deposed as under:“The name of my son is Rakesh Kumar. My son Rakesh
Kumar was got married in Pashhor. The name of wife is
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 6 of 18

Smt. Gulshan. I do not know the place where the wife of
my son is residing but she is residing somewhere in
Hissar District.”
19.

It is most relevant to note that neither in the pleadings

(application for compensation and replication) nor in the evidence
(affidavit Ex.CW-1/A) appellants have disclosed that they were
employed or that the deceased was married. The version set up by
the appellants that the family of the deceased consisted of
appellants and four sisters and that the deceased was the sole
bread earner of the family is thus contrary to the actual facts.
20.

When questioned about the particulars of the premises

where the deceased had died and its owner appellant no.1 deposed
as under:“My son had expired in a Kothi. That Kothi was situated
in Paschim Vihar. I do not know the number, pocket,
Block and Sector of Kothi. I never visited the said Kothi.
(Vol. I visited the Kothi on the day when the death taken
place). The place of occurrence of Kothi is 5-7 K.M.
Away from my house. I did not met with the owner of
the Kothi. I have not any talked with the owner of the
Kothi even I do not know the name of the owner of the
Kothi......A case was registered by the Police after the
death of my son but the case was not prepared that my
son was died in Kothi. I do not know whether any case
was registered against the owner of the Kothi. I have
not enquired from the owner of the Kothi whether he
has entered into any agreement with any person to get
the welding job done in his kothi.”
21.

It is most interesting to note that the appellant no.1

deposed that he had no knowledge about the number etc of the
premises/kothi where the deceased died. While in the pleadings and
affidavit Ex.CW-1/A appellants have categorically stated that the
death of the deceased had taken place at the premises bearing
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 7 of 18

no.1/33, Sunder Vihar, Delhi.
22.

This glaring defect in the testimony of appellant no.1 is

surely not a result of lapse in the memory of appellant no.1.
23.

Deceased died on 20.3.96. Claim petition was filed on

2.7.96. Replication was filed on 24.3.99. Affidavit Ex.CW-1/A was
filed

on

27.2.03.

Cross-examination

of

appellant

no.1

was

conducted on 27.09.04. If appellant no.1 could remember the
particulars of the premises for 7 years i.e from the year 1996 to
2003 there is no reason why he would suddenly forget the same in
the eighth year i.e year 2004.
24.

It is further relevant to note following portion of the

cross-examination of appellant no.1:“My son was taken to hospital by Mr. Billa. It is wrong to
suggest that my son was taken to the hospital by the
owner of the Kothi.”
25.

Naqab Singh PW-2 and Ved Ram PW-3 tendered their

examination-in-chief by way of affidavits which were exhibited as
Ex.PW-2/A and Ex.PW-3/A respectively.
26.

Affidavits Ex.PW-2/A and Ex.PW-3/A are verbatim copies

of each other. Both the witnesses have deposed that they very well
knew the deceased and respondent no.1 Ramesh Kumar. That the
deceased was employed as a welder in the shop of Ramesh Kumar.
That the deceased died due to an accident which occurred during
the course of his employment in the shop. That the cause of the
death of the deceased was the defective welding set provided to the
deceased by Ramesh Kumar. That the deceased regularly used to
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 8 of 18

make complaints to Ramesh Kumar regarding the defect in the
welding set.
27.

It is relevant to note following portion of the cross-

examination of Naqab Singh PW-2:“I know Sh. Maman Chand since the time of birth since
both are the residents of the same village. Maman
Chand was having two sons and both of them have
expired. I do not know the name of the eldest son of
Maman Chand and name of youngest son is Rakesh
Kumar who complaint case is pending before this
Hon'ble Court.....I do not know the house number of
Maman and I do not know the name of father of Maman
nor the name of the wife. The shop of management is
situated at Asha Park. But I do not know the number of
the shop but situated at Main Road of Asha Park. I do
not know the shop bears any name plate or not. I do not
know the number of persons employed with the
management but this Rakesh was employed with the
management/opp. Party. I do not know the size of the
shop. I do not know the adjoining shop of the
management. I usually visit the shop since it is situated
at the main road.......I have heard the deceased died
while operating the welding machine. I came to know
when the deceased was taken to the burial ground for
cremation at that time I came to know about the death
of the deceased of Rakesh Kumar while operating the
machine of the opp. Party. I do not know where the opp.
Party had taken the deceased Rakesh Kumar for
operating the welding machine. I attended the
cremation of deceased Rakesh Kumar. I do not know the
place where the deceased Rakesh had expired while
operating the welding machine. I do not know the time
of the death of Rakesh Kumar.”
28.

It is relevant to note following portion of the cross-

examination of Ved Ram PW-3:“My house is situated in between the house of one Bihari
and Maman Chand. I do not know the house number of
Maman Chand. That the deceased Rakesh was working
as a welder and he was doing the work welding at Fateh
Nagar. He used to work with Billa. He used to say that I
am working with Sh. Billa who is the opposite party..... I
do not know the distance of working place of the
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 9 of 18

deceased. I never visited the place where the deceased
Rakesh was working. I do not know the type of welding
works. I do not know the Billa. I do not know the date of
the death of the deceased. I do not know how the death
of deceased Rakesh takes place. Whenever I asked the
deceased Rakesh about his nature of job, he used to tell
me that I am doing the work of welding with
Billa......That the Maman and his wife were employed at
the time of death of her younger son. I do not know the
place of working of deceased Rakesh.”
29.

On behalf of the respondents Ramesh Kumar Billa was

examined. He reiterated that the deceased was never employed in
the Shop. That the death of deceased did not occur during the
course of his employment with the Shop.
30.

Vide

impugned

order

dated

4.10.05

learned

Commissioner dismissed the application for compensation filed by
the appellants because of following reasons:I

No evidence such as appointment letter, identity card,

salary/wage register etc has been produced by the appellants to
establish that the deceased was employed in the Shop.
II

Noting the contradictions in the testimonies of PW-2 and

PW-3 the learned Commissioner had rejected their evidence.
III

Appellant

no.1

in

his

testimony

as

CW-1

made

contradictory statements.
IV

Appellants concealed certain facts which were very

material and important for proper adjudication of the case.
31.

Aggrieved

by

the

impugned

order

dated

4.10.05

appellants have filed the present appeal under Section 30 of the
Workmen Compensation Act 1923.

FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 10 of 18

32.

In order to claim compensation under the Workmen

Compensation Act 1923 it is essential that:I

Injured/deceased workman must have been employed with

the person from whom compensation has been claimed; and
II

Injury/death of the workman must have occurred during

the course of his employment; and
III

In case of deceased workman, only those deceased legal

representatives

of

the

deceased

workman

are entitled

to get

compensation who are 'dependant' within the meaning of Section 2(d)
of the Workmen Compensation Act 1923.
33.

In petty and unorganized businesses the employer neither

issues any appointment letter to its employees nor do they maintain
any record such as attendance register, wage register etc. Thus I give
no

credence

to

said

aspects

which

have

been

unnecessarily

highlighted by the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation.
34.

In the instant case best available evidence by means of

which appellants could have proved the factum of employment of the
deceased with the Shop was the testimony of the owner of the
premises bearing no.1/33, Sunder Vihar, Delhi.
35.

If version set up by the appellants was indeed correct the

owner of the premises would have deposed owner of the Shop had
contracted to do the welding work at the premises which in turn would
have established that the deceased was employed in the Shop.

36.

From the testimony of appellant no.1 contents whereof

has been noted in para 20 above it is evident that no efforts

FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 11 of 18

whatsoever were made by the appellants to either summon the
owner or to make him testify before the learned Commissioner.
Further even the chowkidar of the house the maker of Ex. CW-1/3
has not been examined.
37.

In the decision reported as Sriram Industrial Enterprises

Ltd v Mahak Singh & Ors AIR 2007 SC 1370 case of the respondents
was that although they had worked continuously from the date of
their appointment for more that 240 days in a calendar year,
appellant had illegally retrenched them from service in violation of
the provisions of Section 6N of the UP Industrial Disputes Act 1947.
The dispute relating to retrenchment of the respondents was
referred by the State Government to the Industrial Disputes Tribunal
under Section 4K of the Act to determine as to whether the
termination of the services of the respondents by the appellant was
just and/or illegal. Appellant contended that the services of the
respondents were never terminated since none of them had worked
for 240 days in the last calendar 12 months immediately preceding
alleged date of termination. Respondents requested the appellant to
produce certain documents in its custody namely Attendance
Register, Payment of Bonus Register and various other documents
relating to the engagement of the respondents as workmen under it.
Appellant failed to produce afore-noted documents. The Tribunal did
not lay any importance to the non-production of the documents
asked for on the ground that the petitioner did not keep such record
relating to the temporary hands and relied on the documents that
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 12 of 18

had been produced to come to a finding that the workmen had not
put in 240 days of service in a calendar year preceding the
termination of their services. Respondents assailed the awards by
way of filing writ petitions in the High Court. Drawing an adverse
inference against the petitioner herein for non-production of the
documents in its possession and holding that the petitioner had
failed to discharge the onus and disprove the respondent's claim,
the High Court held that under the circumstances the Tribunal
should have drawn an adverse presumption under Section 114
Illustration (g) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 against the
petitioner. Taking further note of the expression "continuous
service" under Section 2(g) of the U.P. Act, the High Court found
that the termination of service of the workmen was in violation of
Section 6N of the aforesaid Act. Aggrieved by the decision of the
High Court appellant filed special leave petition before the Supreme
Court and contended that the High Court was wrong in drawing an
adverse inference against them. After considering the case in its
entirety Supreme Court held that best evidence having been
withheld by the appellant the High Court was entitled to draw such
adverse inference against them.
38.

In the decisions reported as Iddar v. Aabida & Ors. AIR

2007 SC 3029 and Rama Paswan & Ors v State of Jharkhand 2007
CriLJ 2750 the Supreme Court has held that in weighing evidence,
the Court can take note of the fact that the best available evidence
has not been given and can draw an adverse inference.
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 13 of 18

39.

The fact that owner of the premises where the deceased

died was not got examined by the appellants entitles this court to
draw an adverse inference against the appellants, more so when at
the criminal trial the accused were acquitted for the offence under
Section 304A I.P.C.
40.

The view taken by the learned Commissioner that PW-2

and PW-3 appears to be tutored witnesses is correct because of
following reasons:I.

PW-2 had deposed that he knows Maman Chand

appellant no. 1 since his birth as they were residents of the same
village. Yet he pleaded ignorance when asked about the names of
the father, elder son, wife of Maman Chand . He even pleaded
ignorance about the house no. of Maman Chand.
II.

Though PW-2 deposed that he visited the Shop number

of times yet pleaded ignorance when questioned about the size,
description of the shop.
III.

PW-2 deposed that he heard that deceased died while

operating the welding machine belonging to the Shop. Hearsay
evidence is not permissible under the Evidence Act. In such
circumstances it cannot be said that PW- 2 proved that the
deceased died during the course of his employment with the Shop.
IV.

PW-3 deposed that his house was situated between the

house of one Bihari and Maman Chand. Yet he pleaded ignorance
when questioned about the house no. of Maman Chand.
V.

In the earlier portion of his cross-examination PW-3 has

FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 14 of 18

deposed that deceased used to work with Billa i.e respondent no.
1.However in the later portion of the cross-examination he deposed
that he did not know any person by the name of Billa.
VI.

PW-3 in his affidavit Ex.PW-3/A deposed that place of

working of respondent no. 1 is just half Kilometer away from the
house of the deceased. In his cross-examination he deposed that he
neither knows nor has ever visited the place of working of the
deceased. When PW-3 has never visited the place of working of the
deceased, then how come he was able to depose that place of
working of the deceased was just half kilometer away from his
house remains a mystery?
VII.

PW-3 in his cross-examination has categorically deposed

that he has no knowledge about the fact that as to how deceased
had died.
41.

Learned counsel for the appellants contended that

statement of Kalicharan Ex.CW-1/3 clearly established that the
deceased was employed in the Shop and that his death occurred
during the course of his employment with the Shop.
42.

This aspect of the case has been dealt by the learned

Commissioner. As regards the said issue learned Commissioner has
held as under:“The claimant have also relied upon the contents of the
FIR in support of their claim, however, same can also be
said to be in any favour of the claimants for the reasons
that firstly the respondent has been acquitted in the
criminal case pertaining to the said FIR and a copy of
the said judgment has been filed by the respondent
before this court. On perusal of the judgment of the
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 15 of 18

learned M.M. I find that there was no incriminating
evidence against the respondent as not even one
witness appeared before the criminal court to depose
against the respondent, not even Kalicharan at whose
instance/complaint the FIR was registered by the
concerned police officials. The said chowkidar has not
been produced before this court by the claimants and
thus in absence of any reliable proof /document I find no
merit in the submissions of the claimants regarding the
existence of the employer-employee relationship.”
43.

I find no reasons to disagree with the view taken by the

learned Commissioner.
44.

The

appellants

first

time

in

the

present

appeal

contended that the respondents have threatened Kalicharan due to
which he refused to testify

in the proceedings

before the

Commissioner. The fact that this contention was not raised before
the learned Commissioner probablizes that this contention is an
after-thought.
45.

Section 2(d) of the Workmen Compensation Act 1923

reads as under:“(d) "dependent" means any of the following relatives of a
deceased workman, namely :- (i) a widow, a minor
legitimate or adopted son, and unmarried legitimate or
adopted daughter, or a widowed mother; and
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the workman at
the time of his death, a son or a daughter who has attained
the age of 18 years and who is infirm;
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the
workman at the time of his death, (a) a widower,
(b) a parent other than a widowed mother,
(c) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate
daughter or a daughter legitimate or illegitimate or adopted
if married and a minor or if widowed and a minor,

FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 16 of 18

(d) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed
sister if a minor,
(e) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased son,
(g) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no
parent of the child is alive, or
(h) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the workman is
alive.
Explanation : For the purposes of sub-clause (ii) and items
(f) and (g) of sub-clause (iii), references to a son, daughter
or child include an adopted son, daughter or child
respectively;”

46.

A reading of Section 2(d) clearly shows that the parents

of a deceased workman are entitled to get compensation only when
they are in wholly or in part dependent upon the earnings of the
deceased workman.
47.

The fact that the appellants tried to hide that they were

employed and were earning about Rs.3,000/- per month at the time
of the death of the deceased and that deceased was married
strongly suggests that the deceased was living separately from the
appellants and that deceased was not giving any amount from his
earnings to the appellants.
48.

As per the appellants the salary of the deceased at the

time of his death was Rs.1,800/- per month.

Whereas appellants

were earning at least Rs.6,000/- per month at the time of the death
of the deceased. The fact that the deceased had only Rs.1,800/- per
month to maintain himself and his wife while his parents i.e. the
FAO No.388-89/2005

Page 17 of 18

appellant had Rs.6,000/- per month at their disposal also leads to an
inference that the deceased was not paying any amount from his
earnings to the appellants.
49.

The

circumstances

of

the

case

suggest

that

the

appellants heard some rumours that the deceased was employed
with the Shop and thus tried to obtain compensation from the
owners of the Shop.
50.

I find no merits in the appeal.

51.

Dismissed.

52.

No costs.

January 29, 2008
sl

FAO No.388-89/2005

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page 18 of 18

