IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
R.S.A. No.5/2002
#
!
$
^

Smt.Harro Devi
through:

........ Appellant
Mr.Rajat Aneja, Advocate.
VERSUS

Shri Ram Gopal
....... Respondent
through : Mr.Prikshit Rai, Advocate.
RESERVED ON: 19.11.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 27.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Appellant was the

plaintiff

and

successfully

demolished the defence predicated by the respondent thereby
emerging victorious with a decree of ejectment and mesne
profits. The judgment and decree by the learned Trial Judge is
dated 14.11.1994.

Unfortunately, in RCA No.15/2001, vide

judgment and decree dated 5.10.2001 she lost the battle. The
judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Judge was set
aside. Her suit was dismissed. Aggrieved by the judgment and
decree dated 5.10.2001 passed in RCA No.15/01 the appellant
has preferred the instant second appeal.
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.1 of 14

2.

H.R.Malhotra, J. framed 2 substantial questions of

law as per order dated 10.10.2006. The same reads as under:'After hearing both the parties, the Court is of the
opinion that a substantial question of law arises
to the effect “if increase in rent amounts to
creating of fresh tenancy”.
Another question of law which arises for
consideration is “whether according to Sections
91 and 92 of the Indian Evidence Act, the party
can be allowed to lead oral evidence despite
having taken the plea of existence of written
instrument.

3.

Counsel for the respondent accepts notice. List
for final hearing on 20th March, 2007.'
At the hearing held on 19.11.2007 there was

considerable confusion amongst the counsel pertaining to the
question of law framed.
4.

I shall highlight the confusion after stating the facts

for only then the inappropriateness of the 2 questions of law
framed can be appreciated.
5.

Appellant, wife of Phool Singh sought ejectment of

the respondent and his brother Bajrangi alleging that Bajrangi
and the respondent were sons of late Kanta Singh who was
inducted as a tenant in one room on the first floor of property
No.6258, Kucha Shiv Mandir, Gali Batashan, Khari Baoli at a
monthly rent of Rs.13.31 which was subsequently increased to
Rs.23/- per month. The tenancy was for a residential purpose.
Vide notice dated 18.1.1997 the tenancy was determined. But
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.2 of 14

due to the operation of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 mere
determination of the contractual tenancy did not entitle the
landlord to evict the tenant. Kanta Singh could not be evicted.
That he died on 7.9.1985 leaving behind his sons the
defendants as his legal heirs being sons. That the wife of Kanta
Singh had predeceased him and his only daughter Bimla was
married and was not residing in the suit premises. That under
Section 2 of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 legal heirs of a
deceased statutory tenant succeed to the tenancy for a period
of 1 year with effect from date of death of the tenant. That
they were not financially dependent upon the tenant. That 1
year was over. That the defendants had no right to continue to
occupy the suit premises.

That continued possession of the

defendants was unauthorized and hence they were liable to be
ejected as also liable to pay mesne profits @Rs.60/- per month
with effect from 8.9.1985 till date of suit. Future mesne profits
till date of possession at the same rate i.e. Rs.60/- per month
were also prayed for.
6.

In the written statement filed by the defendants it

was not denied that their father was a tenant as alleged but it
was stated that their father was indicted as a tenant not only in
respect of the room in question but another room.

It was

clarified that possession of one room was surrendered. In other
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.3 of 14

words tenanted premises as on date when Kanta Prasad died
was admitted.

It was pleaded that the tenancy was for

residential-cum-commercial purpose. It was denied that Kanta
Prasad's tenancy was ever determined. It was denied that his
status got relegated from a contractual tenant to a statutory
tenant. It was alleged that in 1979 parties entered into a fresh
agreement whereby rent was increased to Rs.15/- per month.
That parties entered into a fresh agreement whereby rent was
increased to Rs.18/- per month and finally to Rs.23/- per month
in the year 1983. It was alleged that due to fresh tenancies
when rent was increased from time to time a fresh lease came
into existence post 1979.

It was pleaded that in any case

pursuant to fresh leases, defendants acquired status of
contractual tenants. Thus, it was alleged that the Civil Court
had no jurisdiction to eject the defendants.
7.

At the trial no written lease was produced. I clarify

no written lease deed pertaining to original lease nor to the
stated fresh lease was produced.

Only evidence led was

pertaining to rent receipts, evidencing increased payment of
rent.
8.

It is in the backdrop of aforesaid facts that the

substantial question of law as framed and the confusion arising
therefrom needs to be penned down.
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.4 of 14

9.

I wonder as to how Section 91 and 92 of the Indian

Evidence Act 1872 stood attracted.
10.

It was not a case where terms of a contract or a

grant reduced to the form of a document was sought to be
contradicted or varied by any person. Indeed, learned counsel
for the parties conceded that no question of law arose for
consideration pertaining to Section 91 or 92 of the Indian
Evidence Act being attracted.
11.
dated

To understand as to under what circumstances order
10.10.2006

was

passed, learned

counsel

for the

appellant explained that since in the written statement filed by
the defendants a plea of fresh agreement was raised, proof of
the agreement had to be by producing the agreements and not
by oral evidence.

In other words, learned counsel for the

appellant informed the Court that the objection emanates from
Chapter V of the Indian Evidence Act which deals with
documentary evidence and by virtue of Section 62 of the Indian
Evidence Act a document has to be proved by production of the
document for the inspection of the Court.
12.

Pertaining to the first question framed i.e. 'if

increase in rent amounts to creation of fresh tenancy', to say
the least even the same is most unhappily worded. As noted
herein above, a defence was predicated that from time to time
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.5 of 14

rent was increased when fresh agreements were arrived at. In
proof thereof certain rent receipts were relied upon.
13.

No question of law as framed arises as question No.1

for consideration.

The question which actually arises is,

whether in the facts and circumstances of the case increase in
rent creates a fresh tenancy or not.
14.

I have dared to refer to the order dated 10.10.2006

and to clarify thereon to emphasize the importance of being
focused when question of law are framed for the reason
inappropriate and wrongly framed question of law are bound to
be responded by inappropriate answers; needless to state
inappropriate and irrelevant submissions are made which result
in wasting of precious judicial time.
15.

The question of law which actually arises for

consideration is:-

16.

“Whether the finding of the learned Trial Judge
that the respondent has successfully established
a fresh tenancy after earlier tenancy was
determined is correct as per evidence on record?
Needless to state, an inference pertaining to jural

relationship from the admitted evidence is a question of law.
17.

Let me peep into the evidence.

Ex.PW-2/1 is the

lawyer's notice dated 18.1.1973 issued to Kanta Singh stating
that he was a tenant of the suit property with effect from
6.6.1962 at a monthly rent of Rs.13.31.
RSA No.5/2002

That the tenancy
Page No.6 of 14

commenced from the 6th day of every calender month and
ended on the 5th day of the succeeding month.

That the

tenancy stood determined.
18.

It would be relevant to note at this stage that as per

Ex.PW-2/1 the noticee i.e. Kanta Singh was stated to be a
tenant under Manmohan Prasad who was stated to have sold
the property No.6258 Kucha Shiv Mandir, Gali Batashan, Khari
Baoli to the appellant.

He was required to attorn to the

appellant and simultaneously the tenancy was determined.
19.

Since both Courts below have held that Ex.PW-2/1

was duly served upon Kanta Singh, being a question of fact,
learned counsel for the parties conceded that in view of Ex.PW2/1 the contractual tenancy of Kanta Singh stood determined.
20.

In view of the applicability of the Delhi Rent Control

Act 1958, Kanta Singh became a statutory tenant. There was a
clog on the right of the landlord to evict him.

The clog was

removed and right to seek possession would have sprung on
death of the contractual tenant. Thus, the appellant could not
seek eviction of Kanta Singh.
21.

Learned

counsel

for

the

appellant

and

the

respondent were not at variance on this aspect of the legal
right of the appellant and the clog thereon.
22.

4 rent receipts Ex.DW-1/1 to Ex.DW-1/4 were proved

RSA No.5/2002

Page No.7 of 14

at the trial by the defendant. Ex.DW-1/1 pertains to the rent
received by the appellant for the month 12.1.1973 to
11.2.1973.

She has accepted rent @Rs.11/- per month and

Rs.2.31 as house tax i.e. Rs.13.31 per month.

Ex.DW-1/2

pertains to the rent received for the period 11.2.1973 till
11.3.1973. The rate is the same as mentioned in Ex.DW-1/1.
Ex.DW-1/4 is the rent for the period 12.3.1973 till 11.4.1973. It
is the same as per Ex.DW-1/1 and Ex.DW-1/2. Ex.DW-1/3 is the
rent received by the appellant for the period 11.6.1973 to
12.7.1973. The rent stands enhanced to Rs.12.50. House tax
stands enhanced to Rs.2.50. Total amount received is Rs.15/per month.
23.

Thus, only documentary evidence pertaining to

increase in rent is Ex.DW-1/3.

But, being important, it is

relevant to note that as against tenancy month recorded in
Ex.PW-2/1 being the 6th day of each calendar month till 5th day
of succeeding month, all receipts record a change in the
tenancy month, i.e. from the 12th day of the calendar month
ending on the 11th day of the succeeding month.
24.

In

the

decision

reported

as

1989

SC

467

N.M.Ponniah Nadar vs. Kamalakshmi Ammal it was held that
mere increase of rent does not evidence a fresh tenancy for the
reason original lease may continue but with a variation
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.8 of 14

pertaining to the rent payable. It was held that a surrender of
an existing tenancy does not follow from a mere agreement
made during the pendency for the increase or reduction of rent
or other variation of its terms, unless there is some special
reason to infer a new tenancy, where for instance, the party
make the change in the rent in the belief that the old tenancy
has come to an end.
25.

A similar view was taken by a learned Single Judge

of this Court reported as 1993 (25) DRJ 325 Shri O.Bahree vs.
M/s.Rikhi Bros.
26.

Pertaining to a contractual tenant, on contractual

tenancy being determined but the landlord rendered helpless in
the teeth of protection granted to tenants under rent control
legislation, in the decision reported as AIR 1961 SC 1067
Ganga Dutt Murarka vs. Kartik Chandra Das & Ors. in para 5 it
was observed as under:“5.
Under the Calcutta Rent Ordinance,
1946, and the subsequent legislation which
culminated in the West Bengal Premises Rent
Control Act, 1950, in the expression “tenant” was
included any person who continued in possession
after termination of his tenancy. Section 12 of
the West Bengal Premises Rent Control Act,
1950, expressly protects a tenant whose lease
has expired. By the Rent Restriction Statutes at
the material time, statutory immunity was
granted to the appellant against eviction, and
acceptance of the amounts from him which were
equivalent to rent after the contractual tenancy
had expired or which were fixed as standard rent
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.9 of 14

27.

did not amount to acceptance of rent from a
lessee within the meaning of Section 116,
Transfer of Property Act. Failure to take action
which was consequent upon a statutory
prohibition imposed upon the courts and not the
result of any voluntary conduct on the part of the
appellant did not also amount to “otherwise
assenting to the lessee continuing in possession.”
Of course, there is no prohibition against a
landlord entering into a fresh contract of tenancy
with a tenant whose right of occupation is
determined and who remains in occupation by
virtue of the statutory immunity. Apart from an
express contract, conduct of the parties may
undoubtedly justify an inference that after
determination of the contractual tenancy, the
landlord had entered into a fresh contract with
the tenant, but whether the conduct justifies such
an inference must always depend upon the facts
of each case. Occupation of premises by a
tenant whose tenancy is determined is by virtue
of the protection granted by the statute and not
because of any right arising from the contract
which is determined. The statute protects his
possession so long as the conditions which justify
a lessor in obtaining an order of eviction against
him do not exist. Once the prohibition against
the exercise of jurisdiction by the court is
removed, the right to obtain possession by the
lessor under the ordinary law springs into action
and the exercise of the lessor's right to evict the
tenant will not, unless the statute provides
otherwise, be conditioned.”
In the light of the legal position afore-noted evidence

on record needs to be discussed.

Indeed, it was not the

defence that when rents were increased a written agreement
was executed. Plea taken in the written statement is that after
Ex.PW-2/1 was served a fresh agreement was entered into
between the parties to increase the rent. Neither has it been
stated that the agreement was in writing, nor was it pleaded
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.10 of 14

that the agreement was the oral.

Though, during evidence,

respondent had stated that a written indenture was drawn up
but he failed to bring on record any such written indenture.
Thus, it is not a case where the contents of a written document
were sought to be proved by oral evidence without producing
the document. It is not a case where variation of the terms of a
written document by parol evidence was involved.
28.

The issue has to be discussed and decided with

reference to whether the 4 receipts Ex.DW-1/1 to Ex.DW-1/4
constitute

sufficient

evidence

where

from

a

reasonable

inference can be drawn that a fresh tenancy came into
existence between the parties.
29.

2 distinct facts emerge from the 4 receipts. The first

is that all 4 record that the tenancy month commenced from
the 12th day of calendar month and ends on the 11th day of the
next calendar month. Further, Ex.DW-1/3 evidences increase in
rent.
30.

No doubt, as observed in N.M.Ponniah Nadar's case

(supra) a mere increase or reduction of rent will not necessarily
import a surrender of an existing lease and the grant of a new
tenancy. Also, if on account of the variation in the quantum of
rent any consequential change is made regarding the time and
the manner of payment of rent it cannot have the effect of
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.11 of 14

graver consequences being imported into the change of rent
than what the parties had intended and warrant a finding by
the Court that the parties had intended to create a new tenancy
in supersession of the earlier one or that by operation of law a
new tenancy has come into existence.
31.

But, what happens when even the month of tenancy

is changed?
32.

Though in the plaint, tenancy month has not been

referred to, but in Ex.PW-2/1 served by the appellant upon the
tenant

it

was

specifically

mentioned

that

the

tenancy

commenced on the 6th day of every calender month and ended
on the 5th day of each succeeding month. As noted above, in
the 4 receipts DW-1/1 to Ex.DW-1/4 the tenancy month stands
changed to and commencing from the 12th day of each
calendar month and ends on the 11th day of the next month.
Obviously, the tenancy month has been changed.
33.

In my opinion the change of the tenancy month

cannot be an extension of the previous tenancy for the reason
a new tenancy month has come into existence. This change of
tenancy month cannot be, but the result of a fresh tenancy.
34.

The tenancy month is not only an important term of

the tenancy but lies at the very core of the tenancy. Where the
tenancy month has changed, a core change in the tenancy
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.12 of 14

comes into being. This has to be the result of a fresh tenancy.
35.

In the instant case the change in tenancy month

assumes significance for the reason the earlier tenancy was
determined vide Ex.PW-2/1. Contractual tenancy came to an
end. The status of the tenant became a statutory tenant. No
doubt, the right of the landlord to obtain a decree of ejectment
was eclipsed by the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958, but nothing
prevented the parties from entering into a fresh tenancy. Post
status of the tenant reduced to a statutory tenant only right of
the landlord was to receive the contractual rent. But there was
no embargo on the landlord and the tenant to enter into a fresh
tenancy agreement.
36.

The evidence on record has impacted 2 things. The

first is the right to receive a higher rent and the other is the
change of the tenancy month.
37.

The learned Trial Judge failed to note the legal

impact of the aforesaid twin evidence. The Appellate Court has
dutifully taken note thereof.
38.

The view taken by the learned Appellate Court is a

possible view and conforms to law.
39.

It is settled law that where the learned Trial Judge

does not consider the impact of all evidence brought on record
it is open to the First Appellate Court to re-appreciate the
RSA No.5/2002

Page No.13 of 14

evidence and consider the full impact of the evidence brought
on record.

Further, if the view taken by the Appellate Court

conforms to law and even if 2 views are possible, the Second
Appellate Court would not substitute its view merely because
another view is possible.
40.

Even otherwise, I hold that the only legal inference

which can be drawn on the facts and circumstances of the
instant case in view of the evidence brought on record is that
post determination of the earlier tenancy a fresh tenancy came
into existence where the month of tenancy was changed and
even the rent was increased.
41.

Before concluding I may note that the appellant

made a vain attempt to urge that the rent was increased when
certain repairs were effected in the toilet. But, I note that in
the plaint the appellant did not plead said fact. Thus, appellant
would be precluded from projecting a case not pleaded.
42.

I find no merits in the appeal.

43.

The appeal is dismissed.

44.

LCR be returned forthwith.

45.

No costs.

November 26, 2007
dk-bainsla

RSA No.5/2002

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.14 of 14

