*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.88/2002
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
........ Appellant
through: Mr. Rajat Arora, Advocate
VERSUS
Employees State Insurance Corporation........Respondent
through: Mr. K.P.Mavi, Advocate
FAO No.375/2003
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
........ Appellant
through: Mr. Rajat Arora, Advocate
VERSUS
Employees State Insurance Corporation........Respondent
through: Mr. K.P.Mavi, Advocate
RESERVED ON:
05.05.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
26.05.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The above captioned appeals lay a challenge to an order

dated 24.12.2001 and order dated 30.01.2003 dismissing two

FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page1 of 21

petitions filed by the appellant under Section 75 of the Employees
State Insurance Act, 1948. In the petition filed before the learned
Judge ESI Court which is the subject matter of FAO No.88/2002 a
challenge was made to an order dated 5/11.12.95 passed by the
competent authority under the

ESI Act 1948 followed by a letter

dated 27/28.5.1996 stating that the demand raised vide order dated
5/11.12.1995 has to be satisfied.

In the petition filed before the

learned Judge ESI Court which is the subject matter of FAO
No.375/2003 challenge was to an order dated 13.5.1996.
2.

Since the facts of both cases are near identical, at the

hearing held on 5.5.2008, learned counsel for the parties stated that
reference may be made to the facts of FAO No.88/2002. It may be
stated that the dispute between the parties pertained to 2 LPG
bottling plants of the appellant at Tikri Kalan Delhi and Shakurbasti
Delhi.

The dispute pertains to the employment of certain casual

workers engaged through independent contractors to execute works
relating

to

cutting

grass,

planting

trees,

wood

work

repair

(carpentry) and repair of the boundary wall of the two complexes.
3.

Undisputed position is that the appellant provides better

medical facilities to its employees than what is available under the
ESI Act 1948 and hence has obtained an exemption under Section
90 of the ESI Act 1948 from paying any contribution under the said
Act.
4.

Thus, for the employees of the appellant on its pay rolls

and in respect of whom benefit of medical facilities is made
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page2 of 21

available by the appellant no contribution is payable under the ESI
Act 1948. But, if the appellant does not extend the benefit of its
medical facility to an employee or a category of employees, the
appellant would be liable to pay contribution under the ESI Act
1948, but only for such employees who are covered under the said
Act.
5.

The dispute between the parties surfaced when an

inspecting team from the office of the Employee State Insurance
Commissioner inspected the two bottling plants of the appellant and
noted that certain workmen were engaged in cutting grass, pruning
and planting trees, executing carpentry work for repairing wooden
fixtures and carrying out masonry work i.e. repairing existing
structures. The names of these employees were not entered in the
rolls of the appellant i.e. neither in the wage register nor in the
attendance register. When an explanation was demanded from the
appellant as to why names of these persons were not entered in the
statutory registers maintained by the appellant, response was that
these

workmen

were

deployed

at

the

site

by

independent

contractors to whom the appellant had awarded different works. It
was the case of the appellant that the works in question were not
connected with the principal work being undertaken at the units i.e.
bottling LPG gas in cylinders and that the works were neither
incidental to or preliminary to or connected even remotely with the
main work at the two units.

It was stated that the persons were

deputed by independent contractors to whom various works were
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page3 of 21

awarded and that the appellant did not exercise any supervisory
control over the workmen.

That none of the workmen was

answerable to the appellant.

That payments were made to the

independent contractors as per work order issued to them and as
per the contract after appellant was satisfied that the necessary
works were executed.
6.

Even to a lay man it would be apparent that the issue

had to be decided with reference to the work contract awarded by
the appellant to the contractors and the focus of the inquiry had to
be in relation to Section 2(9), Section 2(13) and Section 2(17) of the
ESI Act 1948 which define “employee”, “immediate employee” and
“principal employer” respectively.

The nature of the works being

executed had to be considered and the nature of supervisory
control, if any, exercised by the appellant had to be considered. For
unexplainable reasons the authorities under the Act kept on seeking
production of the statutory record containing the names of the
workmen found working at the site and the appellant continued to
respond that the question of such a record being available did not
arise for the reason

the workmen

independent contractors.

were the employees of

The appellant did not draw attention of

the authorities under the Act that the issue had to be determined,
as noted above, with respect to the work orders issued to the
independent contractors and in light of the definition of employee,
immediate employee and principal employee.

Even the authority

under the Act did not focus on the core area of dispute. Each party
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page4 of 21

kept knocking at the wrong door. Obviously, entry was attempted
through the wrong door. The result of such knocking was, the
obvious, a wholly misdirected order passed not only by the authority
under the ESI Act 1948 but even the learned Judge ESI Court who,
as would be noted hereinafter went about determining the issue
without considering the work order issued by the appellant to the
independent contractors and without even considering Section 2(9),
Section2(13) and Section 2(17) of the ESI Act 1948.
7.

I need not note in detail the contents of the two orders

passed by the authorities under the ESI Act 1948.

It would be

sufficient to note that the authorities held against the appellant on
two counts. Firstly, that certain workmen were found engaged in
activities at the units of the appellant and secondly, no record
pertaining to the employment and wages payable to the employees
were produced before the authorities.

In other words a best

judgment assessment was framed under Section 45A of the ESI Act
1948.
8.

Relevant part of the two orders passed by the ESI Court

which are subject matter of challenge in the two appeals may be
noted at this stage before proceeding with a reference to the
statutory provisions applicable and the case law on the subject.
9.

In the order dated 24.12.2001 learned Judge ESI Court

has held as under:“12. The first submission of the ld. Counsel for the
petitioner is that persons in respect of which the
contribution has been claimed are not the employees of
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page5 of 21

the petitioner.
However, in letter Ex.PW1/2 written by the petitioner to
the respondent, the petitioner has not challenged the
persons in respect of whom the contribution is being
demanded are not their employees. They only claimed
that they have been depositing the contribution from
time to time and further seeks some time to make the
records of payment available. There was absolutely no
contention that the employees are not their employees.
13. Not only this the basic test to determine whether
a person is an employee or not under the Act is:
whether he is under the control of the employee?
Whether he is under the supervision of the employer?
Here PW2 Sh. S.K.Puri has conceded in the crossexamination that the job done by the contractor was
checked by the staff of the petitioner. He further
conceded that the work done by the transport
contractor was under their supervision and control. He
further conceded that after grass cutting they would
check whether the same had been done as per their
specifications. He further conceded that they used to
pay the contribution. All this make out that persons
were working under the control and supervision of the
petitioner and as such they were the employees of the
petitioner. The submission of the ld. Counsel for the
petitioner is, therefore, without force.
xxx xxx xxx
17. In view of the above discussion, both issues are
decided in favour of the respondents and against the
petitioners.”
10.

In the order dated 30.01.2003 the learned ESI Court has

held as under:“21. The first contention of the ld. Counsel for the
petitioner is that the employees are not performing any
integral or incidental work of the petitioner-Corporations
and as such, are not liable to be covered under the Act.
However, the workers employed in connection with the
work of gardening, grass-cutting etc. cannot be said to
be not employed in connection with the work incidental
to the work of the petitioner-Corporation as it is they
who make the premises and its surroundings fit for
carrying out the operation of the petitioner-Corporation.
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page6 of 21

The Act provides for social security of the workers and
cannot be interpreted in a manner as to exclude a set of
workers who are employed by the employer but are
deliberately given a nomenclature so as to suggest that
they are not the employees under the Act. In a case
reported as Royal Talkies Vs. ESIC 1978 II LLN 268, it
was held that keeping the Cycle stand and running a
Canteen within the cinema premises are incidental or
adjunct to the primary purpose of the Theatre and, as
such, the workers employed therein were held to be the
employees within the meaning of Section 2(9) of the
Act. In order to bring an employee within the sweep of
the Act, it is enough that the work done by him be
ancillary, incidental or may have some relevance or link
with the object of the establishment.
Here, the
employees engaged in gardening, grass-cutting etc. are
making the surroundings fit and appropriate for the
operation of the petitioner-Corporation and, as such,
they are employed in connection with the work of the
petitioner-Corporation.
22. The next contention is that the employees of the
independent contractors cannot be counted to be the
employees of the petitioner-corporation in view of the
authority
of
Calcutta
Electricity
Supply
Corporation(supra). However, the facts of that case are
quite different as in that case the contractors were
electrical contractors who were holding certificate of
competence in their own field and were required to
obtain license before engaging in any contract. No such
case is made out in the instant case as the work
admittedly undertaken by them is of ordinary nature
and not technical or specialised as was the case in the
aforesaid case.
23. Not only this, on perusal of the material on the
record, I find that the petitioner-Corporation was not
totally averse to make payment regarding employees of
the contractors employed by them. This is reflected in
the documents. Ex. RW-1/6 & Ex.RW-1/7, wherein the
petitioner sought time to furnish its details of the
contractors and their compliance with the Act. Similarly,
in the letter Ex. PW-1/4 dated 23-11-1995, the
petitioner-Corporation expressed its inability to produce
the necessary documents to explain the case. As such,
it is clear that they deliberately withheld the documents
and the necessary records from the respondentCorporation as well as from this court and, as such, are
liable to suffer for the same.
Accordingly, the
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page7 of 21

submissions made by the ld. Counsel for the petitioner
that the employees of the contractors are not the
employees within the meaning of the Act as they were
not performing any incidental or integral work of the
petitioner-corporation or that they were employed by
the independent contractors for whom the petitionerCorporation is not responsible, cannot be accepted in
view of the wide and sweeping meaning of the
'employee' as defined in Section 2(9) of the Act.
xxx

xxx

xxx

29. In view of the above discussion, the authorities
cited by the ld. Counsel for the petitioner regarding the
definition of 'employee' and barred by limitation are of
no help to the petitioner. The issue is accordingly
decided in favour of the respondent and against the
petitioner. ”
11.

A perusal of the ESI Act 1948 would reveal that vide

Section 39 thereof an employer is required to pay contributions in
respect of such employee to the Employees State Insurance
Corporation as are covered by the Act. Section 44 of the said Act
requires an employer to maintain registers as required by law and
furnish returns to the authority under the Act. Where, in respect of
a factory or establishment no returns, particulars, registers or
records are submitted, furnished or maintained, the Corporation
may on the basis of the information available to it and after giving a
reasonable opportunity to the employer of being heard, by an order,
determine the amount of contributions payable in respect of the
employees of that factory or establishment. Section 45A embodies
the principles of best judgment assessment.
12.

A forum of challenge is available under Section 75 of the

ESI Act 1948 to an employer to question orders passed by the

FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page8 of 21

authority under the Act relatable to determination of liability of an
employer to pay contribution pertaining to an employee. The forum
is a Court having all the powers of a Civil Court.
13.

The definition of the terms “Employee”, “Principal

employer” and “Immediate employer” under the ESI Act need to be
noted. The term “employee” is defined under Section 2(9) as under:
“Section 2(9) "employee" means any person employed
for wages in or in connection with the work of a factory
or establishment to which this Act applies and(i) who is directly employed by the principal employer,
on any work of, or incidental or preliminary to or
connected with the work of, the factory or
establishment, whether such work is done by the
employee in the factory or establishment or elsewhere;
or
(ii) who is employed by or through an immediate
employer, on the premises of the factory or
establishment or under the supervision of the principal
employer or his agent on work which is ordinarily part
of the work of the factory or establishment or which is
preliminary to the work carried on in or incidental to the
purpose of the factory or establishment; or
(iii) whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to
the principal employer by the person with whom the
person whose services are so lent or let on hire has
entered into a contract of service;
and includes any person employed for wages on any
work connected with the administration of the factory
or establishment or any part, department or branch
thereof or with the purchase of raw materials for, or the
distribution or sale of the products of, the factory or
establishment or any person engaged as an apprentice,
not being an apprentice engaged under the Apprentices
Act, 1961(52 of 1961), or under the standing orders of
the establishment; but does not include (a) any member of the Indian naval, military or air
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page9 of 21

forces; or
(b) any person so employed whose wages (excluding
remuneration for overtime work) exceed such wages as
may be prescribed by the Central Government a month:
Provided that an employee whose wages (excluding
remuneration for overtime work) exceed such wages as
may be prescribed by the Central Government at any
time after (and not before) the beginning of the
contribution period, shall continue to be an employee
until the end of that period;”
14.

The term “immediate employer” is defined under

Section 2(13) as under:
“Section 2(13) "immediate employer", in relation to
employees employed by or through him, means a
person who has undertaken the execution, on the
premises of a factory or an establishment to which this
Act applies or under the supervision of the principal
employer or his agent, of the whole or any part of any
work which is ordinarily part of the work of the factory
or establishment of the principal employer or is
preliminary to the work carried on in, or incidental to
the purpose of, any such factory or establishment, and
includes a person by whom the services of an
employee who has entered into a contract of service
with him are temporarily lent or let on hire to the
principal employer and includes a contractor;”
15.

The term “Principal employer” is defined under Section

2(17) as under:
“"principal employer" means(i) in a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory,
and includes the managing agent of such owner or
occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner
or occupier, and where a person has been named as
the manager of the factory under the Factories Act,
1948 (63 of 1948); the person so named;
(ii) in any establishment under the control of any
department of any Government in India, the authority
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page10 of 21

appointed by such Government in this behalf or where
no authority is so appointed, the head of the
Department;
(iii) in any other establishment, any person responsible
for the supervision and control of the establishment;”
16.

The definitions elaborately describe and determine the

circumstances which bring a workman under the purview of the
term “employee” for the purposes of the Act. The wide span of the
definition of “employee” can be understood from the fact that an
employee is someone associated with not just the principal activity
of the factory or establishment but also any work “incidental to” or
“preliminary to” or “connected with” or “Ordinarily part of” for “the
work of the factory or establishment” or “purpose of factory or
establishment”.
17.

Thus, in effect, the definition does not make any

distinction between technical and non-technical employees and
extends to skilled, semi-skilled, clerical and employees performing
manual functions. Also, there is no distinction between those
employed on time rate or piece rate basis. It hardly matters whether
the employment is permanent, temporarily or casual.

But the

employment must relate to Section 2(9) of the Act.
18.

However, the definition cannot be understood to include

within its scope just every person engaged by an employer. If that
was the intention of the legislature, an inclusive definition would not
have been provided for the term “employee” and a general
definition, interpreted liberally would have served the purpose as
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page11 of 21

good. In the decision reported as Regional Director, Employees'
State Insurance Corporation, Trichur v. Ramanuja Match Industries
(1985 I.L.L.N. 249) it was held that even though the ESI Act 1948 is
a beneficial legislation which needs to be interpreted liberally, the
court is not to travel beyond the scheme of the statute and extend
the scope of it to those not covered by the scheme of the statute on
the pretext of extending statutory benefits. It was held that the Act
does not have a universal coverage.
19.

A bare perusal of Section 2(9) of the ESI Act 1948 makes

it evident that to come within the compass of the definition of the
term “employee” there has to be an employment.

Now, the

distinction between an employment and engagement has to be kept
in mind. Further, the employment has to be in connection with the
work of the establishment or incidental to or preliminary to but
connected with the work of the establishment.
20.

Employment of necessity involves a contract of service

pursuant to which a person, called employee, enters into service of
an employer in connection with some integral part of the operations
carried on by the employer. The employment may be for a short
period and may be paid for daily.

It would be an employment

bringing the employee within the sweep of Section 2(9) of the Act.
On the other hand, a person engaged casually in connection with
processes which are not integral parts of or incidental to or
preliminary

to

or

connected

FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

with

the

operations

of

the

Page12 of 21

establishment, though such engagement may be for long period,
such deployment would not make the workman an employee as
defined under Section 2(9).
21.

In the decision reported as Gnanambikai Mills Ltd. Vs.

ESIC (1970) 2 LLJ 233 it was held that the relevant question in
deciding whether a casual employee would fall within the definition
Section 2(9) of the Act was: whether the work done by him is done
in connection with the work of the factory and whether or not it is
casual or precarious. This was a decision of a Single Judge which
was affirmed by the Division Bench in the decision reported as ESIC
Vs. Gnanambikai Mills Ltd. (1974) Lab.IC 798.
lodged.

A caveat may be

As held in the decision reported as ESI Corporation Vs.

Ayurvedic ICP 1979 Ker.LT 897 the essential distinction between
“engagement of a person to do particular items of work” and
“employment of a person in service” has not to be lost sight of.
22.

A Division Bench of the Kerala High Court, in the

decision reported as Regional Director, ESIC Vs. P.R.Narahari Rao,
while dealing with the subject at hand, in para 7 of the report,
observed as under:“7. .......... The oft repeated distinction is that
between an “employment” and “engagement” if a
person is engaged casually for a purpose
unconnected
with
the
operations
of
the
establishment, or some work which does not form
the integral part of such operations, he may not be
an employee since there would be no employer
-employee relationship between them only in
consequence of the casual engagement for

FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page13 of 21

purposes unconnected with the main operations of
the establishment. On the other hand, if a person
is employed, though casually and for a very short
period of time, but in connection with the
processes which are integral and connected with or
incidental or preparatory to the operations of the
establishment, then he may be an employee
entitled to coverage under the Act.”
23.

Another facet has to be considered.

As held in the

majority view of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported
as Calcutta Electricity Supply Corporation & Ors. Vs. Subhash
Chandra Bose & Ors. 1992 ILLN 353 where the workman is deployed
through

a

contractor

the

interplay

of

employee,

immediate

employee and principal employer has to be considered. This brings
out the concept of supervision or supervisory control of the principal
employer on the employee.
24.

Before noting the relevant observations of the majority

view of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Subhash Chandra Bose's case
(supra) it may be noted that “employment” denotes a larger
concept

than what is denoted by the term “engagement”.

Employment connotes a master and servant relationship and a
concept of non-casual service.

Engagement connotes a casual

employment, casually made for a casual work.

In the decision

reported as ESIC Vs. Ayurvedic Industrial Cooperative Pharmacy
1980 (40) FLR 409(Kerala), vide para 8, it was noted that there may
be engagements which may not amount to service. Many instances
can be envisaged where a person does work for another without
entering into his service, and on the basis merely of a contract to
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page14 of 21

carry out such work.

No doubt, service is also a contractual

relationship, but where there is no case of a person entering into the
service of another, employer-employee relationship does not come
into being.

For instance, a porter undoubtedly works for a

passenger for wages but he is not an employee for the passenger
whose work he does. Similarly, a plumber called into repair is no
doubt paid for his work but for that reason he does not enter into a
contract of service or employment.

Instances need not be

multiplied. It was held that one of the main distinguishing feature
may be said to be disciplinary control.
25.

The

other

facet

of

disciplinary

control

would

be

“supervision” which was highlighted by the majority view in
Subhash Chandra Bose's case (supra). In para 13 and 14 of the said
opinion it was observed as under:“13. In whatever manner the word “employee”
under S. 2(9) be construed, liberally or restrictedly,
the construction cannot go to the extent of ruling out
the function and role of the immediate employer or
obliterating the distance between the principal
employer and the immediate employer. In some
situations he is a cut-off. He is the one who stumbles
in the way of direct nexus being established, unless
statutorily fictioned, between the employee and the
principal employer. He is the one who in a given
situation is the principal employer to the employee,
directly employed under him. If the work by the
employee is conducted under the immediate gaze or
overseeing of the principal employer, or his agent,
subject to other conditions as envisaged being
fulfilled, he would be an employee for the purpose of
S. 2(9). Thus, besides the question afore-posed with
regard to supervision of the principal employer the
subsidiary question is whether instantly the
contractual supervision exercised by the immediate
employer (electrical contractors) over his employee
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page15 of 21

was exercised, on the terms of the contract, towards
fulfilling self-obligation or in discharge of duty as an
agent of the principal employer.
14. P.M. Patel case [1986- I.L.L.N. 55] (vide supra),
can also be of no help to interpret the word
“supervision” herein. The word as such is not found
employed in S. 2(f) of the Employees Provident
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, but
found used in the text of the judgment. It appears to
have been used as a means to establish connection
between the employer and the employee having
regard to the nature of the work performed. But
what has been done in Patel case (vide supra),
cannot ipso facto be imported in the instant case
since the word “supervision” in the textual context
requires independent construction. In the ordinary
dictional sense “to supervise” means to direct or
oversee the performance or operation of an activity
and to oversee it, watch over and direct. It is work
under eye and gaze of someone who can
immediately direct a corrective and tender advice. In
the textual sense “supervision” of the principal
employer or his agent is on “work” at the places
envisaged and the word “work” can neither be
construed so broadly to be final act of acceptance or
rejection of work, nor so narrowly so as to be
supervision at all times and at each and every step
of the work. A harmonious construction alone would
help carry out the purpose of the Act, which would
mean moderating the two extremes. When the
employee is put to work under the eye and gaze of
the principal employer, or his agent, where he can
be watched secretly, accidentally, or occasionally,
while the work is in progress, so as to scrutinize the
quality thereof and to detect faults therein, as also
put to timely remedial measures by direction given,
finally leading to the satisfactory completion and
acceptance of the work, that would in our view be
supervision for the purposes of S. 2(9) of the Act. It
is the consistency of vigil, the proverbial “a stitch in
time saves nine”. The standards of vigil would of
course depend on the facts of each case. Now this
function, the principal employer, no doubt can
delegate to his agent who in the eye of law is his
second self, i.e. , a substitute of the principal
employer. The immediate employer, instantly, the
electrical contractors, can by statutory compulsion
never be the agent of the principal employer. If such
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page16 of 21

a relationship is permitted to be established it would
not only obliterate the distinction between the two,
but would violate the provisions of the Act as well as
the contractual principle that a contractor and a
contractee cannot be the same person. The
Employees' State Insurance Corporation claims
establishment of such agency on the terms of the
contract, a relationship, express or implied. But as is
evident, the creation of deduction of such
relationship throws one towards the statutory
scheme of keeping distinct the concept of principal
and immediate employer, because of diverse and
distinct roles. The definition is well drawn in
Halsbury Laws of England (Hailsham Edn.), Vol. I at
page 193 as follows:
“An agent is to be distinguished on the one
hand from a servant, and on the other hand
an independent contractor. A servant acts
under the direct control and supervision of his
master and is bound to conform to all
reasonable orders given to him in the course of
his work; an independent contractor, on the
other hand, is entirely independent of any
control or interference and merely undertakes
to produce a specified result, employing his
own means to produce that result. An agent,
though bound to exercise his authority in
accordance with lawful instructions which mat
be given to him from time to time by hid
principal, is not subject to its exercise to the
direct control and supervision of the principal.”
And this statement of law was used with approval by
this court in Superintendent of Post Ofiices v.
P.K..Rajamma [1977-II L.L.N. 41].”
26.

The facts in Subhash Chandra Bose's case (supra) were

that Calcutta Electricity Supply had awarded contracts through
contractors to execute excavation works for laying underground
cables under public roads as also the conversion of overhead
electric lines.

It was not in dispute that though the works were

carried out outside the precincts of Calcutta Electricity Supply
Corporation but related to the works ordinarily carried out by
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page17 of 21

Calcutta Electricity Supply Corporation.

The dispute centered

around as to whether Calcutta Electricity Supply Corporation
exercised supervision over the workmen or whether the corporation
measured, evaluated and determined the execution of the works for
purposes of making payment to the contractors.

For if the

corporation exercised no supervision over the workmen engaged by
the contractor it would not be liable, as held by the majority view, to
make any contribution under the Act for such workmen on account
of there being no employer-employee relationship and that the
contractual supervision exercised by the immediate employer (the
electrical contractor), over his employees would be exercised, on
the terms of the contract, towards fulfilling a self-obligation or in
discharge of duty to execute the work for the Calcutta Electricity
Supply Corporation i.e. the principal employer. On facts, in para 19
of the report, factual discussion, concluded the debate in said case
as under:“19. ...To the Division Bench of the High Court it
is obvious that the Regional Director of the
Employees ' State Insurance Corporation has
nowhere found that there was actual supervision,
either by the C.E.S.C., or its duly appointed
agents, over works which were performed by the
employees of the electrical contractors. All that
has been found is that the said works on
completion were checked by the C.E.S.C., and
then accepted. Checking of work after the same
is completed and supervision of work while in
progress is not the same. These have different
perceptions. Checking of work on its completion
is an activity, the purpose of which is to finally
accept or reject the work, on the touchstone of
jobs specifications. Thereafter, if accepted, it has
to be paid for. Undisputably electrical contractors
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page18 of 21

had to be paid on the acceptance of the work.
This step by no means is supervision exercised.
Neither can it be the terminating point of an
agency when the interests of the so called
principal and the so called agent become
business like. Besides, the High Court has found
that the work done by the employees was under
the exclusive supervision of the electrical
contractors or competent supervisors engaged by
them under the terms of the contract and the
licence. By necessary implication supervision by
the C.E.S.C., or its agents stood excluded.
Supervision rested with persons holding valid
certificates of competency for which a register of
supervision was required under the licence to be
maintained. Under the contracts, the electrical
contractors cannot in one breath be termed as
agents of the C.E.S.C., undertaking supervision of
the work of their employees and innately under
the licence to have beforehand delegated that
function to the holder of the certificate of
competency. Thus we hold that on the contract
read with or without the terms of the licence, no
such agency factually or legally, stood created on
behalf of the C.E.S.C., in favour of the electrical
contractors, and none could be, as that would
violate the statutory scheme of distinction well
marked under Section 2(a) of the Act.
The
supervision taken was to fulfill a contractual
obligation simpliciter and we leave it at that
level.”
27.

A perusal of the impugned decisions as also the orders

passed by the authority under the ESI Act 1948 reveals that neither
has come to grip with the core issues required to be considered and
decided. As noted above the authority under the ESI Act 1948 as
also the learned Judge ESI Court went about determining the issue
with respect to the appellant not showing the workers as employed
by the appellant and in respect for whom admittedly no medical
benefits were extended by the appellant. From the mere presence

FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page19 of 21

of these workmen at the precincts of the appellant a presumptive
conclusion was drawn that the works being performed by the
workmen related to or were connected with the work of the
appellant ignoring the concept of work as noted in various decisions
hereinabove. Further, the decision in Subhash Chandra Bose's case
(supra) in relation to supervisory control, though noted, has been
totally ignored in its applicability.
28.

As

noted above the

issue

could

not have

been

adjudicated without considering the work contracts awarded by the
appellant to independent contractors.

Further, in relation to the

said work contracts, supervisory control of the appellant had to be
considered;

focusing

on

whether

the

appellant

exercised

supervisory control over the workmen deployed by the contractor or
whether the supervisory control was limited to measuring the works
and ensuring due completion thereof under the contract for
purposes of making payment to the contractor as per the contract.
29.

Thus, the matter calls for a remand.

30.

Before concluding I may note that the appellant also

took a stand before the learned Judge ESIC that the contractors
engaged by the appellant had deposited, with the authority under
the Act, the contribution to be deposited for the workmen deployed.
Challans Ex. PW-1/6, Ex. PW-1/7, Ex. PW-1/8, Ex. PW-1/9, Ex. PW1/10 and Ex. PW-1/11 were proved in evidence.
31.

Thus, at the remanded stage this aspect of the matter

would also be duly considered by the learned Judge ESI Court.
FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

Page20 of 21

32.

The appeals are accordingly allowed. Orders impugned

in the two appeals are quashed.

Matter is remanded to the ESI

Court for fresh determination keeping in view the observations
made in the present decision.

It is made clear that since the

original contracts awarded by the appellant to the independent
contractors have not been brought on record, learned Judge ESI
Court would grant an opportunity to the parties to bring on record
the said agreements. Lastly, it is made clear that this Court has not
expressed any opinion on the factual aspect of the controversy and
nothing stated in the present decision would be construed as an
expression on the merits of the factual controversy between the
parties. This Court has set aside the impugned orders noting that
the relevant evidence i.e. the work contracts have just not been
considered. Law on the subject has been highlighted by this Court.
33.

Parties are directed to appear before the learned Judge

ESI Court on 1.7.2008.

Proceedings would be revived in

both

petitions by the learned Judge ESI Court. Since considerable time
has lapsed the matter would be decided expeditiously and
preferably by the end of the current calender year.
34.

No costs.

35.

TCR be returned forthwith.

MAY 26, 2008
mm

FAO No. 88/2002 and 375/2003

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page21 of 21

