IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.874/03
#

Jagdish Lal Bhatia & Ors.
........ Appellants
through: Mr.C.P. Vig, Advocate
VERSUS

$

Madan Lal Bhatia & Anr.
....... Respondents
through: Mr.Subhash Verma and
S.K. Duggal, Advocates.
RESERVED ON: 15.11.2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 21.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
This appeal is directed against the order dated

21.10.03 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi
whereby petition filed by the respondent under Section 276 of
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 was allowed and letters of
administration were granted in favour of the respondent in
respect of the will dated 6.2.1985 executed by Late Smt. Ram
Lubhai.
2.

Late Smt. Ram Lubhai (hereinafter referred to as the

deceased) had 5 sons namely, Shri Chand Bhatia, Kishan

page 1 of 20

Chand Bhatia, Madan Lal Bhatia, Jagdish Lal Bhatia and Kundan
Lal Bhatia and one daughter, Rawail Kumari. Deceased died on
4.3.1994. Three sons (Shri Chand, Kishan Chand, Kundan Lal)
had pre-deceased her. Thus, at the time of her death,
deceased was survived by her two sons Madan Lal and Jagdish,
daughter Rawail Kumari and the legal heirs of her other three
pre-deceased sons. Deceased was the owner of the property
bearing Municipal No.26/67 West Patel Nagar, New Delhi and
other movable properties such as cash, post office bonds,
jewellery and house hold items etc.
3.

Madan Lal Bhatia filed a petition under Section 276

of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 seeking probate of a will
purported to have been executed by the deceased on 6th
February, 1985. As per the will, the deceased had bequeathed
her entire property in favour of Madan Lal to the exclusion of
her other legal heirs including her son Jagdish Lal and daughter
Rawail Kumari.
4.

Jagdish Lal and 7 children of Late Sh. Kishan Chand

(pre-deceased son of the deceased) had opposed the petition.
5.

The will in question Ex.PW2/2 is a computer typed

document and consists of 2 sheets. It has been typed in the
English language. It bears the signatures of the deceased on
each page. The signature has been appended in Gurmukhi
script. The will in question is a registered document.
page 2 of 20

6.

The will in question has been witnessed by one

Mr.Bansi Lal Arora and one Mr.M.N. Sharma.
7.

Bansi

Lal

Arora

has

been

examined

by

the

respondent as PW-2 to prove the will. In his examination-inchief he deposed that he is the friend of the respondent. That
he knew the deceased since the year 1972 and that he and the
other attesting witness had attested the due execution of the
will by the deceased. That the deceased along with the
respondent had come to his office and expressed her desire to
execute a will in favour of the respondent as the respondent
was taking good care of her. Regarding preparation of the will
he stated that the will Ex.PW2/2 was drafted by an advocate
Mr.Sharma who is also the other attesting witness. That the will
was drafted under the instructions of the deceased. That the
will was then typed by a typist. (He could not recollect the
name or whereabouts of the said typist). That after the will was
fully typed, the contents of the will were read over to the
deceased by the advocate in vernacular and thereafter
deceased appended her signatures in Gurmukhi.

That

thereafter he signed the will as an attesting witness. That after
the execution and attestation of the will, they went to the office
of Sub-Registrar, Kashmere Gate, Delhi where the will was duly
registered.
8.

To prove the registration of the will in question, one
page 3 of 20

Mr.Shatrughan, LDC, Office of Sub-Registrar, Kashmere Gate,
Delhi was examined as PW-1. He deposed that the will in
question was registered on 6.2.1985. He also brought the
necessary records to prove the same.
9.

On the other hand, objectors/appellants i.e. Anoop

Bhatia and Jagdish Lal Bhatia examined themselves as OW-1
and OW-2 respectively. In their respective testimony, they
deposed that the deceased was not in a sound mental
condition at the time of execution of the will. That being an old
lady, deceased was suffering from various infirmities and could
not even see or hear properly. That the deceased was an
illiterate lady. That the deceased did not appear before the
Sub-Registrar. That the will in question is a forged and
fabricated document.
10.

Apart from their own testimony, objectors have not

led any evidence.
11.

Considering the evidence led by both the parties,

vide order dated 21.10.03 the learned Trial Court has held that
the will dated 6.2.1985 was the last legal and valid testament
of the deceased and thus granted letters of administration in
favor of the respondent Madan Lal.
12.

Aggrieved by the impugned order dated 21.10.03,

objectors to the petition under Section 276 of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925 filed by the respondent have filed the
page 4 of 20

present appeal.
13.

In support of their objections, following grounds

were urged by the objectors :- (Same grounds have also been
urged in the present appeal)
A

That the appellant was an illiterate lady
therefore

she

could

not

have

appended

her

signatures on the will.
B

That the appellant being an old lady was
suffering from various infirmities. At the time of the
execution of the will, deceased was not in a sound
mental condition and could not even see or hear
properly.

Thus,

she

was

not

capable

of

understanding the contents of the will and was also
not in a position to appear before the Sub-Registrar..
C

Since the alleged attesting witness Mr.B.L.
Arora was a friend of the respondent, beneficiary
under the will, not much importance/weightage can
be attached to his testimony.

D

Neither the typist who typed the will nor the
advocate who drafted the will and also an attesting
witness were produced

and

examined by

the

respondent.
E

Disproportionate nature of bequest under the
will is a circumstance casting heavy suspicion on the
page 5 of 20

genuineness of the will.
14.

Section 2(h) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925

defines a will to mean the legal declaration of the intention of a
testator with respect to his property which he desires to be
carried into effect after his death.
15.

Judgment of this Court in the decision reported as

Vidya Sagar Soni v State & Ors AIR 2006 Delhi 354 extensively
dealt with the legal burden of proof when a will is propounded.
What would constitute suspicious circumstances and what form
of affirmative proof should be sought by the court to satisfy the
judicial conscience that the document propounded is the last
legal and valid testament. From a reading of the said decision,
under-noted principles can be culled out :I

The legal burden to prove due execution
always lies upon the person propounding a will. The
propounder must satisfy the judicial conscience of
the court that the instrument so propounded is last
will of a free and capable testator.

II

The onus is discharged by the propounder
adducing

prima

facie

evidence

proving

the

competence of the testator and execution of the will
in the manner contemplated by the law. The
contestant opposing the will may bring material on
record meeting such prima facie in which event the
page 6 of 20

onus would shift back on the propounder to satisfy
the Court affirmatively that the testator did know
well the contents of the will and in sound disposing
capacity executed the same. (see the decision of the
Supreme Court in Madhukar D. Shende v Tarabai
Aba Shedge AIR 2002 SC 637) I
III

No

specific

standard

of

proof

can

be

enunciated which must be applicable to all the
cases. Every case depends upon its circumstances.
Apart from other proof, conduct of parties is very
material and has considerable bearing on evidence
as to the genuineness of will which is propounded.
Courts have to be vigilant and zealous in examining
evidence. Rules relating to proof of wills are not
rules of laws but are rules of prudence.
IV

Expanding on the care and caution to be
adopted by the courts, and presumptions to be
raised, in the decision reported as (1864) 3 Sw & Tr.
431 In The Goods of Geale, it was opined that where
a person is illiterate or semi literate or the will is in a
language not spoken or understood by the executor,
the court would require evidence to affirmatively
establish that the testator understood and approved
all the contents of the will.
page 7 of 20

V.

One form of affirmative proof is to establish
that the will was read over by, or to, the testator
when he executed it. If a testator merely casts his
eye over the will, this may not be sufficient.

VI

Courts have to evaluate evidence pertaining to
the

circumstances

under

which

the

will

was

prepared. If a will is prepared and executed under
circumstances which raise a well grounded suspicion
that the executor did not express his mind under the
will, probate would not be granted unless that
suspicion is removed.
VII

A word of caution. Circumstances can only
raise a suspicion if they are circumstance attending,
or at least relevant to the preparation and execution
of the will itself.

VIII

Another point that has to be considered is
about the improbability in the manner in which the
instrument

is

circumstances

scripted.
would

be

Instance
alleged

of

suspicious

signatures

of

testator being shaky and doubtful, condition of the
testator's

mind

being

feeble

and

debilitated,

bequest being unnatural, improbable and unfair.
IX

Suspicious circumstances are a presumption to
hold against the will. Greater is the suspicion more
page 8 of 20

heavy would be the onus to be discharged by he
who propounds the will.
X

A will is normally executed by a person where
he intends to alter the rule of succession or where
he desires a particular form of inheritance and to
that extent, nature of bequest is not of much
substance to invalidate a will, but consistent view
taken by the courts is that this could be treated as a
suspicious circumstance. What weightage has to be
attached to this suspicion would depend upon case
to case.

XI

Suspicion being a presumptive evidence, is a
weak evidence and can be dispelled.

16.

With regard to proof the Will, in the decision

reported as Madhukar D. Shende v Tarabai Aba Shedge AIR
2002 SC 637 it was observed as under :“8. The requirement of proof of a will is the
same as any other document excepting that
the evidence tendered in proof of a will should
additionally satisfy the requirement of Section
63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 and
Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. If
after considering the matters before it, that is,
the facts and circumstances as emanating
from the material available on record of a
given case the court either believes that the
will was duly executed by the testator or
considers the existence of such fact so
probable that any prudent person ought,
under the circumstances of that particular
case, to act upon the supposition that the will
page 9 of 20

was duly executed by the testator, then the
factum of execution of will shall be said to
have been proved. The delicate structure of
proof framed by a judicially trained mind
cannot stand on week foundation nor survive
any inherent defects therein but at the same
time ought not to be permitted to be
demolished by wayward pelting of stones of
suspicion and supposition by wayfarers and
waylayers. What was told by Baron Alderson
to the Jury in R. v. Hodge 1838, 2 Lewis CC
227 may be apposite to some extent. "The
mind was apt to make a pleasure in adapting
circumstances to one another and even in
straining them a title, if need be, to force then
to form parts of one connected hole; and the
more ingenuous the mind of the individual, the
more likely was it, considering such matters,
to overreach and mislead itself, to supply
some little link that is wanting, to take for
granted some fact consistent with its previous
theories and necessary to render them
complete." The conscience of the court has to
be satisfied by the propounder of will adducing
evidence so as to dispel any suspicious or
unnatural circumstances attaching to a will
provided that there is something unnatural or
suspicious about the will. The law of evidence
does not permit conjecture or suspicion having
the place of legal proof nor permit them to
demolish a fact otherwise proved by legal and
convincing evidence. Well founded suspicion
may be a ground for closer scrutiny of
evidence but suspicion alone cannot form the
foundation of a judicial verdict -- positive or
negative.”
17.

With the aforesaid understanding of the law, I will

now consider the objections raised by the appellants to the will
and the evidence on record.
18.

With regard to ground 'A' i.e. deceased was an

illiterate lady, it is relevant to note the respective pleadings of
both the objectors.
page 10 of 20

19.

Relevant portions of the objections filed by the

appellant Jagdish Lal Bhatia read as under :“PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS :
1.
That the present petition u/s 276 of the
Indian Succession Act, for the grant of the
letters of Administration, is not maintainable,
because Shrimati Ram Lubhai had neither
executed any Will nor she was a sound
disposing mind in February, 1985 at the time
of the alleged execution of the Will, and as
such the alleged Will is a forged and
fabricated document and have no legal or
binding force in the eyes of law.
...........
On Merits
............

20.

7.
Para 7 of the petition is wrong and
denied. It is wrong that deceased Shrimati
Ram Lubhai left behind a registered Will dt.
6.2.1985, bequeathing the property in favor of
the petitioner. The said Alleged Will
dt.6.2.1985 is a forged and fabricated
document, because on the one hand the said
Shrimati was having no legal right over the
said property and on the other hand she was
not of the sound and disposing mind on
6.2.1985, and she could not execute any Will
nor was in a position to execute and Will and it
appears that petitioner had produced some
fictitious person before the Sub Registrar who
impersonated herself as Ram Lubhai, and got
the alleged Will registered before the SubRegistrar. The said Will being forged and
fabricated document, has no force in the eyes
of law.
..........”
Relevant portion of the reply of the appellant Jagdish

Lal to the reply filed by the respondent to the objections reads
as under :“REPLY TO THE PRELIMINIARY OBJECTIONS:
page 11 of 20

21.

1.
Para 1 of the reply to the preliminary
objections as stated is wrong and hence
denied. The Will in question is forged and
fabricated document, and it was never
executed by the deceased, and as such the
present petition is wholly incompetent. The
Will executed by late Shrimati Ram Lubhai is
the forged and fabricated Will. The said
Shrimati Ram Lubhai was not good sound
disposing mind, and as such she could not
execute any Will in February, 1985, and the
present petition on the basis of forged and
fabricated Will is not maintainable.”
For the first time in the examination-in-chief by way

of an affidavit the appellant Jagdish Lal Bhatia, OW-2 deposed
that the deceased was an illiterate lady. Relevant portion of his
examination-in-chief reads as under :-

22.

“5. That the said Smt. Ram Lubhai was not
keeping good health and she never appeared
before the office of sub registrar in connection
with the registration of the said Will because
whenever she did anything, she used to
consult me and she never told me about the
execution of the Will and the Petitioner has
colluded with the attesting witnesses of the
said Will with the object to grab the property
in dispute and as such, the said Will is forged,
fabricated and void document. My mother was
an illiterate and she could not read or write
and she was suffering from various old aged
diseases as such, the question of execution of
any Will by the deceased Smt. Ram Lubhai
does not arise.”
Noting the pleadings of other appellants/objectors,

relevant portion of their objection petition reads as under :“1. That the Will of late Smt. Ram Lubhai is
an act of forgery. Smt. Ram Lubhai had lost all
her senses and was not capable of
understanding the contents of the Will. It is an
act of manipulation and forgery made by the
petitioner with malafide intentions and the
page 12 of 20

23.

same is not binding on the objectors herein.
Taking cue from his uncle Jagdish Lal Bhatia,

objector Anoop Kumar Bhatia,OW-1 also deposed about the
illiteracy of the deceased for the first time in his examinationin-chief. Relevant portion of his examination-in-chief reads as
under :-

24.

“........Smt. Ram Lubhai, our grand-mother was
aged about 90 years at the time of her death
on 5.3.2004. She was illiterate. She was
unable to move. She could not hear anything.
Our grand-mother used to reside with her sons
at their respective houses, from time to time.
Smt. Ram Lubahi had not executed any will.
The Will Ex.PW2/2 is a forged and fabricated
Will and was never executed by Smt. Ram
Lubhai.”
It is well settled that a party can be permitted to

adduce evidence on the basis of the case of pleaded by him in
his pleading. In the decision reported as Abubakar v Harun AIR
1996 SC 612, the Supreme Court has observed as under :-

25.

“........No amount of proof can substitute
pleadings which are the foundation of the
claim of a litigating party........”
Therefore, the plea of the objectors that the

deceased was an illiterate lady cannot be considered for the
reason said plea was not raised in the pleadings of the
objectors but was for the first time introduced in their
evidence.
26.

However for the discussion here-in-after literacy of

the executant becomes irrelevant for if it is otherwise shown
that she executed the will fully conscious of it and after
page 13 of 20

understanding the same, the will shall stand.
27.

With regard to the ground 'B' i.e. that the deceased

was an infirm lady at the time of the execution of the will,
suffice would it be to note that the appellants have not led any
positive evidence to establish the same. Two facts which
according to the learned Trial Court have tilted the scale in the
favor of the respondent and in my opinion rightly so are (i)
evidence that the deceased used to visit one 'Guruji' around
the time of the execution of the will and (ii) that the deceased
died 9 years after the execution of the will.
28.

In the decision reported as Ramabai Padmakar Patil

v Rukminibai Vishnu Vekhande AIR 2003 SC 3109 with regard
to the similar ground raised by the objectors therein, the
Supreme Court has observed as under :“9. ........The fact that Smt. Yamunabai
was hard of hearing or that she was unable
to walk does not lead to an inference that
her mental faculties had been impaired or
that she did not understand the contents of
the document which she was executing. It
is important to note that Smt. Yamunabai
personally came to the office of the SubRegistrar and her death took place after a
considerable period i.e. 3 years and 9
months after the execution of the Will. No
evidence has been adduced by the
defendants to show that at the time of the
execution of the Will she had been suffering
from any such ailment which had impaired
her mental faculties to such an extent that
she was unable to understand the real
nature of the document which she was
executing. We are, therefore, clearly of the
page 14 of 20

29.

opinion that the finding recorded by the
learned District Judge, which has been
affirmed by the High Court in second
appeal, is not based upon a correct
application of legal principles governing the
proof and acceptance of Will and the same
is completely perverse. The aforesaid
finding is accordingly set aside. The finding
recorded by the trial Court that the Will is
genuine is hereby restored”
Pertaining to ground 'C' i.e. that the attesting

witness who proved the will is an interested witness, it is
relevant to note the observations of the Supreme Court in the
decisions reported as Rabindra Nath Mukherjee v Panchanan
Banerjee AIR 1995 SC 1684 and Madhukar D. Shende v Tarabai
Aba Shedge AIR 2002 SC 637.
30.

In the Rabindra's case (supra), the Supreme Court

has observed as under :“6. Insofar as the third circumstance is
concerned, we may first observe that
witnesses in such documents verify whether
the same had been executed voluntarily by
the concerned person knowing its contents. In
case where a will is registered and the Subregistrar certifies that the same had been
read over to the executor who, on doing so,
admitted the contents, the fact that the
witnesses to the document are interested
loses significance. The documents at hand
were registered and it is on record that the
Sub-registrar had explained the contents to
the old lady. So, we do not find the third
circumstance as suspicious on the facts of the
present case”
31.

In the Madhukar's case (supra), the Supreme Court

has observed as under :-

page 15 of 20

“10. The two attesting witnesses on account
of being known to Chingubai's son, being his
classmates, were known to the family, and
therefore, were natural witness to be called to
attest the execution of will. On account of their
acquaintance with the family, they could have
naturally known and identified the executant.
Merely because of being classmates they
would be interested in obliging their
classmates mother so as to benefits her and
go to the extent of falsely deposing is too far
fetched an inference to draw.....”
15. Other reasoning of the trial court and
the first appellate Court, for holding the will
not proved, too to say the least, verge on
absurdity. Bhagubai died a day after the
execution and registration of the will. There is
nothing to show that Bhagubai was physically
or mentally incapacitated from executing the
will. On the one hand, the courts below have
questioned the propriety of the Sub-Registrar
having come to the house of Bhagubai for
registering the will on the ground as to why
Bhagubai could not have gone to the office of
Registrar on an assumption that she was fit to
do so and yet the mental capacity of
Bhagubai to execute the will have been
doubted. The two attesting witnesses have
been held to be 'interested' on the ground of
their being classfellows of Chingubai's son
and on the other hand, it has been doubted
whether they would have known and
identified the executant. There is nothing to
doubt the mental and physical capacity of
Bhagubai but the same has been suspected
because of "complete absence of any medical
evidence, of a doctor which would show that
the testator was in a sound and disposing
stare of mind". There is no rule of law or of
evidence which requires a doctor to be kept
present when a will is executed. In short, the
courts below have allowed their findings to be
influenced by such suspicion and conjectures
as have no foundation in the evidence and
have no relevance in the facts and
circumstances of the case and unwittingly
page 16 of 20

allowed their process of judicial thinking to be
vitiated
by
irrelevant
reasoning
and
considerations. The weighty factor that the
factum of execution of will by Bhagubai was
being denied by a rank trespasser without
raising any specific pleadings and the fact
that no relation of Bhagubai has chosen to lay
a challenge to the will, have been simply
overlooked. In our opinion, the High Court
ought not to have sustained such a perverse
finding which would result in the property of a
rightful owner being lost to a trespasser.”
32.

From the afore-noted two decisions, the legal

principle which emerges is that if there is nothing unnatural
about the will and the evidence adduced satisfies the
requirement of proving a will, the court would not return a
finding of 'not proved' merely on account of certain assumed
suspicion or supposition.
33.

In

so

far

as

ground

'D'

pertaining

to

non-

examination of typist and advocate is concerned, suffice would
it be to note the following observations of the Supreme Court in
Ramabai's case (supra) :“9. The learned District Judge has observed
that Smt. Yamunabai was very old when she
executed the Will and she was hard of
hearing and was unable to walk. He further
observed that Chhaya Dighe who typed the
Will and one Shri Tiwari, Advocate, who was
present at the time of preparation and
execution of the Will, were not examined
and these facts together created a doubt
regarding the authenticity of the Will. As
discussed earlier, in view of Section 63 of
Indian Succession Act and the proviso to
Section 68 of the Evidence Act, the
requirement of law would be fully satisfied if
page 17 of 20

only one of the attesting witness is
examined to prove the Will. That this had
been done in the present case by examining
PW2 Raghunath Govind Sogale cannot be
disputed. No infirmity of any kind had been
found in the testimony of this witness.
Chhaya Dighe merely typed the Will and
she is not an attesting witness nor it is
anybody's case that Smt. Yamunabai had
put her thumb impression on the Will in her
presence, therefore, her examination as a
witness was wholly redundant. The mere
non examination of the Advocate who was
present at the time of preparation or
registration of the Will cannot, by itself, be a
ground to discard the same.......”
34.

As already noted, disproportionate bequest at best

is a circumstance casting suspicion upon the genuineness of
the will. However, said suspicious circumstance can be repelled
by adducing evidence.
35.

In the instant case, the reason given by deceased

for bequeathing her entire property in favour of the respondent
is that she was residing with the respondent and that the
respondent was taking good care of her. It has been admitted
by the objectors also that the deceased was residing with the
respondent.
36.

There is also history of bad relations in the family

evidenced by the fact that the deceased was in litigation with
her son Late Sh Kishan Chand Bhatia over the ownership of the
property which is the subject-matter of the probate petition i.e.
House no.26/67, West Patel Nagar, Delhi.

page 18 of 20

37.

It is also pertinent to note that no challenge has

been laid to the will by the other legal heirs of the deceased
including her daughter Smt. Rawail Kumari.
38.

In the decision reported as S.Sunderasa Pai v

Sumangala T. Pai AIR 2002 SC 317, the Supreme Court has
held that the uneven distribution of assets amongst children by
itself, cannot be taken as a circumstance causing suspicion
surrounding execution of the will. It was further observed :“5....... It is significant to note that only the
plaintiff has questioned the Will. All the
defendants were supporting the Will. The High
Court also found that in view of testimony of
the attesting witness, the Will had been
formally roved. Under these circumstances,
we fail to understand how the conclusion
about the Will being unnatural on the basis of
uneven distribution of the assets by Indira Bai
could be reached.......”.
39.

In the decision reported as Vilas Pandurang

Patil v State of Maharashtra (2004) 6 SCC 158 said, it was
observed as under:“18. ..........It is true that when on the
evidence brought on record two views are
possible and the court has taken a view which
is possible, interference by the appellate court
would not be proper............”.
40.

In view of the above discussion, I hold that the

impugned order dated 21.10.03 does not suffer from any legal
infirmity.
41.

The appeal is thus dismissed.
page 19 of 20

42.

No costs.

43.

LCR be returned.

November 21, 2007
sl

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
(JUDGE)

page 20 of 20

