*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.355/1999
E.S.I.C
through:

........ Appellant
Mr. K.P.Mavi, Advocate
VERSUS

M/s. Om Shiv Die & Leaf Printers
.......Respondent
through:
None for the respondent.
DATE OF DECISION:
25.4.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)

1.

Heard learned counsel for the appellant.

2.

It is urged by learned counsel for the appellant that it

is settled law that best evidence against a party is the admission
of the party concerned, more so when the admission remains
unexplained or/and unrebutted.
3.

It all started when vide letter dated 12.3.1993 the

appellant allotted Code No.II-20775-83 to M/s.Om Shiv Die &
Leafs Printers.
respondent

The code was allotted by the appellant to the

pursuant

to an inspection of the unit of the

respondent carried out on 27.1.1993, record of which inspection
FAO No.355/99

page 1 of 5

was reduced into writing vide survey report of even date, Ex.PW1/DA. The same records 10 persons employed and working in the
unit. The names of the 10 persons stand duly noted in the report.
Parmanand a partner of the unit who was present at the time of
the inspection signed the inspection report.
4.

Dev Anand Sharma, son of Parmanand challenged the

coverage of the firm under the ESIC Act and filed a petition under
Section 75(g) read with Section 77(1-a) of the ESI Act. The same
was registered as ESIC Case No.3/94. He stated in his petition
that as on the date of inspection the respondent was a
partnership firm and that it was subsequently dissolved and
taken over by him as a sole proprietor firm of his. He denied that
at any point of time more than 10 workers were engaged.

He

stated that depending upon work requirement sometimes casual
and sometimes seasonal workmen were engaged.

As an

alternative defence he pleaded that even including the seasonal
or casual employees the number did not exceed 10.

He

appended, as Annexure-B, to his petition, a purported statement
of employees engaged by the unit in the preceding 4 years.
5.

Matter proceeded to trial.

Dev Anand Sharma who

appeared as PW-1 reiterated in his evidence what was pleaded by
him in his petition. In cross-examination he admitted that at the
point mark 'X' on Ex. PW-1/DA there existed the signatures of his
FAO No.355/99

page 2 of 5

father. He however denied that the persons named in the survey
report Ex.PW-1/DA were employed on the date of the survey.
6.

The department examined Mr.T.D.Malhotra as RW-1

who led the inspection team, consisting of besides self, Mr.
K.N.Chawla and Mr.K.C.Arya inspectors.

RW-1 deposed that at

the time of inspection 10 workmen were found operating various
machines and conducting work related to the factory and that
their names were duly noted in the survey report Ex.PW-1/DA. He
stated that 3 more persons were present but they stated to be
friends of the employees and hence their names were not noted.
The witness further stated that Parmanand signed the survey
report at the point mark 'X'.
7.

The learned Judge ESIC Court has allowed the petition

filed by the respondent.
8.

Reasons given by the learned Judge, ESIC Court are

that the inspecting team did not record the parentage of the socalled 10 employees nor noted their designations, much less
obtained their signatures or thumb impressions on the report.
9.

It is unfortunate that the learned Judge, ESIC Court has

not considered the survey report Ex.PW-1/DA with reference to
the signatures of Parmanand, admittedly a partner of the firm at
the time of the survey. The learned Judge ESIC Court has failed
to note that while appending his signatures on the report
FAO No.355/99

page 3 of 5

Parmanand did not record a dissent that what was being noted in
the report was incorrect.

Further, learned Judge failed to note

that Parmanand was not produced as a witness by his son who
claimed to have taken over the business as the sole proprietor
thereof on dissolution of the partnership firm.

Further, the

learned Judge failed to note that the sole proprietor of the
respondent admitted that his father had signed on the survey
report when it was prepared at site and that he did not even
attempt to explain the circumstances under which his father
signed the report without demur or protest.
10.

It would also not be out of place to mention that in

cross-examination, RW-1, was given a suggestion that the survey
report Ex.PW-1/DA was prepared by them in their office. What I
intend to convey is that the respondent attempted to totally
disown the survey report probably forgetting that in his evidence,
PW-1 admitted his father's signatures at point 'X' on the survey
report, meaning thereby, that the report was indeed prepared at
the factory premises of the respondent contemporaneous with
the survey. The survey reports stands fully established.
11.

Since material evidence and circumstances have been

ignored by the learned Judge, ESIC Court, the appeal is allowed.
12.

Impugned judgment and order dated 3.5.1999 in ESIC

Case No.3/94 titled 'M/s.Om Shiv Die & Leafs Printers vs. ESIC' is
FAO No.355/99

page 4 of 5

set aside. The petition filed by the respondent is dismissed.
13.

No costs.

14.

TCR be returned forthwith.

April 25, 2008
dk

FAO No.355/99

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 5 of 5

