IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl.Appeal No. 177/1982
#
!

State (through Drugs Inspector,
Delhi Administration)
........
Petitioner
through:
Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Sh. Hukam Chand
through:

%

........

Respondent

None

DATE OF DECISION: 21.09.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Obtaining leave under Section 378 (4) Cr. P.C. 1973 to

challenge the judgment and order dated 1.2.1982 passed by Sh. D.N.
Kadian, Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi, appellant urges that the
impugned judgment and order dated 1.2.1982 be set aside and that
the respondent be convicted under Sections 27(a)(i) and 27(b) read
with Sections 18(a)(i), 18(a)(ii) and 18(a)(iia) and Rule 65(18) read
with Section 18(c) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
2.

Appellant is the Drugs Inspector, Delhi Administration.

Respondent (accused) is Hukum Chand, sole proprietor of M/s Fair Deal
Chemist.
3.

Briefly noted, relevant facts are that on 5.2.1978, in the

presence of the respondent the Drugs Inspector, Sh. V.B. Bajpai, PW-1

collected samples of two drugs known as Analgin Tablets, Batch
No.235 purported to be manufactured by M/s HKG Pharma (Pvt) Ltd
and

Prednisolone

Tablets,

Batch

No.

CP:104

purported

to

be

manufactured by M/s Cy-per Pharma from the premises of M/s Fair
Deal Chemist. Intimation in form 17 about the collection of the
samples and one sealed portion of each sample was handed over to
the respondent.
4.

The said two drugs were stocked and exhibited for sale in

the said premises. Besides the said two drugs, the firm was also found
stocking and exhibiting for sale various drugs like Apidin tablets,
Digene tablets etc which were marked as “C.G.H.S. Supply- Not for
sale”.
5.

After completing the formalities, one sealed portion of

each sample i.e Analgin tablets and Predinisolone tablets were sent to
the Govt. Analysts, Delhi Administration, Central Indian Pharmacopiea
Laboratory, Ghaziabad and Drugs Labortary, Baroda respectively for
test and analysis. The memos in form 18 having the seal impression of
the seal by which the samples were sealed were separately sent by
registered post to the respective Govt. Analyst.
6.

Both the Govt. Analysts in their reports opined that the

drugs in question were sub-standard, misbranded and not of standard
quality. The reports of the Govt. Analysts in respect of samples of
Analgin tablets and Predinisolone tablets are Ex.PW1/H and Ex.PW1/J
respectively.
7.

Accordingly, the complaint under Sections 27(a)(i) and

27(b) read with Sections 18(a)(i), 18(a)(ii) and 18(a)(iia) and Rule

65(18) read with Section 18(c) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
was filed against the respondent. Prosecution sought conviction of the
respondent on following grounds:(i)

That the respondent was stocking and exhibiting for sale

misbranded drugs. [Section 18(ii)].
(ii)

That the respondent was stocking and exhibiting for sale

adulterated drugs. [Section 18(iia)].
(iii)

That the respondent was stocking and exhibiting for sale drugs

which were not of standard quality [Section 18(i)].
(iv)

That the respondent was stocking and exhibiting for sale drugs

which were not meant for sale [Rule 65(18)].
8.

In respect of grounds (ii) and (iii), the prosecution relied

upon the afore-noted reports of the govt. analysts. As per the
prosecution, the said reports conclusively established that the drugs in
question were adulterated and not of standard quality.
9.

Per contra, stand of the respondent before the Trial Judge

was that the said reports cannot be regarded as conclusive evidence
against the respondent for the reason there has been a breach of
provision of Rule 46 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. It was
contended on behalf of the respondent that the rules framed under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 are mandatory in nature.
10.

Holding that there has been non-compliance of Rule 46 of

the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules by the Govt. Analysts, learned
Metropolitan Magistrate has acquitted respondent of the charges
framed against him under Sections 18(i) and 18(iia) read with Section
27(b) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

11.

Relevant part of the Rule 46 reads as under:“46. Procedure on receipt of sample --On
receipt of package from an Inspector containing a
sample for test or analysis, the Government
Analyst shall compare the seals on the packet
with
the
specimen
impression
received
separately and shall note the condition of the
seals on the package. After the test or analysis
has been completed, he shall forthwith supply to
the Inspector a report in triplicate in Form 13 of
the result of the test or analysis, together with
full protocols of the tests or analysis applied:……
…………”

12.

Rule 57 stipulates that the portion of the sample should be

placed in a sealed packet. It further stipulates that the packet
containing sample together with the Memorandum in form 18 should
be placed in an outer cover (package) and that said package be
forwarded to the Govt. Analyst. It further stipulates that copy of the
memorandum in form 18 as also specimen impression of the seal used
to seal the packet containing the sample should be sent separately to
the Govt. Analyst. Rule 46 stipulates that Govt. Analyst shall compare
the seal on the packet containing the sample with the specimen
impression seal sent to him seperately.
13.

Requirement of comparing seal on the sample with the

specimen of the seal used by the Drugs Inspector is to safeguard the
interest of both prosecutor and the accused. It is a guarantee against
tampering and sure guide to the government analyst that the sample
before him is the same sample which the Inspector had collected from
the accused.
14.

Drugs and Cosmetics Act, the Rules and the Forms

prescribed thereunder constitute on the one hand an elaborate code

against contravention of Law on adulteration of drugs, on the other it
provides sufficient safeguards and checks against the vexatious and
wrong acts of the Drugs Inspectors. The Act lays down the rights and
obligations, and the Rules channelise them. This method of check and
verification is a sure guarantee against tampering. The report of the
Public Analyst is of great vital importance because it virtually
concludes the case against the accused one way or the other. Thus
when the Act prescribes a particular mode for achieving an end, the
end achieved without undergoing the prescribed modes cannot be a
valid achievement and more so when it concerns the life and liberty of
a citizen. The report achieved from the Govt. Analyst in violation of the
rules prescribed under the Act will not be a worthy piece of evidence
for the purpose of criminal prosecution.
15.

Pertaining to the charge that the samples of the 2

medicines were not of standard quality, the learned M.M. has returned
a finding as under :“In the present case, the Memo form 18 are Ex.PW1/F and
Ex.PW1/G. The two reports of the Government Analysts are
Ex.PW1/J and Ex.PW1/H. The main contention of Mr.Soni is
that, as is evident from the aforesaid report, both the Govt.
analyst have not compared the seals on the bottles (packets)
with the specimen seals sent separately to them. They have
merely compared the seals on the package and not on the
packets. It is, therefore, doubtful whether the Government
analysts analysed the samples of the accused or some one
else.
Besides PW1 Mr.V.B.Bajpai retained with himself the seal
affixed to the samples and not handed over to independent
public witness hence, there remained no guarantee that the
seals affixed to the samples that were sent to the Govt.
Analysts remained intact and those samples were in the
same condition as they were when they were taken in the
presence of the accused persons. Moreover, PW-2 Har Lal,
PW6 Dr. P.N.Ahuja and P.W.8 Asa Nand cannot be treated as

independent witnesses of this case as they are interested in
one way or the other as they have not been prosecuted by
the Drug Inspector although they were found stocking or
exhibiting for sale the same very drug for which the accused
has been prosecuted.
19. The learned defence counsel also argued that rules 46
and 57 are in pari materia with the rule 7 and 17 of the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. He cited an authority
1976 Crl. L. J. 421 and tried to show that unless all necessary
steps required under the concerned rule for performing an
official act were proved to have duly taken, no legal
presumption can be drawn under illustration (e) to Section
114 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872. He also produced AIR
1969 S.C. 395 wherein their Lordship of the Supreme Court
have held that where law requires particular thing to be done
in certain manner, then it must be done in that manner or
not at all. So other modes of compliance are excluded.
Besides, the Government analyst in this case have not been
called in the witness box by the prosecution and valuable
right of the accused to cross-examine them has been
defeated.
If the Govt. analysts have been called and
examined in the court, he would have explained the correct
position of the seals on the packages and packets as raised
by the defence.
There is considerable force in the aforesaid contention of
Mr.Soni. In view of the matter, the reports of Govt. Analysts
cannot be taken as conclusive piece of evidence as in this
case in as much as reports of Govt. Analyst Ex.PW1/J and
Ex.PW1/H do not specify whether the Govt. Analysts had
compared the seals on the sample bottles (packets) with the
specimen seal impression in form 18, sent to them
separately. So, it cannot be said with certainty whether the
samples analysed by them were the very same sample which
had been collected from the accused. There is, therefore,
non-compliance of the mandatory rules 46 by the Govt.
analysts. So, the charge of the prosecution that drug was
adulterated and not of standard quality has not been proved
against the accused beyond all reasonable doubt and the
benefit of doubt of the same must be given to the accused.
Hence, charge under IInd and IIIrd head fails. The accused is
therefore, acquitted of the charge under IInd and IIIrd head.”
16.

I find no infirmity in the view taken by the learned

Metropolitan Magistrate on said aspect of the matter.
17.

In so far as charge of misbranding of drugs in question is

concerned, the prosecution relied upon the testimonies of Sh.

S.M.Garg and Sh. Y.S. Bhargava. Sh. S.M. Garg, PW-9 is the Joint
Managing Director of M/s R.K.G. Pharma Pvt Ltd and Sh. Y.S.Bhargava,
PW-10 is the proprietor of Cy-per Pharma. Both the witnesses deposed
that the drugs/tablets seized from the shop of the respondent were
manufactured by their companies.
18.

In his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., respondent

stated that he had purchased the said drugs from one Hayath Singh in
good faith for value. To establish the same, he produced a receipt,
mark ‘A’.
19.

It is pertinent to note that the respondent had disclosed

the name of Hayath Singh to the Drugs Inspector at the time of the
inspection of premises of his shop and similar drugs were recovered
from Hayath Singh when his premises were raided at the instance of
the respondent. It is further relevant to note that Hayath Singh was
prosecuted separately and was convicted and respondent had testified
against Hayath Singh in the said prosecution.
20.

Learned Metropolitan Magistrate has opined and in my

opinion rightly so, that the

respondent was unaware and could not

with reasonable diligence discover that the drugs in question were
misbranded or in any way contravened the provisions of Section 18 of
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. Learned Metropolitan Magistrate
has rightly held that case of the respondent was covered under the
Section 19(3) of the Act.
21.

In respect of ground (iv), holding that the respondent was

stocking and exhibiting for sale drugs which were not meant for sale,
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate has convicted the respondent

under Rule 65(18) read with Section 18(c) of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act,1940 and sentenced him to pay a fine in sum of Rs.1,000/-.
22.

Considering

the

nature

of

the

offence,

punishment

awarded by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate is reasonable.
23.

Noting the broad features of the case of the prosecution,

the evidence led and the reasons for the finding by the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate, I find no merit in the appeal.
24.

The same is dismissed.

25.

Personal

bond

and

surety

bond

furnished

by

respondent are discharged.
26.

LCR be returned.

September 21, 2007
sl

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

the

