*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

CM(M) No.784/2003
Bhim Singh
through: Mr.Aly Mirza, Adv.

........ Petitioner.

VERSUS
Amar Nath & Ors.
........ Respondents
through: Mr.Ravi Gupta, Adv. and Mr.Ankit Jain, Adv.
RESERVED ON: 11.03.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
25.03.2008
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The petitioner had filed a suit for specific performance

of an agreement to sell dated 13.12.1988 executed between the
plaintiff and respondents No.2 to 6 pertaining to 14 bigha and 5
biswa of land in the revenue estate of Village Bakoli. In said suit
an ex-parte ad-interim injunction was issued in favour of the
petitioner and against respondents No.2 to 6 restraining them
from transferring, encumbering or parting with possession of the

CM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.1 of 10

suit land till the next date. The said interim order was extended
from time to time and continues to enure in favour of the
petitioner.

Notwithstanding the order prohibiting respondents

No.2 to 6 from selling the land in question they sold the land to
respondent No.1, Amar Nath, by a registered sale deed on
30.6.1997.

According to Amar Nath when he applied to the

Consolidation Authority for mutating the land in his name on
27.8.2003 he was informed of the Court injunction and a refusal
by the revenue authorities to mutate the suit land in his name.
Accordingly, he filed an application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC for
being impleaded as a defendant in the suit. The said application
was allowed vide order dated 16.10.2003, principally on the
ground that a purchaser under the defendants would be a
necessary party for the reason if plaintiff ultimately succeeds the
purchaser under the defendants would be required to join in
executing a conveyance deed in favour of the plaintiff and hence
his presence before the Court would be necessary.
2.

The order impleading respondent No.1 as a defendant

in the suit has been challenged by the plaintiff by way of the
instant petition.
3.

The issue which arises for consideration has to be

answered in light of the provisions of sub-rule 2 of Rule 10 of
Order 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It reads as under:“(2) Court may strike out or add parties.- The Court
CM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.2 of 10

may at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or
without the application of either party, and on such
terms as may appear to the Court to be just, order
that the name of any party improperly joined, whether
as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out, and that the
name of any person who ought to have been joined,
whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence
before the Court may be necessary in order to enable
the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate
upon and 'settle all the questions involved in the suit,
be added.”
4.

A bare perusal of the legislative provision reveals that

the sweep thereof is controlled by the expression 'settle all the
questions involved in the suit be added'. It is thus apparent that
the focus has not to be whether the applicant is a person who
ought to have been joined as a necessary or a proper party to the
suit, the focus has to be whether the presence of the applicant is
necessary in order to enable the Court to effectually and
completely adjudicate upon and settle the questions involved in
the suit.
5.

One extreme end of the submission could be that since

the plaintiff is a dominus litus and cannot be compelled to litigate
against a person qua whom no relief is prayed for, the expression
'all the questions involved in the suit' would mean only the
questions or disputes between the parties to the litigation and do
not include a question or dispute between one or more of the
parties and a third party. The other extreme end could be to urge
that the expression would include the presence of such parties
who may be affected keeping in view the defence raised in the
CM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.3 of 10

suit as also the actions of the defendant.
6.

In the decision of this Court dated 22nd March 2007 in

CRP No.749/2002 R.K.K.R. Steel Ltd. vs. Northern Steel and
General Mills & Anr. with reference to reported decisions it was
held as under:“34. Independent of the afore-noted decisions cited by
learned counsel, a perusal of the commentaries under Order
1 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure reveal a plethora of
decisions which have considered the ambit of the power of
the Court in impleading a person as a proper party. The
authorities have explained the meaning of the phrase 'all
the questions involved in the suit'.
35. The decisions illustrate a wide spectrum of instances
when intervention was allowed and when refused.
36. From the decisions, no discernible principle governing
the discretionary power of the Court emerges, for the
simple reason, the spectrum of claims is fairly wide and
therefore it would be inadvisable to cast the discretionary
power in a straight jacket of an inflexible formula. However,
one principle emerges, that the language employed in the
rule vests a very wide discretion in the Court.”
7.

Noting the decision reported as 1950-2 All.E.R. 605

Doffus Mieget Compagniesa vs. Bank of England it was observed
that the said decision brings out that the true test lies not so
much in an analysis of what are the constituents of the
applicant's rights but rather in what would be the result on the
subject matter of the action if those rights could be established.
8.

It is a well known recognized principle of law that an

agreement to sell does not create an interest in a property. An
agreement to sell creates a right in favour of the prospective

CM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.4 of 10

purchaser to enforce the agreement against the intending seller.
Obedience could be enforced by the personal presence of the
defendant or through a Court appointed officer.
9.

Holding

that

a

purchaser

of

a

property

during

pendency of a suit for specific performance would be affected by
the decree, a Division Bench of this Court, in the decision
reported

as

DRJ

1992

(23)

179

Smt.Mohinder

Kaur

vs.

Smt.Sudarshan Krishnamurthy held that such a purchaser is
entitled to be substituted in place of the existing defendant under
Order 22 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
10.

In the decision reported as AIR 1983 SC 124 Khem

Chand Shankar Choudhary vs. Vishnu Hari Patil a transferee
pendente lite during pendency of a suit for partition of an estate
was held entitled to be impleaded as a party.
11.

The ratio of afore-noted 2 decisions can be culled out

that upon assignment of the defendant's interest and the
defendant being left with no interest, the assignee would be
entitled to step into the shoes of the defendant. The ratio of the
second decision is that a transferee pendente lite is entitled to
make a request that shares on partition may be so assigned in an
equitable manner so as to protect the possession of the
transferee pendente lite.
12.

Thus,

in

a

suit

for

specific

performance

of

an

agreement to sell, since specific performance is a discretionary
CM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.5 of 10

remedy the transferee pendente lite would be entitled to protect
his interest by calling upon the Court to award damages and not
specifically enforce the agreement to sell.

In that view of the

legal position he would be a person whose presence may be
necessary to settle the questions which arise for consideration in
the suit. I repeat one of the questions to be settled in a suit for
specific performance would be whether the discretionary remedy
of

a

specific

performance

should

not

be

exercised

by

recompensing the plaintiff with damages.
13.

But, a Court of Justice has other rules and other duties

to discharge.

The first and foremost is the duty to uphold the

majesty of law by ensuring compliance with its orders.

In the

decision reported as AIR 1996 SC 135 Surjit Singh vs. Harbans
Singh an assignee pendente lite was not permitted to join the
proceedings on account of the transfer being in defiance of a
restraint order.
14.

In para 4 of the report, their Lordships of the Hon'ble

Supreme Court observed as under:“4.
......... In defiance of the restraint order, the
alienation/assignment was made. If we were to let it go
as such, it would defeat the ends of justice and the
prevalent public policy.
When the Court intends a
particular state of affairs to exist while it is in seisin of a
lis, that state of affairs is not only required to be
maintained, but it is presumed to exist till the Court
orders otherwise. The Court, in these circumstances has
the
duty,
as
also
the
right,
to
treat
the
alienation/assignment as having not taken place at all for
its purposes................
Therefore,
the assigneesCM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.6 of 10

respondents could not have been impleaded by the Trial
Court as parties to the suit, in disobedience of its Orders.
The principles of lis pendens are altogether on a different
footing.
We do not propose to examine their
involvement presently. All what is emphasized is that
the assignees in the present facts and circumstances had
no cause to be impleaded as parties to the suit. On that
basis, there was no cause for going into the question of
interpretation of paragraphs 13 and 14 of the settlement
deed. The path treaded by the Courts below was, in our
view, out of their bounds. Unhesitatingly, we upset all
the three orders of the Courts below and reject the
application of the assignees for impleadment under
Order 22 Rule 10 Cr.P.C.”
15.

The reason given by the learned Trial Judge that

respondent No.1 has to be impleaded as a defendant for the
reason his presence would be required to execute the sale deed if
plaintiff succeeds in the suit may also be dealt with.
16.

The doctrine of lis pendens contained in Section 52 of

the Transfer of Property Act is a complete answer. Section 52 of
the Transfer of Property Act reads as under:“52.
Transfer
of
property
pending
suit
relating thereto. - During the pendency in any Court
having authority within the limits of India excluding the
State of Jammu and Kashmir or established beyond such
limits by the Central Government of any suit or
proceedings which is not collusive and in which any right
to immovable property is directly and specifically in
question, the property cannot be transferred or otherwise
deal with by any party to the suit or proceeding so as to
affect the rights of any other party thereto under any
decree or order which may be made therein, except
under the authority of the Court and on such terms as it
may impose.”
17.

Lis pendens literary means a pending suit; and the

doctrine of lis pendens has been defined as the jurisdiction,

CM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.7 of 10

power or control which a Court acquires over property involved in
a suit pending the continuance of the action and until final
judgment thereunder.
18.

In the decision reported as 1972 (2) SCC 200 Jaya Ram

Mudaliar vs. Ayya Swami & Ors. the scope of lis pendens was
explained as under:“Expositions of the doctrine indicate that the need for it
arises from the very nature of the jurisdiction of Courts
and their control over the subject matter of litigation so
that parties litigating before it may not remove any part
of the subject matter outside the power of the Court to
deal with it and thus make the proceedings infructuous.”
19.

In decision reported as AIR 1973 SC 2537 Rajender

Singh & Ors. vs. Santa Singh & Ors., referring to the doctrine of lis
pendens it was observed as under:“15.
The doctrine of lis pendens was intended to
strike at attempts by parties to a litigation to circumvent
the jurisdiction of a Court, in which a dispute on rights or
interests in immovable property is pending, by private
dealings which may remove the subject matter of
litigation from the ambit of the court's power to decide a
pending dispute or frustrate its decree.
Alienees
acquiring any immovable property during a litigation
over it are held to be bound by an application of the
doctrine, by the decree passed in the suit even though
they may not have been impleaded in it. The whole
object of the doctrine of lis pendens is to subject parties
to the litigation as well as others, who seek to acquire
rights in immovable property, which are the subject
matter of a litigation, to the power and jurisdiction of the
Court so as to prevent the object of a pending action
from being defeated. (Emphasis supplied)”
20.

Lis pendens is based on the doctrine of expediency but

for this it would be impossible for an action to be brought to a

CM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.8 of 10

successful termination if crafty defendants alienate the suit
property before judgment and the plaintiff is driven to commence
de novo proceedings, public policy requires sanctity qua judicial
proceedings to be maintained.

It is immaterial whether the

alienee pendente lite had or had no notice of the pending
proceedings (Rappal v. Gopal AIR 1970 Kerala 180). Question of
good faith or bona fides also does not arise for its application
(Mohd. Ali Abdul vs. Bisahmi AIR 1973 Mysore 133, Shanu Ram
vs. Bashesher Nath & Ors. 1966 (68) PLR (D) 44, Balwinder Kaur
vs. Financial Commissioner (Appeals) Punjab & Anr. AIR 1987 P&H
189).

This rule applies to suits for specific performance.

In

Joginder Singh Bedi vs. Sardar Singh Narang & Ors 26 (1984) DLT
162 (Delhi), it was held that Section 19(b) of the Specific Relief
Act also does not protect a transferee pending litigation.

It is

immaterial whether the alienee pendente lite had or had no
notice of the pending proceedings. Nor it is necessary that the
alienee must be impleaded as a party to the suit. Such transferee
has no prior equity nor any pre-existing right. This is also the law
laid down by a Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court
in Munnilal & Anr vs. Bhaiyselal & Ors. AIR 1962 MP 34 and a Full
Bench of Mysore High Court in Khajath vs. Mohammad Hussain
(1964) Myse LJ 236 (FB) and later followed in Mohd. Ali vs.
Abdulla AIR 1973 Mys 137 (DB).
21.

Looked at from any angle, the impugned order is

CM(M) No.784/2003

Pg.9 of 10

patently contrary to law and hence corrective action is required.
22.

The petition is allowed.

Impugned order dated

16.10.2003 is quashed. Application filed by respondent No.1 for
impleadment is dismissed.
23.

No costs.

25th March, 2008
mm/dk

CM(M) No.784/2003

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Pg.10 of 10

