IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
FAO No.317/2004
#
!

M/s United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
........
Appellant
through: Mr.A.K. De and Mr. V.P. Tripathi,
Advocates.
VERSUS

$
^

Smt. Leela Devi & Ors.
........
Respondents
through: Mr.Alok K. Bhattacharya, Advocates
for respondent Nos. 1 to 5.
Mr.Randhir Jain for respondent nos.
6 and 7.

%

DATE OF DECISION: 23.11.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Heard for disposal.

2.

A short question arises for consideration in the instant

appeal. It is urged by learned counsel for the appellant that in
view of the decision of the Supreme Court reported as Ved
Prakash Garg vs. Premi Devi & Ors. 1998 (1) ACJ 1 insurance
company is not liable to pay the penalty imposed by the
Commissioner Workmen's Compensation.
3.

The relevant facts are that Uttam Singh, the husband
page 1 of 10

of Leela Devi, the father of Tarvinder Singh and Naveen Singh and
the sone of Darman Singh and Bacchi Devi was employed by
M/s.Sai Paints Pvt. Ltd. as a driver. He was assigned duties under
Dinesh Kumar Virmani, a director of M/s.Sai Paints Pvt. Ltd. While
on duty and driving a car bearing No.DL-6C-C-3690 in respect
whereof M/s.Sai Paints Pvt. Ltd. had obtained an insurance cover
died at a road accident on 19.1.1999 when truck No.HR-47-3792
hit the car.

His legal heirs claimed to have served a notice of

demand on 4.6.1999 praying that compensation under the
Workmen's Compensation Act 1923 be paid to them. None was
paid.

They filed a claim petition before the Commissioner

Workmen's Compensation impleading M/s.Sai Paints Pvt. Ltd. as
respondent No.1, Dinesh Kumar Virmani and the appellant as
respondent No.3. The employers admitted that Uttam Singh was
employed as a driver by them and had died at a road accident
while driving car owned by the company. His salary at Rs.2,441/per month was admitted.

The insurance company admitted its

liability as the insurer of the vehicle. Considering the admitted
facts the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation had to apply
the relevant factors as per Schedule IV to Section 4 of the
Workmen's Compensation Act.

So applying it was found that

Rs.2,60,769/- were payable as compensation to the dependents.
The amount of the compensation awarded was not deposited. 2
page 2 of 10

years and 6 months went by.

The Commissioner Workmen's

Compensation passed the order dated 9.1.2004 levying penalty
under Section 4-A(3)(b) of the Act.

50% of the amount held

payable was levied by way of penalty i.e. Rs.1,30,385.50 was held
to be the penalty payable.
4.

It is urged in the appeal that the insurance company is

not liable to pay the penalty.
5.

The issue in the present appeal revolves around

Section 4A of the Workmen Compensation Act which reads as
under:4A. Compensation to be paid when due and
penalty for default.-(1) Compensation under
Section 4 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept
the liability for compensation to the extent
claimed, he shall be bound to make provisional
payment based on the extent of liability which he
accepts, and, such payment shall be deposited
with the Commissioner or made to the workman,
as the case may be, without prejudice to the right
of the workman to make any further claim.
(3) where any employer is in default in paying the
compensation due under this Act within one month
from the date it fell due, the Commissioner shall(a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to
the amount of the arrears, pay simple interest
thereon at the rate of twelve per cent per annum
or at such higher rate not exceeding the maximum
of the lending rates of any scheduled bank as may
be specified by the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, on the amount
due; and
page 3 of 10

(b) if, in his opinion, there is no justification for the
delay, direct that the employer shall, in addition to
the amount of the arrears and interest thereon,
pay a further sum not exceeding fifty per cent of
such amount by way of penalty:

6.

PROVIDED that an order for the payment of
penalty shall not be passed under Clause (b)
without giving a reasonable opportunity to the
employer to show cause why it should not be
passed........”
In the decision reported as Ved Prakash Garg v Premi

Devi & Ors. 1998 (1) ACJ 1 a question arose before the Supreme
Court whether the phrase “liability arising under the Workmen
Compensation Act” as employed by the proviso to sub-section (1)
of Section 147 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and as found under
the proviso to clause (i) of sub-section (1) of Section II of the
Insurance Policy would cover only the principal amount of
compensation as computed by the Workmen's Commissioner or
whether it can also include interest and penalty as imposed on
the insured employer under contigencies contemplated by
Section 4A(3)(a) and (b) of the Workmen Compensation Act.
7.

After

examining the entire scheme of the Workmen

Compensation Act, the Supreme Court has held that:I.

Payment of interest and penalty are two distinct

liabilities arising under the Workmen Compensation Act.
II.

Penalty is not a part and parcel of the legal liability of

the employer to compensate his employee and since the insurer
is under contractual obligation to idemnify the employer for his
page 4 of 10

legal liability the insurer is not liable to pay the penalty.
III.

Liability to pay interest is part and parcel of legal

liability of the employer to pay compensation upon default of
payment of that amount within one month. Therefore, claim for
compensation payable under the Workmen Compensation Act
along with interest thereon will have to be made good by the
Insurance Company jointly with the insured employer.
8.

Relevant discussion is to be found in paras 14 and 19

of the said decision which are being reproduced herein below:“14. On a conjoint operation of the relevant
schemes of the aforesaid twin Acts, in our view,
there is no escape from the conclusion that the
insurance companies will be liable to make good
not only the principal amounts of compensation
payable by insured employers but also interest
thereon, if ordered by the Commissioner to be
paid by the insured employers. Reason for this
conclusion is obvious. As we have noted earlier
the liability to pay compensation under the
Workmen's Compensation Act gets foisted on the
employer provided it is shown that the workman
concerned suffered from personal injury, fatal or
otherwise, by any motor accident arising out of
and in the course of his employment. Such an
accident is also covered by the statutory
coverage contemplated by Section 147 of the
Motor Vehicles Act read with the identical
provisions under the very contracts of insurance
reflected by the Policy which would make the
insurance company liable to cover all such claims
for compensation for which statutory liability is
imposed on the employer under Section 3 read
with Section 4-A of the Compensation Act. All
these provisions represent a well-knit scheme for
computing the statutory liability of the employers
in cases of such accidents to their workmen. As
we have seen earlier while discussing the
page 5 of 10

scheme of Section 4-A of the Compensation Act
the legislative intent is clearly discernible that
once compensation falls due and within one
month it is not paid by the employer then as per
Section 4-A(3)(a) interest at the permissible rate
gets added to the said principal amount of
compensation as the claimants would stand
deprived of their legally due compensation for a
period beyond one month which is statutorily
granted to the employer concerned to make
good his liability for the benefit of the claimants
whose bread-winner might have either been
seriously injured or might have lost his life. Thus
so far as interest is concerned it is almost
automatic once default, on the part of the
employer in paying the compensation due, takes
place beyond the permissible limit of one month.
No element of penalty is involved therein. It is a
statutory elongation of the liability of the
employer to make good the principal amount of
compensation within permissible time limit
during which interest may not run but otherwise
liability
of
paying
interest
on
delayed
compensation will ipso facto follow. Even though
the Commissioner under these circumstances
can impose a further liability on the employer
under
circumstances
and
within
limits
contemplated by Section 4A(3)(a) still the liability
to pay interest on the principal amount under the
said provision remains a part and parcel of the
statutory liability which is legally liable to be
discharged
by
the
insured
employer.
Consequently such imposition of interest on the
principal amount would certainly partake the
character of the legal liability of the insured
employer to pay the compensation amount with
due interest as imposed upon him under the
Compensation Act. Thus the principal amount as
well as the interest made payable thereon would
remain part and parcel of the legal liability of the
insured
to
be
discharged
under
the
Compensation Act and not dehors it. It, therefore,
cannot be said by the insurance company that
when it is statutorily and even contractually
liable to reimburse the employer qua his
statutory liability to pay compensation to the
page 6 of 10

claimants in case of such motor accidents to his
workmen, the interest on the principal amount
which almost automatically gets foisted upon him
once the compensation amount is not paid within
one month from the date it fell due, would not be
a part of the insured liability of the employer. No
question of justification by the insured employer
for the delay in such circumstances would arise
for consideration. It is of course true that one
month's period as contemplated under Section
4A(3) may start running for the purpose of
attracting interest under Sub-clause (a) thereof in
case where provisional payment has to be made
by the insured employer as per Section 4A(2) of
the Compensation Act from the date such
provisional payment becomes due. But when the
employer does not accept his liability as a whole
under circumstances enumerated by us earlier
then Section 4A(2)would not get attracted and
one month's period would start running from the
date on which due compensation payable by the
employer
is
adjudicated
upon
by
the
Commissioner
and
in
either
case
the
Commissioner would be justified in directing
payment of interest in such contingencies not
only from the date of the aw ard but also from
the date of the accident concerned. Such an
order passed by the Commissioner would remain
perfectly justified on the scheme of Section
4A(3)(a)of the Compensation Act. But similar
consequence will not follow in case where
additional amount is added to the principal
amount of compensation by way of penalty to be
levied on the employer under circumstances
contemplated by Section 4A(3)(b) of the
Compensation Act after issuing show cause
notice to the employer concerned who will have
reasonable opportunity to show cause why on
account of some justification on his part for the
delay in payment of the compensation amount
he is not liable for this penalty. However if
ultimately the Commissioner after giving
reasonable opportunity to the employer to show
cause takes the view that there is no justification
for such delay on the part of the insured
employer and because of his unjustified delay
page 7 of 10

and due to his own personal fault he is held
responsible for the delay, then penalty would get
imposed on him. That would add a further sum
up to 50% on the principal amount by way of
penalty to be made good by the defaulting
employer. So far as this penalty amount is
concerned it cannot be said that it automatically
flows from the main liability incurred by the
insured
employer
under
the
Workmen's
Compensation Act. To that extent such penalty
amount as imposed upon the insured employer
would get out of the sweep of the term ' liability
incurred'
by
the
insured
employer
as
contemplated by the proviso to Section 147(1)(b)
of the Motor Vehicles Act as well as by the terms
of the Insurance Policy found in provisos (b) and
(c) to Sub-section (1) of Section II thereof. On the
aforesaid interpretation of these two statutory
schemes, therefore, the conclusion becomes
inevitable that when an employee suffers from a
motor accident injury while on duty on the motor
vehicle belonging to the insured employer, the
claim for compensation payable under the
Compensation Act along with interest thereon, if
any, as imposed by the Commissioner Sections 3
and 4A(3)(a) of the Compensation Act will have
to be made good by the insurance company
jointly with the insured employer. But so far as
the amount of penalty imposed on the insured
employer under contingencies contemplated by
Section 4A(3)(b) is concerned as that is on
account of personal fault of the insured not
backed up by any justifiable cause, the insurance
company cannot be made liable to reimburse
that part of the penalty amount imposed on the
employer. The latter because of his own fault and
negligence will have to bear the entire burden of
the said penalty amount with proportionate
interest thereon if imposed by the Workmen's
Commissioner.(emphasis supplied)
19. As a result of the aforesaid discussion it must
be held that the question posed for our
consideration must be answered partly in the
affirmative and partly in the negative. In other
words the insurance company will be liable to
page 8 of 10

meet the claim for compensation along with
interest as imposed on the insured employer by
the Workmen's Commissioner under the
Compensation Act on the conjoint operation of
Section 3 and Section 4-A Sub-section (3)(a) of
the Compensation Act. So far as additional
amount of compensation by way of penalty
imposed on the insured employer by the
Workmen's Commissioner under Section 4A(3)(b)
is concerned, however, the insurance company
would not remain liable to reimburse the said
claim and it would be the liability of the insured
employer alone.(emphasis supplied)
9.

In view of law laid down by the Supreme Court in Ved

Prakash's case (supra), it is held that the appellant insurance
company is not liable to pay penalty of Rs.1,30,385.50 which was
awarded by the Commissioner Workmen's Compensation for
violation of the order passed by him i.e. in depositing the
compensation

awarded

the

Commissioner

within

the

time

stipulated.
10.

Award is modified insofar as the liability to pay the

penalty is fastened on the insurance company.
11.

Claimants shall be entitled to recover the amount of

penalty from the employer M/s Sai Paints Pvt. Ltd. respondent
no.6.
12.

Appeal is allowed in terms of paras 9 and 10 above.

13.

No costs.

November 23, 2007

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
page 9 of 10

dk

page 10 of 10

