IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Bail Application No.2963/2006
#
!

Neelam

through:

........
Petitioner
Mr.S.K.Rai, Advocate.
VERSUS

$
^

State

%

through:

........
Respondent
Mr.Pawan Sharma, Advocate.

DATE OF DECISION: 28.09.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

FIR No.875/05 dated 24.12.2005
under Sections 302/120-B/34 IPC read with
Sections 25/27 of the Arms Act
PS Najaf Garh.
Neelam is an accused in the afore-noted FIR.

She

seeks regular bail.
2.

Neelam was apprehended and was sent to judicial

custody on 17.1.2006. On 20.9.2006 during hearing of the instant
bail application she was admitted to bail for a period of 2 months
from the date of her release. Reason was that Neelam is a widow
and had 2 minor children for whom arrangements had to be
made.

3.

Thereafter,

extended.

from

time

to

time

interim

bail

was

Interim bail granted to Neelam was lastly extended

vide order dated 21.9.2007 till today i.e. 28.9.2007.
4.

Case of the prosecution is that Neelam's sister Birmati

had a problem with the deceased Virender Yadav who wanted to
establish a factory on land which was claimed by Birmati. That
Neelam helped Birmati in liquidating Virender Yadav by making
available the finances to the paid assassins.
5.

In other words, Neelam is stated to be a conspirator

along with her sister and the hired assassins to kill Virender
Yadav.
6.

Evidence

marshalled

by

the

prosecution

against

Neelam is as under:(a)

Statement of one Satpal recorded on 13.1.2006
informing the police that his sister Savita was married
in village Paprawat and for said reason he used to visit
the village. His brother-in-law Baljit was the maternal
uncle of deceased Virender Yadav.

According to

Satpal he had gone to village Paprawat on 25.11.2005
and learnt that Virender Yadav wanted to establish a
factory on a plot which was objected to by Birmati. He
went to the house of Birmati on 25.11.2005 where he
found another lady apart from Birmati in company of 3
boys who were discussing the problem of Birmati. He

stated that from the talk being held by Birmati, the
lady and the 3 boys, he gathered that they were
resolving that something would have to be done to
prevent Virender Yadav from establishing a factory on
the plot.

That he had to revisit the village on

10.12.2005 and learnt that the dispute between
Birmati and Virender Yadav had not been resolved. He
went to the house of Birmati to talk to her in respect of
the issue. When he went to the house of Birmati he
found Neelam in the company of 3 boys named
Naveen, Arvind and Ashok.

He carefully listened to

what they were talking. He heard Birmati tell Neelam
that there was no impact on Virender Yadav of the
threat given to him by Naveen and Arvind and that
time had come to dispatch Virender Yadav. To quote
from the statement of Satpal, he stated to the police:-

(b)

“Neelam stated that there was no effect on
Virender @ Pappi of the threat given by
Naveen and Arvind. The time has come to
dispatch Virender. He has to be removed from
the path.”
The next evidence marshalled by the prosecution
against Neelam is a statement of Ajit Singh recorded
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. on 15.1.2006. According to
Ajit Singh, Neelam and Birmati had made an extra
judicial confession to him that they had liquidated
Virender Yadav.

(c)

Lastly, is the purported disclosure statement of the coaccused i.e. the assailants that Neelam had provided
them with the requisite finances.

7.

It is not in dispute that Ajit Singh is the maternal uncle

of the deceased and is in police service.
8.

It is relevant to note that deceased Virender Yadav was

murdered on 24.12.2005.
9.

It is urged by learned counsel for the petitioner that

Ajit Singh being the maternal uncle of the deceased it is highly
improbable that the petitioner would go to him and make an extra
judicial confession. Counsel further submits that conspiracies are
hatched in the secrecy of darkness and not in the manner as
disclosed to the police by Satpal. Counsel urges that it is against
human conduct to call hired assassins to the house and discuss
with them the plan to kill a person with doors open, permitting
any person to overhear the conversation. Lastly, counsel urged
that petitioner was not the beneficiary from the death of Virender
Yadav and that being a widow with 2 minor children her energies
would be expected to be devoted to the welfare of her children
and not go about meddling in the affairs of her sister.
10.

Learned counsel for the State opposes the bail urging

that petitioner is involved in a serious offence.
11.

Pertaining to granting bail in non-bailable offences, in

the decisions reported as AIR 1962 SC 253 State vs. Capt. Jagjit

Singh and AIR 1978 SC 179 Gurcharan Singh vs. State (Delhi
Admn.) it was observed that apart from the nature and
seriousness of the offence which has to be kept in mind while
deciding an application for bail in an non-bailable offence, the
character of the evidence; circumstances which are peculiar to
the accused; a reasonable possibility of the presence of the
accused not being secured at the trial; reasonable apprehension
of witnesses being tampered with and lastly the larger interest of
the public or the State are some of the facts to be kept in mind.
12.

Witnesses of the prosecution are males, one of whom

is in the police service.
children.

Petitioner is a widow with 2 minor

There is hardly any possibility of her threatening the

witnesses of the prosecution or tampering with them.
agricultural land in her village.

She has

Her minor children have to be

looked after. She has roots in the society. There is hardly any
apprehension of petitioner absconding from justice.
13.

The nature of evidence which is likely to emerge has

been briefly noted by me in the form of the statements recorded
by the police and the inherent probabilities of the evidence as
urged and evaluated by learned counsel for the petitioner.
14.

Noting that the petitioner is a widow and has 2 minor

children to care for and the fact that trial would take considerable
time I find special equities and circumstances to direct that
petitioner should be released on bail pending trial.

15.

Noting

that

pursuant

to

order

dated

28.9.2006

petitioner has been released on interim bail on her furnishing a
personal bond in sum of Rs.20,000/- with one surety in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the Trial Court and that she has not
misused her liberty, I direct that the personal bond and surety
bond already furnished by the petitioner be accepted by the
learned Trial Judge to admit the petitioner to regular bail pending
trial.
16.

Copy of this order be supplied dasti under signatures

of the Court Master to learned counsel for the petitioner.
17.

No costs.

September 28, 2007
dk

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

