*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.400/2007
National Highways Authority of India ........ Appellant
through: Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate,
Mr. A.S.Chandiok, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Kishan Kumar, Mr. Lakshay Sawhney,
Ms. Shikha Tandon and Mr. Amit Kumar,
Advocates
VERSUS
ELSAMEX-TWS-SNC JOINT VENTURE ........ Respondent
through: Mr. Dushyant A.Dave, Sr. Advocate,
Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Kiran Suri, Mr. Purvesh, Mr. Anirudh,
Ms. Aparna and Ms. Niharika, Advocates
DATE OF DECISION:
28.04.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Yet another instance of an injunction being sought

against a beneficiary who sought to enforce it's right under
bank guarantee(s).
2.

NH-5 in the State of Orissa from Km 136.5 to Km

199.141 has run into a road block. Excluding a stretch of 3.799
Km covering major bridges, the work of 4/6 lanning was
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.1 of 50

awarded

by

NHAI

to

ELSAMEX-TWS-SNC

Joint

Venture

(hereinafter referred to as the contractor). The contract was
awarded on 5.3.2001. 33 months was the completion time i.e.
date of completion was 3.2.2004.
3.

Under the contract the contractor was to furnish a

performance

guarantee

and

was

entitled

to

receive

mobilization advance and equipment advance but the same
was to be secured under bank guarantees in favour of NHAI. 5
guarantees issued by various banks were submitted by the
contractor favouring NHAI on various dates.
4.

Work could not be completed within the completion

period.

On 19.8.2005 a supplementary agreement was

executed modifying/substituting certain clauses of the original
contract, contents whereof being not relevant for adjudication
are not being noted.
5.

The contractor justified delay on various factors not

attributable to it, like non availability of land free from
encumbrance, obstruction by local population, non completion
of allied works by third parties etc. The contractor claimed
escalation in prices of raw material consumed in the works and
hence sought escalation in the price. NHAI denied the same.
But the work continued without any consensus being reached.
6.

The contract contained an arbitration clause.

FAO No.400/2007

The

Page No.2 of 50

contractor invoked the same.

On 23.11.2005 arbitration

commenced with the constitution of the arbitral tribunal. The
work continued because parties agreed that pending resolution
of the dispute by the arbitral tribunal the same should
continue.
7.

The month of April 2006 was reached. The arbitral

tribunal made no headway. The contractor stated that it had
no funds to continue with the work. It claimed complete drying
up of resources.

To facilitate the completion of the work a

temporary solution was found. NHAI agreed to advance money
to the contractor by labeling the same 'Discretionary Advance'.
On 2.5.2006 a supplementary agreement was executed under
which the scheduled date of completion was shifted to June
2007 and additional discretionary advance was agreed to be
paid. The discretionary advance was agreed to be secured in
favour of NHAI by and under bank guarantees. The period of
recovery of all advances was deferred.
8.

Notwithstanding additional funds flowing to the

coffers of the contractor from NHAI, the work progressed at a
snails pace. According to the contractor the escalation in the
price of raw material was far in excess of the advances
received by it and hence the slow pace.

The contractor

constantly demanded price revision. On 5.9.2006 a high level
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.3 of 50

meeting was held in which it was noted that the engineer
appointed to monitor the contract had recommended the
estimated date of completion to be 31.12.2007 and that the
arbitral tribunal had published an award in favour of the
contractor allowing price escalation as per the award. In the
meeting it was decided that every effort would be made to
expedite the work and that NHAI would release additional
funds as per schedule agreed. The schedule appended to the
minutes of the meeting dated 5.9.2006 contemplated NHAI
releasing Rs.24.1 crores as follows:A.

September 2006

Rs.10 crores

B.

January, Feb. and March 2007

Rs.2 crores each month

C.

April and May 2007

Rs.2.3 crores per month

D.

June 2007

Rs.1.9 crores

E.

July 2007

Rs.1 crores

F.

August 2007

Rs.60 lacs

9.

NHAI did not make payment under the award

published by the arbitral tribunal and challenged the same by
filing objections under Section 34 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act 1996.

The said objections are still pending

consideration on the original side of this court.
10.

The contractor received further advances under the

revised agreement as minuted on 5.9.2006 but claimed that
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.4 of 50

the price escalation was so sharp that even within the
increased funds it could not complete the work. Needless to
state as and when further payments were advanced by NHAI to
the contractor, bank guarantees were submitted by the
contractor

in

agreement,

favour

of

supplementing

NHAI.
the

executed between the parties.

On

26.4.2007

existed

another

agreement

was

It was recorded therein that

Rs.10 crores would be further advanced as discretionary
advance to the contractor by NHAI out of which Rs.6 crores
would be in the form of secured material and Rs.4 crores in the
shape of cash shall be paid.

It was further agreed that

recovery of discretionary advances shall be deferred up to June
2007.
11.

By April 2007, 24 bank guarantees came to be

furnished by the contractor in favour of NHAI.

Recorded in

tabular form, a birds eye view of the guarantees would be:-

S.No. Purpose

Bank Guarantee No.

Amount (in Rs.)

1.

Performance
Security

31/2001

195185817

2.

Mobilization
Advance

52/2004

48796455

3.

Mobilization
Advance

53/2004

48796455

4.

Equipment
Advance

134/2001

48800000

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.5 of 50

5.

Equipment
Advance

6.

Payment
28/2004
against Price
Escalation

4100000

7.

Payment
11/2004
against Price
Escalation

7550000

8.

Payment
54/2006
against Price
Escalation

7824050

9.

Payment
92/2006
against Price
Escalation

23485488

10.

Discretionary
Advance

42/2004

48800000

11.

Discretionary
Advance

43/2004

48700000

12.

Discretionary
Advance

69/2004

5250000

13.

Discretionary
Advance

239/2004

2600000

14.

Discretionary
Advance

93/2006

8270859

15.

Discretionary
Advance

151/2005

70000000

16.

Discretionary
Advance

202/2005

30000000

17.

Discretionary
Advance

154/2006

50000000

18.

Discretionary
Advance

155/2006

50000000

19.

Discretionary
Advance

52/2007

50000000

20.

Discretionary
Advance

53/2007

50000000

21.

Discretionary
Advance

0021707IFG000002

20000000

FAO No.400/2007

176/2001

48800000

Page No.6 of 50

22.

Discretionary
Advance

20/2004

5000000

23.

Discretionary
Advance

46/2004

5830000

24.

Discretionary
Advance

111/2005

4147000

12.

By April, 2007 the forth discretionary advance

totalling Rs. 10 crores which had been sanctioned

on

27.3.2007 was utilized in the form of Rs.4 crores being
released directly to the contractor and Rs.4.9 crores paid on
7.5.2007 to various parties who had supplied raw material to
the respondent. Unfortunately, not much work was performed
even after April, 2007. On 16.8.2007 the contractor wrote a
letter informing the appellant : now it has become impossible
to further continue with the works unless NHAI makes
escalation payments and consider revision of rates for the
works carried out after the contract period.....
13.
the

There was a stalemate. The contractor feared that
bank guarantees may be invoked.

Since the arbitral

tribunal had already been constituted to decide the dispute
pertaining to escalation an application was filed under Section
17 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act praying to the arbitral
tribunal that NHAI be restrained from invoking the bank
guarantees.

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.7 of 50

14.

It may be noted that on 5.8.2006 the arbitral

tribunal had passed an award in favour of the contractor
pertaining to one set of claims relating to escalation as per
which approximately Rs.9.37 crores became payable by NHAI
to the contractor.

To put it differently, as per the award

Rs.9.37 crores advanced by NHAI to the contractor under
discretionary advance or under any other head would not be
recoverable by NHAI and has to be adjusted for.
15.

Vide order dated 25.10.2007 impugned in the

instant appeal, the tribunal restrained NHAI from invoking or
recovering any money under the bank guarantees. The finding
by the arbitral tribunal is on the ground that special equities
were shown entitling the contractor to a restraint order against
the appellant.
16.

Justifying

a

restraint

order

pertaining

to

the

performance guarantee reason given by the arbitral tribunal is
in para 11.2 of its order. It reads as under :'11.2.
Thus the validity of this performance
security is upto the end of the defect liability period
of 12 months after completion of the work. The work
under the contract is not yet completed. Therefore
the AT holds that it is premature at this stage to
encash the bank guarantee given as performance
security.'
17.

Pertaining to the bank guarantees at Sr. Nos.2, 3, 4

and 5 of the chart reproduced in para 11 above, the relevant
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.8 of 50

findings by the tribunal are as recorded in para 11.9 of the
order which reads as under :'11.9.
In the light of the above facts, the AT finds
that, having entered into supplementary agreement
on 26.4.2007 and having fully known the stage of
work on that date and the fact that the work could
not progress during the ensuing months, there is no
justifiable reason for the respondent as per the
provision of the supplementary agreement and the
contract to encash the bank guarantee at this stage
such an action would be premature.'
18.

Pertaining to the remaining guarantees the reasons

given by the arbitral tribunal may be crystallized as under:A.

That an award had been published in favour of the

contractor and that the issue of price escalation was pending
further consideration before the arbitral tribunal and that the
award pertaining to part period of escalation had not been set
aside and was pending consideration before the court.
B.

Dispute being a subject matter of consideration

before the arbitral tribunal no emergent cause existed to
invoke the bank guarantees and hence invocation thereof was
not justified.
C.

Under the last supplementary agreement, recovery

of discretionary advances was deferred upto June, 2007 and
the project engineer had recommended extension of time for
completion of the contract upto 31.12.2007.
2007

when

FAO No.400/2007

supplementary

agreement

That in April,

was

drawn

on

Page No.9 of 50

26.4.2007 it was in the knowledge of all that monsoon period
was round the corner and that meaningful work could
commence only after the monsoon was over.

Thus the

contractor could not be blamed for slow progress of work after
April, 2007.
D.

That if bank guarantees were permitted to be

encashed irretrievable harm would be caused to the claimants
on account of the issuing banks liquidating collateral securities
which would seriously impair the financial status of the
contractor

making

it

ineligible

to

participate

in

further

tendering process and may even entail black listing of the
contractor.
19.

Shri Sandeep Sethi, learned Senior Counsel and Shri

Amarjeet Singh Chandhiok, learned Senior Counsel who
appeared for the appellant urged that entire process of
reasoning of the arbitral tribunal is faulty and contrary to law.
Learned counsel urged that it is settled law that a
guarantee

is

independent

of

the

main

contract

bank
and

enforcement of a claim under the guarantee has to be
adjudicated upon with reference to the guarantee.

Counsel

urged that all the bank guarantees were unconditional,
unequivocal and payable on demand, without protest or demur
and hence unless it was pleaded and established that it was a
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.10 of 50

case of a fraud of an egregious nature or that the money would
be lost by the contractor irretrievably, the only 2 known
exceptions to enforce a bank guarantee payable on demand,
no injunction could be issued against the appellant.
20.

Per contra, Shri Dushyant A. Dave learned Senior

Counsel who appeared for the contractor urged that the power
of the arbitrators under Section 17 of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act, 1996 is wider than the power of a Court under
Order 39 Rule 1 and or Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, in
that,

pending

adjudication

of

an

arbitration

claim

the

arbitrators can pass any order as an interim measure. Counsel
urged that where a prima facie case exists, as held by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as 1990
(Suppl.) SCC 727 Wander Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Antox India Pvt. Ltd.,
an injunction must issue.
21.

On merits, to show a prima facie case Shri Dushyant

A. Dave learned Senior Counsel for the contractor referred to
various letters written by the engineer (an independent
agency) appointed under the contract who recommended not
only price revision but even extension of time to the contractor
to urge that it would be most unjust if the contractor was
compelled to honour the bank guarantees.
22.

Shri Sandeep Sethi, learned Senior Counsel for NHAI

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.11 of 50

responded

on

the

prima

facie

merits

of

the

case

by

highlighting that the contractor having received further sum of
Rs.10 crores in April, 2007 did no work in the months of April,
May and June and hardly any work in the month of July and on
16.8.2007 notified the intention to abandon all works. Learned
senior counsel highlighted, with reference to a letter dated
28.6.2007, that since November 2006 till April 2007 the
monthly progress of work was virtually nil.

Counsel pointed

out that the said letter shows that as against an estimated
value of work to be executed in said months in sum of
Rs.41.34 crores, work worth only Rs.1.09 crores was executed.
The letter dated 28.6.2007 is as under :'Date: 28th June 2007
To
Mr.A.K.Parthy,
Project Manager,
Elsamex-TWS-SNC JV,
Bidu Bazar,
Balasore
Sub: Shorfall in achievement of
schedule during May and June 2007

committed

Dear Mr.Parhy,
The table hereunder shows the month-wise miserable
achievements against the schedule from November
2006 to April 2007. It was dismal during November
06 to January 07 and Nill from February 07 to April
07.

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.12 of 50

Nov' Dec'
06
06

Jan'07 Feb'07 Mar'07 Ap'07

Total

Scheduled 2.84 5.27
(Rs.
Crores)

7.55

8.30

8.67

8.71

41.34

Achieved
(Rs.
Crores)

0.12

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.09

0.49 0.48

Even then the 4th Discretionary Advance was
sanctioned amounting to Rs.10.00 crores on 27th
March 07 and out of which Rs.4.0 crores were issued
to the Contractor on 26.04.2007 as cash and Rs.4.90
crores on 07.05.2007 in shape of materials. The
Contractor committed before NJAI to close 13 gaps on
NCW at a cost of Rs.4.00 crores and gave a
programme to work on ECW for an amount of Rs.1.00
crore by June end. To out utter disappointment only
one gap is closed on NCW and work to the tune of
only Rs.26.26 lakhs on NCW and only Rs.44.19 lakhs
on ECW by 27.06.2007 have been executed.'
23.

As held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in

the decisions reported as 2002 4 SCC 105 Bhatia International
Vs. Bulk Trading SA & Anr. and 2004 3 SCC 155 Firm Ashok
Traders & Anr. Vs. Gurumukh Das Saluja & Ors. a court, under
Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 and an
arbitral tribunal under Section 17 of the said Act are
empowered to pass interim orders in the nature of interim
measure till disposal of a dispute before an arbitral tribunal.
Their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
recourse to Section 9 or Section 17 requires status quo to be
possibly maintained having regard to the fact that the parties

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.13 of 50

understood the workability of the agreement in a particular
manner and that interim directions should normally precede
findings of a prima facie case with further consideration of
balance of convenience and irreparable injury.
24.

The observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

the afore-noted 2 decisions which were strongly relied upon by
Sh

Dushyant

contractor,

A.

in

Dave,

my

learned

humble

Senior

opinion,

counsel

cannot

for

extend

the
to

consideration of bank guarantee for the reason, law relating to
bank guarantees stands well crystallized. Further, as would be
noted hereinafter the dispute between the parties is not
whether the guarantees have been invoked in terms thereof
but

relates

to

recognized

exceptions

in

law

where

notwithstanding a bank guarantee being enforced on its terms
a court or a tribunal would still restrain the guarantor from
paying under the guarantee.
25.

I do not find anything in the language of Section 17

of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 which confers a
wider power on the arbitral tribunal to issue interim orders visa-vis the power of a court to issue interim injunctions either
under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure or
Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.
26.

Decisions pertaining to interim injunctions issued by

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.14 of 50

courts or by arbitral tribunals in relation to interim measures to
be adopted in contractual disputes not involving a bank
guarantee are wholly inapplicable when injunction against
invocation or realization of money under a bank guarantee is in
issue. The reason thereof is that pertaining to bank guarantees
right to receive money conferred upon the beneficiary is as per
the guarantee and if the guarantee is invoked in terms of the
guarantee the beneficiary would be entitled to urge that
nothing else other than consideration of the bank guarantee
should go into the decision making process, hence the
argument of the beneficiary to adopt the hands of policy would
be very strong, nay indefeasible.

But, as would be noted

hereinafter, in equity, certain exceptions have been carved out
by courts and issue has to be settled and decided only with
reference to the said exceptions.
27.

Since I am dealing with 24 bank guarantees I do not

intend to reproduce the language of all 24 bank guarantees
but note that each guarantee enjoins upon the issuing bank to
pay under the respective guarantee the sum demanded by the
beneficiary. I note that the guarantees specifically record that
each guarantee is an unconditional bank guarantee. Some of
the

guarantees

use

the

expressions

'without

cavil

or

argument', 'without any demur, reservation, contest, recourse
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.15 of 50

or protest' etc.
28.

A feeble attempt was made by learned Senior

Counsel for the contractor to urge that since the guarantees
made a reference to the principal contract, the guarantees
were not to be read in isolation and that the same had to be
read with reference to the main contract, meaning thereby, the
defaults under the principal contract had to be kept in view.
29.

The argument needs to be noted and rejected for

the simple reason nearly all bank guarantees, which this Court
has come across, in the recitals refer to it being executed
pursuant to a condition under the main contract obliging the
contractor to furnish bank guarantees drawn on nationalized or
scheduled banks. A recital in the bank guarantee to the effect
that it is being issued pursuant to a term in the contract
requiring a bank guarantee to be furnished would not mean
that all terms of the contract get embodied in the terms of the
bank guarantee. Unless a condition of a contract is made an
integral part of the operative part of a bank guarantee the
same cannot be read as a condition of the bank guarantee.
30.

Holding that each and every bank guarantee is an

unconditional bank guarantee I proceed to discuss the law
relating to injuncting the beneficiary from receiving under the
bank guarantee.
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.16 of 50

31.

The forensic battle fought at the bar centered on:

what is the sweep of the expression special equity the span
whereof entitles the guarantor to avoid payment under the
guarantee.
32.

'Fraud', 'irretrievable injury' and 'special equity' are

expressions found in a catena of judicial opinions penned by
Learned

and

Honourable

Judges

and

notwithstanding

a

plethora of case law on the subject, the debate goes on.
33.

Where the guarantee is limited (on it's terms) we

have no problem, for the enforcement of the guarantee has to
be

within

the

conditions

(limitations)

contained

in

the

guarantee. But where a guarantee is couched in a language
which makes it unconditional and the guarantor binds himself
to give money to the beneficiary on demand, without demur or
protest; and the guarantor is not even permitted to probe into
the dispute between the parties, an area of fertile litigation has
grown because most common law jurisdictions recognize
primacy to justice as an integral part of law enforcement.
34.

Though opinions on bank guarantees span half a

century, since I do not intend to make a catalogue, I plunge
mid-stream and commence my discussion with the celebrated
decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as 1987 (2)
U.P.Coop.Federation Ltd. Vs. Singh Consultants & Engrs. (P)
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.17 of 50

Ltd.

I do so, as said decision has noted the prior landmark

decisions on the subject and throws considerable light on what
would be special circumstances or special equity justifying
issuance of an injunction to restrain the bank from paying
under the guarantee issued by it. I also note that the decision
has been constantly followed in all later decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court.
35.

2 guarantees in sum of Rs.16.5 lacs and Rs.33 lacs,

being a performance guarantee and security for monies
advanced respectively were the subject matter before the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in an action for injunction.

The

operative part of the 2 guarantees, inter alia, provided as
under:
(1st Guarantee)
“NOW, THEREFORE, the bank hereby guarantees to
make unconditional payment of Rs.16.5 lacs
(Rupees sixteen lacs fifty thousand only) to the
Federation on demand at its office at Lucknow
without any further question or reference to the
seller on the seller's failure to fulfil the terms of the
sale on the following terms and conditions.”
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

(2nd Guarantee)
“Now, therefore, in consideration of the aforesaid
advance of the said sum of Rs.33 lacs (Rupees
thirty-three lacs only) to be paid by the PCF tot he
seller as aforesaid the Bank hereby agrees and
guarantees to make unconditionally immediate
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.18 of 50

payment to the Federation as its office at lucknow
of the sum of Rs.33 lacs (Rupees thirty three lacs
only) or any part thereof as the case may be, due
to the PCF from the seller at any time on receipt of
the notice of demand without any question or
reference to the PCF or to the seller on the seller's
failure to fulfil the terms of the said advance on the
following terms and conditions.”
36.

Holding that the language of the 2 guarantees made

it crystal clear that the guarantees were unconditional, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court proceeded to note prior decisions and
culled out the exceptions whereunder a Court would be
justified in issuing an injunction restraining invocation or
payment under an unconditional guarantee.
37.

It was noted that the letter of credit has been

developed over hundreds of years of international trade.

It

was most commonly used in conjunction with the sale of goods
between geographically distant parties. That it was intended
to facilitate the transfer of goods between distant and
unfamiliar buyer and unknown customer. It was noted that it
was difficult for a buyer to pay for goods prior to their delivery.
The bank's letter of credit came into existence to bridge the
gap.

In such transactions, the seller (beneficiary) receives

payment from issuing bank when he presents a demand as per
terms of the documents. The bank must pay if the documents
are in order and the terms of credit are satisfied.

FAO No.400/2007

The bank

Page No.19 of 50

was not allowed to determine whether the seller had actually
shipped the goods or whether the goods conformed to the
requirements of the contract. Any dispute between the buyer
and the seller must be settled between themselves.
38.

The reason of the aforenoted opinion is obvious.

The letter of credit is a contract. The bank promises to pay the
'beneficiary' – traditionally a seller of goods – on demand if the
beneficiary presents whatever documents may be required by
the letter. They are normally the only two parties involved in
the contract. The bank which issues a letter of credit acts as a
principal, not as agent for its customer, and engages its own
credit.

The letter of credit thus evidences an irrevocable

obligation to honour the draft presented by the beneficiary
upon compliance with the terms of the credit.
39.

Their Lordships noted that whether it is a traditional

letter of credit or a new device like performance bond or
performance guarantee, the obligation of the guarantor
(usually a bank) is the same.
40.

One exception to the rule of absolute independence

of a bank guarantee was thereafter noted. It was traced to the
opinion of Shientag J. in a case in U.S.A. reported as Sztejn Vs.
J.Henry Schroder Banking Corpn. 31 NYS 2d 631.
41.

The year was 1941.

FAO No.400/2007

Injunctions against payments
Page No.20 of 50

under letters of credit were not issued by courts. Mr. Sztejn
had wanted to buy quality bristles from Indian and struck a
deal for a quantity with an Indian seller. Payment was secured
to the seller by means of a letter of credit which provided that
upon receipt of appropriate documents the bank would pay for
the shipment.

Somehow Mr. Sztejn discovered that the

shipment made was crates of worthless rubbish. He went to
the bank with a request not to pay and received a response
that being a letter of credit it was an independent undertaking
of the bank and hence it must pay. Mr. Sztejn went to Court.
He sought an injunction against the issuing bank to restrain it
from paying under the letter of credit. He made, prima facie,
good his allegations that as against the contracted goods i.e.
bristles, worthless material and was shipped. Noting a fraud in
the

transaction

the

Court

issued

an

injunction

against

payment.
42.

In U.P.Coop.Federation's case their Lordships noted

that exception of fraud created by Shientag J. had been
subsequently accepted by Courts in England. See: (1) Hamzen
Milas & Sons. v. British Imex Industries Ltd. (1958) (2) QBD
127), (ii) R.D. Harbottle Mercantile) Ltd. & Anr. v. National West
Minister Bank Ltd. (1977 (2) All E. 862), (iii) Edward Owen
Engineering Ltd. v. Barclays Bank International Ltd. (1978 (1)
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.21 of 50

All E.R. 976); and (iv) UCM (Investment) v. Royal Bank of India
(1982) (2) All E.R.720. The last case is of the House of Lords
where Lord Diplock in his speech said (at p.725):
“The whole commercial purpose for which the
system of confirmed irrevocable documentary
credits has been developed in international trade is
to give to the seller an assured right to be paid
before he parts with control of the goods and that
does not permit of the any dispute with the buyer as
to the performance of the contract of sale being
used as a ground of non-payment or reduction or
deferment of payment.
To this general statement of principles as to the
contractual obligations of the confirming bank to
the seller, there is one established exception: that
is, where the seller, for the purpose of drawing on
the credit, fraudulently presents to the confirming
bank documents that contain, expressly or by
implication, material representations of fact that to
his knowledge are untrue. Although there does not
appear among the English authorities any case in
which this exception has been applied, it is well
established in the American cases, of which the
leading or 'landmark' case is Sztejn Vs. Henry
Schroder Banking Corpn. This judgment of the New
York Court of Appeals was referred to with approval
by the English Court of Appeal Edward Owen
Engineering Ltd. V. Barolays Bank International Ltd.
though this was actually a case about a
performance bond under which a bank assumes
obligations to a buyer analogous to those assumed
by a confirming bank to the seller under a
documentary credit. The exception for fraud on the
part of the beneficiary seeking to avail himself to
the credit is a clear application to the maxim ex
trupi cause non oriture or if plain English is to be
preferred, 'fraud unravels all', the courts will not
allow their process to be used by a dishonest person
to carry out a fraud.”
43.

I may only add that exception of fraud has been

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.22 of 50

codified in Sections 5-114 of the Uniform Commercial Code.
44.

Can an injunction be issued upon a plea that the

beneficiary has not supplied the goods as per contract? Law
on the subject was thereafter noted by their Lordships in U.P.
Coop. Federation's case. It was noted that this question arose
before the Court of Appeal in England in Hamzon Melas & Sons
Vs. British Imex Industries Ltd. 1985 (2) Q.B.D. 127, wherein it
was held the principle was that commercial trading must go on
the solemn guarantee either by the letter of credit or by bank
guarantee

or

irrespective

of

any

dispute

between

the

contracting parties whether or not the goods were upon
contract.
45.

With reference to the decision of the House of Lords

reported as United City Merchants (Investment) Ltd. & Ors. Vs.
Royal Bank of Canada & Ors. viz-a-viz a plea of fraud in
invoking the guarantee and a plea of goods not being upto
contract, their Lordships summarised as under:“The whole commercial purpose for which the
system of confirmed irrevocable documentary
credits had been developed in international trade
was to give the seller of goods an assured right to
be paid before he parted with control of the goods
without risk of the payment being refused,
reduced or deferred because of a dispute with the
buyer. It followed that the contractual duty owed
by an issuing or confirming bank to the buyer to
honour the credit notified by him on presentation
of apparently confirming documents by the seller
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.23 of 50

was matched by a corresponding contractual
liability on the part of the bank to the bank to the
seller to pay him the amount of the credit on
presentation of the documents. The bank's duty
to the seller was only vitiated if there was fraud on
the part of the seller.”
46.

Their Lordships noted that the irretrievable injustice

was also a ground on which an injunction could be issued. The
decision of Lord Denning M.R. reported as Elian & Rabbath
(Trading as Elian & J. Rabbath Vs. Massas & Ors. 1966(2)
Lloyd's List Law Reports 495 was noted where an injunction
was issued to prevent irretrievable injustice.
47.

In my opinion, being relevant for clarification of the

issue raised in the instant case being decided by me, the
peculiar facts; the reasons for the opinion and expression used
in Elian's case need to be noted.

In that case the first

defendants' Greek motor vessel 'Flora M' was chartered by
Lebanese charterers for carriage of plaintiffs' cargo (consigned
to Hungary) from Bairut to Rijeka. Discharge was delayed at
Rijeka and Ship owners exercised lien on cargo in respect of
demurrage. Third defendant bank put up guarantee in London
in favour of second defendant (first defendants' London
agents) to secure release of cargo.

There was a claim by

Yugoslavians to distrain on goods, involving ship in further
delay

and

master

FAO No.400/2007

of

Flora

M,

on

lifting

original

lien,

Page No.24 of 50

immediately exercised another lien in respect of extra delay
(which was raised when Hungarian buyers put up 2000). Two
years later, shipowners claimed arbitration with charterers to
assess demurrage for which first lien was exercised and
claimed to enforce guarantee.

Plaintiff claimed declaration

that guarantee was not valid and injunction to restrain
shipowners or their agents from enforcing guarantee. First and
second defendants appealed against granting of injunction by
Blain, J. It was held by the Court of Appeal that it was a special
case in which the Court should grant an injunction to prevent
what might by irretrievable injustice.

Lord Denning, M.R.,

observed that although the shippers were not parties to the
bank guarantee, nevertheless they had a most important
interest in it.

If the Midland Bank Ltd., paid under this

guarantee, they would claim against the Lebanese bank who in
turn would claim against the shippers.
certainly be debited with the account.

The shippers would
On being so debited,

they would have to sue the shipowners for breach of their
promise express or implied, to release the goods.

Lord

Denning, M.R., further posed the question were the shippers to
be forced to take that course?

Or can they shortcircuit the

dispute by suing the shipowners at once for an injunction? He
further observed at page 497 of the Report that this was a
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.25 of 50

special case in which injunction should be granted.

Lord

Denning, M.R. went on to observe that there was a prima facie
ground for saying that on telex messages which passed (and
indeed, on the first three lines of the guarantee) the
shipowners promised that, if the bank guarantee was given,
they would release the goods.

He further observed that the

only lien they had in mind at that time was the lien for
demurrage. But would anyone suppose that the goods would
be held for another lien?

It can well be argued that the

guarantee was given on the understanding that the lien was
raised and no further lien imposed and that when the
shipowners, in breach of that understanding imposed a further
lien, they were disabled from acting on the guarantee.
48.

The expression that it was a special case in which

the Courts should grant an injunction to prevent what might be
irretrievable injustice caught the eye of their Lordships of the
Supreme Court. Sabyasachi Mukharji J. (as his Lordship then
was), in para 16 of the decision in U.P. Coop. Federation's case
noted that Lord Denning M.R. treated this as a very special
case and in a later decision he expressed his views on this
matter.

In para 19, his Lordship noted the view of Lord

Denning M.R. in the opinion reported as Edward Owen
Engineering Ltd. Vs. Barclays Bank International Ltd. 1978 (1)
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.26 of 50

All. E.R. 976.
49.

The facts of Edward Owen's case were that English

suppliers entered into a contract with Libyan buyers to supply
goods to them in Libya.

The contract was subject to a

condition precedent that the plaintiffs would arrange for a
performance bond or guarantee to be given, for 10% of the
contract price, guaranteeing performance of their obligations
under the contract.
defendants,

their

Accordingly, the plaintiffs instructed the
bankers

to

give

on

their

performance guarantee for the sum of £50,203.

behalf

a

Acting on

those instructions the defendants requested a bank in Libya to
issue a performance bond to the buyers for that sum, and
promised the Libyan bank that they would pay the amount of
the guarantee on first demand, without any conditions or
proof.

The Libyan bank issued a letter of guarantee for

£50,203 to the buyers. The contract between the plaintiffs and
the buyers provided for payment of the price of the goods
supplied by a confirmed letter of credit.

The letter of credit

opened by the buyers was not a confirmed letter of credit and
did not, therefore, comply with contract. Because of that noncompliance the plaintiffs repudiated the contract. Although it
was the buyers who appeared to be in default and not the
plaintiffs, the buyers nevertheless claimed on the guarantee
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.27 of 50

given by the Libyan bank who in turn claimed against the
defendants on the guarantee they had given.

The plaintiffs

issued a writ against the defendants claiming an injunction to
restrain them from paying any sum under the performance
guarantee. A judge granted the plaintiffs an interim injunction
in the terms of the injunction claimed by the writ but
subsequently another judge discharged the injunction.
plaintiff appealed to the court of appeal.

The

Lord Denning M.R.

held that the justice was right in discharging the injunction and
reiterated that the bank must honour its commitment.
50.

Thus, in para 24 of the decision in U.P.Coop.

Federation case, Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sabyasachi Mukherjee
clarified that it appears that special equities (circumstances)
mentioned therein i.e. in Elian & Rabbath's case may be a
situation where the injunction was sought for to prevent
injustice which was irretrievable in the words of Lord Denning
M.R. In para 28, his Lordship categorically opined :
“It is not the decision that there should be a
prima facie case. In order to restrain the
operation either of irrevocable letter of credit
or of confirmed letter of credit or of bank
guarantee, there should be serious dispute and
there should be good prima facie case of fraud
and special equities in the form of preventing
irretrievable injustice between the parties.
Otherwise the very purpose of bank
guarantees would be negatived and the fabric
of trading operation will get jeopardised.”
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.28 of 50

51.

As I humbly understand, the ratio of law culled out

in U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. case, is that the bank must
pay under an unconditional guarantee; with the exception, if
prima face case is made out that element of fraud exists on
the part of the beneficiary or if there exists a special equity in
the form of preventing irretrievable injustice then alone an
injunction may be issued. Further, fraud has to be of an
egregious nature and not a dispute that goods supplied are not
as per contract.
52.

Thus, prima facie, only 2 exceptions are recognized.

Firstly, fraud and secondly to prevent irretrievable injustice.
The expression 'a special case' or 'a special equity' qualifies
the prevention of irretrievable injustice and is not a third or a
distinct head. If it is, then the special case or equity has to be
akin to or a variant of irretrievable injustice.
53.

Jainsons Clothing Corporation had a back to back

contract with STC for supply of 3000 MT of B Grade Basmati
Rice which had to be exported by STC to Abu Dhabi
Municipality. Jainsons had furnished a bank guarantee (issued
at its request by it's banker), relevant clause whereof was as
under :“That the Bank hereby irrevocably and
unconditionally guarantee to the Corporation
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.29 of 50

that in the event of any failure/default for
whatever reason on the part of M/s Jainsons
Clothing Corporation in performing all or any of
its obligations under the said contract and/or the
export contract and the L/C established
thereunder and as may be amended from time
to time, the Bank shall pay to the Corporation
forthwith on Corporation's first demand an
amount of Rs.11,70,000 (Rupees Eleven laksh
Seventy thousand only) being approximately 5%
of the contract value of the export. The payment
shall be made by the Bank to the Corporation
without any demur, protest or contestation and
without
any
reference
to
supplier
notwithstanding any dispute(s) whatsoever
pending between the Corporation and the buyer.
A certificate of the Corporation that supplier has
defaulted in the fulfilment of its obligations shall
be sufficient for the purpose of filing claim on the
Bank under the guarantee and the same shall be
final, conclusive and binding on the Bank. The
bank shall forthwith pay to the Corporation the
amount claimed by the Corporation up to the
amount guaranteed herein. In case Bank fails to
pay the amount claimed by the Corporation
within 15 days of the date of demand of the
Corporation, then the bank shall also be liable to
pay to the Corporation interest @ 22.75% per
annum from the date of Corporation demand up
to the date of actual payment and the guarantee
amount shall stand enhanced to the extent of
the interest thus due and payable by the Bank.”
The guarantee was issued in terms of clause 17 of the
contract between Jainson and STC which was as under:“17. Bank Guarantee – The supplier shall within
three days of the signing of this contract furnish
to the STC a bank guarantee from a scheduled
bank for an amount of Rs.11,70,000 (Rupees
Eleven lakhs Seventy thousand only) which is
equivalent to 5% value of the contract as per the
proforma attached hereto as Annexure III for the
performance of its obligations under this
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.30 of 50

contract and the export contract. The bank
guarantee should be made valid up to 22-71985.
In the event of supplier's failure to
perform any of its obligations under the back-toback contract and/or the export contract, STC
shall without prejudice have the right to claim
eventual damages, be entitled to invoke the
bank guarantees and forfeit the amount realised
thereunder. Supplier's liability and on account of
their failure to fulfil their obligations will not be
restricted up to the value of the bank guarantee
to be furnished by supplier.”
Jainsons sought an injunction to restrain the issuing bank
from making payment under the guarantee stating that STC
had

cancelled

the

principal

contract

with

Abu

Dhabi

Municipality and hence it was a case of fraudulent invocation
of the bank guarantee.
54.

Noting that the bank guarantee was unconditional

and its enforcement was not hedged with or conditional upon
the performance of the principal contract and that there was
no fraud in the execution of the contract between Jainson and
STC, in the decision reported as 1994(6) SCC 597 STC Vs.
Jainsons Clothing Corporation & Anr. their Lordships of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the exception carved out in
the decision in U.P.Coop. Federation Ltd. case i.e. fraud of an
egregious nature and irretrievable injustice were the only 2
recognized exception and thus on the occurrence of the events
mentioned in the bank guarantee it becomes enforceable and

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.31 of 50

that disputes in the performance of the contract does not give
rise to a cause to seek an injunction from enforcing the
guarantee.
55.

In its decision reported as 1995 (4) SCC 515 N.T.P.C.

Vs. Flowmore Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. the Hon'ble Supreme Court
revisited the law on the subject.

2 performance guarantees

and 3 guarantees to secure the mobilization advance, all 5
being unconditional and payable on demand, were the centre
of the dispute. The main contract having an arbitration clause,
the dispute was pending adjudication before an arbitral
tribunal.

S.T.C.

invoked

the

bank

guarantees

pending

arbitration. Flowmore sought injunction urging 2 pleas. That
main dispute was pending adjudication before the arbitral
tribunal and hence status quo should be maintained. Secondly
invocation was fraudulent. Repelling both contentions, it was
held

that

pendency

of

arbitration

proceedings

was

an

irrelevant factor and that fraud had to be of an egregious
nature so as to vitiate the entire underlying transaction while
irretrievable injustice had to be of a kind arising in a situation
land in Itek Corpn Vs. First National Bank of Boston 566 Fed
Supp 1210. Finding none, the injunction granted by the High
Court was vacated.
56.

That takes me to the decision in Itek Corporation's

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.32 of 50

case. The facts were that in April of 1977, Itek entered into a
contract with the Imperial Government of Iran to manufacture
certain high-technology optical equipment. The contract price
was $22,500,000. By the terms of this contract, the Imperial
Government was required to make an advance payment to Itek
of $4,500,000. Itek, in turn, was obliged to provide security for
this advance in the form of four bank guarantees, each in the
amount of $1,125,000, issued by Bank Melli and naming the
Imperial Ministry of War as beneficiary.

Itek was further

required to furnish a bank guarantee in the amount of
$2,250,000, issued by Bank Melli in favour of the Imperial
Ministry of War as security for the good performance of its
contractual obligations.

As a condition to issuing the

guarantees, Bank Melli required Itek to supply standby letters
of credit in its favour, issued by an American bank, with
amounts and terms paralleling those of its own guarantees.
Itek complied with this condition by providing five letters of
credit issued by FNBB and naming Bank Melli as beneficiary.
Each of these standby letters of credit stated that payment
would be conditioned on receipt of an authenticated cable
stating that Bank Melli had been required to make payment
under its corresponding guarantee to the Imperial Ministry of
War and that it was airmailing to FNBB a signed statement to
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.33 of 50

that effect. Of the five original letters of credit issued by FNBB,
three remained outstanding as of January 1980, when the suit
was brought. These were S-14555, issued and outstanding in
the amount of $2,250,000; S-14588, issued in the amount of
$1,125,000 and outstanding in the amount of $70,753; and S14559, issued and outstanding in the amount of $1,125,000.
The contract between Itek and the Imperial Government of Iran
provided that in the event of force majeure, including the
cancellation of Itek's export license covering the equipment,
either party would be entitled to inform the other of the event
constituting force majeure and, after three months, to cancel
the contract by written notice. Upon cancellation, the parties
would clear their account and release all guarantees and
letters of credit. From April of 1977 through the end of 1978,
work on the contract apparently proceeded without incident.
An independent American company monitored the progress of
the work performed by Itek and gave Itek consistently high
praise for its efforts. By February 10, 1979, the value of Itek's
performance amounted to $20,300,000; and payments to Itek
totalled $11,100,000.

In early 1979, Iran underwent a

revolution. Ultimately, the head of the Imperial Government,
Shah Riza Pahlevi, was driven into exile, and was succeeded in
power by the religious leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.34 of 50

The Islamic Republic of Iran was established, and the Imperial
Ministry of War was replaced by the Ministry of National
Defense. On April 30, 1979, the State Department cancelled
the export license for the equipment to be manufactured by
Itek under the contract.

Two weeks later, on May 15, 1979,

Itek notified the Iranian authorities of the occurrence of force
majeure, and requested consultations in accordance with the
terms of the contract. On August 20, 1979, representatives of
Itek met in Iran with officials of the Ministry of National
Defense to discuss the occurrence of force majeure and the
status of the contract obligations.

At this meeting, Itek's

representatives also presented the Iranian participants with
copes of unpaid invoices that had accumulated since February
1979, and a summary of the account under the contract. On
November 3, 1979, the United States Embassy in Teheran, Iran
was forcibly taken over and 52 American citizen were taken
hostage.

In response to the crisis, President Carter on

November 14, 1979 declared a national emergency and, by
Executive Order No.12170, “blocked” all Iranian assets subject
to the jurisdiction of the United States. Shortly thereafter, the
Treasury Department promulgated regulations to implement
the Presidential directive that all assets be blocked.

These

regulations prohibited the transfer of any property subject to
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.35 of 50

the jurisdiction of the United States in which Iran had any
interest

whatever,

except

as

authorized

by

license

or

regulation. The regulations specifically authorized payment by
United States banks on letters of credit issued in favour of an
Iranian entity, provided the payments were made into blocked
accounts in domestic banks. At the same time, nothing in the
regulations precluded any person for whose account a standby
letter of credit was opened or any other person from contesting
the legality of the demand from the Iranian entity or from
raising any other legal defense to payment. On December 6,
1979, Itek sent to the Ministry of National Defense further
written notice advising of the occurrence of force majeure, and
again requesting consultations. No response was received to
this communication.

The suit was filed on January 9, 1980.

Itek pleaded that prevailing circumstances in Iran created a
serious risk that unwarranted and fraudulent demands would
be made upon the letters of credit then outstanding with FNBB.
Itek sought temporary and permanent relief in the form of an
order enjoining FNBB from honoring any demand on the letters
of credit, without first giving Itek five days notice. 9.1.1980 the
Court entered a temporary restraining order requiring three
days notice prior to payment, and after hearing on January 18,
1980, a preliminary injunction was entered to the same effect.
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.36 of 50

In February and March of 1980, Bank Melli requested extension
of two of the outstanding letters of credit. In the alternative,
Bank Melli requested immediate payment in full. Itek directed
FNBB to refuse both the requests for extension and payment,
on grounds that the contract had been cancelled and the
letters of credit securing the advance payment had been
cleared.
57.

Itek sought an injunction restraining FNBB from

making any payment on the letters of credit. Holding in favour
of Itek it was held:
“In commercial litigation, the question whether the
plaintiff is likely to suffer irreparable injury may be
cast in terms of whether the plaintiff has available
a legal remedy adequate to compensate it for its
injuries. Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U.S.
305, 312, 102 S.Ct. 1798, 1803, 72 L.Ed.2d 91
(1982).
Though I accept that Itek's ultimate
damages, absent an injunction, are susceptible to
reasonable estimation, I do not find that this alone
establishes an adequate remedy at law. As I
stated in an earlier opinion in this matter, “the fact
that its damages may be reasonably calculable
will provide Itek with little consolation in the event
those damages ultimately prove uncollectable.”
Itek Corporation v. First National Bank of Boston,
511 F.Supp.1341, 1348 (D.Mass.1981). Nothing
has occurred to change my view that “if [FNBB]
were to make payment on the letters as
demanded, Itek's only recourse would be a lawsuit
against the Iranian Government,” 511 F.Supp. at
1349, or that on the present record, this cannot be
viewed as an “adequate” remedy.”
58.

In an action for injunction relating to 14 bank

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.37 of 50

guarantees of 4 kinds; (i) to secure Mobilization Advance; (ii) to
secure the Security Amount; (iii) to secure the Funds Advanced
by Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd.; and (iv) to secure
Due Performance, the High Court granted an injunction qua the
guarantees except the guarantees under head No.(iii) in favour
of the contractor Tarapore & Co. holding that on facts special
equity or special circumstances were shown justifying grant of
an injunction. Reason given by the High Court was that till the
arbitrator decided the dispute the claim under the bank
guarantees (qua which injunction was issued) had not yet been
crystallized. Reversing the decision of the High Court, in the
decision reported as 1996 (5) SCC 34 Hindustan Steelworks
Constructions Ltd. Vs. Tarapore & Co. it was held:
“14. The High Court also committed a grave error
in restraining the appellant from invoking bank
guarantees on the ground that in India only a
reasonable amount can be awarded by way of
damages even when the parties to the contract
have provided for liquidated damages and that a
term in a bank guarantee making the beneficiary
the sole judge on the question of breach of
contract and the extent of loss or damages would
be invalid and that no amount can be said to be
due till an adjudication in that behalf is made
either by a court or an arbitrator, as the case
may be. In taking that view the High Court has
overlooked the correct position that a bank
guarantee is an independent and distinct
contract between the bank and the beneficiary
and is not qualified by the underlying transaction
and the primary contract between the person at
whose instance the bank guarantee is given and
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.38 of 50

the beneficiary. What the High Court has
observed would be applicable only to the parties
to the underlying transaction or the primary
contract but can have no relevance to the bank
guarantee given by the bank, as the transaction
between the bank and the beneficiary is
independent and of a different nature. In case of
an unconditional bank guarantee the nature of
obligation of the bank is absolute and not
dependent upon any dispute or proceeding
between the party at whose instance the bank
guarantee is given and the beneficiary. The High
Court thus failed to appreciate the real object and
nature of a bank guarantee. The distinction which
the High Court has drawn between a guarantee
for due performance of a works contract and a
guarantee given towards security deposit for that
contract is also unwarranted. The said distinction
appears to be the result of the same fallacy
committed by the High Court of not appreciating
the distinction between the primary contract
between the parties and a bank guarantee and
also the real object of a bank guarantee and the
nature of bank's obligation thereunder. Whether
the bank guarantee is towards security deposit or
mobilisation advance or working funds or for due
performance of the contract if the same is
unconditional and if there is a stipulation in the
bank guarantee that the bank should pay on
demand without a demur and that the beneficiary
shall be the sole judge not only on the question of
breach of contract but also with respect to the
amount of loss or damages, the obligation of the
bank would remain the same and that obligation
has to be discharged in the manner provided in
the bank guarantee. In General Electric Technical
Services Co. Inc. v. Punj Sons (P) Ltd. while
dealing with a case of bank guarantee given for
securing mobilisation advance it has been held
that the right of a contractor to recover certain
amounts under running bills would have not
relevance to the liability of the bank under the
guarantee given by it. In that case also the
stipulations in the bank guarantee were that the
bank had to pay on demand without a demur and
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.39 of 50

that the beneficiary was to be the sole judge as
regards the loss or damage caused to it. This
Court held that notwithstanding the dispute
between the contractor and the party giving the
contract, the bank was under an obligation to
discharge its liability as per the terms of the bank
guarantee. Larsen and Toubro Limited v.
Maharashtra
State
Electricity
Board
and
Hindustan Steel Workers Construction Ltd. v. G.S.
Atwal & Co. (Engineers) Pvt. Ltd. were also cases
of work contracts wherein bank guarantees were
given either towards advances or release of
security deposits or for due performance of the
contract. In both those cases this Court held that
the bank guarantees being irrevocable and
unconditional and as the beneficiary was made
the sole judge on the question of breach of
performance of the contract and the extent of
loss or damages an injunction restraining the
beneficiary from invoking the bank guarantees
could not have been granted. The above referred
three subsequent decisions of this Court also go
to show that the view taken by the High Court is
clearly wrong.”
59.

Referring to the decision in U.P.Coop.Federation

case, it was reiterated the fraud and special equity in the form
of irretrievable injustice were the only recognized exceptions
justifying granting an injunction (Refer para 18 and 23).
60.

I may hasten to add that the decision in Hindustan

Steelworks Construction Ltd. case, has, vide para 18 clarified
the ambit of what constitutes a fraud justifying granting an
injunction. It was clarified as under:“It may be pointed out that fraud which is
recognised as an exception is the fraud by one of
the parties to the underlying contract and which
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.40 of 50

has the effect of vitiating the entire underlying
transaction. A demand by the beneficiary under
the bank guarantee may become fraudulent not
because of any fraud committed by the beneficiary
while executing the underlying contract but it may
become so because of subsequent events or
circumstances. We see no good reason why the
courts should not restrain a person making such a
fraudulent demand from enforcing a bank
guarantee.”
61.

Thus, a dispute on merits; a claim that some money

has been recovered under running bills; that matter was
pending adjudication before the arbitrators are all irrelevant
factors while considering a claim for injunction pertaining to a
bank guarantee.
62.

In the decision reported as 1996 (5) SCC 450 Ansal

Engineering Projects Ltd. Vs. Tehri Hydro Development Corpn.
it was held that a serious dispute on the question as to who
committed the breach of the contract and whether the amount
is due and payable by the contractor till the arbitrator declares
the award are not circumstances, much less exceptional,
justifying granting an injunction to restrain the bank from
paying under the guarantee.
63.

A slightly discordant note was struck in the decision

reported as 2002 (10) SCC 508 State of Haryana Vs.
Continental Construction wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court
did not interfere with an injunction order passed by the High

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.41 of 50

Court noting that the dispute was pending adjudication before
the arbitrator.

However in the decision reported as 2006(2)

SCC 728 BSES Ltd. Vs. Fenner India it was observed:
“We are afraid that the short order in Continental
Construction Ltd. appears to have been made on the
narrow facts of that case and does not constitute a
precedent binding us.
Moreover, as mentioned
earlier, a line of judgments of this Court have long
settled the law relating to the invocation of bank
guarantees.”
64.

In the decision reported as 1997(6) SCC 450

Dwarikesh Sugar Industries Ltd. Vs. Prem Heavy Engineering
Work P. Ltd. it was held that special circumstance of
irretrievable injury means a circumstance which makes it
impossible for the guarantor to reimburse itself by way of
restitution.

In the decision reported as 1997(1) SCC 568

U.P.State Sugar Corporation Vs. Sumac International Ltd. the
fact that the beneficiary was a sick company and that a
scheme for its revival was pending consideration before BIFR
under Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act 1985
was held not to be a circumstance showing that money would
be irretrievably lost if the claim ultimately went in favour of the
contractor. Referring to the decision in Itek Corporation case
and

the

law

pertaining

to

injunction

claims

qua

bank

guarantee, it was observed:
“The courts have carved out only two exceptions. A
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.42 of 50

fraud in connection with such a bank guarantee
would vitiate the very foundation of such a bank
guarantee. Hence if there is such a fraud of which
the beneficiary seeks to take advantage, he can be
restrained from doing so. The second exception
relates to cases where allowing the encashment of
an unconditional bank guarantee would result in
irretrievable harm or injustice to one of the parties
concerned.
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
xxxx
On the question of irretrievable injury which is the
second exception to the rule against granting of
injunctions when unconditional bank guarantees are
sought to be realised the court said in the above
case that the irretrievable injury must be of the kind
which was the subject matter of the decision in the
Itek Corpn. Case.
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

Before us, however, in the course of argument, the
learned advocate for the respondent urged for the
first time in this case there would be irretrievable
injustice to the respondent if the bank guarantees
are allowed to be realised because the appellant is a
sick industrial company in respect of which a
reference is pending before the board for industrial
and financial reconstruction under the Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985.
The respondent contends that even if it succeeds
before the arbitrator it will not be able to realise his
claim from the appellant. The mere fact that a
reference under the Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) Act, 1985 is pending before the
Board, is, in our view, not sufficient to bring the case
in the ambit of the “irretrievable injustice”
exception. Under the scheme of the said Act the
board is required to make such inquiry as it may
deem fit for determining whether any industrial
company has become a sick industrial company.
Under Section 16 (4) where the board deems it fit to
make an inquiry or to cause an inquiry to be made
in this connection, it may appoint one or more
persons to be special directors for safeguarding the
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.43 of 50

financial and other interests of the company or in
the public interest. Under Section 17 after making
an inquiry, if the Board is satisfied that a company
has become a sick industrial company, the Board
may then decide, by an order in writing, whether it
is practicable for company to make its net worth
exceed the accumulated loses within a reasonable
time. If this is practicable, then the Board shall give
such company the opportunity to make its net worth
exceed the accumulated loses. Under Sub-Section
(3) of Section 17 if the Board decides that this is not
practicable within a reasonable time, it may adopt
measures specified in Section 18 and provide for a
scheme for appropriate measures in relation to that
company. There can, therefore, be no presumption
that the company will, in no circumstance, be able
to discharge its obligations.
xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

xxxx

Under Section 22 on which the respondent relies,
where in respect of an industrial company, an
inquiry under Section 16 is pending, or any scheme
under Section 17 is under preparation or a
sanctioned scheme is under implementation or
when an appeal under Section 25 is pending, then
no proceedings for the winding up of the industrial
company or for execution, distress or the like
against any of the properties of the industrial
company or the appointment of a receiver in
respect thereof can be proceeded with; and no suit
for the recovery of money or for the enforcement of
any security against the industrial company shall lie
or be proceeded with except with the consent of the
Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate
Authority. The respondent contends that its right to
realise its claim, of established, would be affected
by reason of Section 22 of the said Act. There is no
material before us to show that the appellant
company cannot make its net worth positive. NO
scheme has been framed under the said Act so far.
Even under Section 22 there is no absolute bar
against any suit for the recovery of money. The suit
cannot be proceeded with except with the consent
of the Board of the Appellate Authority.
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.44 of 50

Therefore, in an appropriate case, the Board or the
Appellate Authority is entitled to give its consent to
such a claim being proceeded with. This is not a
situation of the kind envisaged in the case of Itek
Corpn. where there was no possibility whatsoever of
recovery of any amount from the purchaser.”
65.

In the decision reported as BSES Ltd. Vs. Fenner

India Ltd. 2006 (2) SCC 728 'lack of good faith' and/or
'enforcing with an oblique purpose' were arguments brought
into aid to urge that if a bank guarantee was invoked for an
oblique purpose or invocation lacked in good faith, exceptional
circumstance

existed

justifying

granting

an

injunction.

Decision of the Court of Appeal in Singapore reported as
Samwoh Asphalt Premix Ptc. Ltd. Vs. Sum Cheong Piling Pte
Ltd. (2002) 1 SLR 1 was considered.
66.

The Court of Appeal in Singapore held that where a

bank guarantee was invoked as a 'bargaining chip' or as a
'deterrent' or in an 'abusive manner' it would amount to calling
a guarantee for an oblique purpose, justifying the issuance of
an injunction.
67.

Refusing to go for the bite, in Femur India's case the

Hon'ble Supreme Court held:
We are afraid that in the face of the law succinctly
laid down in U.P.Coop. Federation and reiterated in
numerous judgments of this Court referred to
earlier, we are unable to accept the wide
proposition of law laid down in the foreign
judgments cited by Mr. Sorabjee. Whatever may
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.45 of 50

be the law, as to the encashment of bank
guarantees in other jurisdictions, when the law in
India is clear, settled and without any deviation
whatsoever, there is no occasion to rely upon
foreign case-law.”
68.

The legal position which can be summarized would

be that a bank guarantee is an independent contract between
the bank and the beneficiary and disputes pertaining to bank
guarantees have to be resolved de-hors the terms of the main
contract between the parties or disputes relatable to the main
contract between the parties. Where a bank guarantee is a
conditional guarantee invocation thereof would have to be in
strict conformity with the conditions on which the guarantee is
issued. In such a case an injunction can be granted against
payment under the bank guarantee if it is found that the
condition upon which the guarantee was issued has not been
complied

with

or

met.

But

where

the

guarantee

is

unconditional and/or the bank has agreed to make payment
without demur or protest, on the beneficiary invoking the bank
guarantee the bank is obliged to honour the same for the
reason like letters of credit, a bank guarantee if not honoured
would cause irreparable damage to the trust in commerce and
would deprive vital oxygen to the money supply and money
flow in commerce and transaction which is necessary for
economic growth.
FAO No.400/2007

Disputes pertaining to the main contract
Page No.46 of 50

cannot be considered by a court when a claim under a bank
guarantee is made and the court would be precluded from
embarking on an enquiry pertaining to the prima facie nature
of the respective claim of the litigating parties relatable to the
main dispute.

The dispute between the parties to the

underlying contract has to be decided at the civil forum i.e. a
civil suit if there exists no arbitration clause in the contract or
before the arbitral tribunal if there exists an arbitration clause
in the contract.

Pendency of arbitration proceedings is no

consideration while deciding on the issue of grant of an interim
injunction. That certain amounts have been recovered under
running bills and have to be adjusted for is of no concern in
matters relating to invocation of bank guarantee. That there
are serious disputes on questions as to who committed the
breach of the contract are no circumstances justifying granting
an injunction pertaining to a bank guarantee. Plea of lack of
good faith and/or enforcing the guarantee with an oblique
purpose or that the bank guarantee is being invoked as a
bargaining chip, a deterrent or in an abusive manner are all
irrelevant and hence have to be ignored. There are only 2 well
recognized exceptions to the rule against permitting payment
under a bank guarantee. The same are :A.

A fraud of egregious nature;

FAO No.400/2007

Page No.47 of 50

B.

Encashment of the bank guarantee would result in

irretrievable harm or injustice of an irreversible kind to one of
the parties.
69.

The irretrievable harm or injustice of an irreversible

kind must relate to a situation akin to the one found in Itek
Corporation's case or of the kind or in Elian & Rabbath's case
(supra).
70.

There is no separate third exception of a special

equity justifying grant
beneficiary

from

of an injunction to restrain the

receiving

under

an

unconditional

bank

guarantee and if there exists any third exception of a special
equity the same has to be of a kind akin to irretrievable
injustice or putting a party in an irretrievable situation.
71.

I thus eschew any reference to the merits of the

respective claims of the parties before the arbitral tribunal.
Indeed, the arbitral tribunal could not have proceeded to
consider the issue under Section 17 of the Arbitration &
Conciliation Act by predicating the discussion on the merits of
the claim of the contractor.
tribunal

pertaining

to

The reasons given by the arbitral

the

performance

guarantee

while

injuncting invocation thereof are indeed perverse. Admittedly,
the contractor has not completed the work.
performance
FAO No.400/2007

guarantee

is

an

Admittedly, the

unconditional

guarantee.
Page No.48 of 50

Admittedly, the contract stipulated period is over.

Whatever

be the substantive disputes between the parties pertaining to
who is in the breach of the contract, the performance
guarantee is invocable on its terms.
72.

Pertaining to the other guarantees the only issue

which needs consideration is the impact of an arbitral award in
favour of the contractor under which approximately Rs.9.37
crores have been found as the entitlement of the contractor.
The award is under challenge by NHAI under Section 34 of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.

If the award is upheld,

NHAI would have to give adjustment of said amount to the
contractor. Unfortunately for the contractor their Lordships of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Hindustan Steel Works case
(supra) held that merely because certain amounts were
recovered from the running bills towards mobilization advance
would not justify grant of an injunction to restrain the
beneficiary from realizing the money under an unconditional
bank guarantee issued to secure the mobilization advance.
Further,

their

Lordships

held

that

merely

because

the

contractor had to recover certain amounts under the running
bills would have no relevance to the liability of the guarantor to
pay

under

the

guarantee.

Meaning

thereby

issue

of

adjustments have not to be gone into while deciding on the
FAO No.400/2007

Page No.49 of 50

question relating to unconditional bank guarantees.
73.

The appeal is accordingly allowed. Impugned order

dated 25.10.2007 passed by the learned Arbitral Tribunal is
quashed.

Respondent's application under Section 17 of the

Arbitration & Conciliation Act is dismissed.
74.

Since

the

respondent

has

the

benefit

of

an

injunction in its favour which stands vacated today, to enable
the respondent to avail further remedies as per law, operation
of the present order is suspended for a period of 3 weeks from
today.
75.

No costs.

April 28, 2008
MM

FAO No.400/2007

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.50 of 50

