IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C. No.2811/2004
#
!

M/s Krystal Poly Fab Ltd. Ors.
....... Petitioner
through: Mr. Rajesh Ranjan, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

M/s. Indo Rama Synthetics India Ltd. ....... Respondent
through: Mr. Simran Mehta, Advocate

%

DATE OF DECISION: 30-08-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.(Oral)
Complaint under Section 138 read with Section 141

NI Act has resulted in issuance of a summoning order against
the petitioners.
2.
ground.

The summoning order is questioned only on one
It is urged that on 14.12.1998 BIFR had passed an

order under Section 22 A of SICA.
3.

The direction issued vide order dated 14.12.1998 is

as contained in para 9 of the order. It reads as under:Page 1 of 3

4.

“9. The Bench also directed u/s 22A of SICA
that the company should not dispose of any of
its fixed assets without prior approval of BIFR.
It could, however, continue to rotate its
current assets in the normal course of
business but ensure that all sale proceeds and
other related transactions were routed
through its financing bankers only.”
Conceding that the order restricts the direction to

the fixed assets of the company, learned counsel for the
petitioner urges that the latter part of the direction was to the
effect that business of the company had to be transacted only
through the operating agency. Counsel states that operating
agency was appointed as per para 7 of the said order.
5.

6.

Para 7 of the order reads as under:“7. Further, on the basis of submissions made and
the material on record, the Bench observed that a
package u/s 17(2) was not possible. Accordingly, in
exercise of he powers conferred on under section
17(3) of the Act, the Bench appointed CBI as the
Operating Agency (OA) to examine the viability and
prepare a viability study report keeping in view the
provisions of Section 18 of the Act and the
'Measures and Guidelines' enclosed.”
A perusal of para 7 of the order shows that the

Central Bank of India was appointed as the operating agency
limited with the mandate to examine the viability report and
submit the same for consideration of the Board.
7.

Neither para 7 nor para 9 read by themselves or coPage 2 of 3

jointly lead to the conclusion that business operations of the

company were taken over by the operating agency.
8.

In that view of the matter, the petitioners cannot

evade liability in respect of cheques issued by them.
9.

In the decision reported as (2000) 2 SCC 745 Kusum

Ingots and Alloys Vs. Pennar Peterson Securities Ltd. law was
stated with clarity. Clarity being that if order under Section 22
A of SICA restrained the company from dealing with its assets,
the company nor its directors would be liable to be prosecuted
under Section 138 of the NI Act in respect of cheques issued
from the account of the company.
10.

The ratio has to be understood with reference to the

injunctive order relatable the fixed assets and/or the movable
assets.
11.

In the instant case, the company was permitted to

carry on business transactions. There was no embargo on the
company or its director to deal with the movable assets of the
company or to deal with the funds lying to the credit of the
company.
12.

I find no merits in the petition.

13.

Dismissed.

August 30, 2007
mm

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Page 3 of 3

