IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL.APPEAL.No.36/1986
#
!

Man Mohan
through:

.......Appellant
Mr. Rajesh Mahajan, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

State

through:

%

.......Respondent
Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate

DATE OF DECISION: 31-10-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)
Man Mohan the appellant was charged for the

offence under Section 307 IPC alleging that on 28.12.1982, at
about 10:45 AM, he caused with intention or knowledge injuries
on Brij Mohan, injuries being under such circumstances that Brij
Mohan may have died.
2.

At the trial the prosecution examined besides Man

Mohan, one Shankar Lal, brother of Brij Mohan and Santok
Singh, a shopkeeper in the neighbourhood, as witnesses of the
prosecution being PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4.
page 1 of 7

3.

All 3 witnesses of the prosecution supported the

version of the complainant Brij Mohan who stated that on the
day in question when he was proceeding on his bicyle in front
of the shop of Man Mohan, he i.e. Man Mohan caught him and
inflicted fist blows. He fell down. Man Mohan went inside his
shop and brought with him a rappi (a sharp edged instrument
used for cutting leather or foam). That he was stabbed twice
with the rappi, one blow was towards the face and the other on
the left shoulder. He fell down. Man Mohan attempted to stab
him in his stomach. He turned and as a result the blow struck
near his buttock. He cried.

People from neighbourhood

assembled. That he remained in the hospital for about 9 days.
4.

Shankar Lal, examined as PW-2 fully corroborated

Brij Mohan. Even Santok examined as PW-4 fully corroborated
Brij Mohan.
5.

In his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. Man

Mohan stated that his he was falsely implicated. He stated that
wife of Brij Mohan and his wife are real sisters.

At the time

when the incident took place he was not at his shop. He was
intercepted by the police at Jamna Bridge and was brought to
his shop. His wife was weeping and told him that Brij Mohan
wanted to take liberties with her. On her raising objections a
page 2 of 7

crowd had gathered. Brij Mohan was beaten by the public and
their servant. That their servant has vanished.
6.

Believing the testimony of Brij Mohan as also the

testimony of PW-2 and PW-4 who corroborated Brij Mohan,
learned Trial Judge proceeded to hold that Man Mohan had
assaulted his brother-in-law in the manner deposed to by him.
However, taking note of the injury and the manner in which Brij
Mohan described the blows inflicted on his person, learned
Judge has recorded a conviction under Section 326 IPC for
voluntary causing grievous hurt by a sharp edged weapon.
7.

It is urged by learned counsel for Man Mohan that no

motive has been imputed to him and in the absence of a
motive, it does not stand to logic or reasoning that Man Mohan
would attack Brij Mohan.

Counsel urges that possibility of

incident taking place in the manner explained by Man Mohan in
his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. cannot be ruled out.
8.

I need not unnecessarily hold myself and consider

the plausibility of the afore-said submission for the reason
when Brij Mohan was cross-examined, a suggestion was put to
him to the effect that Brij Mohan had first abused Man Mohan.
9.

The suggestion is self incriminating in respect to the

presence of Man Mohan at the time when the incident took
page 3 of 7

place.
10.

It has then sought to be urged that the nature of

injuries did not attract the offence under Section 326 IPC. At
best, offence is made out under Section 324 IPC.
11.

Dr. B. Bhattacharya who had treated Brij Mohan has

been examined as PW-6.

He has proved his report as

Ex.PW6/A. Learned Trial Judge has considered the said report
and testimony of the doctor.
12.

In view of the report and testimony of the doctor

and keeping into consideration the nature of the weapon of
offence used, view taken by the learned ASJ that offence under
Section 326 IPC stands established cannot be faulted.
13.

Thus, I find no infirmity in the judgment and order

convicting Man Mohan.
14.

As regards the sentence, Man Mohan has been

sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and 6
months and fine of Rs.200/- has been imposed. In default of
payment of fine it has been directed that he would undergo
further simple imprisonment for 3 months.
15.

Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the

incident in question relates to 20.12.1982. 25 years have gone
by. Counsel further points out that the impugned judgment is
page 4 of 7

dated 24.12.1985 and for 21 years the appeal has remained
pending.

Counsel submits that the current jurisprudential

thinking in the field of criminology is laying greater emphasis
on the reformatory aspect of sentencing policy and less on the
deterrent aspect of the sentencing policy. Learned counsel has
cited the following decisions :1.

B.G. Goswami Vs. Delhi Administration AIR 1973 SC 1457

2.

Ram Narain Vs. State of U.P. AIR SC 2200

3.

Narinder Kumar Vs. The State (Delhi Admn.) 17 (1980)

DLT 302
4.

Parveen Kumar Vs. The State 17 (1980) DLT 297

5.

Kathi Odhabhai Bhimabhai Vs. State of Gujarat 1993

Crl.L.J. 187
6.

Alam and Others Vs. State of Rajasthan 1981 SCC (Crl.)

624
7.

Ved Prakash Vs. State of Haryana 1981 SCC (Crl.) 182

8.

Ashok Kumar Vs. State (Delhi Administration) 1980 SCC

(Crl.) 426
9.

Vishnu Nagnath Deshmukh Vs. State of Maharashtra AIR

2000 SC 3677
16.

I need not copiously note the observations in the

afore-noted judgments except the observation from the
page 5 of 7

decision in B.G.Goswami's case (supra).
17.

The paragraph which is intended to be noted

highlights the purpose of sentence. It highlights 3 attributes of
a sentence. The first facet is that the accused must realise that
he has committed the act which is not only harmful to the
society of which he forms an integral part but is also harmful to
his own future both as an individual and as a member of the
society.

The second facet highlights the punitive deterrent

aspect of a sentence.

The

third

facet highlights

the

reformatory aspect of a sentence.
18.

The Court has observed as under :“Punishment is designed to protect society by
deterring potential offenders as also by preventing
the guilty party from repeating the offence; it is also
designed to reform the offender and re-claim him as
a law abiding citizen fo good of the society as a
whole. Reformatory, deterrent and punitive aspects
of punishment thus play their due part in judicial
thinking while determining this question. In modern
civilized societies, however, reformatory aspect is
being given somewhat greater importance. Too
lenient as well as too harsh sentences both lose
their efficaciousness. One does not deter and the
other may frustrate thereby making the offender a
hardened criminal.
In the present case, after
weighing the consideration already noticed by us
and the fact that to send the appellant back to hail
now after 7 years of the agony and harassment of
these proceedings when his is also going to lose his
job and to earn a living for himself and for his family
members and for those dependent on him, we feel
that it would meed the ends of justice if we reduce
page 6 of 7

the sentence of imprisonment to that already
undergone but increase the sentence of find from
Rs.200/- to Rs.400/-. Period of imprisonment in
case of default will remain the same.”
19.
Man Mohan has not been involved in any criminal
activity after the unfortunate incident in question.

He is

married and has six children. He is a grand father as of today.
When appeal was admitted on 28.2.1986, Man Mohan was
admitted to bail.

No useful purpose would be served in

requiring Man Mohan to surrender and undergo the remaining
sentence of the imprisonment.
20.

I accordingly dispose of the appeal by affirming the

order of conviction but I reduce the sentence to the period
already undergone by Man Mohan.

The fine imposed is

maintained. Needless to state, if the fine imposed is not paid
by Man Mohan, he shall undergo simple imprisonment as
directed by the learned ASJ.
21.

Copy of this order be supplied dasti to Man Mohan.

22.

LCR be returned.

October 31, 2007
vg

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 7 of 7

