IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Crl. Appeal No.196/1987
#
!

N.D.M.C.

through:

........
Appellant
Mr.Rajesh Mahajan, Adv.
VERSUS

$
^

Neeraj Prakash & Anr.
........
Respondents
through: Mr.R.N.Mittal, Senior Advocate
with Mr.Pawan Kumar Mittal
andrews
Ms.Akanksha Verma
Chandhiok
for the accused.
%

DATE OF DECISION: 30.10.2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1.

Pursuant to the warrants issued on 10.8.2007 the

accused is present in court along with counsel as noted above.
2.

At the outset it may be noted that the record of the

learned Metropolitan Magistrate is not traceable in the record
room (criminal) Tis Hazari as per letter dated 10.8.1992
addressed by Sh. M.L.Mehta, then Metropolitan Magistrate,

page 1 of 6

New Delhi. Unfortunately, learned counsel for the parties also
do not have the record of the trial.

The position therefore

would be that matter would have to be considered with
reference to the impugned order of acquittal.
3.

I have heard learned counsel for the parties. Within

the constraints noted herein above i.e. non availability of the
testimony of the witnesses, it is but apparent that matter has
to be considered on the fulcrum whether the appreciation of
evidence by the learned Trial Judge, as reproduced in the order
suffers from a patent illegality or an irregularity.
4.

Misdirected approach or reference of testimony of a

particular witness viz-a-viz the other cannot be resorted to for
the reason testimony of the witnesses is not available.
5.

For purposes of this order, reproduction of facts and

testimony of the witnesses as recorded in the impugned order
has been treated as a correct narration of the testimony of the
witnesses.
6.

Neeraj Prakash was charged with the offence of

preventing the food inspector from taking a milk sample on
14.5.1974. Time being 6:30 P.M.
7.

Prosecution alleged that on the date in question, at

6:30 P.M., food inspector S.C.Bhalla examined as PW-2
page 2 of 6

accompanied by Chief Food Inspector R.K.Bhanot examined
PW-6 and another food inspector R.C.Kapoor examined as PW-5
and one Inder Singh examined as PW-7 reached terrace
restaurant on the 10th Floor, Mayur Bhawan, Cannaught Place
which was being run by Neeraj Prakash. S.C.Bhalla disclosed
his identity and went to the kitchen of the restaurant where
about 8 kg of boiled milk was found stored in an aluminium
vessel (Patila).

It was being used for preparation of tea and

coffee to be served to the customers in the dining hall of the
restaurant.

On enquiry, Neeraj Prakash informed S.C.Bhalla

that the milk was toned milk and was being used for preparing
tea and coffee. S.C.Bhalla expressed his intention to purchase
a sample of the milk for analysis.

Neeraj Prakash became

furious and shouted “MUJHE MAAR DOGHEY KYA PHIR SAMPLE
LANEY AA GAYAE HO, MUJHE NAHIN DENA HAI SAMPLE”.
8.

So stating, Neeraj Prakash shouted at his workers to

close down the restaurant.

On hearing shouts of Neeraj

Prakash some customers and staff members entered the
kitchen from the dining hall. Neeraj Prakash pushed S.C.Bhalla
and threw the vessel containing the milk on the floor.

The

vessel was picked up and seized as per seizure memo. The
food inspector requested the customers who had gathered to
page 3 of 6

be a witness.

One Dina Nath Bhatia PW-4 agreed to be a

witness. PW-7 Inder Singh soaked the split milk in a piece of
cloth and sealed the same. It was seized thereafter.
9.

The prosecution examined the entire raiding party

as witnesses as also Dina Nath Bhatia. All supported the case
of the prosecution.
10.

In defence, Neeraj Prakash examined O.P.Chopra,

B.K.Gupta, A.K.Srivastava and Raman Kumar as DW-1, DW-2,
DW-3 & DW-4. DW-1, Assistant Delhi High Court proved record
of Writ

No. 794/74 which evidences that the premises

wherefrom restaurant was being run was licenses by NDMC to
Neeraj Prakash and there was a dispute pertaining to his right
to continue to occupy the licensed premises. DW-3, Clerk from
the Delhi High Court proved the exhibits DW-3/1-30 being
record

of

Writ

No.

794/74

which

included

the

stated

communication by Neeraj Prakash to NDMC that he had closed
the restaurant on 28.8.1973 pursuant to a direction issued by
the Medical Health Officer on 20.8.1973 to close down the
restaurant as Municipal Health License was not issued.
11.

Appreciating the testimony of the witnesses of the

prosecution, learned Trial Judge has held it to be a case of a
motivated implication.

Reason for so holding is that all
page 4 of 6

witnesses of the prosecution have deposed 'like parrots'.
12.

Learned Trial Judge has specifically adverted to the

testimony of PW-4 and has noted that he could not be labeled
as an independent witness for the reason in cross examination
he admitted that his brother was an employee of NDMC. The
zeal of this witness to implicate Neeraj Prakash has been
highlighted by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate with
reference to the fact that PW-1 to PW-3 and PW-5 to PW-7
categorically stated that public witnesses entered the kitchen
when altercation had taken place in the manner noted in para 7
herein above, but PW-4 deposed pari materia as if even he had
witnessed the altercation. Conclusion arrived at is that since
PW-4 has gone to the extent of supporting the case of the
prosecution with reference to a part of the incident which he
had not witnessed, it establishes that he was an interested
witness.
13.

Another factor noted by the learned Metropolitan

Magistrate is that being an employee of ISI, PW-4 had chosen
to taken leave on the day when he was examined as a witness
of the prosecution, meaning thereby PW-4 was enthusiastically
participating in the case of the prosecution.
14.

Ignoring the last circumstance noted by the learned
page 5 of 6

Judge, namely PW-4 availing leave to appear in court when he
was examined as a witness, the other 2 reasons recorded by
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate are prima facie sound
reasons.
15.

It is indeed unexplainable as to how D.N.Bhatia

could depose to facts which took place in his absence.

Of

course, except on the premise that D.N.Bhatia parroted what
was desired by the prosecution to be parroted.
16.

I note that the incident relates to the year 1974.

The order of acquittal is dated 11.2.1985. I am dealing with
the matter in the year 2007. This court as also learned counsel
are handicapped on account of the fact that Trial Court Record
is misplaced.

Neither counsel has the testimony of the

witnesses with them.
17.

Under the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

October 30, 2007
mm

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 6 of 6

