IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
F.A.O. No.212/1995
#
!

M/s Ram Kanwar Ram Niwas
.......Appellant
through:
Mr.M.L. Bhargava, Advocate
VERSUS

$
^

Union of India
.......Respondent
(through General Manager, Northern Railways)
through:
Mr.Sanjay Pathak, Advocate
RESERVED ON: 28.01.2008

%

DATE OF DECISION: 31.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

This is an appeal filed under Section 23 of the Railway

Claims Tribunal Act, 1987 against the order dated 5.5.95 passed by
the learned Railway Claims Tribunal, Delhi.
2.

The appellant M/s Ram Kanwar Ram Niwas filed a suit

against the respondent claiming a compensation of Rs.27,125/-.
3.

The case set up by the appellant was that M/s Dhuliyan

Trades entrusted a consignment comprising of 245 bags (each bag

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.1 of 18

weighing 100 kgs) of Urad dal to the respondent for transport from
Dhulianganga station to New Delhi. That the consignment was
booked under invoice no.4 railway receipt no.C 895604 dated
20.6.84

under

the

Railway

Risk.

That

it

is

the

'endorsed

consignee'/purchaser of the said consignment/goods. That at the
time when the delivery of the consignment was taken from the
respondent it was found that 40 bags were short-delivered and 57
bags were in damaged condition. That the shortage and damage
took place due to gross negligence and misconduct of the
employees of the respondent. That it called upon the respondent to
make payment of the compensation for the loss and issued notice
under Section 78-B of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 and Section 80
of the Code of Civil Procedure for settlement of the claim. That since
there was no response to the notice the suit is filed.
4.

Respondent resisted the suit inter-alia contending that

the original Railway receipt bears remarks “said to contain”
meaning thereby that the loading of the consignment was done by
the consignor and not supervised by the railways therefore it is not
liable to pay any compensation for the alleged shortage of bags.
That staff of the respondent has not supervised the actual quantity
loaded into the wagon at the forwarding station. If any short
delivery was found in the consignment at the time of the delivery, it
is due to the short loading by the consignor. It was further stated

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.2 of 18

that the short delivery certificate was issued on the request of the
consignee, without prejudice, at the destination station only to place
on record the actual quantity received by the destination station
and it does not amount to admission of any liability that the
shortage occurred due to its negligence in the carriage of the
consignment.
5.

However respondent admitted that there was a hole in

the roof of the wagon in which consignment was loaded because of
which water seeped into the wagon as a result of which 57 bags
were damaged. It agreed to pay compensation in respect of damage
caused to 57 bags.
6.

In the replication appellant categorically pleaded that

the consignment was not booked on “said to contain” basis and that
the loading of the consignment in the wagon was done under the
supervision of the staff of the respondent.
7.

In support of the case set up by it, appellant examined

one Mr. Kul Bushan as AW-1 who was a partner of the appellant
firm. AW-1 tendered his examination-in-chief by way of an affidavit
which is at page 15 of the record of the Railway Claims Tribunal. In
the affidavit AW-1 deposed on the lines of the pleadings filed of the
appellant.
8.

Along

with

the

affidavit

AW-1

produced

following

documents:-

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.3 of 18

S.No. Description
Document

of Exhibit
No.

Page
No. Remarks
in
the
record of
Railway
Claims
Tribunal

1.

Assessment Report Ex.A-4
issued by Railway

Page 49

i)Records
short
delivery of 40
bags.
ii) Records 57
bags
were
damaged.
iii) Records that
there was a hole
in the roof of the
wagon.
iv) Records that
endorsement/rec
ords
'said
to
contain' has been
scored off from
the
railway
receipt
without
there being any
signature
or
stamp
of
railways.

2.

Counter
foil
of Ex.A-3
railway receipt no.C
895604
dated
20.6.84

Page 53

i)Records
that
consignment
comprised of 245
bags.
ii)Records
that
consignment was
booked
under
railway risk.
iii)An
endorsement
“said to contain”
was made on
receipt but later
scored off.

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.4 of 18

3.

Copy
of
Certificate

4.

Cash book, ledger Ex.A-5,A- Page 75,77
book, sales book.
6 and A- and
79
7
respectivel
respectiv y.
ely.

Records that a
sum
of
Rs.1,03,652.50
was paid by the
appellant
to
consignor of the
goods.

5.

Forwarding Note

Ex.A-2

Page 107

Does
not
contains
endorsement
“said to contain”.

6.

Extract of delivery No
book in respect of exhibit
goods shed

Page 111

Records that the
consignment
comprised of 245
bags.

7.

Counter
Foil
Gate Pass

of Ex.A-9

Page 113

Records that the
consignment
comprised of 245
bags.

8.

Extract of Loading Ex.A-4
Book

Page 125

Records that the
consignment
comprised of 245
bags.

9.

TXR No
exhibit

Page 55

Records
that
there was a hole
in the roof of the
wagon.

It is relevant to note that all the documents produced by

the appellant save and except documents Ex.A-5, Ex.A-6 and ExA-7
were admitted by the respondent.
10.

On behalf of respondent one Mr.Vishno Singh Khanna

was examined as RW-1. RW-1 was working as Chief Goods Clerk at
the Tughlabad Station. He deposed that consignment in question
was unloaded at New Delhi Railway Station under his supervision.

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.5 of 18

11.

An affidavit 27.3.90 deposed by one Mr. Virendra Kumar

who was working as Chief Goods Clerk, Northern Railway is found in
the record of the Tribunal. Said affidavit is at page 27 of the record
of the Tribunal and reads as under:“That Loading Book and Tally Book are one and the
same thing. However loading book is used in case of
wagon load consignment and Tally book is used in case
of 'small' consignment.”
12.

On behalf of the respondent following documents were

produced:S.No. Description
Document
1.

DPCC Certificate

2.

3.

13.

of Exhibit
No.
Ex.R-1

Page No. Remarks
Page 52

i)Records
short
delivery of 40
bags.
ii) Records 57
bags
were
damaged.
iii) Records that
there was a hole
in the roof of the
wagon.

Extract of Unloading No
Book.
Exhibit

Page
131

Records that 205
bags
were
unloaded.

Copy of an Invoice

Page
121

Invoice contains
endorsement
“said to contain”.

No
Exhibit

After considering the case in its entirety the learned

Tribunal has held that the respondent is not liable to pay
compensation to the appellant in respect of short delivery of 40

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.6 of 18

bags. Relevant portion of the decision of the learned Tribunal reads
as under:“8. Sec. 73 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 provides
for the general responsibility of the railway admn. as a
carrier except from any of the causes specified therein.
In the present case, in order to make the railway admn.
liable for non-delivery of 40 bags of Urad, the applicants
are bound to prove that their consignor owned 245
bags and that they were actually entrusted to the
raiway admn. for carriage. The applicants are endorsed
consignees. They have produced the Railway Receipt
endorsed in their favour marked as Ex. A-3. Ex. A3 with
the endorsement “L/U” goes to show that the
consignor/consignee was in charge of loading and
unloading.
Further, Ex. A-3 with the endorsement
“SWA” only shows that the weight of the goods given in
the RR was not accepted by the railway admn. The
next relevant endorsement in Ex. A is the endorsement
with regard to the use of the words S/C meaning 'saidto-contain' the number of bags delivered for carriage. A
careful examination of Ex.A3 goes to show that certain
words initially written in Ex.A-3 in the column “No.and
Description” are subsequently scored. Shri Bhatnagar,
learned counsel for the respondent contended that Ex.
A3 was issued originally with the endorsement S/C and
the said endorsement S/C was scored subsequently
after the issue of RR by the party interested in doing
the same. On the other hand, Sh.R.C.Gupta, learned
counsel for the applicant submitted that even assuming
that the endorsement S/C in Ex. A-3 is scored, it is
possible that the Booking Clerk even at the time of
preparing Ex.A3 could have scored the endorsement in
the usual course.
Therefore, according to learned
counsel for the applicant, it must be taken that there is
no endorsement in Ex. A-3 containing the letters S/C
meaning 'said-to-contain' qualifying the statement
regarding the number of bags delivered for carriage.
We are unable to accept the above contention of Shri
R.C.Gupta. If really, the Booking Clerk had scored the
endorsement S/C in Ex. A-3 immediately after making
the same, such scoring should contain the signature of
the person who scored endorsement S/C and also the
Station stamp. The scoring is not attested by any
person. Further, The respondent has produced a copy
FAO No.212/1995

Page No.7 of 18

of the invoice “certified to be true”, found at page 87 of
the case records, which clearly goes to show that the
endorsement to the effect S/C meaning that the
consignment was said to contain 245 bags was actually
there in the Railway Receipt and not scored as found in
Ex.A3. The necessary inference which flows from this is
that Ex. A-3 originally contained the endorsement S/C
and that the said endorsement was subsequently
scored by the party who is interested in doing so after
the RR was issued to him.
There is yet another
clinching piece of evidence namely Ex. A-4 which
probablizes to case of the respondent that Ex. A-3
contained the endorsement S/C and that the scoring of
the said endorsement in Ex. A-3 was done
subsequently. Ex.A-4 is the assessment report signed
by the representatives of the applicant and the
respondent. The relevant portion of Ex.A-4 reads thus:“Direct loading. Bags old used & single. Resewn
Contents dropping wagon WT selected by sender. It
was observed that S/C signifying 'said to contain' was
given by later on scored out in ink without signature or
station stamp.
9.
On the basis of the materials available on record,
we have no hesitation that RR, Ex. A-3 issued to the
consignor in this case is qualified with the statement
that the wagon was “said to contain” 245 bags of Urad.
10. There could be no presumption that 245 bags of
Urad were put in the wagons for carriage in as much as
the railway admn. did not accept that 245 bags were
loaded and the RR only contains the endorsement 'said
to contain' 245 bags. As already stated above, in order
to make the respondent liable for the loss of 40 bags
the owner has to prove that 245 bags of Urad were put
on rails. They also have to prove by letting in evidence
as to how and when the consignor acquired 245 bags of
Urad and the price paid for the same and the exact
quantity the consignor loaded in the wagon.......
11. The consignor has not been examined in this case
as a witness. The applicants have not let in any
evidence to prove that the consignor owned 245 bags
of Urad by producing consignor's purchase bills. AW1
has admitted in his evidence that he was no;t present
at the time of loading. The applicant has not examined
FAO No.212/1995

Page No.8 of 18

any witness to prove that 245 bags of Urad were
actually loaded in the wagon.
xxxxx
15. n view of the legal and factual position discussed
above, we have no hesitation in accepting the
contention of the learned counsel for the respondent
that even assuming that 40 bags of Urad were stolen
from the wagon due to negligence or carelessness on
the part of the respondent, in order to make railway
admn. liable for short-delivery, the applicant would
have to prove that 245 bags of Urad were put on rails
and that the applicant has not proved by acceptable
evidence that their consignor owned 245 bags of Urad
and delivered the same to the railway admn. for
carriage. The applicant has also not established that
the goods in dispute were loaded under the supervision
of the railway staff. In these circumstances, we hold
that the applicants are not entitled to any relief in
respect of said 40 bags on the ground or shortdelivery........”
14.

In regard to damaged 57 bags learned Tribunal has

directed the respondent to pay compensation in sum of Rs.7054/- to
the appellant.
15.

In these circumstances appellant has filed the present

appeal under Section 23 of the Railway Claims Tribunal Act
challenging the decision in so far it has held that the respondent is
not liable to pay compensation to the appellant in respect of short
delivery of 40 bags.
16.

The dispute in the present case is two-fold:- i) Whether

the consignment in question was booked on “said to contain” basis?
ii) If yes, effect thereof?
17.

The stand of the appellant was that the consignment

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.9 of 18

was not booked on “said to contain” basis and that the booking
clerk wrongly made an endorsement “said to contain” on the
railway receipt and after realizing the error scored off the same.
Whereas respondent contended that the endorsement “said to
contain” on the railway receipt was not scored off by it's staff but by
an interested party.
18.

From an analysis of the decision of the Tribunal contents

whereof has been noted in para 13 above it is clear that while
holding that the railway receipt contains endorsement “said to
contain” two documents have found favour with the Tribunal:- i)
Assessment Report Ex.A-4 and ii) Copy of an invoice which is at
page 121 of the record of the Tribunal.
19.

Assessment Report Ex.A-4 has been prepared by an

official of the Railway. The opinion has been expressed in the report
by the official by merely perusing the railway receipt of the
appellant i.e. Ex.A-3. The official has not opined on the basis of
office copy of the railway receipt. It thus cannot be said that
Assessment Report Ex.A-4 establishes that endorsement “said to
contain”was scored off by an interested party.
20.

Invoice which is at page 121 of the record of the

Tribunal is a photocopied document. The said document has not
been admitted by the appellant. No evidence has been led by the
respondent to establish that the said invoice was a photocopy of the

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.10 of 18

original invoice issued by the Railway in respect of the consignment
in question. In such circumstances reliance could not have been
placed upon the said invoice.
21.

The best evidence by means of which respondent could

have proved that endorsement “said to contain” on the railway
receipt was scored by an interested party and not by its staff is the
office copy of the railway receipt Ex.A-3.
22.

The

office copy of the railway receipt Ex.A-3 has not

been produced by the respondent. No reasons for its non-production
is forthcoming.
23.

In the decision reported as Sriram Industrial Enterprises

Ltd v Mahak Singh & Ors AIR 2007 SC 1370 case of the respondents
was that although they had worked continuously from the date of
their appointment for more that 240 days in a calendar year,
appellant had illegally retrenched them from service in violation of
the provisions of Section 6N of the UP Industrial Disputes Act 1947.
The dispute relating to retrenchment of the respondents was
referred by the State Government to the Industrial Disputes Tribunal
under Section 4K of the Act to determine as to whether the
termination of the services of the respondents by the appellant was
just and/or illegal. Appellant contended that the services of the
respondents were never terminated since none of them had worked
for 240 days in the last calendar 12 months immediately preceding

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.11 of 18

alleged date of termination. Respondents requested the appellant to
produce certain documents in its custody namely Attendance
Register, Payment of Bonus Register and various other documents
relating to the engagement of the respondents as workmen under
it. Appellant failed to produce afore-noted documents. The Tribunal
did not lay any importance to the non-production of the documents
asked for on the ground that the petitioner did not keep such record
relating to the temporary hands and relied on the documents that
had been produced to come to a finding that the workmen had not
put in 240 days of service in a calendar year preceding the
termination of their services. Respondents assailed the awards by
way of filing writ petitions in the High Court. Drawing an adverse
inference against the petitioner herein for non-production of the
documents in its possession and holding that the petitioner had
failed to discharge the onus and disprove the respondent's claim,
the High Court held that under the circumstances the Tribunal
should have drawn an adverse presumption under Section 114
Illustration (g) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 against the
petitioner. Taking further note of the expression "continuous
service" under Section 2(g) of the U.P. Act, the High Court found
that the termination of service of the workmen was in violation of
Section 6N of the aforesaid Act. Aggrieved by the decision of the
High Court appellant filed special leave petition before the Supreme

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.12 of 18

Court and contended that the High Court was wrong in drawing an
adverse inference against them. After considering the case in its
entirety Supreme Court held that best evidence having been
withheld by the appellant the High Court was entitled to draw such
adverse inference against them.
24.

In the decisions reported as Iddar v. Aabida & Ors. AIR

2007 SC 3029 and Rama Paswan & Ors v State of Jharkhand 2007
CriLJ 2750 the Supreme Court has held that in weighing evidence,
the Court can take note of the fact that the best available evidence
has not been given and can draw an adverse inference.
25.

The fact that the respondent has not produced office

copy of the railway receipt Ex.A-4 entitles this court to draw an
adverse inference against the respondent.
26.

Another important piece of evidence in this regards is

forwarding note Ex.A-2.
27.

Forwarding

note

Ex.A-2

does

not

bears

any

endorsement “said to contain”.
28.

Noting the provisions relating to forwarding note and

railway receipt the Rajasthan High Court in the decision reported as
Union of India v Roop Narayan & Ors (1997)1 WLN 339 has held that
the forwarding note is a primary evidence and railway receipt is
secondary evidence for the reason railway receipt is prepared on
the basis of forwarding note and not otherwise.

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.13 of 18

29.

The fact that the forwarding note Ex.A-2 does not

contains endorsement “said to contain” coupled with the fact that
the office copy of the railway receipt Ex.A-3 was not produced by
the respondent gives credence to the stand of the appellant that
the consignment in question was not booked on “said to contain”
basis and that the endorsement “said to contain” on the railway
receipt Ex.A-3 was scored off by an official of the respondent.
30.

Assuming that the consignment in question was booked

on “said to contain” basis it would be advisable to consider the
evidence on said aspect.
31.

Learned counsel for the respondent contended that in

case where consignment is booked on “said to contain” basis and
loading is not

supervised by the staff of the railways then the

railways is not liable to pay compensation on account of short
delivery.
32.

In the decision reported as AIR 1956 Mad 176 Union of

India v. S. P. L. Lekhu Reddiar it was held that where goods were
loaded in the wagon by the sender and not by the railway servants
and the information given by the sender is accepted as correct for
the purpose of charging freight and receipt is granted and at the
destination station, shortage is detected, it is for the plaintiff to
establish as to what actually were the goods delivered to the
railway for carriage at the forwarding station.

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.14 of 18

33.

In the decision reported as AIR 1961 Orissa 141 South

Eastern Railway v. Epari Satyanarayana it was held that the railway
receipt conveys no admission by the Railway Administration that
the weight of the consignment as shown in the receipt or the
description of goods as furnished by the consignor is correct. In the
absence of evidence of actual booking of the goods as shown in the
railway receipt, the railway is not liable for short delivery where
goods are received in sound and intact condition. It is for the
consignors or the consignees to adduce evidence as to the actual
booking of the goods as these facts are within their special
knowledge.
34.

In the decision reported as AIR 1973 Pat 244 Union of

India v. Chotelal Shewnath Rai it has been held that where there is
no evidence to prove the actual weight of the goods loaded in the
wagon and the loading had been done at the despatching station by
the consignor, the Railway Administration is not liable for short
delivery detected at the destination. From the mere mention of a
particular weight in the railway receipt and the forwarding note for
the purpose of calculating the freight charge, no admission on the
part of the railway as to the correctness of the weight of the goods
loaded can be made out to fix up the liability.
35.

In the decision reported as AIR 1984 Orissa 156 Orient

Paper Mills Ltd. v. Union of India a Division Bench of Orissa High

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.15 of 18

Court has held that in a suit for damages for loss of goods against
the Railway Administration, the onus lies on the plaintiff to establish
the actual loading of the goods for the loss of which the claims have
been made. That was also a case where the consignment had been
loaded and despatched from the siding of the consignor.
36.

In the decision reported as

Union of India v Roop

Narayan & Ors (1997)1 WLN 339 the core question which had arisen
for consideration was whether consignment booked under a "said
to contain" railway receipt, amounts to admission on the part of the
railway administration, that the said number of articles had in fact
were loaded.
37.

In said regards the learned court noted the provisions of

Rule 1513 of the Indian Commercial Railways Manual which reads as
under:"The outward tally book is an important and initial
record of the actual loading of consignments and is
iikely to be referred when responsibility has ot be fixed
in the event of any package found missing at repacking
and trans shipping points or at destination station".
38.

After noting the afore-noted rule and other relevant

provisions the learned court summed up as under:“Upshot of the above discussion is, that if the railway
receipt contains the "said to contain" remark, it does not
amount to admission on the part of the Railway
Administration that the said number of articles had in
fact been loaded. But when responsibility has to be
fixed in the event of any package found, missing at
destination station, then examination of "outward tally
book" and "Forwarding Note" is necessary. The learned
FAO No.212/1995

Page No.16 of 18

Tribunal by a majority judgment, has rightly allowed the
applications. In view of this, all the arguments advanced
by the learned counsel for the appellants, devoid of any
force.”
39.

Thus from the afore-noted discussion it is clear that

when consignment is booked on “said to contain” basis the railways
is not exonerated from its liability to pay compensation in respect of
short delivery of loaded goods. The only effect of the endorsement
“said to contain” is that the onus to prove that the quantity as
claimed by consignor/consignee was actually loaded is on the
consignor/consignee.
40.

It remains to be seen in the instant case that whether

appellant duly proved that consignor loaded 245 bags in the wagon
consignor.
41.

Counter foil of gate pass Ex.A-9 and extract of delivery

book (pg 111) and extract of loading book Ex.A-4(loading book is
equivalent to outward tally book as deposed by Virender Kumar,
Chief Goods Clerk, Northern Railway) are important pieces of
evidence to prove actual loading as held in Roop Narayan's case
(supra). Said documents leads to a strong inference that the 245
bags were loaded in the wagon. These entries are made by the
respondent's staff and it can be presumed that officials must have
made entries only after counting the bags.
42.

It cannot be lost sight of the fact there was a hole in the

FAO No.212/1995

Page No.17 of 18

roof of the wagon meaning thereby that the wagon was tampered
with.
43.

In view of above discussion I thus hold that:-

I

Consignment in question was not booked on “said to

contain” basis.
II.

Even if it is assumed that consignment in question was

booked on “said to contain” basis the appellant has duly proved
that consignor had loaded 245 bags of Urad Dal in the wagon.
III.

Respondent is liable to pay compensation to the

appellant in respect of short delivery of 40 bags.
44.

There is no serious dispute from the side of the

respondent to the amount of compensation claimed by the
appellant for short delivery of 40 bags.
45.

In the suit appellant has claimed a sum of Rs.20,000/- as

compensation for short delivery of 40 bags.
46.

Accordingly I direct the respondent to pay to the

appellant a sum of Rs.20,000/- together with the interest @ 7.5 p.a.
from the date of filing of the suit till date of realisation.
47.

Appeal is accordingly allowed in terms of para 45 above.

48.

No costs.

49.

LCR be returned.

31 January, 2008
SL

FAO No.212/1995

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
JUDGE

Page No.18 of 18

