*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

FAO No.327/1996
M/s Harish Chand Deepak Kumar ........
Appellant
through: Mr. M.L.Bhargava, Advocate
VERSUS
UOI
through:

........
Respondent
Mr. S.R.Narayan, Advocate
RESERVED ON:
28.4.2008
DATE OF DECISION:
30.4.2008

%
CORAM:

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Whether on the evidence on record the order dated

18.4.1996 passed by the Railway Claim Tribunal is justified or not
is the issue which needs adjudication in the instant appeal.
2.

On 30.9.1988, as consignor, appellant entrusted to the

railways 478 bags of kabuli gram vide RR No.204751 for
transportation from Carnac Bridge to Delhi.

When offered for

delivery, contents of 60 bags were found damaged to the extent
of 35% and those of 80 bags to the extent of 40%. The railway
authorities disclaimed liability to recompense the appellant.

FAO No.327/1996

Page No. 1 of 7

Claim petition filed before Railway Claim Tribunal has suffered a
dismissal.
3.

Two reasons have weighed with the Tribunal in

dismissing the claim petition. Firstly, that the goods were directly
loaded from the truck to the railway wagon under supervision of
the appellant and secondly at the point of destination the TXR
certificate records that the wagon was found in a water tight
condition at the place of destination.
4.

It was urged at the hearing by learned counsel for the

appellant that the Railway Claim Tribunal has wrongly cast the
onus of the appellant and that as per decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court reported as SC 1414 UOI Vs. Sugauli Sugar Works
Pvt. Ltd. onus to prove no negligence was on the railway
authorities. Secondly, counsel urged that as per Rule 2145 of the
commercial manual, railway authorities cannot issue a railway
receipt till goods arrive at the railway premises and that as per
Rule 1451(b), while issuing the railway receipt the railway officers
are obliged to examined and weigh the goods before issuing a
railway receipt. Counsel further urged that as per Rule 1418 (a &
b) it is the duty of the railway officers to properly examine and
ensure that the goods offered for carriage are securely packed in
accordance with the packing conditions.

Sh. M.L.Bhargava

learned counsel for the appellant urged that in the teeth of the
relevant rules the finding returned by the learned Tribunal is
perverse.

Counsel further urged that the railway receipt

FAO No.327/1996

Page No. 2 of 7

evidences that the goods were booked at railway risk.
5.

To appreciate the contentions a few additional facts

need to be noted.
6.

The goods in question were entrusted to the railway

authorities for carriage as aforenoted vide railway receipt
No.204751 (document not formally exhibited but at page 139 of
the Record of the Tribunal).

The same records that the goods

were loaded in the wagon directly from the truck on 30.9.1988
and that the carriage was on Railway Risk. However, the wagon
commenced journey on the intervening night of 5th and 6th
October 1988 and reached the destination within the requisite
time on 9.10.1988.
7.

At the point of destination the consignee who was also

the consignor raised an issue pertaining to the goods being
damaged. An inspection was carried out contents whereof were
noted in the DDPC book.

Relevant extract proved as Ex. R-7

records that 158 bags were having marks of dry water.
8.

The assessment report dated 14.10.1988 Ex. R-8

records that on joint examination of the goods in presence of
representative of the appellant and the railway officers, 158 bags
were old used bags and had dry water marks on the bags that
part content of the gram had suffered dis-colouration; had turned
into lumps; fungus had appeared.
9.

The relevant rules cited by learned counsel for the

appellant and as noted above, read as under:FAO No.327/1996

Page No. 3 of 7

“2145.
Prohibition against grant of railway receipts
before the actual receipt of consignments on railway
premises Except where otherwise provided as in the case of the
loading done at a private or assisted siding, a railway
receipt should not be granted until the relevant
consignment has actually arrived in full on the railway
premises and has been accepted by the staff deputed
for this purpose.
1451.
(a)

Grant of receipt foil of invoice to consignors.

............

(b) Railway Receipts (i.e. receipt foils of invoices)
should not be granted till goods tendered for despatch
have been correctly examined and weighed. When
senders are required to load their consignments, the
railway receipts should not be given until the loading
has been completed to the satisfaction of the Railway.
1418.

Examination of packing etc. of goods:-

(a) Each package in a consignment tendered for
conveyance should be carefully examined to see that it
is properly and securely packed in accordance with the
packing condition laid down in the I.R.C.A. Goods
Tariff. In this context, the explanatory instructions
contained in the rules dealing with the 'packing
conditions for goods' appearing in the tariff should be
carefully studied and complied with.
It should also be seen that the goods are not
likely to deteriorate or otherwise lose weight or value
in transit.
(b) When a consignment tendered for despatch is not
packed in accordance with the packing conditions laid
down in the I.R.C.A. Goods Tariff or is insecurely
fastened or packed or shows signs of pilferage or is in
defective condition, as a consequence of which it is
liable to deterioration, leakage, wastage or damage in
transit, it should be ensured that remarks as to the
exact defect in packing or nature of defective condition
of the consignment is recorded on the forwarding note
clearly and in detail by the consignor or his authorised
agent his own hand writing.
For example,
consignments of grain, pulses, seeds, sugar, pieceFAO No.327/1996

Page No. 4 of 7

goods, cotton, tobacoo, wool, jute, provisions, etc.
often get wet while being brought to the station
premises for loading.
These should be carefully
examined and precise remarks from the consignor or
his authorised agent, regarding the number and
condition of the affected bags, should be obtained on
the forwarding note, if the consignments are not
tendered in good and dry condition.”
10.

Pertaining to the rules it would be difficult to concur

with learned counsel for the appellant that the same obliged the
railway authorities to check the contents of each and every bag.
Indeed, if this is the mandate of the rules, loading and unloading
would become a very cumbersome and a time consuming
process.

The process of loading a wagon would take days

together. As in the instant case, the number of bags entrusted to
the railway officers for carriage was 478. To open each and every
bag to check its contents would have required the unsealing of
the bags and thereafter resealing the same.

Desealing and

resealing equipment would have to be brought to site where
wagon was loaded.
11.

As I read the rules, and indeed as the same require to

be so interpreted in a business like manner, the mandate is for
the railway authorities to examine and check whether the weight
of

the

consignment

is

correctly

recorded

and

that

the

consignment is packed in a proper packaging material. No more
is required.
12.

As noted by the Tribunal, the date when consignment

was entrusted for carriage was not monsoon period.

FAO No.327/1996

Indeed, I

Page No. 5 of 7

note that the appellant has led no evidence that during the period
the consignment remained entrusted with the railway authorities
it had rained.

As noted by the Tribunal, at the point of

destination, as per TXR certificate the wagon was found water
tight. This means that no water seeped into the wagon in transit
or otherwise.
13.

The contents of the DDPC book and the assessment

report date 14.10.1986 assume significance. As noted above the
two documents record that 148 bags were having marks of dried
water.

Internal contents showed that due to presence of

moisture, part of the contents had got damaged.
14.

Even to a lay man the conclusion would be obvious;

being that the bags which had become wet had retained the
moisture within but externally were dry.

That is why on the

gunny bags water mark of dried water was observed.
15.

The evidence on record therefore probablizes that the

consignment which had got wet much earlier, when not even
entrusted to the railway authorities had become substantially dry,
in that, the bags containing the gram had dried up.

Anyone

receiving the sealed bags would have no reasons to suspect that
the contents within had moisture. The extent of deterioration of
the gram is also indicative of the same being wet and thereafter
in a humid condition for a considerable number of days and not 5
or 6 days. It is settled law that every day experience can be put
into aid by judges while probablizing facts. Gram which is a hard
FAO No.327/1996

Page No. 6 of 7

cereal is in the dried up form and if soaked in water swells for 2 to
3 days before decomposition sets in.

The de-colouration and

fungus formation normally takes 10 to 12 days after the gram is
soaked in water and allowed to remain in a wet condition.
16.

The decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sugauli

Sugar Works's case is not applicable in the facts of the said case.
In said decision the wagon got lost in a river when the barge over
which the railway track was laid suddenly sunk when the goods
carrying train was crossing the bridge.

Their Lordships of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the responsibility to maintain
the barge and the track was of the railway authorities and thus it
was not for the claimant to prove the circumstances under which
the barge and the track sunk. The Hon'ble Supreme Court noted
that there was no satisfactory explanation offered by the railway
authorities for the sinking of the barge.
17.

I find no merits in the appeal.

18.

Dismissed.

19.

No costs.

April 30,2008
mm

FAO No.327/1996

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No. 7 of 7

