IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CR.P. No.286/2006
#
!

Seasons Catering Services Pvt.Ltd.
.......
Petitioner
through: Mr.V.P.Singh, Senior Advocate with
Mr.M.I.Chaudhary, Advocate.
VERSUS

$
^

Delhi Development Authority & Ors. ....... Respondents
through: Mr.Rajiv Bansal, Adv. for R-1 & 2.
RESERVED ON : 07-05-2007

%

DATE OF DECISION: 31-05-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Vide order dated 7.5.2007, with consent of parties, it

was directed that the civil revision petition would be treated as a
petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. Accordingly,
arguments were heard. Matter was reserved for judgment.
2.

Relevant

facts

necessary

to

be

noted

for

an

adjudication are that on 29.5.1998 a licence deed was executed by
DDA in favour of the petitioner granting a licence to the petitioner
to enter upon and use the premises described in the licence deed
for running a restaurant and picnic hut at Mehrauli.
3.

The important terms of the licence deed are :-

C.R.P. 286/2006

page 1 of 16

a)

Clause 1. It states that the initial period for which
the licence would be operative is 11 months, renewable
for further period of 11 months, but upto a maximum of
5 years with increase of licence fee by 10% on each
renewal.

b)

Clause 3. It states that no right, title or interest
in the land/structure

shall accrue in favour of the

petitioner on account of grant of licence.
c)

Clause 9. It states that on expiry of the period of
the licence or earlier determination thereof, petitioner
would peacefully handover possession of the site to DDA
and remove its material brought at the site.

d)

Clause 15. It states that the petitioner would not
be permitted to make any additions/alterations within
the licenced site/premises except to make suitable
wooden compartment/ partition inside the restaurant.

4.

Petitioner continued to exercise right under the licence

deed till a notice dated 28.5.2003 was issued by DDA informing
that the maximum extendable period of 5 years being over, DDA
would be resuming possession on 5.6.2003.

The petitioner was

advised to vacate the licensed site.
5.

Neither was there compliance to the notice dated

28.5.2003 nor was there any indication from the petitioner that he
would comply with the said notice. On the contrary, the petitioner
filed a suit for injunction to restrain DDA from resuming
possession.

The fate of the suit is unknown but admittedly, no

orders were passed in favour of the petitioner in the said suit.
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 2 of 16

6.

Since DDA had to regain possession by procedure

established by law and the premises were a public premises as
defined under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized
Occupants) Act,1971 (hereinafter referred to as P.P.Act,1971), the
Estate Officer, DDA issued a notice dated 5.12.2003 and served
the same upon the petitioner calling upon the petitioner to show
cause as to why an order of eviction be not passed.
7.

The notice in question was issued under sub-section (i)

and clause (b)(ii) of sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the
P.P.Act,1971.
8.

Since much controversy was raised on the language of

the notice aforesaid, it would be useful to reproduce the same in
verbatim. The notice reads as under :“IN THE COURT OF ESTATE OFFICER
SOUTH WEST ZONE:ROOM NO.C-1/5, VIKAS SADAN,
NEW DELHI - 110023
Notice under sub-section (i) and clause (b)(ii) of Subsection (2) of Section 4 of Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act,1971
M/s Seasons Catering Service Pvt.Ltd.
B-6, Anupam Plaza, Hauz Khas,
New Delhi.
File No.EO/SWZ/Restaurant/Picnic Hut/Mehrauli
dt. 5.12.03
WHEREAS I, the undersigned of the opinion on the
ground specified below that you are in unauthorized
occupation of the public premises mentioned in the
schedule below and that you should be evicted from the
said premises.
'GROUNDS'
The land mentioned in the schedule below belong to
Union of India and is under the Management and Control
of DDA.
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 3 of 16

Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (1) of section
of the P.P.Act, I hereby call upon you to show cause on
or before 19.12.2003 at 12.00 noon why such an order
of eviction should not be made.
And in pursuance of clause (b)(i) of sub-section (2) of
Section 4, I also call upon you all persons who are, or
may be in occupation of or claim interest in the public
premises described below to appear before me in person
or through a duly authorised representative capable to
answer all material question in connection with the
matter along with evidence which you intend to produce
in support of the show cause on 19.12.2003 at 12 noon
for personal hearing. In case, you fail to appear on the
said date and time, the case will be decided ex-parte.
SCHEDULE
Land measuring 12,654.75 sq.mtrs., for restaurant/
picnic hut at Mehrauli Green Area, New Delhi.

9.

sd/ESTATE OFFICER
South West Zone/Room No.C-1/6,
Vikas Sadan, New Delhi-110023”
To the naked eye, without much efforts, it would be

evident that the Estate Officer has acted more like a machine and
less like a human being. The proforma specified under the P.P.Act,
1971 pertaining to a notice under Section 4 has been utilized and
under the caption “GROUNDS” the same word has been typed
without specifying the grounds on which the notice was issued and
on which an order of eviction was proposed to be passed.
10.

Notice

dated

5.12.2003

petitioner, a detailed reply was filed.

being

served

upon

the

I may note that the reply

runs into 21 pages.
11.

Inter alia, it was stated that DDA was unable to utilize

the land for a picnic complex and therefore in October 1997 DDA
invited offers from third parties to operate a picnic complex from
the site. That officers of DDA informed the petitioner that period of

C.R.P. 286/2006

page 4 of 16

11 months as the maximum period for the licence extendable upto
a maximum of 5 years was a formality and that the allotment
would be extended commensurate with the investments made by
the successful tenderer. That based on the aforesaid oral
assurances the

petitioner submitted a

bid.

Being the highest

bidder the bid of the petitioner was accepted. That licence deed
dated 29.5.1998 was thus a mere formality. That the petitioner
spent about Rs.85 lacs on the land and refurbishing the site.

That

letter dated 28.5.2003 issued by DDA was illegal. That the letter
was challenged by way of a suit and that the suit was pending.
That the land was an agricultural land and was governed by the
provisions of Delhi Land Reforms Act,1954 and only authorities
constituted under the said Act were competent to take a decision
on the issue of possession. That the land was vested with DDA for
the purpose of management and control

and, therefore, Estate

Officer of DDA had no jurisdiction to initiate proceedings under the
P.P.Act,1971.

That the notice did not specify the grounds

on

which it was alleged that the petitioner was in unauthorized
occupation of land. It was specifically pointed out that except for
recording “GROUNDS”, the notice failed to notify any ground. That
the Central Government had resolved, which resolution was
notified

as

a

undertakings

guideline
would

not

on

30.5.2003

evict

that

tenants

on

public

sector

commercial

considerations.
12.

One would have expected the Estate Officer, DDA to

have cured the defect in the show cause notice by issuing a
supplementary notice specifying the grounds on which it was
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 5 of 16

alleged that the petitioner was an unauthorized occupant from the
premises in question and had to be evicted.
13.

But the Estate Officer continued with the proceedings

and recorded evidence. In brief, the evidence led by DDA was
that the licence was not renewed beyond a period of 5 years and
on the terms of the licence deed, continued retention of the
licensed premises beyond 5 years was an unauthorized retention.
14.

Vide order dated 16.8.2004, the Estate Officer returned

a finding against the petitioner holding that as the land was an
acquired land and belonged to the Central Government and placed
at the disposal of DDA under Delhi Development Authority Disposal
of Developed Nazul Land Rules 1981 and Section 22 of Delhi
Development Act,

Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 was not

applicable thereto. It was held that the grant did not permit the
petitioner to effect any structural additions over the land except
to make wooden partitions in the restaurant. He opined that no
right, title or interest was created in favour of the petitioner qua
the licensed site. He held that since the licence deed specifically
noted that it could be renewed upto only 5 years and that there
was no renewal beyond 5 years, petitioner had no right to continue
to occupy the site. Accordingly, ejectment order was passed.
15.

Ejectment order dated 16.8.2004 was challenged by the

petitioner by way of an appeal under Section 9 of the P.P.Act 1971.
Notwithstanding various grounds urged in the appeal, only 5
grounds were addressed at the hearing as noted by the learned
Judge in para 2.2 of the order. The 5 grounds on which eviction
order was challenged and as noted in para 2.2 of the order of the
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 6 of 16

learned Appellate Judge are as under :“i)
That the Estate Officer has not been duly
appointed in terms of Section 3 of the Act.
Despite this objection being raised before the
Estate Officer, he proceeded to take up the
matter without considering the appellant's plea.
Therefore, the impugned order
is without
jurisdiction and is liable to be set aside.
ii)
That notice u/s 4 of the Act lacks material
particulars and was vague;
iii)
That the impugned order suffers from nonapplication of mind and has been passed by the
Estate Officer simply on the basis of the advice
received from the DDA's Law Officer;
iv) That notice u/s 4 as well as the impugned
order u/s 5 of the Act was illegal as they have not
been issued in the particular form prescribed
under the rules; and

16.

v)
That cancellation of lease in favour of the
appellant and its non-extension is arbitrary and
discriminatory and is violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India and is even in violation of
Clause 7 of the lease, therefore, proceedings
arising therefrom are illegal. “
Vide order dated 15.9.2006, the appeal has been

dismissed. Each and every contention urged has been repelled.
17.

I need not note the reasons in the order passed by the

learned Appellate Judge for the reason I intend to note grounds
urged in support of the petition and reasons advanced by the
learned counsel for the petitioner and thereafter deal with the
same. Duplication would serve no useful purpose.
18.

I may note the grounds which were advanced at the

hearing held on 7.5.2007.

Eschewing a challenge to the

competence of the Estate Officer to act as the

Estate Office of

DDA, a ground which was urged before the learned

Appellate

Judge as also the ground urged before the Estate Officer that the

C.R.P. 286/2006

page 7 of 16

land was covered by the provisions of Delhi Land Reforms Act
1954 and hence authorities constituted thereunder could alone
decide the issue of possessory rights were not urged before me.
19.

Four contentions were urged. It was firstly urged that

the show cause notice dated 5.12.2003 indicated no grounds on
which

it was asserted that the

petitioner was an unauthorized

occupant. Shri V.P.Singh, learned senior counsel for the petitioner
urged that the notice was issued mechanically

recording the

captioned 'GROUNDS” without disclosing what the grounds were.
Thus, counsel urged that the notice

was non-est and could not

form the basis of a valid eviction order. Counsel cited AIR 1980
J&K 16, Dr.Yash Paul Gupta Vs. Dr.S.S.Anand, a Division Bench
decision of the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir; AIR 1988 Delhi
174

Shri Bhagat Singh Vs. DDA and 2003 (VI) AD(Delhi) 357;

Kailash Singh Vs. Union of India to buttress his submissions.
20.

On merits, counsel urged that there was a total non-

application of mind by the Estate Officer who has returned a
finding that the licence was for a period of 11 months only.
Counsel urged that the Estate Officer ignored that the licence deed
clearly recorded that it was renewable for successive period of 11
months. The third contention urged by the learned counsel was
predicated on the policy decision formulated as guidelines and
circulated on 30.5.2003 to the effect that for the premises under
the control of public sector undertakings/ financial institutions,
P.P.Act 1971 would not be resorted to for evicting tenants merely
on commercial considerations.

Lastly, counsel urged that the

tenure of licence deed revealed that it was actually a lease and,
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 8 of 16

therefore, petitioner could not be evicted from the site under the
P.P.Act 1971 without serving a notice under Section 106 of the
Transfer of Property Act 1882 and validly determining the lease
thereunder.
21.

Since main thrust of the submissions made by the

learned counsel for the petitioner was on the first count urged i.e.
deficiency in the notice, I propose to deal with the same at the
end.
22.

Pertaining to the other three grounds urged, suffice

would it be to note that a trivial incorrect recording of a fact which
otherwise has no material bearing on the substance of the issue
cannot ever vitiate an order.
23.

No doubt, the Estate Officer has recorded that the

licence granted was

for a period of only 11 months, but since

possession was asked to be restored on expiry of 5 years and
eviction proceedings

were initiated after 5 years, said incorrect

recording of fact is immaterial.
24.

As noted here-in-above, vide clause 1 of the licence

deed, it was specifically noted that the initial period of the licence
was 11 months.

That the licence was renewable for successive

period of 11 months with increase in licence fee by 10% but upto
only 5 years.
25.
urged

Thus, the second count on which a challenge has been
against the eviction order and the order passed by the

learned Appellate Judge fails.
26.

The third challenge predicated on the policy decision

dated 30.5.2003 raised an issue which is no longer res-integra. A
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 9 of 16

Division Bench of this Court in the decision reported as 100 (2002)
DLT 497, Uttam Parkash Bansal & Orts. Vs. LIC had an occasion to
deal with the issue as to when executive instructions can operate
in the field occupied by a statute or a statutory rule.

The Division

Bench categorically held that executive instructions cannot
operate in the field occupied by a legislation, be it a statute or a
statutory rule.
27.

That apart, the policy guideline has to be understood in

the historical background which necessitated the formulation of
the policy.
28.

Life

Insurance

Corporation

and

other

financial

institutions, to whom properties were mortgaged for loans
obtained by third parties, managed to acquire ownership rights in
the properties which had to be sold due to the mortgagee
defaulting in repayment of the loan. More often than not, these
properties had tenants
Legislations.

who were

protected by Rent Control

On ownership being acquired by the statutory

corporations, the premises/properties went outside the protective
umbrella of the Rent Control Legislations. It was in this context
that the Central Government issued guidelines that the statutory
corporations should not initiate eviction proceedings against the
old tenants purely on commercial considerations.
29.

Inherently, the policy guidelines would not apply to a

case of a licence under a commercial venture of a statutory
corporation; in the instant case DDA. Sine qua non for application
of the policy guideline is a tenancy right in favour of the tenant
prior to acquisition of ownership by the statutory corporation.
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 10 of 16

30.

In modern times, statutory authorities are augmenting

their resources by entering into purely commercial ventures. A
land owning agency can utilize its land by letting it out or granting
a licence in respect thereof. The revenue generated is used for
cross subsidizing low cost housing etc.
31.

The second contention urged is accordingly found

without any merits.
32.

On the last issue urged i.e. that the indenture is a lease

and not a licence, the same has to be rejected for two reasons.
Firstly, it was never urged before the Estate Officer nor before the
Appellate Judge that the indenture created is a lease.

On the

contrary I note that the contention urged by the petitioner was that
since the licence contained a grant which permitted the petitioner
to effect constructions on the site and since the petitioner effected
construction of a permanent character, the licence was an
irrevocable licence.

Though not specifically stated, defence

predicated was under Section 60 of the Easement Act 1882.
33.

Thus, petitioner cannot be permitted to urge a plea not

taken at the earlier stage either before the Estate Office or the
Appellate Judge.
34.

Secondly, assuming that the grant is a lease, case

projected that there is no determination of the lease inasmuch as
no notice under Section 106 of Transfer of Property Act 1882 was
issued to determine the lease is a submission without any
foundation for the reason, where a lease expires by efflux of time,
no notice of determination of the lease has to be issued. Indeed,
as noted above maximum period during which petitioner could
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 11 of 16

occupy the site was 5 years. Admittedly prior to the completion of
5 years period, on 28.5.2003, DDA notified to the petitioner that
period of grant being over, DDA would assume possession on
5.6.2003.
35.

The first contention urged by Shri V.P.Singh, learned

senior counsel for the petitioner merits a deeper consideration.
36.

The conventional view is that where a statute vests a

power and specifies the manner in which the power has to be
exercised, the power must be exercised in the manner specified
and in no other manner.

Further, where the statute expressly

provides for issuance of a notice and granting a hearing, the
statutory requirements would be read as mandatory, for the
reason they are a statutory incorporation of the principles of
natural justice.

This was the rationale of the decision of the

Division Bench of the Jammu & Kashmir High Court in Dr.Yash Paul
Gupta's case (supra). The Division Bench repelled the argument
that notwithstanding deficiency in the ground specified in the
notice issued under Section 4 of the P.P.Act 1971, since the
noticee was aware of the ground for eviction and had given a reply
on merits which was considered by the Estate Officer, it made no
difference. The Division Bench held that requirement of Section 4
of the P.P.Act 1971 was mandatory and not merely directory for
the reason failure to make an effective reply to the notice for
eviction visits the noticee with the consequences of eviction.
37.

In Bhagat Singh's case (supra) a learned Single Judge of

this Court also took the view that a notice under Section 4 of the
P.P.Act 1971 was a mandatory requirement and unlike a notice
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 12 of 16

under Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act 1882 could not
be waived.

On facts, a notice which misdescribed the subject

property was held to be an invalid notice. Eviction order passed
pursuant thereto was quashed.
38.

In Kailash Singh's case (supra) importance of the notice

under Section 4 of the P.P.Act 1971 was highlighted with reference
to an order of eviction being passed on grounds other than the
ones which were notified to the noticee.

It was held that

requirement of a notice being mandatory, an order which travelled
beyond the terms of the notice would amount to an order being
passed without a prior notice.
39.

However, judicial trend reveals that there has been a

shift in the strict view of strict compliance with the letter of the law
pertaining to issuing a notice and contents thereof.
40.

In

the

decision

reported

as

1980

(4)

SCC

379

S.L.Kapoor vs. Jagmohan (p 395 para 24) it was observed:“As we said earlier where on the admitted or indisputable
facts only one conclusion is possible and under the law only
one penalty is permissible, the court may not issue its writ
to compel the observance of natural justice, not because it
is not necessary to observe natural justice but because
courts do not issue futile writs.” (emphasis supplied)
41.
It is, therefore, clear that if on the admitted or
indisputable factual position only one conclusion is possible and
permissible the Court need not issue a writ merely because there
is violation of the principles of natural justice.
42.

With periodic frequency Courts are faced with a

dilemma between breach of the rules of natural justice and the
Court's discretion to refuse relief even though the rules of natural
justice have been breached, on the ground that no real prejudice is
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 13 of 16

caused to the affected party. In the decision reported as AIR 1966
SC 828 Gadde Venkateswara Rao vs. Government of A.P. and in
the decision reported as (1988) 1 SCC 40 Mohd. Swalleh vs. IIIrd
ADJ the Supreme Court refused to issue a writ of certiorari
notwithstanding that the impugned order was passed without
issuing the mandatory notice.
43.

In the decision reported as 1993 (4) SCC 727 Managing

Director ECIL, Hyderabad vs. B.Karunakar & Ors.

the theory of

prejudice caused to be shown was highlighted by the Supreme
Court. It was held that mere breach of a principle of natural justice
was no ground to quash a decision unless the party affected
established that it was prejudiced by the said deficiency.
44.

In the decision reported as (1996) 6 SCC 237,

M.C.Mehta vs. UOI & Ors. the Supreme Court noted that cases
relating to breach of natural justice can be segregated in 2 groups.
Group 1 where facts are not admitted. Group 2 where the facts
are admitted. In the context of the latter category it was noted
that there was considerable case law and literature as to when
relief can be refused on the ground that there was no possibility of
success or that the result would not have been different even if
natural justice was followed.

The useless formality theory was

discussed. It would be interesting to note that in para 22 of the
report the Supreme Court noted that even in cases where the facts
are not all admitted or beyond dispute, there is a considerable
unanimity that the Courts can, in exercise of their discretion refuse
certiorari, prohibition, mandamus or injunction even though
natural justice is not followed.
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 14 of 16

45.

There is yet another line of cases for example (1996) (3)

SCC 364 State Bank of Patiala vs. S.K.Sharma and (1996) (5) SCC
460 Rajender Singh vs. State of M.P. that even in relation to
statutory provisions requiring notice, a distinction is to be made
between cases where the provision is intended for individual
benefit and where a provision is intended to protect public interest.
In the former case, it can be waived, while in the latter it cannot be
waived.
46.

Reason of the law pertaining to a notice is that the

noticee must be fully informed of the reasons on which an action is
proposed to be taken against him.

Reason thereof is that only

then can the noticee, effectively and meaningfully, put forward his
case and deal with the contents of the notice. Indeed, reasons are
the lifeline of a decision and lack of reasons render lifeless a
decision.

Where the noticee, notwithstanding deficiency in a

notice, comprehends what is intended to be conveyed and
effectively and fully responds to the notice I see no reason not to
uphold a consequential order passed thereto, if otherwise the
order is in compliance with the law, for the reason no prejudice
whatsoever has been caused to the noticee. Further, where the
noticee has given an effective and full reply to the notice and the
authority issuing the notice has dealt with the reply on merits, and
the decision on merits is legal and valid, it would be an empty
formality to call upon the authority to issue a proper notice and
deal with the same set of objections and re-decide the matter. I
have used the expression 'same set of objections' for the reason
the noticee would obviously re-state his case and do no more.
C.R.P. 286/2006

page 15 of 16

47.

In the instant case, reply sent by the petitioner to the

show cause notice dated 5.12.2003 shows that the petitioner was
fully aware that its status as an unauthorized occupant was stated
on the basis that the licence granted was extendable up to a
maximum of 5 years, which period had lapsed without any further
extension; licence having lapsed by efflux of time, the petitioner
had to vacate the premises. So understanding the notice, a full
and complete reply thereto was furnished. It was duly considered
and a reasoned order was passed.
48.

The first submission urged by learned senior counsel for

the petitioner is accordingly found without any merits.
49.

The petition is dismissed.

50.

No costs.

May 31, 2007
dk

C.R.P. 286/2006

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 16 of 16

