IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO No.84/2001
# New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
.......Appellant
!
through: Mr.L.K.Tyagi, Adv.
VERSUS
$ Shri Thakur Singh Rana & Ors.
......Respondents
^
through: Ms.Sumeet Kaur, Adv. for
respondents No.1, 2, 6 and 7.
RESERVED ON : 24-03-2007
%

DATE OF DECISION: 30-03-2006
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.
:

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

Question which I am supposed to answer is whether

the deceased was a passenger and hence liability of the
appellant, as per the policy of insurance, is a limited liability?
2.

Date of accident is 3.11.1988.

Thus, it is not in

dispute that the issue raised has to be decided in light of the
policy of insurance taken out by the owner of the mini bus
bearing No.DBP-1488 and the provisions of the Motor Vehicles
FAO 84/2001

page 1 of 12

Act 1939.
3.

Learned counsel for the parties did not dispute that

cause of action arose on the date of the accident and that the
Motor Vehicles Act 1988 came into force with effect from
1.7.1989.
4.

According to the appellant, insured had paid premium

of Rs.12/- per passenger and hence liability of the insurance
company was limited to Rs.15,000/- per passenger.
5.

Policy of insurance has not been proved in evidence.

However, certificate of insurance issued by the appellant in
respect of the vehicle in question has been proved at the trial.
Under the caption 'SCHEDULE OF PREMIUM' pertaining to
liability to public risk, the certificate of insurance reads as
under:SCHEDULE OF PREMIUM
B. LIABILITY TO PUBLIC RISK

1,975-00
Rs.

240-00

27 Passengers

Rs.

324-00

Limit per passenger Rs....

Rs.

Add: for L.L. to passengers.
as per END IMT. 13

Maximum Rs..... as per M.V.Act 1939
Add for L.L. to paid driver and/or

Rs.

16-00

Cleaner as per END IMT.16

FAO 84/2001

page 2 of 12

Add for increased T.P. Limits
Section 11 1(i) Unlimited

Rs.

75-00

Section 11 1(ii) Rs.....
Rs.
Add for ...........

Rs.
Rs.2,630-00

COMPREHENSIVE PREMIUM (A + B)
Less 5% S.D.

Rs.

131-00

Less : 10% Sp. Discount (If due)
NET PREMIUM DUE (ROUNDED OFF)

6.

2,499-00

It is not in dispute that the deceased late Shri Chatter

Singh Rana was in the process of boarding the bus and got
crushed under the rear wheel of the bus due to fact that when
he was in the process of boarding the bus, the driver
accelerated the bus all of a sudden, resulting in Chatter Singh
Rana slipping from the foot-board and getting crushed under
the rear wheel of the bus. He died at the spot.
7.

With reference to certain decisions, learned Tribunal

has held that the deceased was not a passenger in the bus
inasmuch as he had yet to enter the bus, purchase a ticket and
commence the journey.
8.

I need not discuss the said decisions for the reason all

decisions pertain to accidents after 1.7.1989 and therefore are
under the M.V.Act 1988.
9.

Issue is squarely covered in favour of the appellant as

per the decision of the Supreme Court reported as 1997 ACJ 1,
FAO 84/2001

page 3 of 12

Noorjahan vs. Sultan Razia @ Thaju and Ors.

In said decision,

Supreme Court was considering the liability of the insurance
company to satisfy the award in favour of the claimants who
were the dependents of Syed Abu Thakir. He suffered grievous
injuries while alighting from a bus and died on the way to the
hospital.
10.

Whereas insurance company alleged that he was a

passenger at the time of the accident and hence liability of the
insurance company was limited, claimants and the owner
alleged to the contrary.
11.

Section 95(1) of the M.V.Act 1939 was the focus of

consideration before the Supreme Court. It would be useful to
extract the relevant part of said section which was considered
by the Supreme Court. The same reads as under:“95.
Requirements of policies and limits of
liability.- (1) In order to comply with the
requirements of this Chapter, a policy of insurance
must be a policy which(a)

xxx

xxx

xxx

(b)
insures the person or classes of persons
specified in the policy to the extent specified in subsection(2)(i)
against any liability which may be
incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily
injury to any person or damage to any property of a
third party caused by or arising out of the use of the
vehicle in a public place;
FAO 84/2001

page 4 of 12

(ii)
against the death of or bodily injury to any
passenger of a public service vehicle caused by or
arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public
place.
Provided that a policy shall not be required(i)

xxx

xxx

xxx

(ii)
except where the vehicle is a vehicle
in which passengers are carried for hire or
reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a
contract of employment, to cover liability in
respect of the death of or bodily injury to
persons being carried in or upon or entering or
mounting or alighting from the vehicle at the
time of the occurrence of the event out of
which a claim arises, or
12.

(iii)
xxx
xxx
xxx”
In respect of sub para (ii) of the proviso to sub-section

(1) of Section 95 of the M.V.Act 1939, in para 7 of the report,
Supreme Court observed as under:“7.
It is clear that legislature intended that
such persons, viz., passengers who are in the
process of alighting from a public service vehicle,
should be covered by the policy of insurance, which
requirement is mandatory under section 95 (1) (b)
(ii) of the Act. Further, once such persons, viz.,
those who are entering or alighting from the vehicle
are treated as passengers, the limit of liability of the
insurance company has to be located in clause (ii)
of section 95 (2) (b) of the Act. The limit at the
relevant time was Rs.10,000/-.
13.

Concurring with the view taken by the High Court that

Syed Abu Thakir was a passenger and not a third party,
Supreme Court observed as under:-

FAO 84/2001

page 5 of 12

14.

“The High Court rightly interpreted the proviso (ii)
extracted above to mean that the liability in respect
of death of or injury to persons alighting from the
vehicle at the time of the accident need not be
covered except where the vehicle is a vehicle in
which the passengers are carried for hire or reward
or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of
employment. In other words, where the vehicle is a
vehicle in which the passengers are carried for hire
or reward or by reason of or pursuant to a contract
of employment, giving rise to the above liability
arising out of an accident, the vehicle has
necessarily to be covered. It can be seen that the
proviso is an exception to section 95(1). As per
sub-section (b) the insurance policy must insure the
persons specified in the policy against (i) any
liability to person or property of a third party, and
(ii) against death or personal injury to any
passenger of a public service vehicle. The liability
in respect of those suffering personal injury while
getting into or alighting from the vehicle need not
be covered if the vehicle is not one in which the
passengers are carried for hire or reward. But as in
the present case, the vehicle is one that carries
passengers for hire or reward, the liability for
personal injury or death caused while getting into or
alighting from the vehicle would be required to be
covered by the policy. In other words, such people
who suffer injury or die while alighting from the
vehicle are to be covered by the general rule that
the insurance policy for a public service vehicle
should cover the liability against the death of or
bodily injury to any passenger of such a vehicle.”
Decision of the Supreme Court makes it clear that in

view of Section 95(1)(b) of the M.V.Act 1988, a policy of
insurance shall not be required to cover liability in respect of
death of or bodily injury to persons boarding or alighting from a
motor vehicle because clause (ii) of the proviso thereto
engrafts an exception and says that where the vehicle is one in
FAO 84/2001

page 6 of 12

which passengers are carried for hire or reward or by reason of
or in pursuance of a contract of employment, it shall be
necessary to cover liability in relation to person carried in or
upon said vehicle which would include cases of death or bodily
injury caused while entering or mounting or alighting from said
vehicle.
15.

Therefore, if a person is still in the process of

boarding or alighting from the vehicle, said person would be
entitled to the coverage, within the limit of liability fixed under
the statute at the relevant point of time.
16.

It has to be noted that the afore-noted provisions are

beneficial provisions engrafted by way of an exception to
provide an insurance cover to passengers.
17.

Since it was cited, it is my duty to note that a decision

of a learned Single Judge of this Court reported as 2005 ACJ
731 Narender Singh vs. Sudarshan Kumar & Ors.
18.

Learned counsel for the respondents urged that the

ratio of said decision is that in respect of passengers, insurance
company must satisfy the award passed in favour of the
claimants and thereafter recover the amount paid in excess of
its limited liability from the assured.
19.

It may be noted at the outset that said decision

FAO 84/2001

page 7 of 12

related to death of passengers who were on a pilgrimage to
Ujjain in the bus which suffered a fatal accident and fell in
Shipra river near the city of Ujjain.
20.

The said decision has not noted the authoritative

pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Noorjahan's case
(supra).

Secondly, terms of the policy nor certificate of

insurance was proved in the said case. Document Ex.RW-1/A
on which insurance company was relying was a photocopy of
the stated insurance policy. The learned Single Judge held that
being neither original insurance policy nor a carbon copy nor an
office copy thereof, the document had no evidenciary value.
Independent thereof, learned Judge held that since the
document did not contain all the terms and conditions of the
insurance, issue can be considered in light of the Indian Motor
Tariffs effective from 1.12.1973. In para 40 of the report, the
learned Single Judge

noted decision of the Supreme Court

reported as 1998 ACJ 531 Amrit Lal Sood vs. Kaushalya Devi
Thapar. Following words from para 7 of the said report were
noted:“On a careful reading and analysis of the decision
in Amrit Lal Sood, 1998 ACJ 531 (SC), it is clear that
the view taken by the Court is no different. In this
decision also, the case of Jugal Kishore, 1988 ACJ
270 (SC), is referred to. It is held:

FAO 84/2001

page 8 of 12

(i)
that the liability of the insurer depends
upon the terms of the contract between the insured
and the insurer contained in the policy;
(ii)
there is no prohibition for an insured from
entering into a contract of insurance covering a risk
wider than the minimum requirement of the statute
whereby risk to the gratuitous passenger could also
be covered; and

21.

(iii)
in such cases where the policy is not
merely statutory policy, the terms of the policy
have to be considered to determine the liability of
the insurer.”
It was thereafter observed by the learned Single

Judge that the decision of the Supreme Court in Amrit Lal
Sood's case (supra) made a vital distinction between a
statutory liability and a contractual liability.

The sum and

substance of the distinction made by the Supreme Court is that
under the statute the liability is limited to what is provided in
the statute, but that does not prohibit the contracting parties
from creating an unlimited or higher liability.
22.

Concluding the discussion in Narender Singh's case

(supra) in para 58 and 59, learned Single Judge observed as
under:“58.
On the basis of all the decisions mentioned
above, it is quite clear that the Act provides a limit
to the liability of the insurance company vis-a-vis
the insured.
But, the insurance company and
insured can through a contract, increase the liability
by enhancing the amount of premium and even
provide for a wider coverage in respect of third
party risks.
The Act does not prohibit such
FAO 84/2001

page 9 of 12

variations and, in fact, the India Motor Tariffs even
provides for it.

23.

59.
In the present case, all the terms of the
contract of insurance were not brought on record by
the insurance company or the owner of the vehicle.
Under these circumstances, it has become
necessary to refer to the India Motor Tariffs to know
the standard terms of contract. A perusal of the
standard terms so derived shows that they are in
substance similar to the terms of insurance
contracts dealt with by the Apex Court in the
decisions mentioned above. Consequently, the only
available conclusion is that even though the
monetary liability of the insurance company is
limited as claimed by it, that limited liability is only
vis-a-vis the insured. The liability vis-a-vis 'any
person' or a third party like the appellants is not
limited. The insurance company has contracted
with the insured to indemnify a third party to
recover an amount under or by virtue of the
provisions of the Act. This is, however, subject to
the right of the insurance company to recover from
the assured any amount paid in excess of its liability
but for the Act. This is the sum and substance of
the wider coverage provided by the insurance policy
in the cases decided by the Supreme Court and the
present case.”
It is apparent that the premium paid under Indian

Motor Tariff was not established before the learned Single
Judge and on said account benefit of the beneficial provisions
of the M.V.Act 1939 was given to the claimants.

24.

In the instant case, it is not in dispute that as per

Indian Motor Tariff 13 if premium of Rs.12/- per passenger was
paid, liability of the insurance company would be Rs.15,000/-

FAO 84/2001

page 10 of 12

per passenger.

In the instant case, certificate of insurance

establishes that for 27 passengers premium paid was Rs.324/i.e. Rs.12 per passenger.
25.

The appeal accordingly stands allowed.

award is set aside.

Impugned

I hold that the liability of the insurance

company to satisfy the award is limited to Rs.15,000/-.
Remaining amount has to be realized by the claimants from the
owner of the bus.
26.

Before concluding I may note that pursuant to orders

dated 18.4.2001, appellant deposited the entire amount
awarded, which included up to date interest. 50% thereof was
permitted to be withdrawn by the claimants.
27.

I therefore direct that the balance amount lying in

deposit together with accrued interest thereon be returned by
the Registry to the appellant by either endorsing the fixed
deposit receipt in favour of the appellant or by encashing the
fixed deposit receipt and preparing a cheque in the name of
the appellant for said amount.
28.

In respect of 50% awarded sum which has been

received by the claimants I hold that save and except the
amount payable under the limited liability of the appellant to
the claimants, together with proportionate interest thereon,

FAO 84/2001

page 11 of 12

balance amount shall be recovered by the appellant from the
owner of the vehicle in question and not from the claimants.
29.

No costs.

March 30, 2007
dk

FAO 84/2001

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

page 12 of 12

