IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
MAC. APP. No.980/2006
#
!

M/s.United India Insurance Company .......
through: Mr.A.K.De, Adv.

Appellant

VERSUS
$
Smt.Kusum Jindal & Ors.
.......
Respondents
^
through: Mr.Sanjeev Mehta & Ms.Aruna Mehta,
Advs. for respondents
Ms.Eashita
Mandal,
Adv.
For
respondent
No.6
MAC. APP. No.985/2006
#
!

M/s.United India Insurance Company .......
through: Mr.A.K.De, Adv.

Appellant

VERSUS
$
^

Shri Ankit & Anr.
....... Respondents
through: Ms.Shantha Devi Raman, Adv. for
respondent No.1
Mr.Vijay Kumar Wadhwa, Adv. for
respondent No.2
MAC. APP. No.986/2006

#
!

M/s.United India Insurance Company .......
through: Mr.A.K.De, Adv.

Appellant

VERSUS
$
Mrs.Rani Gupta & Ors.
.......
Respondents
^
through: Ms.Shantha Devi Raman, Adv. for
respondents No.1 to 4
Mr.Vijay Kumar Wadhwa, Adv. for
Page 1 of 28

respondent No.5
%

DATE OF DECISION: 31-05-2007
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Y

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Y

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest? Y

:
1.

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
Apart from a question of fact pertaining to

quantification of the loss of dependence and compensation
payable to the injured which are different in each appeal, a
common question of law arises for consideration in the three
appeals which arise out of the same accident involving the
same car. Thus, the three appeals are being decided by a
common order.

Needless to state, they arise out of a

common award under which 3 claim petitions have been
decided.
2.

The date was 12.2.2004. Praveen Kumar Gupta,

Rajender

Jindal

and

Ankit

Gupta

were

travelling

as

passengers in a TATA Indica car bearing No. HR 26U 3423.
The car was owned by Avtar Singh, a friend of Praveen
Kumar Gupta and Rajender Jindal. Ankit Gupta is the son of
Page 2 of 28

Praveen Kumar.
3.

The owner/driver Avtar Singh lost control of the

vehicle and rammed into a tree by the side of the road with
such great force that the resultant impact led to the instant
death of Praveen Kumar and Rajender Jindal at the spot.
Ankit survived but with injuries on the face.
4.

Praveen Kumar Gupta was survived by his wife

and 3 children. Rajender Jindal was survived by a wife and 4
children.

The two set of survivors filed claim petitions for

compensation invoking Section 140 read with Section 166 of
the MV Act 1988.

Ankit Gupta did likewise for injuries

sustained by him.
5.

The car was insured with the appellant. Admitting

the said fact of the car being insured with it and that the
accident was caused due to the rash and negligent driving
by the insured i.e. Avtar Singh, a defence was taken by the
appellant that the deceased as also the injured were
gratuitous passengers in the car and the policy of insurance
covered pubic risk to third parties and since passengers in a
car are not third parties, appellant was not liable to satisfy
the award.
6.

The learned Tribunal has returned a finding

Page 3 of 28

against the appellant.
7.

Whether a Gratuitous Passenger travelling in a

Private car would fall within the meaning of 'third party' and
covered by 'Statutory Policy' within the meaning of Section
147 of the Act may be a question of debate, but in the
instant case I need not deal with the said issue for the
reason, admittedly, the policy in question taken out by the
insured and issued by the appellant is a 'PRIVATE CAR
PACKAGE

POLICY' and as notified by the Tariff Advisory

Committee, with effect from 1.7.2002, the terms and
conditions of a private car package policy mandate as
under:“SECTION II -LIABILITY TO THIRD PARTIES
1.
Subject to the limits of liability as laid down in
the Schedule hereto the Company will indemnify the
insured in the event of an accident caused by or
arising out of the use of the vehicle against all sums
which the insured shall become legally liable to pay
in respect of:(i)
death of or bodily injury to any person
including occupants carried in the vehicle
(provided such occupants are not carried for
hire or reward) but except so far as it is
necessary to meet the requirements of Motor
Vehicles Act, the Company shall not be liable
where such death or injury arises out of and in
the course of the employment of such person
by the insured.
(ii)

damage to property other than property
Page 4 of 28

8.

belonging to the insured or held in trust or in
the custody or control of the insured.”
It is thus obvious that where policy issued after

1.7.2002 is a Package Policy for Private Car the risk
coverage would include the sum payable by the insured in
respect of death of or bodily injury to any person including
occupants carried in the vehicle provided such occupants
are not carried for hire or reward.
9.

Learned counsel for the appellant cited the

opinion published as II (2006) ACC 1 (SC) United India
Insurance Co. Ltd. Shimla vs. Tilak Singh & Ors. to urge that
gratuitous passengers in a private vehicle would not be
entitled to be treated at par with third parties and that the
insurance company would not be liable to indemnify the
insured i.e. pay under the award where the death caused is
to a gratuitous passenger in a private vehicle.
10.

I may note at the outset that para 21 of the said

decision clearly reveals that the Supreme Court was dealing
with a 'STATUTORY POLICY' and not 'A PACKAGE POLICY FOR
PRIVATE CARS'.
11.

The instant 3 cases deal with a policy which was

issued in the year 2003. Admittedly, the policy is a Package
Policy for Private Cars.

Thus, the very basis on which

Page 5 of 28

defence has been predicated by the appellant, being
untenable, in so far challenge is made on the very liability to
pay, the appeals must fail.
12.

Since learned counsel for the appellant argued

that it is impermissible to issue a policy which violates the
provisions of the M.V.Act 1988, I need to consider whether
the terms of the notification issued by the Tariff Advisory
Committee pertaining to a Package Policy for Private Cars
with effect from 1.7.2002 violates any provision of the
M.V.Act 1988 or not.
13.

In order to decide the said issue it would be

useful to refer to the provisions of the M.V.Act 1939, the
forerunner of the M.V.Act 1988, and the case law.
14.

To appreciate the position under the M.V.Act

1939 as amended up to the year 1969, reference may be
made to Section 95 of the M.V.Act 1939. It reads as under:“95. Requirement of policies and limits of
liability :-(1) In order to comply with the
requirements of this Chapter, a policy of
insurance must be a policy which
(a) is issued by a person who is an authorized
insurer or by a co-operative society allowed
under Section 108 to transact the business of an
insurer;”
(b) insures the person or classes of persons
specified in the policy to the extent specified in
Page 6 of 28

sub-section (2)(i)
against any liability which may be incurred
by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury
to any passenger or damage to any property of a
third party caused by or arising out of the use of
the vehicle in a public place;
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any
passenger of a public service vehicle caused by
or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public
place :
Provided that a policy shall not be required(i)
to cover liability in respect of the death,
arising out of an in the course of his employment,
of the employee of a person insured by the policy
or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such
an employee arising out of and in the course of
his employment other than a liability arising
under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (8
of 1923), in respect of the death of, or bodily
injury to, any such employee (a)

engaged in driving vehicle, or

(b) if it is a public service vehicle engaged as a
conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets
on the vehicle, or
(c) if it is a goods vehicle, being carried in the
vehicle, or
(ii) except where the vehicle is a vehicle in
which passengers are carried for hire or reward
or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of
employment, to cover liability in respect of the
death of or bodily injury to persons being carried
on or upon or entering or mounting or alighting
from the vehicle at the time of the occurrence of
the even out of which a claim arises, or
(iii)

to cover any contractual liability.
Page 7 of 28

Explanation- xxxx (Not relevant in this case)
15.

It is pertinent to note that clause (II) to sub

section (1) (b) of Section 95 was inserted by Act 56 of 1969.
The said provision came for consideration before the
Supreme Court and the opinion is reported as AIR 1977 SC
1735 Pushpabai Purshotam Udeshi v. M/s. Ranjeet Ginni and
Pressing Company Pvt. Ltd.
16.

The case related to the death of a gratuitous

passenger travelling in a private motor car which met with
an accident. The car was insured for third party risks and
the policy of insurance was described as a 'Comprehensive
Policy of Insurance' but the liability to such passenger was
limited to Rs.15,000/-. Interpreting the provisions of section
95(a) and 95(b) (i) of the M.V.Act 1939 in para 20 it was
observed:“20. x x x x x The plea that the words "third
party" are wide enough to cover all persons
except the person and the insurer is negatived
as the insurance cover is not available to the
passengers made clear by the proviso to Subsection which provides that a policy shall not be
required:
(ii) except where the vehicle is a vehicle in which
passengers are carried for hire or reward or by
reason of or in pursuance of a contract of
employment, to cover liability in respect of the
death of or bodily injury to persons being carried
Page 8 of 28

17.

in or upon or entering or mounting or alighting
from the vehicle at the time of the occurrence of
the event out of which a claim arises. x x x x x”
It was held that it was not necessary that a policy

of insurance should statutorily cover risks to the passengers
who are not carried for hire or reward.
18.

Decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court

reported as AIR 1974 AP 310, Madras Motors & Insurance
Co. V. Kattan Reddy Subha Reddy

which was noted with

approval by the Supreme Court in the opinion reported as
AIR 1998 SC 1433, Amrit Lal Sood v. Kaushalya Devi Thapar
may also be noted.

Two gratuitous passengers in a private

car suffered injuries due to the car being involved in an
accident. The car was insured for third party risks and the
policy of insurance was 'Comprehensive Policy of Insurance'.
In the context of proviso (ii), it was held that the policy was
wide enough to cover liability incurred by the insurer in
respect of injury caused to the occupants of the car. The
decision refers to an interesting observation of Lord Denning
in the opinion reported as 170 ACJ 144 CA Motor Insurer's
Bureau v. Connell.

The observations relate to providing

compulsory insurance for passengers. They read as under:'Many people think the Act should be altered so
as to provide compulsory Insurance for
passengers. I think so too. It is very hard on a
Page 9 of 28

passenger that he should be injured by the
driver and have no recourse for damages. I
hope that Parliament will soon remedy the
position.
Meanwhile, I would suggest that
anyone, who asks for or accepts a lift should ask
the driver :

19.

“Are you insured for passengers or not?” for, if
he is not, and there is an accident, he may be
unable to get any compensation.'
Amrit Lal Sood (Supra) related to a private car

involved in an accident and the driver who was a friend of
the insured, travelling gratuitously, in the car was injured
and sought compensation.
'Comprehensive

Insurance

The car was insured under a
Policy'.

Interpreting

the

expression 'any person' in the policy of insurance it was held
that it could include an occupant of the car who was
travelling gratuitously.
20.

In para 4 of the judgment, it was observed that

“the statutory insurance does not cover injury suffered by
occupants of the vehicle who are not carried for hire or
reward and the insurer cannot be held liable under the Act.
But that does not prevent an insurer from entering into a
contract of insurance covering a risk wider than the
minimum requirement of the statute whereby the risk to
gratuitous passengers could also be covered. In such cases
where the policy is not merely a statutory policy, the terms

Page 10 of 28

of the policy have to be considered to determine the liability
of the insuer.”
21.

In the light of the above noted decisions, the legal

position under the M.V.Act 1939 would be that the Insurance
Company was not liable to compensate for the death or
bodily injuries to a gratuitous passenger in a private car or
other category vehicles unless and until there was a
separate contract between the insurer and the insured. In
other words, unless the Insurance Company agreed to bear
extra risk to a gratuitous passenger in a private car, the Act
as it stood then, did not contemplate liability on the part of
Insurance Company to indemnify the insured. But if there
existed a comprehensive policy of insurance, then the risk to
gratuitous passenger was covered.

Meaning thereby a

policy of insurance could be in excess of the limits stipulated
under the M.V.Act 1939.
22.

Observations

of

the

Supreme

Court

in

the

decision reported as (1999) 1 SCC 403 Mallawwa v. Oriental
Insurance Company Ltd. may also be noted. Dealing with
Section 95 of the Act 1939 and in particular the proviso (ii)
to Section 95, it was observed:“7. x x x x x What is important to be noted is that
the legislature, after providing generally in
Page 11 of 28

23.

clause (b) of sub-section (1) in wide terms so as
to include “any person” and every motor
“vehicle” within its sweep, carved out a certain
exception by adding a proviso to that clause. By
proviso (ii), it restricted the generality of the
main provision by confining the requirement to
cases where “the vehicle is a vehicle in which
passengers are carried for hire or reward or by
reason of or in pursuance of a contract of
employment”. In the absence of the proviso, the
main provision would have included all classes of
vehicles including goods vehicles and all
passengers whether carried for hire or reward or
by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of
employment or otherwise. That is the reason why
there is a reference to different classes of
vehicles in proviso (i). It refers to “vehicle”,
“public service vehicle” and “goods vehicle”. The
words “any person” in the main provision would
have included the employee of the person
insured, and therefore, an exception was made
by enacting proviso (i) so as to restrict liability of
the insurer in respect of his employees. Both
those exceptions were made as the legislature
did not want to widen the liability of the insurer
and the insured by making it more than what it
was under the English Act, upon which Section
95 was based. x x x x x”
In the concluding para 14 of the report it was

noted that the M.V.Act 1988 has introduced Section 147
which has specifically altered Section 95 of the M.V.Act
1939.
24.

At the outset it may be noted that the M.V.Act

1988 does not define the expression 'third party' except that
Section 145 (g) of the Act states that it includes the
Government.

The object of insurance of vehicles against

Page 12 of 28

third

party

risks

is

to

ensure

that

the

sufferer

is

compensated for the loss sustained by him independent of
the financial condition of the driver and owner of the vehicle
involved. The provisions of the Act have to be construed in
such a manner as to ensure this object of the enactment.
25.

Section 146 of the M.V.Act 1988 mandates that a

motor vehicle must have a policy of Insurance against third
party risks.
26.

Section 147 of the M.V.Act 1988 reads as under :“147.
Requirement of policies and
limits of liability (1) In order to comply with
the requirements of this Chapter, a policy of
insurance must be a policy which-(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised
insurer; and
(b) insures the person or classes of persons
specified in the policy to the extent specified in
sub-section-(2)
(i) against any liability which may be incurred by
him in respect of the death of or bodily [injury to
any person, including owner of the goods or his
authorised representative carried in the vehicle]
or damage to any property of a third party
caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle
in a public place;
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any
passenger of a public service caused by or
arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public
place.
Provided that a policy shall not be required(i) to cover liability in respect of the death,
Page 13 of 28

arising our of the and in the course of his
employment, of the employee of a person
insured by the policy or in respect of bodily
injury sustained by such an employee arising out
of and in the course of his employment other
than a liability arising under the Workmen's
Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), in respect
of the death, or bodily injury to, any such
employee-(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or
(b) if it is public service vehicle engaged as a
conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets
on the vehicle, or
(c) if it is a good carriage, being in the vehicle, or
(ii) to cover any contractual liability.”
27.

A bare reading of the afore noted provision shows

that the policy of insurance has to cover liability in respect
of death or bodily injury to any person including owner of
the goods or his authorized representative who may be
carried in a goods vehicle/carriage as defined under Section
2(14) of the Act.
28.

Section 149 of the M.V.Act 1988 casts a duty on

the insurer to satisfy judgments and awards passed against
the insured in respect of third party risks notwithstanding
that insurer may be entitled to avoid or cancel or may have
avoided or cancelled the policy. There is no statutory limit
of liability provided under the M.V.Act 1988 unlike the old
Act of 1939.
Page 14 of 28

29.

At first blush it would be revealed to a reader that

a third party must necessarily indicate a party other than
those who are parties to the contract of insurance. Thus,
insured and insurer are the first and second party and all
others are third parties except that category of persons who
may be excluded specifically by the Act or the contract of
insurance. The owner, insured and third party cannot be
rolled into one. In other words, the insured is not covered by
the policy of insurance as third party unless he has taken
personal

insurance

or

coverage.

Reference

in

this

connection may be made to the decision reported as AIR
2004 SC 4767 Dhanraj V. New India Assurance Company
Ltd.
30.

In the decision reported as AIR 2003 SC 607 New

India Insurance Company Ltd. v. Asha Rani Section 147 of
the M.V.Act 1988 came up for discussion in the context of
cause of action that arose prior to the amendment in the
M.V.Act 1988 with effect from 14.11.1997. It was held that
the legislature has brought within the sweep of Section 147
of the M.V.Act 1988 compulsion for the insurer to insure,
even in case of goods vehicle, the owner of the goods or its
authorized representative being carried in a goods vehicle

Page 15 of 28

when that vehicle meets with an accident and the owner of
the goods or his representative either dies or suffers bodily
injuries. In para 26 of the report it was observed:“In view of the changes in the relevant provisions
in the 1988 Act vis-à-vis the 1939 Act, we are of
the opinion that the meaning of the words “any
person” must also be attributed having regard to
the context in which they have been used i.e. “a
third party”. Keeping in view the provisions of
the 1988 Act, we are of the opinion that as the
provisions thereof do not enjoin any statutory
liability on the owner of a vehicle to get his
vehicle insured for any passenger travelling in a
goods vehicle, the insurers would not be liable
therefor.”
31.

It was held that gratuitous passenger travelling in

a goods vehicle shall not be covered within the meaning of
the expression 'any person' and shall not be a third party
unless additional premium is paid in regard to the passenger
and/or Insurance Company extends its contractual liability.
32.

In the report published as II (2006) ACC 1 (SC),

United India Insurance Company Ltd. vs. Tilak Singh, the
decision which was vehemently relied upon by learned
counsel

for

the

appellant,

the

position

of

gratuitous

passenger was discussed in relation to the M.V.Act 1939 visa-vis the later amendment brought by the M.V.Act 1988. In
para 20 and 21 of the report it was held that even under the
new Act, the legal position as regards 'gratuitous passenger'

Page 16 of 28

is the same. Following observations in para 25 and 27 of the
report published as (2003) 2 SCC 223 II 2002 ACC 753 New
India Assurance Co. V. Asha Rani were noted with approval:“25. Section 147 of the 1988 Act, inter alia,
prescribes compulsory coverage against the
death of or bodily injury to any passenger of
“public service vehicle”. Proviso appended
thereto categorically states that compulsory
coverage in respect of drivers and conductors of
public service vehicle and employees carried in a
goods vehicle would be limited to the liability
under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. It does
not speak of any passenger in a “goods
carriage”.
27. Furthermore, sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of Section 147 speaks of liability
which may be incurred by the owner of a vehicle
in respect of death of or bodily injury to any
person or damage to any property of a third
party caused by or arising out of the use of the
vehicle in a public place, whereas sub-clause (ii)
thereof deals with liability which may be incurred
by the owner of a vehicle against the death of or
bodily injury to any passenger of a public service
vehicle caused by or arising out of the use of the
vehicle in a public place.”
33.

Tilak

Singh's

case

(Supra)

holds

that

the

proposition of law in Asha Rani's Case (Supra) in relation to
goods vehicle shall apply with equal force to 'gratuitous
passenger' in any other vehicle also. As noted herein above
Tilak Singh's case (supra) related to a statutory policy.

It

would be pertinent to mention here that Tilak Singh's case
(supra) related to the death of a pillion rider on a two
Page 17 of 28

wheeler scooter and his legal representatives had claimed
compensation against the registered owner of the scooter
and the insurer. The two wheeler scooter was insured for
third party risk for the period 07/03/1989 to 06/03/1990 and
the accident had taken place on 31.10.1989.

The Court

found that the Insurance Policy covering the risks did not
contain an endorsement of IMT 70 covering liability to pillion
riders and, therefore, in that context held that the Insurer
Company was not liable to indemnify the insured and pay
compensation to the legal representatives of the deceased.
I may indicate here that IMT-70 is no longer in operation and
as per Section 3 of the present tariffs even a pillion rider is
covered by Third Party risks unless he happens to be an
employee of the insured for which extra premium is to be
required to be paid.
34.

To summarize, where the policy is a statutory

policy or an act only policy, a gratuitous passenger in a
private vehicle would not be covered for a bodily injury or
death under the policy of insurance. But, nothing prevents
the insurance company from issuing a wider coverage i.e.
assuming a greater risk liability.

As in the instant case,

where the policy is a Package Policy for Private Cars, terms

Page 18 of 28

of the policy and the applicable conditions as notified by the
Tariff Advisory Committee would have to be looked into to
determine the risk liability assumed by the insurer.
35.

Reverting to the quantification of the claims in

the three claim petitions filed by the wives and children of
the two deceased passengers and by the surviving injured
i.e. Ankit Gupta, individual facts pertaining to the income of
the deceased and nature of injuries on the injured need to
be noted.
36.

Pertaining to the claim lodged by the wife and

children of Praveen Kumar Gupta admitted position is that
the deceased was aged 46 years when he died. He had left
behind his wife, 3 major children and parents.

He was

operating a manufacturing unit where machines were being
fabricated.

He was conducting business under the name

and style: 'M/s. Bharat Industries'.
37.
assessee.

Praveen
3

Kumar

income

Gupta

tax

was

returns

an

income

pertaining

to

tax
the

assessment years 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 were
proved as Ex. PW1/A to Ex. PW1/C respectively.

The last

return reveals an annual income of Rs.1,27,432/-.

Based

thereon, learned Tribunal held that the annual income of the

Page 19 of 28

deceased in the year immediate prior to his death would be
treated as Rs.1,25,000/-. Since the 3 income tax returns i.e.
Ex. PW-1/A to Ex. PW-1/C revealed a gradual increase in the
annual income, learned Tribunal opined that there is proof of
future prospects i.e. income increasing over the years.
Holding that by the time deceased ceased to be in gainful
business his income would have doubled, mean average
annual income was determined as Rs.1,87,500/-. Deducting
1/3rd as the personal expenses of the deceased loss of
dependence has been treated to be Rs.1,25,000/- per
annum. Applying the multiplier 13 total loss of dependence
has been determined as Rs.16,25,000/-.
been awarded towards funeral expenses.

Rs.15,000/- has
To the wife

Rs.25,000/- has been awarded towards loss of consortium.
To the 3 children Rs.75,000/- has been awarded towards loss
of love and affection.

Total compensation granted is

Rs.17,40,000/-.
38.

It is urged by learned counsel for the appellant

that the compensation awarded is excessive on two counts.
Firstly, considering the age of the deceased being 46 years,
multiplier of 13 is excessive. Secondly, since income of the
deceased was from a capital asset, the asset having

Page 20 of 28

survived to the family, loss of dependence had to be
determined with reference to the decision of the Supreme
Court reported as 2005 (10) SCC 720 New India Assurance
Co. Vs. Charlie & Anr.
39.

The

assessment

of

compensation

for

the

dependents is beset with difficulties because from the nature
of things it has to take into account many imponderables like
life expectancy of the deceased and the dependents; the
amount which the deceased would have earned during the
remainder of his life; the amount he would have contributed
to the dependents; the chance of income improving or
losing.

Most

hypothesis.

of

these

calculations

remain

as

mere

To provide objectivity in the determination of

loss of dependence a multiplier method was evolved in the
opinion reported as (1942) 1 All ER 657 Davies Vs. Powell
Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd. This has been consistently
followed by courts in India. This multiplier method requires
the ascertainment of the loss of dependence or the
multiplicand on the basis of capitalizing; applying an
appropriate multiplier.

The existing income as also future

growth is considered and since a lump sum amount is paid
to the dependents, the said income is multiplied by an

Page 21 of 28

appropriate multiplier. The choice of the multiplier is based
upon the age of the deceased or the dependents (whichever
is higher) and the rate of return by way of interest which
would flow to the dependents if money awarded is invested
in a dividend yielding annuity.
40.

In the MV Act 1988, with the insertion of Section

163 A and Schedule II to in the year 1994 a statutory
recognition was accorded to the multiplier method to be
adopted

while

determining

the

loss

of

dependence.

However, defects and deficiencies were noted in the
multiplier stipulated in the II'nd

Schedule to the MV Act

1988. These were highlighted by the Supreme Court in the
decision reported as (1996) 4 SCALE 22 UPSRTC Vs. Trilok
Chand. It was pointed out that the II'nd Schedule serves as a
guide but not as an invariable ready reckoner. Pertaining to
deceased having different ages (as is noted against each
case hereinunder noted) different multipliers as noted in
each case were adopted:
a)

AIR 1994 SC 1631 General Manager, Kerala State Road

Transport Corporation Vs. Sussamma Thomas & Ors. For a
deceased aged 38 years multiplier adopted was 13.
b)

2007 (2) SCALE 227 New India Assurance Co. Vs.

Page 22 of 28

Kalpana & Ors.

For a deceased aged 33 years multiplier

adopted was also 13.
c)

AIR 2005 SC 2985 Tamilnadu State Road Corporation

Vs. S.Rajapriya & Ors.

For a deceased aged 38 years

multiplier adopted was 12.
d)

2004 ACJ 53 The Municipal Corporation of Greater

Bombay Vs. Shri Laxman Iyer & Ors. For a deceased aged
18 years and age of parents being 47 years and 43 years
multiplier adopted was 10.
41.

Taking guidance from the afore-noted decisions I

am of the opinion that in the instant case, appropriate
multiplier to be adopted is 10.
42.

In the decision reported as (2005) 10 SCC 720

New India Assurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Charlie & Anr., it was noted
that where income is derived from a capital asset, normal
rule about the deprivation of income is directly not
applicable

and

other

circumstances

have

also

to

be

considered.
43.

The decision does not list out what would be the

other parameters. But, to a rational mind it is obvious that
where income is not the sole yield of the personal labour of
an individual and is the yield of a personal labour cum

Page 23 of 28

capital i.e. a synthesis of the two, impact of the capital asset
surviving to the family has to be considered and discounted
for while determining the loss of dependence.
44.

The other method could be to determine the

wages paid for employing a person to manage the capital i.e.
substitute the labour value for the income which was being
generated from the capital asset due to the labour input by
the deceased.
45.

Thus treating mean average income accruing

from the capital asset due to the personal labour of the
deceased i.e. Praveen Kumar as Rs.1,87,500/- per annum as
worked out by the Tribunal and applying the multiplier 10,
the loss determined is Rs.18,75,000/-.

From this, amount

which the deceased would have spent on himself has to be
deducted.

Further, discount has to be given due to the

capital asset surviving to the family.
46.

Apportioning 2/3rd as the labour input i.e. personal

input of the deceased in the business and treating 1/3rd as
the yield from the capital asset, loss occasioned due to
death of the deceased comes to Rs.12,50,000/-.

The

remaining loss of Rs.6,25,000/- could be made good by the
family by renting out the factory or after liquidating the

Page 24 of 28

capital asset investing the money in an annuity yielding
income by way of interest.
47.

Notwithstanding the extended size of the family

of the deceased, I consider deduction of 1/3rd for the
personal spending of the deceased as appropriate for the
reason all his children were major as on the date of the
accident. From the sum of Rs.12,50,000/-, deducting 1/3rd as
the personal expenses of the deceased i.e. Rs.4,16,666/-,
loss of dependence determined is Rs.8,33,334/-. Rounded of
to Rs.8,35,000/-.
48.

Maintaining the other compensation awarded by

the Tribunal, MAC.APP.No.986/2006 which pertains to the
death of Praveen Kumar Gupta stands disposed of reducing
the compensation which has been awarded by the Tribunal
by sum of Rs.7,90,000/-.

Noting that the Tribunal has

awarded a total compensation of Rs.17,40,000/- I hold that
the compensation payable to the dependents of Praveen
Kumar Gupta would be Rs.9,50,000/-.

Other terms of the

award are retained as per the award.
49.

Pertaining

to

the

death

of

Rajender

Jindal,

admitted fact is that he was aged 52 years when he died.
He had left behind his wife and 4 major children. He was a

Page 25 of 28

Manager with a Private Firm 'M/s. Jindal Electricals'. On the
basis of evidence led, learned Tribunal has determined the
annual income of the deceased on mean average basis as
Rs.72,000/-. Appropriating 1/3rd as the personal expenses of
the deceased loss to the family has to determine as
Rs.48,000/-. Multiplier adopted is 11. Thus, pecuniary loss
determined is Rs.5,28,000/-. Rs.10,000/- has been awarded
towards funeral expenses.

Rs.25,000/- has been awarded

towards loss of consortium to the wife.

Rs.1,00,000/- has

been awarded towards loss of love and affection to the 4
children. Thus, total compensation awarded is Rs.6,63,000/-.
50.

Laying

a

challenge

to

the

compensation

determined vide MAC.APP.No.980/2006, learned counsel for
the appellant restricted challenge only on the issue of
multiplier adopted.

Conceding that evidence on record

justify mean average income of the deceased being
determined at Rs.72,000/- per annum, Sh. A.K.De, learned
counsel for the appellant urged that since the deceased was
aged 52 years, multiplier to be adopted ought to be 8 and
not 11.
51.

For the reasons noted hereinabove while dealing

with the compensation payable to the dependents of

Page 26 of 28

Praveen Kumar Gupta, multiplier to be adopted while
determining pecuniary loss to the dependents of Rajender
Jindal has to be 8.5.
52.

I note that the deceased was maintaining besides

self, his wife and four children. However, since three children
of the deceased were major as on the date of the accident, I
consider deduction of 1/3rd towards the personal expenses of
the deceased as appropriate.
53.

Treating mean average income of the deceased

as Rs.72,000/- per annum and deducting 1/3rd towards
personal expenses of the deceased, loss of dependence
comes to Rs.48,000/- per annum. Applying multiplier of 8.5,
total loss of dependence comes to Rs.4,08,000/-.
54.

Maintaining the other compensation awarded by

the Tribunal, total compensation payable to the dependents
of the deceased Rajender Jindal comes to Rs.5,43,000/-.
Thus, MAC. APP. No.980/2006 which pertains to death of
Rajender

Jindal

stands

disposed

of

by

reducing

the

compensation by sum of Rs.1,20,000/-. Other terms of the
award are retained.
55.

MAC.APP.No.980/2006 is accordingly allowed in

terms of para 54 above .

Page 27 of 28

56.

Pertaining to the personal injuries suffered by

Ankit Gupta, award whereto is a subject matter of challenge
in MAC.APP.No.985/2006, I note that total compensation
awarded to him is Rs.1,05,000/-. The break-up is as under:A.

Medical Expenses ........

Rs.35,000/-

B.

Pain and suffering ........

Rs.35,000/-

C.

Loss of amenities ........

Rs.20,000/-

D.

Conveyance charges ......

Rs.10,000/-

52.

A mild attempt was made at the hearing that non

pecuniary loss awarded was excessive. I do not think so for
the reason as a result of the accident, Ankit suffered multiple
injuries on the face. The jaw was fractured. 8 teeth were
broken.

He remained hospitalized from 12.2.2004 to

16.2.2004.

Taking

into

account

the

permanent

disfigurement of the face, non pecuniary damages awarded
are not excessive.
53.

MAC.APP.No.985/2006 is dismissed.

May 31, 2007
mm

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

Page 28 of 28

