IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
F.A.O. No.361/1996
#
!

Shri Ganpat Nath
(since deceased through LRs) & Ors.
.....Appellants
through:
Mr.V.B.Andley, Senior Advocate
with Mr.Rajinder Mathur
and Ms.Lakshita Sethi.
VERSUS

$
^

Smt. Parsandi Devi & Ors.
through:

........ Respondents
Mr.K.K.Bhuchar.

RESERVED ON: 23.01.2008
%

DATE OF DECISION: 31.01.2008
CORAM:

*

Hon'ble Mr.Justice Pradeep Nandrajog

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.

1.

The parties come from a rural background and

hence their conduct, behaviour and understanding of the ways
of the law would be appreciated by me in relation to the ways
of the world in rural India.
2.

With the aforesaid preface, relevant facts needed

to be set out for adjudication of the instant appeal may be
noted.
3.

Parsandi Devi and Inderjeet filed a suit seeking a

decree of declaration that they are the owners of House
FAO No.361/96

Page No.1 of 6

No.431, Chirag Delhi.

They sought a decree for mandatory

injunction against MCD to mutate their names as owners
thereof and to delete the name of Ganpat Nath recorded by
the MCD as the owner of the house.
4.

MCD was impleaded as defendant No.1.

Ganpat

Jogi S/o Jhuttar was impleaded as defendant No.2.
5.

The relief claimed affected defendant No.2.

He

was proceeded against ex-parte in the suit after being
ostensibly served by substituted means.

Fortunately for

Ganpat Jogi the suit suffered a dismissal on merits. Parsandi
Devi and Inderjeet filed an appeal. Notice in the appeal was
taken out for service of the respondents i.e. MCD impleaded
as respondent No.1 and Ganpat Jogi S/o Jhuttar impleaded as
respondent No.1. The summons taken out by registered A.D.
post as well as through the process server were returned with
the endorsement by the process server that he tendered the
summons to Ganpat Jogi S/o Jhuttar who refused to accept the
same informing that his name was Ganpat Nath and that his
father's name was not Jhuttar but was Gulab Nath.

Similar

was the report of the postal authorities.
6.

On 4.5.1981, learned Appellate Court directed

service to be effected by beat of drums. Accepting the report
of the process server who effected service by beat of drums,
respondent No.2 i.e. Ganpat Jogi S/o Jhuttar was proceeded
against ex-parte. Appeal succeeded. Decision of the learned

FAO No.361/96

Page No.2 of 6

Trial Judge was reversed. Suit was decreed.
7.

On 30.8.1984 an application under Order 41 Rule

21 CPC was filed by Ganpat Nath S/o Gulab Nath (appellant in
the instant appeal) stating that he was not served with
summons in the suit nor was he served with summons in the
appeal. He stated that the stated defendant Ganpat Jogi S/o
Jhuttar was his mis-description for the reason he was adopted
by Gulab Nath and hence on adoption he was known as
Ganpat Nath S/o Gulab Nath.
8.

The learned Appellate Judge decided the said

application vide impugned order dated 16.10.1996.

Noting

the report of the process server and the fact that the record of
the nazarat branch showed that the appellants/respondents
had deposited necessary charges for summons to be served
by beat of drums and that the process server had withdrawn
the said sum, notwithstanding formal proof of proclamation by
beat of drums not forthcoming on record, it was held that
there was enough evidence to sustain service upon the
applicant i.e. Ganpat Nath by beat of drums.
9.

Learned Appellate Court therefore dismissed the

application filed by Ganpat Nath S/o Gulab Nath and refused
to recall the ex-parte judgment and decree allowing the
appeal.
10.

During arguments in the instant appeal I asked

learned counsel for the appellant as to why did Ganpat Nath

FAO No.361/96

Page No.3 of 6

not accepted the summons tendered to him for the reason he
knew that his natural father was Jhuttar and that his natural
father has named him Ganpat Jogi.

Learned counsel was

questioned that Ganpat Nath could have understood that the
summons tendered to him describing him as Ganpath Jogi S/o
Jhuttar were meant for him.
11.

The response was interesting.

12.

It was submitted by learned counsel for the

appellant that Ganpat Nath believed that if he accepted a
notice issued in the name of Ganpat Jogi S/o Jhuttar it would
have meant that he had accepted that he was Ganpat Jogi S/o
Jhuttar and not Ganpat Nath S/o Gulab Nath. For said reason
he did not accept the summons.
13.

I asked learned counsel for the respondents as to

why his clients did not amend the memo of parties to show
that the defendant-respondent was Ganpat Jogi S/o Jhuttar
claiming himself to be Ganpat Nath S/o Gulab Nath. Learned
counsel for the respondent replied that if his clients had done
so, they believed that they would have accepted that Ganpat
Jogi S/o Jhuttar was Ganpath Nath S/o Gulab Nath.
14.

The relevance of the respective stand of the

parties would have affected the right of Ganpat Nath to claim
inheritance under Gulab Nath as he was, as per his claim, the
adopted son of Gulab Nath and on his death inherited the
properties of Gulab Nath.

FAO No.361/96

Page No.4 of 6

15.

I eschew reference to the testimony of AW-1, AW-2

and AW-3, the 3 witnesses of the appellant who deposed
before the Appellate Court when appellant's application under
Order 41 Rule 21 CPC was listed for recording evidence. I also
eschew reference to the adoption deed Ex.AW-2/1 as also
Ex.AW-2/2 being the mutation in favour of Ganpat Nath as son
of Gulab Nath. I also eschew reference to AW-2/3 being a title
document in favour of Ganpat Nath S/o Gulab Nath pertaining
to compensation of land belonging to Gulab Nath received by
Ganpat Nath.
16.

I eschew reference to the testimony of RW-1 and

RW-2 and the record pertaining to service by beat of drums
for the reason the parties stood by their rigid stand and
notwithstanding appellant knowing that in relation to a
property which was mutated in his name in the municipal
records a suit was filed, yet in spite thereof did not receive the
summons nor responded thereto because the summons were
issued in the name of Ganpat Jogi S/o Jhuttar and appellant
believed that if he responded to the said summons it would
mean that he accepted that he was not Ganpat Nath S/o
Gulab Nath but was Ganpat Jogi S/o Jhuttar.
17.

The

rural

background

of

the

appellant

has

obviously resulted in his innocent understanding of the ways
of the world. His conduct, when appreciated with reference to
the conduct of a person from a rural background is not merit-

FAO No.361/96

Page No.5 of 6

less.
18.

Valuable rights of Ganpat Nath have got affected

by the impugned decision passed by the learned Appellate
Court. If for no other reason, impugned order has to be set
aside and appeal is required to be re-heard on merits, for the
reason, that valuable rights of Ganpat Nath would be lost in
absence of any meaningful representation by him.
19.

For the reasons stated herein above I hold that

Ganpat Jogi S/o Jhuttar claiming himself to be Ganpat Nath S/o
Gulab Nath had sufficient cause for not appearing when the
appeal was listed for hearing and hence would be entitled to
have the appeal re-heard and disposed of on merits.
20.

The appeal is allowed. Order dated 16.10.1996 is

set aside. Application filed by the appellant under Order 41
Rule 21 CPC is allowed.
21.

Parties shall appear before the learned Appellate

Judge on 24.3.2008 when appeal would be formally listed for
re-hearing.
22.

LCR be returned forthwith.

23.

No costs.

January 31, 2008
d.k.bainsla

FAO No.361/96

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
JUDGE

Page No.6 of 6

