*

REPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) 158/2008
KAMALA CONSTRUCTION COMPANY
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. G.C. Rawal, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Kuljeet Rawal, Adv.
Versus

NATIONAL HIGHWAY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Rajeshwar Kumar Gupta, Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

%

JUDGMENT
01.04.2008

:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 26th March,

2008 passed by the learned Single Judge disposing of the application of the
plaintiff under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure being IA
No.5493/2004 holding that the said application has no merit and consequently
the same was dismissed.
2.

The appellant herein has filed a suit for injunction and declaration that

FAO(OS) 158/2008

Page 1 of 6

the respondent-defendant be restrained from encashing the bank guarantee/bid
security furnished by the appellant and a declaration that the attempt to forfeit
the bid security as a consequence of the withdrawal of awarded contract was
void and illegal. While issuing summons in the aforesaid suit, the learned
Single Judge also passed an order of ex parte interim injunction restraining the
defendant from encashing the bank guarantee furnished by the appellant. We
agree by the said order passed in the application under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2
CPC which is registered as IA No.6976/2005. In the impugned order, the said
application of the appellant filed and registered as IA No.5493/2005 which was
the application under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 and the application of the respondent
which is IA No.6976/2005 were disposed of in the aforesaid manner. The
learned Single Judge in the impugned order considered the issues raised by the
appellant for making absolute the interim injunction which was passed and on a
consideration thereof, recorded that the General Manager of the respondentNational Highway Authority of India Limited, had the power and jurisdiction to
invoke the said bank guarantee and therefore contentions raised were without
merit. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant is being aggrieved by
the aforesaid findings recorded by the learned Single Judge.
3.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties. The contention that is

raised before us is that the General Manager could not have invoked the bank
guarantee as he was not authorised to do so and being not an employer as also
envisaged in para 71 Clause 1.1 of the bank guarantee of the bid document. It
FAO(OS) 158/2008

Page 2 of 6

is also stated that bank guarantee is not being invoked in terms of the bank
guarantee agreement and in support of the aforesaid contention, counsel
appearing for the appellant has relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in
Hindustan Construction Company Limited Vs. State of Bihar & Ors.
Reported at AIR 1999 SC 3710. It is also submitted by counsel appearing for
the appellant that if the injunction is not granted in favour of the appellant, the
suit itself would become infructuous and therefore, according to him, the
impugned order is required to be set aside and quashed.
4.

We have considered the aforesaid submission in the light of the records.

The similar contentions were also raised before the learned Single Judge who
has considered the said contention in depth in paragraph 10. He has also
considered the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in Hindustan
Construction Company Limited (Supra) and has held that the said decision is
not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case because in the said
case, it was apparent that the said bank guarantee could be invoked by the
Chairman and not by the Chief Manager and none else. Where the bank
guarantee was issued in favour of the National Highway Authority of India, it
could be invoked by successor or assignee. The learned Single Judge has given
cogent decision for conclusion arrived at which would be found to be very
reasonable.

The documents on record would also indicate that the bid

documents were invited by the General Manager. The notice inviting tender is
part of the record. It was issued by Mr. Ajit Kumar, General Manager. In
FAO(OS) 158/2008

Page 3 of 6

paragraph 3 of the same, it was stated that the bidder may obtain further
information in support at the office of the National Highway Authority of India
from Mr. Ajit Kumar, General manager. In paragraph 6 of the notice, it was
also mentioned that all bids must be delivered to Mr. Ajit Kumar, General
Manager, National Highway Authority of India. The bank guarantee was also
executed in favour of the National Highway Authority and not in the name of
Chairman who is stated to be employer as defined. The letter dated 28 th April,
2005 i.e. the letter of acceptance of the tender of the appellant, was also signed
by the said general manager who invoked the bank guarantee. There is a
statement on record and the material to show that the General Manager was
authorised to award the contract and he was also authorised to invoke the bank
guarantee. It is established from the various documents placed on record that
there was correspondence between the appellant and the National Highway
Authorities which was either addressed to the General Manager or signed by
him. Therefore, the learned Single Judge was justified in holding that it is
incorrect to submit that the bank guarantee could be invoked by the Chairman
of the National Highway Authority of India and none else. So far as the
decision of the defendant-construction company is concerned, the same is
rendered in the light of the facts which are clearly distinguishable. In the said
case, it was the Chief Engineer who invoked the bank guarantee in terms of the
clause itself.
In that view of the matter, we may also refer to the findings of the
FAO(OS) 158/2008

Page 4 of 6

learned Supreme Court recorded in paragraph 20 of the same judgment wherein
it is clearly held by the Supreme Court that since the bank guarantee was
furnished in the said case in the favour of the Chief Engineer, there is no
definition of the Chief Engineer, in the guarantee and it was provided that the
Chief Engineer was included as General Manager. Accordingly, the invocation
was thus wholly wrong and bank is under no obligation to perform the same. In
the present case, the bank guarantee was addressed to the National Highway
Authority of India.

It is also very clear from the record that all the

correspondence and all steps in the matter were being taken by the General
Manager. Therefore, even the letter dated 28th April, 2005 which is the letter of
acceptance of the tender of the appellant, was written by the General Manager
and therefore the General Manager appears to be wholly competent to accept
and also to invoke the bank guarantee.
In that view of the matter, prima facie findings recorded by the learned
Single Judge for temporary injunction cannot be said to be infructuous because
temporary injunction was not granted in favour of the appellant. If later on, it
is found that invocation is without jurisdiction, the amount can be recovered by
the appellant if the suit is decided in its favour. So far as the definition of
employer which is strictly relied upon by the counsel for the appellant, is
concerned, the same includes not the Chairman but also includes his successors,
assignees and that the General Manager has been given the authority and has
been, therefore, brought within the aforesaid expression.
FAO(OS) 158/2008

Page 5 of 6

In this view of the matter, we find no merit in the appeal which is hereby
dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
April 01, 2008
aa

FAO(OS) 158/2008

Page 6 of 6

