*

REPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
RESERVED ON :
December 07, 2007
DATE OF DECISION : April 1, 2008

+

W.P.(Crl.) 793/2007 and Crl. M.A. No.6724/2007
SHEELA

..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. M.K. Singh, Advocate

versus

STATE NCT OF DELHI & ANR.
..... Respondents
Through: Ms. Mukta Gupta, Standing Counsel for the
State.
Mr. J.N. Verma, Advocate for R-2
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.

1.

In this writ petition, the petitioner prays for the issuance of a writ of habeas

corpus directing the respondent No.2 to produce the son of the petitioner, Rohit,
aged about four years and to hand over the custody of the said child to the
petitioner. A writ of mandamus or any other writ or direction to the respondent
No.1 to register an FIR against the respondent No.2 is also prayed for.
2.

On issuance of notice to the respondents, the respondent No.2–husband
W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 1 of 9

appeared in person and by an order dated August 21, 2007 was directed to hand
over the custody of the child to the petitioner–mother in the Court. The petitioner
was, however, directed to bring the child on the following day to the Court, that
is, on 22nd August, 2007. On the said date, an order was passed by a Division
Bench of this Court, which reads as under:
“Husband of the petitioner is present in the Court and
he undertakes to take his wife and son to his place of work
from Delhi. They shall live together as husband and wife and
report to this Court on the next date.
The father of the petitioner Sh. Roop Singh Sajwan and
father of respondent no.2 shall give their undertakings of the
good conduct and behaviour of the petitioner and respondent
no.2. They shall also state in the said undertakings that they
will not in any manner ill treat the wife Smt. Sheela and Master
Rohit. The father of Smt. Sheela shall also give an undertaking
ensuring good behaviour and conduct of his daughter, which
shall be kept on record.
List on 28th November, 2007, when Smt. Sheela, her
husband along with her child shall be present in the Court.”

3.

Pursuant to the aforesaid order, undertakings were furnished by the parties,

i.e., the petitioner, the respondent No.2, the father of the petitioner, Shri Roop
Singh Sajwan, and the father of the respondent No.2, Shri Anand Singh Rawat, in
terms of the aforesaid order. The custody of the child was consequently allowed
to remain with the petitioner–mother for the time being. In order to ensure
compliance with the order, the case was adjourned to 28th November, 2007 when
the petitioner, the respondent No.2 and the child were directed to be present in
Court.

W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 2 of 9

4.

On 28.11.2007, this Court was informed by Ms. Mukta Gupta, the Standing

Counsel for the State that the petitioner, who had undertaken to go to the place of
work of the respondent–husband from Delhi, did not comply, though the
respondent–husband showed his willingness and even rented an independent
accommodation for the purpose of residing together with the petitioner and his
child. In view of the aforesaid statement made by the counsel for the State, she
was directed to file a comprehensive report and it was ordered that till then, the
child shall remain with the respondent No.2–husband. The custody of the child
was accordingly restored to the husband. The following order was passed by this
Court and the matter was adjourned to 7th December, 2007 to enable the parties to
comply with the order:
“On 21st August, 2007, the custody of the child was
handed over to the petitioner-mother on the ground that she
undertook to go to the place of work of the respondent-husband
from Delhi. The counsel appearing for the State informs us
that the petitioner did not do so though the respondent showed
his willingness and had in fact, rented an independent
accommodation.
Counsel for the State is directed to file a comprehensive
status report bringing the up-to-date development of the case
on record before the next date of hearing. Till then, the child
shall remain with the husband who will ensure the presence of
the child on the next date of hearing and the child shall be
handed over to the husband by the petitioner in the chamber of
Ms. Mukta Gupta, counsel for the State.
List on 7th December, 2007.”
5.

A detailed status report came to be filed by the State Counsel, which

happens to be the last in a series of three status reports filed by the respondent

W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 3 of 9

No.1–State. A conjoint reading of the aforesaid status reports shows that the
present writ petition has emanated from a marriage gone sour between the
petitioner and the respondent No.2.

The conjugal knot which was tied on

11.10.2002, according to the petitioner was strained by demands for dowry and by
the mental torture inflicted upon her by her husband and in-laws; whereas
according to the respondent No.2, the marital ties were strained by the
intervention of a third person by the name of Mr. Dheeraj Singh Sharma, who has
a magnetic effect upon the petitioner. Be that as it may, a spate of complaints
came to be filed by the petitioner against the respondent No.2 and his family
members, the first being an FIR bearing registration No.248/2007 dated 31st
March, 2007 under Sections 498A/406/34 IPC.
6.

It is further set out in the status report that while investigation was still in

progress in the said FIR, a second complaint was received from the petitioner to
the effect that she had been receiving threat calls, and at the instance of the
petitioner the relevant section being Section 506 IPC was added to the case, after
completing the formality of recording her statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
The petitioner had alleged in the aforesaid complaint that she had received threat
calls from three mobile Nos. – 9719807942, 9971919438 and 9412994813.
However, the investigating agency found that no phone calls were received on the
cell-phone of the petitioner from the said three mobile numbers though on
examining the caller ID attached to the petitioner's landline phone, it was found

W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 4 of 9

that some calls had been received from the above mentioned

three mobile

numbers. As per the petitioner, the said mobile phones belong to her husband,
which matter is stated to be still under investigation. The petitioner had also
alleged in her complaint that she was forcibly aborted, without her consent, at the
E.S.I. Hospital, but on enquiry being made from the said hospital, it was revealed
that the MTP of the petitioner was carried out with the written consent of the
petitioner submitted to the doctor by the petitioner herself.
7.

In the meanwhile, the present petition came to be filed by the petitioner

praying for the production and custody of her son. When the matter was listed
before the Court on 21st August, 2007, the petitioner appeared before the Court
and alleged that the respondent No.2 had beaten her. An enquiry was directed to
be made by the Court into the matter and in compliance with the aforesaid order,
the petitioner was medically examined vide MLC No.19711. The statement of the
petitioner was also recorded, wherein she stated that she was beaten with fists and
legs by her husband and her brother-in-law at night, and that her husband had had
physical relations with her against her will. Investigations conducted by the
police and the recording of the statements of the witnesses including the
neighbours, however, led the investigating agency to assert in the status report
that no such incident of quarrelling had taken place and according the MLC also,
only one minor abrasion was found on the hand of the petitioner, which was
opined by the doctor to be a simple blunt injury.

W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 5 of 9

8.

A reading of the order passed on the following day, that is, on 22 nd August,

2007, reproduced hereinabove, shows that on the said date both the parties stated
before the Court that they had decided to live together and that the husband of the
petitioner had undertaken to take the petitioner and his son to his place of work
from Delhi. As set out in the said order also, both the parties were directed to file
affidavits and undertakings in order to ensure maintenance of good behaviour and
the same were filed by them.

According to the status report, however, the

petitioner did not rejoin her husband, and on 01.11.2007, a PCR call vide DD
No.18A was received at Police Station Moti Nagar regarding a quarrel, which was
entrusted to Head Constable Dev Dutt, who reached the spot and found the
respondent No.2 present at the parental home of the petitioner, who stated that in
pursuance of the undertaking given to this Court, he had come to his in-laws'
house to take his wife and child with him, but his wife had refused to go with him
and her father was also refusing to send her. The petitioner, who was also
present, categorically refused to go with the respondent No.2 and stated that she
would appear before this Court on 28.11.2007. Since the investigating agency
found that no incident of fighting or quarrelling had taken place, the matter was
dropped.
9.

Counsel for both the parties have been heard by us at some length in the

presence of the parties. It is apparent from the record that considerable efforts
have been made by the Court to sort out the matter. It is also clear from the record

W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 6 of 9

that the efforts proved altogether futile in view of the rather adamant stand
adopted by the petitioner. The petitioner to us appears to be interested only in
instituting and prosecuting complaint after complaint against the respondent
No.2–husband for reasons best known to her, and seems not at all interested in
resuming cohabitation with him. The present writ petition also appears to us to
have been filed by the petitioner against the respondent No.2 as a devious device
to get the custody of the child from the respondent No.2–father, in which she
appears to have been successful for a short spell of time. A facade was no doubt
put up by her before the Court of willingness to live with the petitioner, which,
however, could not be kept up for long. There can be no manner of doubt that the
marriage has gone awry and is on the rocks. The respondent No.2 expressed his
willingness before this Court to live with the petitioner and even went to the
extent of obtaining rented accommodation for the aforesaid purpose, but the
petitioner appears to be totally averse to residing with the respondent No.2, and all
efforts made by him to live together with her have been rebuffed by her by
levelling every conceivable and uncalled for allegation against him.

The

petitioner, in fact, seems to us to be in the habit of levelling baseless allegations
against the respondent, merely with a view to harass him. She cannot be allowed
to take advantage of her own wrongful conduct for obtaining the custody of the
child. Even otherwise, the custody of the child, in our view, must be given to the
parent capable of ensuring the welfare of the child and it is not for this Court in

W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 7 of 9

writ proceedings to determine where the welfare of the child lies.

This is

essentially a matter of evidence and in the domain of the Guardian Court. We,
therefore, see no conceivable reason to trespass or stray into the said domain by
issuing a writ of habeas corpus in favour of the petitioner for handing over the
custody of the child to the petitioner, which is presently with the respondent No.2.
A three-Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dr.(Mrs.)
Veena Kapoor Vs. Shri Varinder Kumar Kapoor (1981) 3 Supreme Court Cases
92 has observed as under:“2. It is well settled that in matters concerning the custody of
minor children, the paramount consideration is the welfare of the
minor and not the legal right of this or that particular party. The
High Court, without adverting to this aspect of the matter, has
dismissed the petition on the narrow ground that the custody of
child with the respondent cannot be said to be illegal
3. It is difficult for us in this habeas corpus petition to take
evidence without which the question as to what is in the interest of
the child cannot satisfactorily be determined. ..................”

10.

The ratio laid down in the case of Veena Kapoor (supra) has also been

reiterated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Rajesh K.Gupta Vs. Ram
Gopal Agarwala and Others (2005) 5 Supreme court Cases 359 which is read as
follows:.
“7. It is well settled that in an application seeking a writ of
habeas corpus for custody of a minor child, the principal
consideration for the court is to ascertain whether the custody
of the child can be said to be lawful or illegal and whether the
welfare of the child requires that the present custody should
be changed and the child should be left in the care and
custody of someone else. It is equally well settled that in case

W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 8 of 9

of dispute between the mother and father regarding the
custody of their child, the paramount consideration is welfare
of the child and not the legal right of either of the parties. [See
Veena Kapoor (Dr.) Vs. Varinder Kumar Kapoor and Syed
Salemuddin v. Dr. Rukshana.]. It is, therefore, to be examined
what is in the best interest of the child Rose Mala and whether
her welfare would be better looked after if she is given in the
custody of the appellant, who is her father”.
11.

We, therefore, leave the parties to battle out the custody of the child in

appropriate proceedings before the appropriate fora.

The writ petition is

accordingly dismissed as being without merit, leaving the parties to bear their own
costs. Crl. M.A. No.6724/2007 also stands disposed of accordingly.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

MUKUL MUDGAL, J.
APRIL 1, 2008
km

W.P.(Crl.) No.793/2007

Page 9 of 9

