*

REPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 48/2008
Date of Decision: 1st February, 2008

%

DINESH LALWANI

..... Appellant

Through: Mr. Sunil Lalwani, Advocate
versus
D.S.I.D.C.

..... Respondent

Through: Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
JUDGMENT
01.02.2008

%
:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

CM No.1556/2008
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties on this application
seeking for condonation of delay. For the reasons stated in the application, the
application is allowed and the delay is condoned.
Application stands disposed of accordingly.
LPA 48/2008
1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed by the

learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant, wherein
the appellant prayed for a direction that the allotment of the industrial plot by the

LPA 48/2008

Page 1 of 4

respondent-D.S.I.D.C should be restored in favour of the appellant and possession
be handed over to him.
2.

The appellant was an applicant in a Scheme for Relocation of Industries

formulated by the respondent Corporation for allotment of an alternative industrial
plot. The appellant was a successful applicant. An allotment letter was issued to
him, which was subsequently revised under letter dated 23.10.2000. The said
letter was on the subject of allotment of industrial plot under the Relocation
Scheme.

The appellant was intimated that his application for allotment of

industrial plot for shifting from his existing industrial area is accepted and that a
decision has been taken to allot him a plot as per his entitlement in the Bawana
Industrial Area.

The appellant was directed to deposit 50% of the revised

estimated cost of the plot, which was at Rs.4,200/- per sq. mtr. within three
months. Taking a stand that the appellant had failed to abide by the directions, his
allotment was cancelled by the respondent-D.S.I.D.C..
3.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid action on the part of the appellant, the

aforesaid writ petition was filed in this Court, which was considered by the
learned Single Judge and by the impugned judgment and order the same was
dismissed. The findings and conclusions arrived at by the learned Single Judge
are under challenge in this appeal, on which we have heard the learned counsel
appearing for the parties. It is submitted by the appellant that the appellant has
already deposited 50% of the amount, which is lying deposited with the
respondent. However, no such plea appears to have been taken by the appellant
before the respondent. In fact, the learned Single Judge has examined the records
and on appreciation thereof has held that the appellant did not even pay 50% of
the value of the plot, which he was required to deposit in terms of the allotment

LPA 48/2008

Page 2 of 4

letter. There was an order by the Supreme Court also in which direction was
issued that all allottees who were to pay 50% of the amount should be allowed to
deposit the said amount by a particular date, i.e., July 31, 2004 and if the amount
is not paid, the said allotment should be cancelled. Pursuant to aforesaid order of
the Supreme Court, a wide publication of the said order was given in which it was
mentioned that a number of applicants who were not eligible for allotment of plots
under the Relocation Scheme were visiting the office for getting clarification, and
in that view of the matter the clarification was being issued through the public
notice published in the newspapers that certain categories of units were not
eligible under the Scheme as per the Supreme Court directions, inter alia, being
those applicants who had been allotted plots in the year 2000 but had deposited
less than 50% of the cost up to 31st March, 2001 and had been allowed payment of
50% up to 31st July, 2004. Despite the aforesaid publication, 50% of the amount
in terms of the allotment letter was not deposited by the appellant and, therefore,
his allotment came to be cancelled by the respondent. The public notice was
issued by the D.S.I.D.C. on 26.01.2001, which also refers to the aforesaid order of
the Supreme Court passed on 24.01.2000. Although the aforesaid orders were
passed on 24.01.2000 and the public notice was issued on 26.01.2001, no writ
petition was filed for long three years by the appellant and only thereafter, the
aforesaid writ petition was filed on 02.09.2004. Since the appellant did not
deposit the required amount of 50% in terms of the stipulation in the letter dated
23.10.2000 and also in terms of the public notice issued on 26.01.2001, therefore,
the learned Single Judge held that no equity could be shown to the appellant and
the writ petition cannot be entertained and must accordingly be dismissed.
4.

We find that the reasons given by the learned Single Judge are cogent and

LPA 48/2008

Page 3 of 4

justified. If the mandate of the allotment letter is not followed and also the
stipulations in the public notice are not adhered to, there was no other alternative
for the respondent-D.S.I.D.C. but to cancel the allotment of plot. We find no error
in the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
5.

At one stage, counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that there is

discrimination on the face of the records. We are, however, unable to accept the
aforesaid contention in view of the fact that such contentions raised were also
dealt with by the learned Single Judge and were rejected by the learned Single
Judge by giving reasons.

The said reasons were also cogent reasons and,

therefore, we are not impressed by the submissions of the counsel for the
appellant.
6.

The appeal has no merits and is accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 01, 2008
km

LPA 48/2008

Page 4 of 4

