*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

REPORTED

RESERVED ON :
March 20, 2008
DATE OF DECISION : April 2, 2008
+

LPA No. 665/2003 and CM Nos.4204/2004 & 6054/2007
JAGMAL (DECEASED) THR. LRs

..... Appellant

Through: Mr. R.L. Kohli, Advocate
versus
MCD

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. O.P. Saxena, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.

1.

The challenge raised in this Letters Patent Appeal is to the

judgment and decree of the learned Single Judge dated
21.05.2003, passed in a suit for possession and mesne profits filed by
the predecessors-in-interest of the appellants, plaintiffs in the suit,
mainly on the basis of possession under Section 6 of the Specific
Relief Act.
2.

The essential facts may be briefly delineated first.

3.

It is the case of the appellants-plaintiffs in the suit that since

1989, their predecessor-in-interest, one Shri Jagmal Singh who died
during the pendency of the suit and prior to him, Shri Nathu Mal (his
father), since 1977, owned and possessed the land comprised in

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.1 of 14

Khasra No.383 Village Tihar, New Delhi, measuring 4 bighas 9 biswas.
Nathu Mal died on 5.02.1989 and thereafter Jagmal Singh
continued to hold, own and possess the aforesaid land though a
part of it was taken in the abadi and for road widening and thus the
open land that remained with him was about 2 bighas. The land
adjacent to the land of the plaintiff comprised in Khasra No.1573
was in the possession of the Municipal Corporation and the
Municipal Corporation had some Municipal Stores there. One Chet
Ram filed a suit for recovery of possession against the M.C.D. in
regard to this land which had been allegedly encroached upon by
the M.C.D. and secured a decree for possession. When the said
decree was got executed against the M.C.D., and the M.C.D. was
dispossessed, the M.C.D. on 4.4.1993 encroached upon and took
illegal possession of the plaintiff's land i.e., the suit land. Thereupon,
the plaintiff sent a legal notice dated 28.4.1993 by registered A.D.
Post to the defendant-M.CD. Despite the aforesaid legal notice, the
M.C.D. did not remove itself from the suit land and instead, raised
unauthorised construction thereon.

The plaintiff accordingly on

expiry of the period of notice of two months was constrained to file
a suit for possession and mesne profits within six months of the date
of dispossession i.e., 4.4.1993 under Section 6 of the Specific Relief
Act, from which the present appeal arises.
4.

The defendant, who is the respondent in the present appeal,

sought to contest the suit and apart from raising legal pleas under
Sections 477 and 478 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act and

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.2 of 14

Section 10 of the C.P.C., asserted that the land in question
belonged to and vested in the defendant-Corporation and that the
Corporation was in actual physical possession thereof for the last 20
years without any interruption or hindrance. Significantly also, the
defendant alleged that the plaintiff was guilty of suppressing the
material fact that he had filed an earlier suit which was pending in
the Court of the Civil Judge at the time of institution of the present
suit.
5.

The appellant-plaintiff, in replication, while reiterating his prior

possession over the suit land, categorically admitted having filed an
earlier suit in the Court of the Civil Judge, but stated that it was
proposed to file a transfer application to enable both the suits to be
tried together by this Court. Such a transfer application was never
filed nor the outcome of the said suit is known.
6.

On the basis of the claims and counter-claims of the parties,

the learned Single Judge on 21.3.1996 framed the following issues
for determination:
“1.

Whether the suit of the plaintiff is barred under Sections
477-478B M.C.D. Act? OPD.

2.

Whether the suit is barred under Section 10 CPC? OPD.

3.

Whether the defendant has any right to possess the suit
land? OPD.

4.

Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of possession
as alleged? OPP.

5.

To what mesne profits is the plaintiff entitled and from
what date and at what rate? OPD.

6.

What directions are necessary in terms of Order 20 Rule
12 CPC?

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.3 of 14

7.
7.

Relief.”

The learned Single Judge while deciding issues No.1 and 2 in

favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant-respondent,
disposed of issues No.3 to 6 together, decreeing the suit in respect
of only 350 sq.yds. of the suit land on the ground that the plaintiff
had not been able to prove his possessory title in respect of the
remaining 500 sq.yds. On the same reasoning, it was held that the
question of granting mesne profits to the plaintiff, therefore, did not
arise.
8.

The findings of the learned Single Judge as reflected in paras

18-23 of the judgment reads as follows:
“18. Plaintiff has claimed his prior possession over the
suit land mainly on the ground that father of the
deceased plaintiff was in possession of suit land for the
last 50 years and in suport of this, khasra girdwari
Exhibits P-6, P-7, P-8 and P-9 have been filed showing
possession in the name of Mr. Nathu father of the
deceased-plaintiff

from

5.10.1977

to

1989

and

thereafter in the name of deceased plaintiff from 1991
to October, 1998.
19.

However, the instant suit was filed in 1993. It is

contended that entries in khasra girdwari continue
unless these are sought to be changed by the person
concerned.
20.

In support of defendant's claim, Mr. R.D. Jolly,

learned counsel for the defendant has filed site plan as
well as certificate of SDM. The certificate of the SDM
states that suit land is an evacuee property and stands
in the name of Yaseen etc. and the site plan also shows

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.4 of 14

that private houses have been built on the suit
property. However, this report was filed by the SDM at
belated state and after several directions.

However,

the `khasra girdwari' filed by the plaintiff shows Yaseen
and others as the owner of the suit property and the
plaintiff as cultivator with rent.
21.

It is contended by learned counsel for the plaintiff

that suit land is vacant over which no property has
been except some constructions by defendant-MCD.
It comprises of 17 biswas which is equivalent to 850
sq.yds. This claim of the plaintiff particularly in view of
khasra girdwari produced by him as well as report of
the SDM is not sustainable as it is difficult to imagine
that land measuring 850 sq.yds. will remain in vacant
possession of the plaintiff for 50 long years without
raising any construction. Report of the SDM appears to
be correct.
22.

The Assistant Engineer and other officers of MCD

are present and state that MCD is in possession of 500
sq.yds over which they have raised some constructions.
This fact itself shows that plaintiff has been in possession
of remaining land measuring 350 sq.yds. right from the
days of his father. Had the MCD been in possession of
entire chunk of land for the last 20 years it would have
used the entire land without leaving the possession of
the plaintiff over 350 sq.yds. vacant land.
23.

In the result, suit is decreed in respect of 350

sq.yds. as the remaining land can be held to be in
possession of MCD.

Since defendant has not been in

possession of entire 850 sq.yds. and the plaintiff has not
been able to prove his possessory title in respect of
remaining 500 sq.yds., the question of granting mesne
profits does not arise.

Decree Sheet be drawn

accordingly.”
LPA No.665/2003

Page No.5 of 14

9.

We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant as well

as the learned counsel for the respondent-Corporation at length.
The suit records were also called for and we have gone through the
same meticulously. Before, however, we embark upon a discussion
of the merits and demerits of the appellants' case, it is worth
mentioning that the present appeal was initially filed as a Regular
First Appeal, but in view of the provisions of Section 6(3) of the
Specific Relief Act, it was directed by a Bench of this Court to
convert the same into a Letters Patent Appeal in view of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Vinita M. Khanolkar Vs. Pragana
M. Pai AIR 1998 SC 424. In the said case, the Supreme Court held in
the context of Section 6(3) of the Specific Relief Act that any
statutory provision barring an appeal or revision cannot cut across
the constitutional power of a High Court unless the statutory
enactment concerned expressly excludes appeals under Letters
Patent. No such power is discernible from Section 6(3) of the Act.
10.

We accordingly proceed to dispose of the present appeal as

a Letters Patent Appeal by virtue of the constitutional powers vested
in us by Clause 10 of the Letters Patent. At the same time, we take
note of the decision of the Supreme Court in Ashok Nagar Welfare
Association and another Vs. R.K.Sharma & others reported in (2002)
1 SCC 749 and a decision of this Court in Arun Khanna Vs. Rajeev
Gupta 2006 (129) DLT 14 to which one of us, Hon'ble Justice Dr.
Mukundakam Sharma (as His Lordship then was) was a party. In the
first case, the Supreme Court ruled that no appeal shall lie from a

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.6 of 14

judgment and decree of a Court rendered under Section 6 of the
Specific Relief Act and that even the power of revision shall not be
exercised except in exceptional cases. The ratio of this decision
was referred to and relied upon by the Delhi High Court in the latter
case.
11.

In the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the

appellants placed implicit reliance upon the affidavits filed by way
of evidence of Smt. Rameshwari Devi, the wife of the plaintiff
Jagmal and two others to contend that from the unrebutted
evidence on record, it stands established that the plaintiff-Jagmal
was in possession of the suit property for the last many years.
Reliance was also placed by counsel on the Khasra girdwaris Ex P-6,
P-7, P-8 and P-9 showing the possession of Nathu, the father of the
deceased plaintiff from 1977 to 1989, and thereafter the possession
of the deceased plaintiff Jagmal from 1991 to October, 1998.
Counsel for the appellants accordingly urged that the learned
Single Judge erred in not decreeing the suit in its entirety.
12.

Learned counsel for the respondent-Corporation, on the other

hand, sought to support the judgment rendered by the learned
Single Judge by contending that the appellants had miserably
failed to prove prior possession of the suit land, inasmuch as the
appellants are not in possession of any documents in the form of
sale deed, title deed, lease deed, etc., to show that they had
purchased the suit land or that they were in possession thereof as
tenants,

licensees,

LPA No.665/2003

etc.

Counsel

submitted

that

the

only

Page No.7 of 14

documentary evidence relied upon by the appellants were the
Khasra girdwaris (Ex.P-6 to Ex.P-9) to establish their possession over
the suit land, but no reliance could be placed on the said Khasra
girdwaris in view of the fact that they had not been proved by the
plaintiffs-appellants in accordance with law.

So far as the oral

evidence was concerned, no doubt, the appellants had filed three
affidavits by way of evidence with a view to prove and establish
their prior possession over the suit land, but apart from the fact that
the said affidavits by way of evidence merely contained bald
assertions of prior possession of the suit land they did not in any
manner further the case of the appellants.
13.

A look now at the provisions of Section 6 of the Specific Relief

Act, which reads as under:
“6.

Suit

by

person

dispossessed

of

immovable

property.- (1) If any person is dispossessed without his
consent of immovable property otherwise than in due
course of law, he or any person claiming through him
may,

by

suit,

recover

possession

thereof,

notwithstanding any other title that may be set up in
such suit.
(2)

No suit under this section shall be brought-

(a)

after the expiry of six months from the date of

dispossession; or
(b)

against the Government.

(3)

No appeal shall lie from any order or decree

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.8 of 14

passed in any suit instituted under this section, nor shall
any review of any such order or decree be allowed.
(4)

Nothing in this section shall bar any person from

suing to establish his title to such property and to
recover possession thereof.”
14.

It is well established by a long series of decisions analysing and

interpreting the provisions of Section 6 of the Act and, indeed, it was
not disputed by the counsel for the parties to the present appeal
that though to maintain a suit for possession, title is irrelevant, it must
be proved and established beyond doubt that the plaintiff was in
prior possession of the suit property. It is also trite that such a suit is
maintainable against a third party and not a person who claims
himself to be the owner of the suit property. It was also not disputed
by the counsel for the parties that a suit under Section 6 of the Act,
if filed against the owner, the plaintiff must establish and prove a
better title than the owner. In the instant case, the contention of
the appellant is that the respondent, Municipal Corporation of
Delhi, is a third party, whereas the respondent asserts ownership and
actual physical ownership of the suit land for a period of twenty
years preceding the institution of the suit. Once the defendant, as
in the instant case, claims ownership of the suit property, the plaintiff
has to establish a better title or fail (See Nair Service Society Ltd. Vs.
K.C. Alexander and others AIR 1968 SC 1165).
15.

On a conspectus of all the facts and circumstances of the

instant case, in our considered view, the claim of the respondent-

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.9 of 14

Corporation that it has been in ownership and possession of the suit
land appears to be tenable. We say so on the basis of the following
facts.
16.

Admittedly, the only documentary evidence placed on

record by the appellants to establish their possession over the suit
land are the Khasra girdwaris (Ex.P-6 to Ex.P-9). A bare look at the
said Khasra girdwaris is sufficient to show that the appellants are not
the owners of the suit land and, as a matter of fact, the Khasra
girdwaris filed by the appellants show one Yaseen and others as the
owners of the suit land and the plaintiff as the cultivator with rent.
The said Yaseen and his co-owners have not been impleaded as
parties in the suit by the plaintiffs-appellants. Their statements made
on oath would have gone a long way in enabling the plaintiffsappellants to prove on record that they were in actual physical
possession of the suit land. The best evidence has, therefore, been
suppressed for reasons best known to the appellants.
17.

Even otherwise, we are of the considered opinion that no

reliance can be placed on the aforesaid Khasra girdwaris for the
reason that though the Khasra girdwaris show the name of the
deceased plaintiff Jagmal as the cultivator from 1991 to October,
1998, the plaintiff Jagmal's own case is that the respondentCorporation had encroached upon his land on 4.4.1993. The instant
suit was also filed in the year 1993, meaning thereby that even after
the filing of the suit wherein the plaintiff alleged that he had been
dispossessed from the suit land, the plaintiff continued to be shown

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.10 of 14

in the Khasra girdwaris to be in possession of the suit land. Thus, it is
self-evident that the Khasra girdwaris do not reflect the true and
correct state of affairs. It is also trite that the entires in the Khasra
girdwaris are continued by the revenue authorities till they are
sought to be changed by the person or persons concerned. Such
an exercise not having been undertaken on the plaintiff being
dispossessed, assuming for the sake of argument that the plaintiff
was in possession, it would be highly unsafe to rely upon the
aforesaid Khasra girdwaris.
18.

There is yet another aspect of the matter which needs

consideration. The aforesaid Khasra girdwaris have been filed with
the affidavit of Smt. Rameshwari Devi, wife of plaintiff Jagmal.
Neither the Patwari, nor the Qanungo nor the Tehsildar have been
brought into the witness box to prove their authenticity. The Khasra
girdwaris, therefore, cannot be said to be proved by the plaintiff in
accordance with law and hence cannot be relied upon.
19.

Adverting

to

the

evidence

of

the

plaintiffs-appellants

witnesses, three affidavits have been placed on record being the
affidavit in evidence of the wife of the deceased plaintiff and the
affidavits of two other persons. The record, however, reveals that on
account of change in panel, which took place twice over in quick
succession, the suit was missed by the respondent-Corporation, and
the respondent was proceeded ex parte. The plaintiffs' witnesses
were, therefore, never subjected to cross-examination on the
aspect of prior possession. Ordinarily the evidence of the plaintiffs'

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.11 of 14

witnesses being unrebutted on the record, we would have been
inclined to place reliance upon the same, but for the fact that the
report of the Sub Divisional Magistrate, which affirms that the suit
land is an evacuee property standing in the name of Yaseen etc., is
accompanied with a site plan which shows that private houses
have been built on the suit property. The plaintiffs have nowhere
disputed the report of the S.D.M. and the site plan filed by him nor
the plaintiffs have staked their claim to the said private houses and,
on the contrary, the learned Single Judge has recorded the
statements made in Court by the Assistant Engineer and other
officers of the MCD, affirming that the MCD is in possession of 500
sq.yds. of the suit land over which they have raised the aforesaid
construction.

This shows that the plaintiffs were not in prior

possession of the suit land and, at any rate, the plaintiffs were not in
prior possession of the suit land to the extent of 500 sq.yds. on which
the MCD structures exist.

The learned Single Judge cannot,

therefore, be faulted for holding that the plaintiffs have not been
able to prove possessory title in respect of 500 sq.yds., out of the 850
sq.yds. comprising the suit property.

Even otherwise, as observed

by the learned Single Judge, it is unthinkable that the plaintiffs
would have remained in vacant possession of 850 sq.yds. of land for
a long span of 50 years without raising any construction thereupon.
This by itself lends credence to the report of the SDM and the
statements made by MCD officials that the respondent is in
possession of 500 sq.yds. only out of the 850 sq.yds. comprising the

LPA No.665/2003

Page No.12 of 14

suit land.
20.

We, therefore, find no merit in the present appeal which is

accordingly dismissed. Needless to state that it shall be open to the
plaintiffs to file a title suit or any other appropriate proceedings, if
not already filed, to stake their claim over the entire suit land and
the observations made in this judgment having been rendered in a
summary suit shall not be binding in the said suit or proceedings,
which shall be considered on its own merits.
21.

LPA No. 665/2003 and CM Nos.4204/2004 & 6054/2007 stand

disposed of with the aforesaid observations.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

APRIL 2, 2008
VK.

LPA No.665/2003

CHIEF JUSTICE

Page No.13 of 14

*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
RESERVED ON :
March 20, 2008
DATE OF DECISION : April 2, 2008

+

Cont.Cas.(C) No.1222-27/2005
SMT.RAMESHWARI DEVI & OTHERS

..... Appellants

Through: Mr. R.L. Kohli, Advocate
versus
MCD & OTHERS

..... Respondents
Through: Mr. O.P. Saxena, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.
In view of the reasons recorded in LPA 665/2003, this

contempt petition is dismissed accordingly.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

APRIL 2, 2008
VK.

LPA No.665/2003

CHIEF JUSTICE

Page No.14 of 14

