REPORTED
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
RESERVED ON :
February 11, 2008
DATE OF DECISION : April 4, 2008

+

LPA 1161/2007 and CM No.11148/2007
PRAGATI EDUCATIONAL AND WELFARE
SOCIETY

..... Appellant
Through: Ms. Richa Kapoor, Advocate
versus

DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

..... Respondent

Through: Ms. Sangeeta Chandra, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.

CM No.11149/2007
For the reasons set out in the application, delay of 35 days in
filing the appeal is condoned.
Application stands disposed of accordingly.
LPA 1161/2007 and CM No.11148/2007
1.

The challenge in the present appeal is to the judgment and

order dated 15th May, 2007 passed by the learned Single Judge
dismissing W.P.(C) No.20890/2005 titled Pragati Educational &
Welfare vs. D.D.A.
2.

The facts relevant for the disposal of the present appeal are

LPA 1161/2007

Page 1 of 28

as follows. The appellant Society was allotted a plot of land on
perpetual leasehold basis measuring 800 sq. m. for construction of a
Nursery School, at Pocket 5, Jasola, New Delhi by the respondent
DDA vide allotment letter dated 28th September, 2001. The terms of
payment of the said allotment were that the appellant was
required to pay the cost of land @ 80 lakhs per acre, i.e., a total sum
of Rs.39,22,753/-. Clause 22 and 23 of the allotment letter, which
are relevant to the present case, read as follows:
“22. If the above terms and conditions are
acceptable to you, the acceptance there of with
attested undertaking be sent to the undersigned
along with the bank challan in favour of DDA for
Rs.39,22,753/- Rs.38,27,032/- (Land Premium) +
Rs.95,676/- (G. Rent) and documentation charges
Rs.45/-) within 60 days from the date of issue of the
allotment cum demand letter. The said amount can
also be deposited in the bank counter situated in
DDA's office complex and copy of the same may
be sent to this office for having deposited the
demand along with acceptance letter undertaking
within 60 days from the date of issue of demand
cum allotment letter. Within 60 days of issue of
demand cum allotment letter the allottee shall be
require to make the entire payment. Thereafter,
18% interest shall be chargeable up to 6 months
from the date of issue of the demand cum
allotment letter.
23. In case the payment and acceptance letter
with required undertaking is not received within the
stipulated period as stated above, it will be
presumed that you are not interested in the
allotment of the land and the offer of allotment will
stand withdrawn.”
3.

Apparently, the appellant Society made an initial deposit of

Rs.2 lakhs on 13.11.2001, that is, within the due date and thereafter,
by a letter dated 15.11.2001 sought confirmation from the DDA
whether the site allotted would be handed over to the Society free
LPA 1161/2007

Page 2 of 28

from all encumbrances.

Some more letters written to the

respondent and personal visits made by the officials of the
appellant Society did not yield any result, inasmuch as the Society
kept on insisting on knowing whether the property was free from
encumbrances, whereas the respondent DDA refused to confirm
the same and, instead, told the Society that it should first deposit
the full amount as asked for and then it would be informed about
whether the site was free from encumbrances/encroachments.
Eventually, on 13th June, 2003, the appellant Society deposited the
balance sum of Rs.37,22,753/-. Despite this, the respondent did not
process the case of the appellant till as late as October, 2005, that
is, even after the passage of 27 months from the deposit of the
balance consideration nor informed the appellant about the status
of the plot to be allotted to the appellant.

Consequently, the

appellant on 26th October, 2005 filed a writ petition, being W.P.(C)
No.20890/2005 for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the
DDA to hand over the possession of the demised plot or
alternatively to allot and hand over possession of another plot of
the same size and in the same area. However, even before the
DDA filed its reply to the writ petition, the Single Judge on 09.01.2006
directed the DDA to remove the encroachments from an
alternative site, which was offered to the appellant on that date.
The said order reads as under:
“Records produced by DDA shows that the site
possession whereof has been given to the petitioner
has come under encroachment (partly).
This
LPA 1161/2007

Page 3 of 28

appears to be the reason why delivery of possession
to the petitioner is being delayed.
DDA is directed to remove the encroachments
within three weeks from today.
Renotify for 23rd February, 2006.”
4.

The

DDA

having

failed

to

remove

the

aforesaid

encroachments, the learned Single Judge on 23rd February, 2006
passed the following order:
“+WP(C) No.20890/2005
*
DDA to file counter affidavit within a week.
Under no circumstances, encroachments would
continue. Encroachments would be removed within
a period of three weeks from today.
If
encroachments are not removed, Vice Chariman,
DDA will file an affidavit disclosing the following:(1) When were the encroachments noted first by
DDA?
(2) Who was the officer in charge of the area
whose duty it was to inform as and when first
encroachment came up?
(3) What disciplinary action has been taken
against the errant officer who permitted
encroachments to come up?
(4) When was the complaint lodged with the local
police station informing the police that public
land has been encroached upon?
(5) Why was FIR not registered against the
encroachers under Sections 447/448 IPC.
List on 14.3.2006.”
5.

The DDA again defaulted in complying with the order. Not

only the encroachments were not removed within the period
specified by the Court, but the Vice Chairman, DDA did not file the
affidavit disclosing the replies to the queries put by the learned
Single Judge. Instead on 13.03.2006, a counter-affidavit was filed
on behalf of the respondent DDA by the Director (Lands), Delhi
Development Authority, in which an averment was made that by a
LPA 1161/2007

Page 4 of 28

letter dated 28th December, 2001, issued to the appellant, the
appellant had been requested to make the payment of the
balance premium amount alongwith the interest immediately, the
stipulated period of payment having already expired on 26.11.2001.
Paragraphs 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the said counter-affidavit are
significant and the relevant portions thereof read as under:
“8. That it may be noted that till that stage there
had been no verification which had been got done
and not even the Department, what to speak of the
petitioner, even had any idea that the site already
stood allotted to another Society. The right of the
Society to claim possession could have arisen only
when
the
Society
had
made
full
payment.....................................................................
9.
.....................................................................In fact,
when any society deposits money after the
stipulated time, the delay has to be regularized for
restoration by the Hon'ble L.G., Delhi. Unfortunately,
however, this aspect came to be over looked by
the Department and instead, the file was
referred/sent to the Planning Wing for sub-division
and exploring of an alternative site. That was the
stage when the notings (which have been referred
to by this Hon'ble Court in its order dated 9.1.2006)
came to be recorded that till the encroachment is
removed, sub-division and subsequent handing over
of the possession to the petitioner society cannot
take place.
10. That it has been the consistent stand of the
DDA that since 2003 no restoration of allotment of
belated payment cases are being accepted. This
decision was taken since after the said period,
allotments of Institutional Lands to societies, were to
be made by auction and not under the previous
policy where allotment of institutional land was
made at concessional rates, thus resulting in
anomalies
qua
the
rate
of
allotment......................................................................
11. That the case of the petitioner has been
examined and it has been found that in fact, the
petitioner society is not entitled to be considered for
the allotment of an alternative plot. Simply because
the petitioner had made payment on its own in 2003
LPA 1161/2007

Page 5 of 28

– much after the period for payment had expired,
does not give any right to the petitioner. As pointed
out above, the notings in the file indicating that
proceedings were started to locate an alternative
site for the petitioner society, did not take into
consideration and overlooked the very relevant and
important fact that once the offer of allotment had
lapsed due to failure to make the payment within
the time/extended time unless, the said allotment
was restored/revived by the L.G., Delhi, the
proceedings for consideration of alternative
allotment are void ab-initio.
12. That there has, of course, been negligence on
the part of the DDA in not refunding the amount
paid by the society much after the time frame for
making payment had expired and without seeking
any restoration/revival from the Competent
Authority. However, this can be compensated in
terms of interest which would be payable by the
DDA to the petitioner society.”
6.

It may pertinently be stated that even in the counter-affidavit

filed by the DDA on 13.03.2006, the DDA did not disclose the
particulars of the site/land originally allotted to the appellant,
thereby leading to the inevitable conclusion that the allotment
made to the appellant was only on paper.

Furthermore, no

explanation was given in the affidavit for retaining Rs.39,22,753/paid by the appellant despite repeated letters written by the
appellant for the allotment of the plot.
7.

A further affidavit on the same day, that is, on 13.03.2006 was

filed by the Commissioner (Land Disposal), Delhi Development
Authority in which a prayer was made for dispensing with the
requirement of the filing of the affidavit by the Vice Chairman, DDA
and taking on record the affidavit filed by the Commissioner.
Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the said affidavit are significant and

LPA 1161/2007

Page 6 of 28

accordingly are being reproduced hereunder:
“3. That in order to comply with the order passed
by this Hon'ble Court on 23.2.06 as regards the
removal of encroachments, it is submitted that the
Dy. Director (Institutional Lands) alongwith AD
(Survey) and the concerned Patwari inspected the
area on 24.2.06. The inspection revealed that the
land in question over which the encroachments
existed and were to be removed had never been
transferred to the DDA by the LAC. The DDA
therefore, has no jurisdiction over the said land. In
fact, the land is under a Court stay order in CWP
No.3111/98 entitled 'Raghubir Singh and Anr. Vs. UOI
& Ors.'.
It was further revealed that the New Leases
(NL) branch of the DDA had examined the land
status of the proposed site which was considered for
allotment as an alternative plot to the petitioner
society in view of the fact that the previous site
allotted to the petitioner already stood allotted
earlier. At this juncture confusion was created due
to misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the
records and litigations.
The Institutional Wing
marked sites at 3 places i.e. 'X', 'Y' and 'Z' and
requested the NL Wing to identify the status of the
sites and their feasibility for alternative allotment.
The NL Wing mentioned the site marked as 'X' as
under litigation and marked that the site 'Y' and 'Z'
were vacant and fell in Khasra No.267, whereas, the
ground reality is that both 'Y' and 'Z' are under
litigation/encroachment and fall in Khasra No.268
and not Khasra No.267 as reported by the NL Wing
on 26.5.04. As on date, the dispute is going on
between GNCTD and Raghubir and his brother
Jagbir.
4.
That since the DDA does not have jurisdiction
over the site on which the encroachments exist, nor
can any action be taken by the DDA in this regard
for the said piece of land no answers can be given
by the VC, DDA to any of the queries set out by this
Hon'ble Court in its order dated 23.2.2006. Thus, it is
in view of the above circumstances that the present
affidavit is being filed under the signatures of the
Commissioner (LD) and not under the signatures of
the VC, DDA.”
8.

The learned Single Judge on consideration of both the

LPA 1161/2007

Page 7 of 28

aforesaid affidavits filed by the DDA by his order dated 4th May,
2007, after observing that prima facie the case appeared to be a
case of double allotment for which the DDA would have to be
answerable in law, observed that the matter had assumed serious
proportions given the fact that not only was the petitioner kept in
the dark about the fact of doubt allotment, but even this Court was
led by the DDA to believe on 09.01.2006 that an alternative land
existed when no such land was in fact available with the DDA. It
was further observed in the order that there seemed to be no
justification why the Vice Chairman, DDA did not think it fit to
comply with the order dated 23rd February, 2006 by filing an affidavit
himself. It was directed that the affidavit of the Vice Chairman,
DDA should be filed on or before 30th April, 2007.
9.

Pursuant to the aforesaid order, an application was filed by

the DDA for extension of time for filing the affidavit of the Vice
Chairman on the ground that the relevant records could not be
collected in time and ultimately on 11.05.2007 an affidavit was filed
by the Vice Chairman, DDA.

In the said affidavit, a complete

somersault was taken by the DDA, inasmuch as, in the said affidavit,
it was categorically stated that it was not a case of double
allotment, and the plea was taken that since the Society had failed
to make payment with interest within the prescribed period as per
condition 23, it was a case of “deemed cancellation” and the
allotment stood withdrawn. It was further stated as follows:
“c.

The layout plan of said plot in pocket-5, Jasola

LPA 1161/2007

Page 8 of 28

was finalized on 9.7.2002. As per layout plan an
area of 1400 sq. mtrs. was earmarked for society for
Autism, 660 sq. mtrs. for community room and 963
sq. mtrs. for dispensary. No plot was earmarked in
the said layout plan for petitioner society.
d.
The Competent Authority approved allotment
of 1400 sq. mtrs. to society for Autism on 29.4.2002
and allotment letter to the said society was issued
on 2.8.2002. The decision to allot the plot to society
for Autism was taken much after the deemed date
of cancellation of allotment of the petitioner
society. Further, it may be submitted that an area
measuring 660 sq. mtr. for community room and 963
sq. mtr. for dispensary are still available. The above
sequence of events shows that it is not a case of
double allotment.”
10.

As regards alternative allotment, it was submitted as follows:
“g. It is submitted that, DDA has not misled the
Court on the issue of alternative allotment. There
was an exercise in the file for allotting an alternative
allotment before delivery of the judgment in Rahul
Daka Education Society case by the Hon'ble High
Court in March, 2006. In this exercise an area was
identified and it was found to be encroached. This
is a mistaken identify of a land which did not belong
to DDA. Before rectifying this mistake the Hon'ble
High Court perused the records file of DDA and
noted that there are encroachments on the
proposed alternative site and accordingly directed
the DDA to remove those encroachments. When
an exercise was made, it was noticed that the site
has not been handed over to DDA.
5.
It is submitted that, an ambiguity had crept in
the file regarding alternative allotment and in the
process various alternative sites were explored. An
enquiry is being ordered to fix responsibility as to
how this mistake has taken place.”

11.

Not satisfied with the affidavit filed by the Vice Chairman,

DDA, the Deputy Director (Institutional Lands), DDA chose to file an
additional affidavit on behalf of the respondent DDA. In the said
additional affidavit, an entirely new case was sought to be made

LPA 1161/2007

Page 9 of 28

out by the respondent DDA, and it was highlighted that when the
counter-affidavit was filed by the DDA on 13.03.2006, there was an
erroneous assumption that the case of the appellant Society was of
double allotment, but as a matter of fact the land originally allotted
to the appellant Society was allotted in favour of the Society for
Autism on 2nd August, 2002, i.e., after 11 months of the allotment of
land to the appellant Society, the date of allotment of which was
28th September, 2001, and 4 months after the automatic withdrawal
of the offer of allotment. Thus, it could not be construed as double
allotment.

As regards the proceedings in the file to locate an

alternative site for the appellant Society, the explanation tendered
in the said additional affidavit is as follows:
“8. That it appears that the reason as to why, the
proceedings were started in the file to locate an
alternative site for the petitioner society was
because at that stage, nobody took into
consideration the very relevant and important fact
that once an offer for allotment had lapsed due to
failure to make the payment within the prescribed
time no right for allotment accrues.
When balance payment was tendered by the
petitioner society on its own in 2003, at that stage,
the DDA without verifying whether the allotment
survived, started looking into site conditions about
the site proposed for allotment to the petitioner
society. Since the report at that stage (in 2003)
given about site conditions was that the land had
been allotted to Autism Society and certain other
societies, it was presumed to be a case where
alternative site would have to be located for the
petitioner society.........................................................”
12.

It was further submitted in the additional affidavit that the

policy of the DDA regarding institutional land was being reviewed
and that allotments were no longer being made at concessional
LPA 1161/2007

Page 10 of 28

rates, and hence no regularisation of allotment of belated payment
cases was being accepted “to avoid anomalies since the policy
was under review”.
13.

We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone

through the records of the respondent DDA and upon doing so, we
have arrived at the following conclusions which are borne out by
the records of the respondent DDA itself.
(i)

In the first affidavit filed on behalf of the DDA by the Director
(Lands), a case of double allotment is sought to be made out
and there is a categorical admission that the DDA overlooked
the aspect that delay has to be regularized for restoration by
the L.G., Delhi and instead the file was sent to the Planning
Wing for sub-division and exploring of an alternative site. It is
also submitted that the notings in the file indicated that
proceedings had been started to locate an alternative site for
the appellant Society.

(ii)

In the second affidavit filed on the very same date, that is, on
13.03.2006 by the Commissioner (Land Disposal), DDA, an
entirely different stand was adopted and it was stated that on
inspection, it was revealed that the DDA had no jurisdiction
over the land in question and, in fact, the land was under a
Court stay order in CWP No.311/1998 titled Raghubir Singh
and Anr. vs. UOI & Ors., and as on date also the dispute is
going on between the GNCTD and the said Raghubir and his
brother. It was admitted that the land status of the proposed
LPA 1161/2007

Page 11 of 28

site was considered for allotment as an alternative plot to the
appellant in view of the fact that the previous site allotted to
the appellant already stood allotted earlier, meaning thereby
that the case of double allotment and the exploration of
alternative site were both admitted by the DDA. There is not a
word in the said affidavit about “deemed cancellation” of
allotment.
(iii)

In the third affidavit filed by the Vice Chairman, DDA dated
May, 2007 too, it was admitted that there was an exercise in
the file for allotting an alternative site before delivery of the
judgment in the case of Rahul Daka Vikas Society (Regd.)
Through its Secretary and Anr. vs. DDA by this Court in March,
2006, and when such an exercise was made, it was noticed
that the site had not been handed over to the DDA. It was
also submitted that an ambiguity had crept in the file
regarding the alternative allotment and in the process, various
alternative sites were explored. It was further submitted that
an enquiry was being ordered to fix responsibility as to how
this mistake had occurred.

It was, however, added as an

afterthought that the appellant Society was not entitled to
any land since there was default in tendering payment on
behalf of the appellant Society.
(iv)

In the fourth and final affidavit on behalf of the DDA, as
already noticed, the DDA claims that the issue of double
allotment did not arise in the present case as there was
LPA 1161/2007

Page 12 of 28

“automatic withdrawal of the offer of allotment”. There was a
wrong assumption that this was a case of double allotment.
The reason as to why the proceedings were started in the file
to locate an alternative site for the appellant Society was
because nobody took into consideration the very relevant
and important fact that once an offer for allotment had
lapsed due to failure to make the payment within the
prescribed time, no right of allotment accrues. It was further
stated that now the mode of allotment to schools is by way of
auction and the value of the plot as on date is much higher
than the rate at which the offer was made to the appellant
Society.
14.

From a conjoint reading of the various affidavits filed by the

DDA along with the notings on the original records pertaining to the
case, the following facts clearly emerge:
(i)

That the appellant's apprehension that the site allotted to him
was under litigation was not a misplaced one as is evident
from the noting dated 10th April, 2002, which reads as follows:
“As per approved lay out site allotted for Nursery School is
earmarked for Primary School as per approved lay out
plan of the area. Part of the school site is under litigation
before processing the case further we may refer this case to
Area (Plg) to know their view.”

(ii)

That on the appellant's depositing the sum of Rs.39,22,753/with the DDA on 17th June, 2003, the case was never
considered for regularisation as per the existent policy of the

LPA 1161/2007

Page 13 of 28

DDA, as is evident from the notings dated 14.07.2003 and
08.08.2003, which read as follows:
“This is a case of allotment of land for c/o nursery school
to Pragati Educational & Welfare Society. A demandcum-allotment letter was issued on 28.9.2001 (p-62/cr.) to
Pragati Educational & Welfare Society for c/o nursery
school land measuring 800 sq. mtrs at Pocket-5, Jasola
with the direction the required payment within 60 days and
further up to 6 months with the interest @ 18% P.A. as per
the terms and conditions of the allotment letter dated
28.9.2001. After elapsed of 19 months the society has
deposited the demanded amount of Rs.39,22,753/- vide
challan No.171935 dtd. 13.11.2002 and challan No.32326
dtd. 19.6.2003 towards cost of land & ground rent and the
same verified by A.O.(IL) subject to regularization of delay
period/restoration of the case from the Competent
Authority.
In view of the position explained above the case
may be submitted to Hon'ble V.C./DDA being a
Competent Authority for regularization of delayed period
subject to payment of restoration charges @ Rs.300/- per
sq. mtrs. & interest for delayed period @ 18% P.A.
Submitted for consideration and orders please.
Sd/14/7/03
*
*
*
*
In response to the query of Director (LC) dtd. 8.7.2003 at
P-16/N. In this connection it is submitted that the society
has deposited the Premium of Rs.39,22,753/- and the case
is to be restore subject to payment of restoration charges +
interest @ 18% P.A. obtaining the approval of competent
authority, as well as issue no.1 the expenditure incurred on
boundary wall the amount will be recovered after handing
over/taking over the physical possession. Issue No.2.
That the site was earmarked for primary school and the
same proposed/considered for c/o nursery school, as per
note of A.E.(IL) dtd.10.4.2002 at P-11/N. In view of above
now if agreed we may refer the case to Area Planning cell
DDA for confirmation/feasibility and to know their views.
Submitted please.
LPA 1161/2007

Page 14 of 28

Sd/8/8/03”
(iii)

That it is clear from the above that the matter instead of being
placed before the Vice Chairman, DDA for consideration of
regularisation of the delayed period subject to the payment
of

Rs.12,73,704/-

(Interest

on

premium

Rs.10,33,704/-

+

Rs.2,40,000/- as restoration charges @ Rs.300 per sq. mtr. as
worked out by the respondent DDA), was referred on 8th
August, 2003 to the Area Planning Cell, DDA to know their
views.
(iv)

That it further emerges from the records that it was a case of
double allotment and the DDA, therefore, proceeded to
explore an alternative site in the nearby area, as is clear from
the notings dated

12.12.2003, 22.04.2004, 14.06.2004 and

20.04.2005, which read as follows:
“Since the proposed land to Pragati Educational &
Welfare Society measuring 800 sqm at Pocket-5, Jasola
has been allotted to Autism and Jan Sahyog Munch and the
remaining is unallotted, so in view of the above note of
Plg. Deptt. the case may be referred to AE(IL) to explore
the alternate site in the nearby area as per LOP placed
opposite.
Sd/12/12/03
*
*
*
*
As desired gone through the file and found that PS/NS sites
shown in structural plan of Jasola are not clear. As per
site condition they are partially encroached and partially
fenced.
It seems they are not properly demarked.
Therefore if agreed case may be sent to DD(NL) for
verification of ownership of the lands PS/NS three sites

LPA 1161/2007

Page 15 of 28

marked as X,Y,Z by (Gulabi color) may be verified after
that file may be sent to the Chief Engineer (SEZ) for
proper boundary wall/basbed wire fencing. Submitted for
further n/a please.
Sd/22/04/04
*
*
*
*
As per the report prepared by (NL) Branch on Page No.24
& 25/N for X,Y,Z sites marked on L.O.P. Site Z can be
proposed for Nursery School to the Pragati Education and
Welfare Society subject to sub-division plan of site 'Z'
(which is meant for P.S + N.S). Therefore if agreed case
may be sent to Area Planning Jt. Director (AP) II Vikas
Minar for approved sub-division plan with dimension of
P.S + N.S since this is a case of alternate site and amount
has already been deposited.
Submitted for further n/a and onward transmission.
Sd/14/06/2004
*
*
*
*
In this case land measuring 800 Sq. Mtrs. was allotted to
Pragati Educational and Welfare Society vide the orders of
Hon'ble LG on dated 25.9.2001 at page 7/N for
construction of nursery school at Pkt.-5, Jasola. Demandcum-allotment letter was issued on 28.9.2001 (P.62/C)
with the direction to deposit the cost of land within 60 days
and further upto 6 months alongwith interest @ 18% P.A.
as per the terms and condition of the allotment letter
dt.28.9.2001. The Society had made the part payment of
Rs.2,00,000/- within the stipulated period and remaining
Rs.37,22,753/- after the stipulated period i.e. after 18
months late.
As per report of AE(IL) at Page 11/N it has been
seen that the as per approved lay out plan site allotted for
nursery school is earmarked for Primary school. Part of
the school site is under litigation. The case was referred to
area planning Wing. It has also been reported by the
AE(IL) at P.20/N that the proposed site has already been
allotted to other Society. The case again sent to Planning
Wing for Sub-Division plan at P.27/N. As per the report of
Planing Wing at P.28/N the sub-division plan is under
approval. The ownership report of the alternate site has
LPA 1161/2007

Page 16 of 28

also been provided by the DD/NL at P.2425/N.
In view of the above if agreed we may request
Dir.(AP)I in the first instance to provide the sub-division
plan of the proposed alternate site.
Submitted please.
Sd/20/4/05”
(v)

That there were encroachments on the proposed site. This is
evident from the notings dated 6th May, 2005 and 9th May,
2005, which are as follows:
“OSD (Lands) vide note dated 29.4.05 at page 32/N has
referred the file for subdivision plan in respect of Pragati
Educational Welfare Society.
The matter has already been examined in our file
no.PA/JDII/APJ/2004/015 wherein Dir(API) vide note
dated 29.10.04 at page 23/C has requested CLM(DDA) to
kindly get it remove the encroachment on the site so that
further necessary action could be taken. Copy of the note
is place opposite at 97/C.
Submitted pl.
Sd/6.5.05
*
*
*
*
The matter has been referred to CLM and CLD for
removing the unauthorised encroachment on the site as per
letter marked at A above. Copy of the same is placed at
97/C.
Sd/9/5/05”

(vi)

That after the passing of the order dated 9th January, 2006 by
this Court, the Deputy Director (Institutional Lands) in his noting
dated 24th February, 2006 stated as follows:
“.............................................................................................
2. The Court has made it very clear that the DDA cannot
take people for a ride like this and it has been directed

LPA 1161/2007

Page 17 of 28

today that a last opportunity of 3 weeks is being given to
clear the encroachment on the alternative site proposed
failing which the VC, DDA shall file an affidavit under
his
signatures
indicating
the
following..............................................................
The Court has granted only one weeks time to file
the counter affidavit.”

(vii)

That the land under reference was acquired land and
physical possession had not been given by the LAC to the
DDA. There was also a stay operating in respect of the land
by orders of this Court in CWP No.311/1998, CMP No.6941/1998
titled Raghubir Singh and Anr. vs. UOI & Ors. against
demolition and dispossession.

(viii) That for the first time on 24th February, 2006, resort was taken
by the DDA to their “consistent stand since 2003” that they
were not accepting any restoration of belated cases.

The

relevant portion of the said noting being significant is
reproduced herein below:
“...........................................................................................
6.
When the society has deposited the money after
stipulated time, the same has to be regularized for
restoration by the LG but unfortunately, this aspect was
deferred and the file was referred/sent to Planning for subdivision and exploring an alternative site. Subsequently,
the issue being debated in the file is the feasibility of an
alternative plot and sub-division of the same but the
Planning at 33/N ultimately recorded that till the
encroachment is removed, sub-division cannot take place.
7.
As explained in the above paras, encroachments
cannot be removed as the land does not belong to DDA
and pertains to GNCTD.
8.
Finally, the aspect which has to be considered and
LPA 1161/2007

Page 18 of 28

examined is whether the society is eligible for allotment of
alternative land. It is our consistent stand that since 2003,
we are not accepting any restoration of belated cases. In
this present case also, DDA has informed the society on
28.12.01 (65/C) that the society has no right/claim if they
have not paid the premium. Probably, we may have to
explain the Hon'ble High Court from this perspective.”
(ix)

That thereafter the Vice Chairman, DDA filed an affidavit in
this Court in which it was submitted as follows:
“It is submitted that an ambiguity has crept in the
file regarding alternative allotment and in the
process various alternative sites were explored.
An enquiry is being ordered to fix responsibility as
to how this mistake has taken place.”

(x)

That on the aforesaid facts, the learned Single Judge
rendered his judgment and order dated 15.05.2007, which is
impugned before us, inter alia, on the ground that the
allotment in favour of the appellant stood “automatically
cancelled” in terms of condition 23 of the allotment letter
dated 28th September, 2001. It was observed by the learned
Single Judge that the question of the DDA not keeping the site
ready for allotment could not arise till such time the
petitioner/appellant in fact had performed its part of
obligation and made payment. Reliance was placed on the
judgment rendered by the Court in the

Rahul Daka Vikas

Society's case. However, while rejecting the prayers made in
the writ petition, the learned Single Judge directed that the
DDA within six weeks and in any event not later than 29th June,
2007 refund to the appellant the entire sum of Rs.39,22,753/LPA 1161/2007

Page 19 of 28

together with interest @ 18% p.a. on those amounts from the
respective dates of their deposit by the appellant with the
DDA till 29.06.2007 or an earlier date on which the refund is
made.
(xi)

That the refund was accordingly made by the respondent
and accepted by the appellant “under protest” in terms of
the decision of the learned Single Judge, which is impugned
before us.

15.

On a conspectus of all the facts and circumstances of the

case, we are, however, unable to concur with the findings of the
learned Single Judge for the following reasons:
(i)

The appellant's apprehension that the site allotted to him was
not free from encumbrances was not misplaced as is evident
from the records.

(ii)

The appellant in his letter dated 15.11.2001 clearly stated that
it had already suffered a loss of Rs.22 lakhs in respect of
another allotment made by the DDA to it.

Apparently,

therefore, it was a case of once bitten twice shy.
(iii)

The DDA did nothing to allay the apprehensions of the
appellant in this regard, despite several letters written by the
appellant to the DDA enquiring about the status of the land
allotted to it and insisted that the appellant first make the
payment.

(iv)

Admittedly, no notice was ever served on the appellant
Society to show cause as to why the allotment in its favour be
LPA 1161/2007

Page 20 of 28

not cancelled.
(v)

The respondent DDA, at no point of time, issued a
cancellation letter to the appellant Society informing the
Society about the “deemed cancellation” or otherwise, not
even after the payment was belatedly made by the
appellant Society and accepted by the respondent DDA.
The respondent DDA is, therefore, estopped from raising the
plea of “deemed cancellation”.

(vi)

The appellant Society was handicapped even to raise funds
for making payment without being given the particulars of the
land and without being assured by the respondent that the
land

allotted

to

it

was

free

from

encumbrances/encroachments.
(vii)

The appellant Society all along was made to believe that the
reason for not disclosing the particulars of the land was that
the respondent itself was processing the case of the appellant
for making alternative allotment of a plot.

(viii) Finding no alternative and to save the allotment, the
appellant had no option but to deposit the balance of
Rs.37,22,753/- belatedly on 13th June, 2003.
(ix)

A number of representations were made by the appellant
even thereafter for obtaining possession of the land, none of
which were responded to by the respondent.

(x)

Till as late as October, 2005, i.e., after 27 months from the
deposit made by the appellant Society on 13th June, 2003,
LPA 1161/2007

Page 21 of 28

the respondent did not process the case of the appellant and
did not offer any plot to the appellant or inform the appellant
about the status of the plot to be allotted to it.
(xi)

On 09.01.2006, on the appellant Society filing a writ petition
before this Court and during the course of hearing of the said
writ petition, the respondent submitted that the alternative
site, possession whereof was to be handed over to the
appellant, had come under encroachment and it was due to
this reason that the delivery of possession of the alternative
plot of land had also been delayed. Accordingly, by orders
dated 09.01.2006 and 23.02.2006 passed by the learned Single
Judge, the respondent was directed to remove the said
encroachments.

(xii)

For the first time in the counter-affidavit, the respondent DDA
came out with an entirely different story that the plot of land
originally allotted to the appellant was cancelled as there
was delay in making payment by the appellant.

(xiii)

The respondent DDA in the counter-affidavit filed by the Vice
Chairman, DDA clearly admitted their fault/lapse in not
referring the case of the appellant for regularisation of delay
in making the payment to the Lieutenant Governor as per the
existent policy and instead referring the file to the Planning
Wing for sub-division and exploring of an alternative site.

(xiv) The respondent in a subsequent affidavit filed by it changed
its stand to state that the alternative site over which
LPA 1161/2007

Page 22 of 28

encroachment existed “had never been transferred to the
DDA by the LAC” and, therefore, it had no jurisdiction over the
said land.
(xv)

Resort was taken to the purported change in policy of the
respondent in auctioning the institutional plots for the first time
after the filing of the writ petition in this Court.

Further,

according to the respondent DDA, the said policy came into
existence in 2003, but neither the date of the policy nor the
policy itself was enclosed with the various affidavits filed by
the respondent DDA.
(xvi) The learned Single Judge while observing that there was
absolutely no justification for the DDA to have retained the
sum of Rs.40 lakhs (approx.) for such a long span of time
without apprising the appellant about the cancellation of the
allotment made to it and without even refunding the amount
to the appellant Society, simultaneously could not have held
that there was “deemed cancellation of the allotment”,
which is also belied by one fact that the DDA themselves
were looking for
appellant.

alternative land to be given to the

There was no letter or intimation cancelling

allotment in favour of the appellant. There was some delay in
depositing the entire amount, but their delay was condoned
which is established and crystal clear from the subsequent
conduct of the DDA in looking for alternative land and also
pursuing the issue for making land available to the appellant.
LPA 1161/2007

Page 23 of 28

(xvii) The direction for return of the entire payment deposited by
the appellant Society along with interest @ 18% p.a. in the
circumstances of this case cannot be said to be equitable as
the appellant cannot be made to suffer either for the fact
that the site allotted to him was under litigation and was not
free from encumbrances/encroachments or for the fact that
his case for restoration of the plot was by the fault of the DDA
officials

not

placed

before

the

Vice

Chairman

for

regularisation as per the existent policy of the DDA or for the
fact that the possession of the alternative site allotted by the
DDA to the appellant Society was never in fact handed over
by the LAC to the DDA.
(xviii) The respondent would have been fully within its rights to
cancel the allotment of the site in question on the failure of
the

appellant Society to make the payment within the

stipulated time. It having failed to do so, cannot now take up
a stand of “deemed cancellation”.
(xix) The reliance placed by the respondent DDA on the judgment
rendered by Single Bench of this Court on 17th March, 2006 in
WP(C) No.5358-59/2004 titled as Rahul Daka Vikas Society
(Regd.) Through its Secretary & Anr. vs. DDA & Anr. is of no
avail to the respondent as the said decision is distinguishable
on its facts. The most fundamental fact which distinguishes
and sets apart that case from the present case is that the
DDA in the present case was never in a position to hand over
LPA 1161/2007

Page 24 of 28

possession of the land, whereas in the said case the land was
free from all encumbrances and the DDA was in a position to
allot the land to the petitioner immediately on payment being
made. Then again, the petitioner in the said case had paid
only 50% of the price of the land when the DDA issued notice
to the petitioner calling upon the petitioner to immediately
pay, within ten days, the balance amount payable together
with the stipulated interest and only thereafter proceeded to
cancel the allotment on the file.

Though not immediately

intimating the cancellation to the petitioner, the DDA,
however, much prior to the filing of the writ petition by the
petitioner intimated to the petitioner that its allotment stood
cancelled.

Not only this, the DDA wrote to the petitioner

immediately on cancellation that the no objection certificate
issued to the petitioner, permitting it to mortgage the land
with the banker to obtain a loan, be returned to enable the
DDA to further process the case, the further process
contemplated by the DDA being to return the partial
payment deposited by the petitioner.
(xx)

It is trite law that in the sale of immovable property, there is no
presumption as to time being the essence of the contract
even where the parties have expressly provided that the time
is the essence of the contract. Such a stipulation will have to
be read along with the other provisions of the contract and
the attendant facts and circumstances. A Constitution Bench
LPA 1161/2007

Page 25 of 28

of the Supreme Court in the case of Chand Rani (Smt.) (dead)
by LRs vs. Kamal Rani (Smt.) (dead) by LRs (1993) 1 SCC 519
held that in fact there is a presumption against time being the
essence of the contract.

The Constitution Bench decision

refers to and relies upon the earlier decisions of the Supreme
Court in Govind Prasad Chaturvedi vs. Hari Dutt Shastri (1977)
2 SCC 539 and Indira Kaur (Smt.) vs. Sheo Lal Kapoor (1988) 2
SCC 488. In a series of subsequent decisions of the Supreme
Court also, it has been reiterated time and again that in
transactions of immovable property, there is no presumption
as to time being the essence of the contract and if it is
provided in the agreement it has to be read along with the
other

provisions

of

the

contract.

[See

Swarnam

Ramachandran (Smt.) and Anr. vs. Aravacode Chakungal
Jayapalan (2004) 8 SCC 689, K.S. Vidyanadam and Ors. vs.
Vairavan (1997) 3 SCC 1 and Balasaheb Dayandeo Naik
(Dead) through LRs and Ors.vs. Appasaheb Dattatraya Pawar
JT 2008(2) SC 63].
Applying the aforesaid law laid down by the Supreme
Court to the facts of the instant case, it is no where provided
in the allotment letter issued by the respondent that time is of
the essence and all that is provided in condition 23, which is
heavily relied upon by the respondent DDA, is that in case the
payment and acceptance letter with required undertaking is
not received within the stipulated period, it will be presumed
LPA 1161/2007

Page 26 of 28

that the appellant is not interested in the allotment of the land
and the offer of allotment will stand withdrawn. This, by no
stretch of imagination, can be construed to mean that time
was the essence of the contract assuming this to be a case of
contract between the Delhi Development Authority and the
appellant.

The

theory

of

“deemed

cancellation”

propounded by the respondent DDA after the filing of the writ
petition is not discernible either in condition 23 or from the
records maintained by the DDA prior to the filing of the writ
petition.
16.

In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of the

considered opinion that the appeal deserves to be allowed. We
accordingly allow the appeal and direct the respondent DDA to
place the matter before the Vice Chairman, DDA for restoration of
the allotment of land measuring 800 sq. mtrs. in Jasola to the
appellant Society within a period of six weeks, which, as per the
notings in the records is still available in Pocket-5, Village Jasola,
subject to the payment of regularisation charges by the appellant
Society @ Rs.300 per sq. mtr. and also subject to the payment of
interest on the entire amount at the rate of 18% per annum from 28th
November, 2001 till 13th June, 2003.

The

appellant Society shall

make payment of the aforesaid amount to the DDA by way of a
demand draft within four weeks of the date of the intimation to it of
the site allotted to it by the respondent DDA and shall
simultaneously refund the entire amount received by it from the
LPA 1161/2007

Page 27 of 28

respondent DDA pursuant to the orders of this Court, which was
received by it “under protest”.
17.

Before parting with the case, we also express our anguish at

the cavalier and inept manner in which the entire case has been
handled and dealt with by the respondent DDA at all stages, and
also the manner in which wholly irreconcilable and vacillating
stands have been taken by the DDA from time to time before this
Court. We hope and expect that the DDA will in the future bear in
mind the doctrine of legitimate expectation imposing upon it a duty
to act in consonance with the principles of fair play, and its duty as
a statutory body to ensure that the citizen receives nothing less than
his due, both in law and in equity.
18.

The appeal stands disposed of with the aforesaid observations

and directions.

CM No.11148/2007 also stands disposed of

accordingly.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

CHIEF JUSTICE
APRIL 4, 2008
km

LPA 1161/2007

Page 28 of 28

