*

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 41/2008
Date of Decision: 5th February, 2008

%
DR. DEBASISH PANIGRAPHI

..... Appellant

Through: Mr. Rajeev Sharma, Advocate
versus
MCD & ORS

..... Respondents

Through: Mr. Amit K. Paul, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
JUDGMENT
05.02.2008

%
:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

This appeal is directed against the order passed by the learned Single Judge

dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant as against the order of
punishment imposed on him by the respondents.
2.

The undisputed facts are that the appellant was absent from duties for a

long period of more than four years and, therefore, a departmental proceeding was
initiated against him for his unauthorized absence during the period from
09.02.2001 to 25.04.2005. An Inquiry Officer was appointed to go into the charge
levelled against the appellant. The Inquiry Officer conducted the inquiry and
thereafter submitted his report, finding the appellant guilty of the charge regarding
unauthorized absence. In fact, the aforesaid charge of unauthorized absence was
specifically admitted by the charged officer during the course of inquiry. The only
LPA 41/2008

Page 1 of 4

defence that was sought to be given by the appellant was regarding his domestic
problem. Thus, admittedly the appellant, who was a responsible Government
officer, remained absent from duties unauthorizedly and, therefore, he was guilty
of the charge. The punishment, which was awarded by the disciplinary authority
was reduction in pay in the present time scale of pay by two stages for a period of
two years with cumulative effect and also to treat the period of absence from duty
as not spent on duty for all intents and purposes. The aforesaid order passed by
the disciplinary authority was challenged before the Appellate Authority. The Lt.
Governor of Delhi is the Appellate Authority, who considered the aforesaid appeal
and on consideration of the records rejected the said appeal under order dated
28.05.2007.
3.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid orders, a writ petition was filed, which

was considered by the learned Single Judge.

The learned Single Judge

specifically recorded in her order that there is no allegation by the appellant that
the inquiry proceedings were improperly conducted or that there was any violation
of the principles of natural justice. On a perusal of the said order passed by the
learned Single Judge, it appears to us that the only plea which was taken by the
appellant before the learned Single Judge was regarding the quantum of
punishment imposed on the appellant, which, according to the counsel was very
harsh and disproportionate to the misconduct alleged. The learned Single Judge
considered the said plea in the light of the records and held that the said
punishment cannot be said to be harsh or disproportionate to the charges
established when it is considered in terms of the long absence from duty of the
appellant, which was unjustified and, therefore, it cannot be said that the
punishment was disproportionate.

LPA 41/2008

Page 2 of 4

4.

Same issue is raised before us by the counsel appearing for the appellant,

who has submitted before us that the appellant is aggrieved basically because of
the order of punishment whereby not only the appellant is reduced in pay in the
present time scale of pay, but his absence is also treated to be a period not spent
on duty and, therefore, the punishment is harsh and disproportionate.

The

appellant was a responsible Government officer and was fully acquainted with the
conduct and discipline rules. He was unauthorizedly absent from duty for long
period of four years. The appellant did not behave in a proper manner and his
conduct in remaining absent for a long period without any authority itself was not
proper. Despite the said fact, the respondents condoned his lapse to the extent of
giving him only a penalty of reduction in pay and treating his long period of
absence, which was unauthorized, as period not spent on duty.
5.

The aforesaid punishment awarded to the appellant cannot be said to be in

any manner harsh or disproportionate. We are unable to agree with the counsel
appearing for the appellant that the punishment awarded was not justified. The
appeal has no merit and is accordingly dismissed.
CM No.1238/2008
In view of the fact that we have heard the counsel for the appellant on
merits on the appeal, therefore, the application seeking for condonation of delay
stands disposed of in terms of the aforesaid order.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 05, 2008
LPA 41/2008

Page 3 of 4

km

LPA 41/2008

Page 4 of 4

