*

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CO.APP. 19/2006
Date of Decision: 5th February, 2008

%
ESCORTS FINANCE LTD.

..... Appellant

Through: Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Geetika Panwar and Mr. Simran Mehta,
Advocates
versus
ESCORTS LIMITED

..... Respondent

Through: Mr. Ramesh Babu and Mr. Srinjoy Banerjee,
Advocates for Reserve Bank of India
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
JUDGMENT
05.02.2008

%
:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant as also the counsel

appearing for the Reserve Bank of India on this appeal, which is filed against the
observation made by the learned Single Judge in paragraph 24 of the order dated
17th March, 2006. By the said order, the petition of the companies in question,
that is, Escorts Limited

and Escorts Finance Limited for the scheme for

amalgamation was being considered by the learned Single Judge. While passing
orders on that petition, an order was passed that so far the civil suits and criminal
cases which are pending against the petitioners in the company petition, order for

CO.APP. 19/2006

Page 1 of 3

stay of those proceedings cannot be ordered, but liberty was granted by the learned
Single Judge to the transferor company to make a request for adjournment in the
Courts where proceedings are pending with an observation that if any such request
is made, the same would be examined and decided by the said courts on merits.
2.

On perusal of the records, we find that so far the first motion is concerned,

orders have been passed in respect of the same and now the matter is pending on
second motion before the learned Single Judge, who is hearing the matter. Since
the parties are before the Company Judge on second motion in respect of the
scheme for amalgamation, it would be necessary for the Company Judge to pass
orders as deemed fit and proper on the second motion in the matter pending before
him. There are certain recovery proceedings pending against the transferor and
transferee company which are initiated before the consumer forums, besides
criminal complaints which have also been filed by the depositors. Those cases are
mostly pending outside Delhi. The learned Single Judge declined to stay the
proceedings in those matters as the same would have cause inconvenience to the
depositors and also unnecessary delay in the proceedings, but a liberty was granted
to the transferor company to make a request for adjournment in the courts where
those proceedings are pending.
3.

Upon hearing the counsel for the parties, we observe that since a second

motion is pending for consideration, if and when request for adjournment is made
in the courts where the aforesaid proceedings are pending, the said prayer could be
granted and the matter could be adjourned pending final decision of the second
motion pending before the learned Company Judge. If and when request for
adjournment is made in the execution proceedings in the consumers courts where
some of the aforesaid proceedings are also pending, the said prayer could be

CO.APP. 19/2006

Page 2 of 3

granted and the matter could be adjourned pending final decision of the second
motion pending before the learned Company Judge.
4.

In terms of the aforesaid order, the appeal stands disposed of.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 05, 2008
km

CO.APP. 19/2006

Page 3 of 3

