I-22
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

O.M.P. 353/2006

BIHAR STATE HYDRO POWER CORPORATION
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Nagendra Rai, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Amit Kumar and Mr. Ashish Kumar,
Advocates
versus
BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICAL LTD
AC+
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. J.C. Seth with Mr. Sanjay Kr.,
Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

%

ORDER
06.05.2008

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J. (ORAL)

1.

This is a petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 filed by

the Bihar State Hydro Power Corporation, which is admittedly a State
Government undertaking against the Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd., which is a
Central Public Sector Company, praying for the issuance of appropriate

O.M.P. 353/2006

Page 1 of 4

directions and orders, directing the respondent to supply the requisite material
for which payment has already been received by the respondent. The case of
the respondent is that the petition is in an actual fact a petition for performance
of the contract between the parties though in the garb of an application under
Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. This aspect, however,
need not be gone into by this Court for the reason that the counsel for both the
parties are in principle agreed that considering the nature of the controversy,
which is between a department of the State and a department of the Central
Government/Public Sector Undertaking, in terms of the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. vs. City &
Industrial Development Corporation, Maharashtra Ltd. and Ors. reported in
(2007) 7 SCC 39,

the matter has to be sorted out by a High-Powered

Committee constituted by the Supreme Court, comprising of the following:
(i)

The Cabinet Secretary of the Union,

(ii) Chief Secretary of the State,
(iii) Secretaries of the departments concerned of the Union and
States; and
(iv) Chief Executive Officers of the undertakings concerned.
2.

Both counsel are in tandem that it is for the aforementioned High-

Powered Committee to refer the matter to this Court and/or a Tribunal, if

O.M.P. 353/2006

Page 2 of 4

deemed fit and proper, the said High-Powered Committee having been set up
for the purpose of ensuring that frivolous disputes do not come up before the
Courts and Tribunals without clearance from the High-Powered Committee. If
it can, the High-Powered Committee is expected to resolve the disputes inter se
Government departments and undertakings. If the dispute is a bonafide one
which is not capable of being resolved by the High-Powered Committee, the
High-Powered Committee would undoubtedly give clearance to the resolution
of the dispute before a Court of law or a Tribunal, as the case may be. Since the
Committee is constituted of highly placed officers of the Government, who do
not have any interest in the dispute, their decision on whether the litigation is
frivolous or not, even it found to be unpalatable by one of the parties, cannot be
given the go-by and has to be abided by. In short, the entire purpose of the
constitution of such a Committee under the order of the Supreme Court is to
ensure that inter-se Government departments there is no quibbling over petty
issues leading to further burgeoning of dockets in the Courts over matters of
little or no import.
3.

In the instant case, however, the counsel for both the parties are not in a

position to apprise this Court as to whether or not a High-Powered Committee
on a permanent basis has been constituted in terms of the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. (supra). According

O.M.P. 353/2006

Page 3 of 4

to the counsel for the petitioner, there is no permanent

High-Powered

Committee in existence whereas, according to the counsel for the respondent
such a High-Powered Committee is already in existence. To avoid further delay
in the matter, the present petition is, therefore, disposed of with the direction to
the petitioner to move the High-Powered Committee, if already in existence,
and, in case a High-Powered Committee is required to be constituted and/or set
up, to move the Cabinet Secretary of the Union for the constitution of the same
in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the Oil & Natural Gas
Corporation Ltd. (supra). Such a High-Powered Committee in consonance
with the terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court shall be constituted within
four weeks of the petitioner moving an application before the Cabinet Secretary
of the Union, if not already in existence, and shall take a decision on the present
case within four months from the date of its constitution. A copy of the
aforesaid decision shall be furnished to the counsel for both the parties.
4.

The petition stands disposed of with the aforesaid directions and

observations.

REVA KHETRAPAL,J
MAY 06, 2008
km

O.M.P. 353/2006

Page 4 of 4

