*
+

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO(OS) 209/2002
S.N.REKHI & ANR.
..... Appellants
Through: Mr.T.K.Ganju, Sr. Adv. with Mr.C.S.Gupta,
Mr.Bharat Gupta and Mr.R.K.Mishra,
Advocates.
versus
PAMILA MANMOHAN SINGH & OTHERS
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.Sandeep Sethi, Sr.Adv. With
Mr.Mahendra Rana and Mr.Lakshay
Sawhney, Advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

%
:

JUDGMENT
07.02.2008
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

We have heard the learned counsel for the parties on this appeal, which is filed

against the judgment and order dated 17.05.2002 passed by the learned Single Judge in
the suit, whereby the learned Single Judge has answered two issues on the basis of an
application filed under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
2.

The respondent herein, namely, Smt.Pamila Manmohan Singh instituted a suit for

declaration of right, title and interest in respect of the suit property and for for a decree
for possession and mesne profit. In paragraph-22 of the plaint, it was stated by her that as
per Section 14 of the Limitation Act, the period between 1981, that is the year when the
suit was instituted and 24.08.1993, that the date when the suit was dismissed in default

FAO(OS) 209/2002

Page 1 Of 3

and for non-prosecution, that is, 12 years has to be excluded in computing the period of
limitation for filing the suit regarding the suit filed in respect of authenticity of a gift
deed. A bare reading of the paragraph indicates that it was assumed by the respondent
herein that while filing the appeal that the suit was otherwise barred by limitation, but
the period of limitation is protected in view of the statement made in paragraph-22 of the
plaint. The said statement made in paragraph-22 was refuted by the appellant in his
written statement, contending as follows:
“22. Para 22 of the plaint is legally misconceived and is denied. As per
the allegations made, the suit is hopelessly barred by time and the same is
to be dismissed as per Section 3 of the Limitation Act. Section 14 of the
Limitation Act has got no application in excluding the period during which
the suit by defendants 1 & 2 has been prosecuted while the deceased
Dr.R.Kohli had full knowledge about the assertion of absolute ownership
of the subject property by Late Smt. Channo Devi and defendant No.1. It is
ridiculous on the part of the deceased Dr. R.Kohli and now by the plaintiff
to allege that gift deed which was executed and registered on 23.5.33 and
duly acted upon during all this time was not in their knowledge. The
plaintiff has devised a novel way, exclusive of the Limitation Act, for
computing the period of limitation for filing the suit. The plea is legally
misconceived and merits summary rejection”.
3.

In the light of the aforesaid pleadings of the parties, it appears to us that the said

issue with regard to as to whether the suit was barred by limitation could have been
decided only after the parties are allowed to lead their respective evidence on this aspect.
The said issue involves not only the question of fact, but also of law. In our considered
view, it was not proper for the learned Single Judge to consider the said issue only as an
issue of law and deciding the same on the basis of an application under Order VII Rule
11 of the Code of Civil Procedure and not giving the parties to lead any evidence.
4.

We hold that the said issue should now be decided by the learned Single Judge by

FAO(OS) 209/2002

Page 2 Of 3

allowing the parties to lead their respective evidence on this aspect. We are also
informed that so far the other issues are concerned, except for issue No.2, the trial
between the parties is proceeding before the learned Single Judge and the same is stated
to be at the stage of cross-examination of the defendants' witnesses.
5.

Insofar as the issue with regard to the cause of action is concerned, in our view,

the same could also be gone into at the stage of trial. In terms of this order, as to whether
the suit is barred by limitation, it would be open for the parties to lead their evidence
even now, for which the parties shall be given an opportunity to lead further evidence, if
any, in respect of the aforesaid issue only. So far the remaining issues which are stated to
be pending for consideration before the learned Single Judge are concerned, the same
may be proceeded with in accordance with law and all the issues shall now be decided
by the learned Single Judge in accordance with law as expeditiously as possible.
6.

The parties shall appear before the learned Single Judge on the date already fixed

there. It is also made clear that while deciding the aforesaid two issues, the learned
Single Judge shall not, in any manner, be persuaded or influenced by the impugned
judgment and order which stand more or less modified by us in terms of our above order.
7.

FAO(OS) 209/2002 stands disposed of in terms of the above order.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 07, 2008
dc

FAO(OS) 209/2002

Page 3 Of 3

