*

REPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) 113/2008
SWATCH LIMITED

..... Appellant
Through: Mr.Suhail Dutt and Mr.Digvijay Kumar,
Advocates.

Versus

PRIYA EXHIBITORS PRIVATE LIMITED
Through: None

..... Respondent

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

%
:

JUDGMENT
07.03.2008
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 20 December, 2007 whereby

th

the learned Single Judge, relying on the relevant provisions by which the parties are
governed and which have a binding effect on them, dismissed the suit filed by the
appellant on the ground that Courts at Delhi will have no jurisdiction to decide the
present matter. The relevant provisions as appear in the letter dated 1.07.2003, are
reproduced below for reference:“The legal effect of all dealings between the parties is to be
interpreted according to the internal laws of Switzerland. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, the parties expressly exclude the
applicability of the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Sale of Goods of April, 11, 1980.
FAO(OS) 113/2008

Page 1 of 5

All disputes and controversies arising between the parties are to
be submitted for determination exclusively to the Courts of the Canton
of Bern in Switzerland. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Swatch Ltd. may
at is option seek interim and permanent injunctive relief before any
Court or like judicial instance, which in the absence of the foregoing
provision, would have jurisdiction to grant the relief sought”.
2.

The learned Single Judge has held that though the appellant/plaintiff reserved

its rights to invoke jurisdiction of the Swiss Court and the application of Swiss laws
but it also kept an option with it to seek interim and permanent injunctive relief before
any Court, which in the absence of the provisions extracted above, would have
jurisdiction to grant the relief. It is also required to be mentioned at this stage that even
in the subsequent letters dated 18.7.2003, 25.7.2003 and 31.7.2003, these two
paragraphs have been repeated in verbatim. The expression used by the
appellant/plaintiff in the said clauses, according to the learned Single Judge, were in
the nature of ouster clause. It was held that Delhi Courts would have no jurisdiction to
decide the aforesaid suit. While coming to the aforesaid conclusion, the learned Single
th

Judge referred to the provisions of Halsbury’s Laws of India, 10 Edition, particularly
paragraphs 75.237 and 75.238. Reference was also made to the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in British India Steam Navitation Co.Ltd. Vs.
Shanmughavilas Cashew Industries and Others (1990) 3 Supreme Court Cases 481.
The following passage from British India Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. (supra) would
have relevance and, therefore, the same is extracted below for proper interpretation of
the provisions relevant for the purpose of deciding this case.
“28. Clause 3 of the bills of lading also contains the selection of law
made by the parties. The contract is governed by English law and
disputes are to be determined according to English law. Is the selection
of law binding? In Cheshire and North’s Private International Law
th
(11 edn., page 495), while discussing about the interpretation of

FAO(OS) 113/2008

Page 2 of 5

contract the authors say: “When the stage has been reached where an
obligation, formally and essentially valid and binding on parties of full
capacity, has been created, then in the further matters that may require
the intervention of the court, there is, speaking generally, no reason in
principle why the parties should not be free to select the governing
law.” The express choice of law made by parties obviates need for
interpretation.
29. In the absence of an express choice the question of the proper law
of contract would arise. The parties to a contract should be bound by
the jurisdiction clause to which they have agreed unless there is some
strong reason to the contrary.
30. Dicey and Morris in the Conflict of Laws formulate the following
rule on proper law of contract as Rule 180:
“Rule 180: The term “proper law of a contract” means the
system of law by which the parties intended the contract to be
governed, or, where their intention is neither expressed nor to be
inferred from the circumstances, the system of law with which the
transaction has its closest and most real connection.
Sub-rule 1: When the intention of the parties to a contract, as to
the law governing the contract, is expressed in words, this
expressed intention, in general, determines the proper law of the
contract.
Sub-rule 2: When the intention of the parties to a contract with
regard to the law governing the contract is not expressed in
words, their intention is to be inferred from the terms and nature
of the contract and from the general circumstances of the case,
and such inferred intention determines the proper law of the
contract.”
There can, therefore, be no doubt that the instant contract of
affreightment evidenced by the bills of lading will be governed by
English law. As the law has been chosen, the proper law will be the
domestic law of England and the proper law must be the law at the
time when the contract is made throughout the life of the contract and
there cannot be a “floating” proper law. It has been recognized since
Gienar v. Meyer that at the time of making the contract the parties may
expressly select the law by which it is to be governed and they may
declare their common intention by a simple statement that the contract
shall be governed by the law of a particular country. This has been
settled by a long line of decisions, as Rex v. International Trustee for
the Protection of Bondholders AG, Vita Food Products Inc v. Unus
Shipping Co. Ltd., James Miller and Partners Ltd. v. Whitworth Street

FAO(OS) 113/2008

Page 3 of 5

Estates (Manchester) Ltd., Mackender v. Feldia AG, Compagine
d’Armement Maritime SA v. Compagnie Tunisienne de Navigation SA,
Acrow (Automation) Ltd. v. Rex Chainbelt Inc”.
3.

The decision of the Supreme Court in A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. Vs.

A.P.Agencies, Salem, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1239, would have direct relevance
and, therefore, relevant portion is being extracted below.

“18……………….Thus, it is now a settled principle that where there
may be two or more competent Courts which can entertain a suit
consequent upon a part of the cause of action having arisen therewith,
if the parties to the contract agreed to vest jurisdiction in one such
court to try the dispute which might arise as between themselves the
agreement would be valid. If such a contract is clear, unambiguous and
explicit and not vague it is not hit by Ss.23 and 28 of the Contract Act.
This cannot be understood as parties contracting against the Statute.
Mercantile Law and practice permit such agreements.
21. From the foregoing decisions it can be reasonably deduced that
where such an ouster clause occurs, it is pertinent to see whether there
is ouster of jurisdiction of other Courts. When the clause is clear,
unambiguous and specific accepted notions of contract would bind the
parties and unless the absence of ad idem can be shown, the other
Courts should avoid exercising jurisdiction. As regards construction of
the ouster clause when words like ‘alone’, ‘only’, ‘exclusive’, and the
like have been used there may be no difficulty. Even without such
words in appropriate cases the maxim ‘expressio unius est exclusio
alterius’ – expression of one is the exclusion of another may be
applied. What is an appropriate case shall depend on the facts of the
case. In such a case mention of one thing may imply exclusion of
another. When certain jurisdiction is specified in a contract an
intention to exclude all others from its operation may in such cases be
inferred. It has therefore to be properly construed”
4.

A bare perusal of the aforesaid relevant clause in letters dated 11.07.2003,

18.07.2003,

25.07.2003

and

31.07.2003

would

disclose

that

what

the

plaintiff/appellant desired by incorporating the aforesaid provision was to stipulate
that a particular court would have jurisdiction to decide the dispute arising between the
parties. The aforesaid clause uses the expression “exclusively to the Courts of the

FAO(OS) 113/2008

Page 4 of 5

Canton of Bern in Switzerland”, which appears to us to be the ouster clause in respect
of all other courts. In paragraph-21 of the judgment in A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd.
(supra),

the Hon’ble Supreme Court has categorically and clearly stated that as

regards construction of the ouster clause, when words like ‘alone’, ‘only’, ‘exclusive’,
and the like have been used there may be no difficulty. Since the aforesaid clause
which is relied upon also has an expression which exclusively vests the territorial
jurisdiction on the Bern Court, the jurisdiction of all other courts is ousted and,
therefore, the learned Single Judge was justified in coming to the aforesaid conclusion.
5.

So far as the subsequent expression in the said clause is concerned, that was

applicable only when there is not a clause of the aforesaid nature governing the terms
and conditions of the agreement between the parties and only in that event it was
possible for the appellant/plaintiff to ask for interim order from any other court. The
contention of the counsel appearing for the appellant is that the defendant/respondent
has waived the objection. In our considered opinion, the same is not the case here, for
if jurisdiction by the act of parties is vested in a particular Court, there cannot be any
waiver so far that jurisdiction is concerned.
6.

We find no merit in this appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
MARCH 07, 2008
dc

FAO(OS) 113/2008

Page 5 of 5

