*

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : 11th March, 2008

+

LPA 128/2008 and C.M.No.3612/2008 (for impleadment and stay)
GABDOO SINGH MEMORIAL
EDUCATIONAL TRUST
..... Appellant
Through: Mr.Sumit Bansal and Mr.Manish Paliwal,
Advocates.
versus
D.D.A.

..... Respondent
Through: Mr.Rajiv Bansal, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

%

JUDGMENT
11.03.2008

:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 16th January, 2008 passed by the

learned Single Judge, whereby the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition filed
by the appellant-Trust. By the said writ petition, the appellant challenged legality of the
communication issued by the Delhi Development Authority rejecting the request for
allotment of adjacent land to the appellant under letter dated 16th March, 2001. The writ
petition was dismissed by the learned Single Judge on several grounds, one of them being
delay and laches in approaching the court. The second ground being that the appellant has

LPA 128/2008

Page 1 of 4

no vested right for allotment of any land. The other ground on which the writ petition of
the appellant was dismissed is the vacillating stand being taken by the appellant in
various representations submitted for allotment of the aforesaid land.
2.

Counsel for the appellant has submitted before us that the appellant was given a

hope by the respondent/DDA by stating that once it upgrades the school from nursery to
middle school, its request for allotment of adjacent land would be considered and
accordingly steps were taken by the appellant to get the school upgraded from nursery to
middle, to satisfy the requirement spelt out by the respondent/DDA. But despite the said
fact, the request of the appellant was turned down. We have considered the said
submission in the light of the records. The plot in question measuring around 1000 sq.
mtrs is adjacent to the land on which the appellant has already a nursery school which
also measures around 1000 sq. mtrs and was allotted by the respondent/DDA. The said
adjacent land was vacant and, therefore, the appellant filed an application seeking for
allotment of the said land also in favour of the appellant. The request of the appellant was
also forwarded by various Members of Parliament and the said request of the Members of
Parliament was also considered by the Delhi Development Authority, but the same was
rejected on the ground that the land user of the said adjacent land is meant for preprimary school and, therefore, the same cannot be allotted in favour of the appellant, as
the appellant requires the said land to establish the middle school upto class VIII.
3.

In this connection, we may however refer to the findings recorded by the learned

Single Judge in paragraph-5 of the impugned order, wherein, on perusal of the records,
the vacillating stand taken by the appellant while making the request for allotment of

LPA 128/2008

Page 2 of 4

additional land was recorded. Initially in the year 1994, in the representation submitted
for allotment of adjacent land, it was stated that the additional land was required for a
play field and park. The said plea was rejected by the respondent. Thereafter, in the year
1997, i.e., after another three year period, a plea was taken that there was an increase in
the number of students, therefore, additional land was required. Whereas on the third
occasion, a plea was taken by the school authorities that the said additional land was
required to establish a middle school upto class VIII. Even thereafter, a stand was taken
by the appellant that the land was required by the appellant for construction of a library,
audio-video room, music room, drama room, staff room, sand pit, etc.
4.

Therefore, it is established from the records which are referred to by the learned

Single Judge that the appellant has been giving different reasons and justifications and
taking vacillating stand with regard to the purpose for which the aforesaid land was
required. Counsel for the appellant has also taken us through some of the correspondence
between the appellant and respondent. It is true that at one stage, the respondent stated
that the request of the appellant could be considered if the school is upgraded, but finally
on the representations submitted by the Members of Parliament on behalf of the appellant
which are at pages 79 & 85 of the paper book before us, it was the consistent stand of the
respondent that the aforesaid additional land cannot be allotted in favour of the appellant
as the land was specifically meant only for nursery school, and that upgradation of the
school from nursery to middle school would not automatically entitle the appellant for
allotment of any additional land. The said Members of Parliament were also informed
that the aforesaid request of the appellant was considered and that in terms of the

LPA 128/2008

Page 3 of 4

planning norms, the request could not be acceded to. The said intimation was given by the
respondent to the appellant as far back as in 2001, whereas the writ petition came to be
filed in the year 2006. The learned Single Judge has held that delay in approaching the
court from 16th March, 2001 till 27th April, 2006 has also not been satisfactorily explained
in the writ petition.

In that view of the matter, there is also delay and laches in

approaching the court. It is also pointed out that the fact that the appellant has already
been allotted land for establishing a nursery school will not automatically entitle the
appellant to the allotment of additional land, and the appellant, therefore, will have no
vested right to get the additional land.
5.

In the above view of the matter, we find no merit in this appeal and the same is

accordingly dismissed.
6.

C.M.3612/2008 is also accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
MARCH
dc

11, 2008

LPA 128/2008

Page 4 of 4

