*

REPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 2450/2005 and CM Nos.15345-47/2005 and 11793/2007
RESERVED ON
: January 14, 2008
DATE OF DECISION : February , 2008
LAKSHMAN C.SAHA
..... Appellant
Through : Mr. Mathews J. Nedumpura, Advocate
versus
SPECIAL DIRECTOR OF ENFORCEMENT
& ORS.
..... Respondents
Through : Mr. Dalip Mehra, Advocate with
Mr. Rajiv Ranjan, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL

1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
JUDGMENT

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 13th September, 2005

passed by the learned Single Judge whereby the learned Single Judge dismissed
the writ petition on the ground of non-compliance with the orders dated
31.05.2005 directing the petitioner to deposit 25% of the penalty within six
weeks from the date of the order.
2.

The facts emerging from the record are that by a detailed order dated

LPA 2450/2005

Page 1 of 17

26th February, 1992, the Special Director, Directorate of Enforcement, New
Delhi, after recording the evidence of the parties and affording personal
hearing to the appellant on a number of dates, that is, 31.05.1990, 02.07.1990,
24.10.1990, 14.11.1990 and 28.11.1990 held that in view of the investigations,
it appeared that the appellant had received a total payment of Rs.1,55,87,155/during the period 1980 to 1987 from one Shri Ranjit Saha, a person resident in
India, at the instructions of his uncle Shri Pabitra Saha of Mymensingh,
Bangladesh, a person resident outside India. It also appeared that the said
Lakshman Saha had made total payments to the tune of Rs.1,51,92,935/- to
various persons in India during the said period at the instructions of the said
Shri Pabitra Saha of Bangladesh wihthout any general or special permission
from the Reserve Bank of India. It was further held that the receipt of total
payments of Rs.1,55,87,155/- and the making of payments of Rs.1,51,92,935/in the manner aforesaid was in contravention of the provisions of Section
9(1)(b) and Section 9(1)(d) respectively of the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1973 and accordingly called for the imposition of a total penalty of Rs.10
lakhs on the appellant to be paid at the office of the Enforcement Directorate,
Calcutta Zonal Office, Calcutta by means of a demand draft drawn in the
favour of the Deputy Director, Enforcement Directorate, Calcutta Zonal Office,
Calcutta within 45 days of the receipt of the order.
3.

Aggrieved by the above order of the Directorate of Enforcement, the

appellant preferred an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal for Foreign
Exchange, being Appeal No.239/1992 alongwith an application praying for
dispensing with the requirement of the deposit of the penalty amount of Rs.10
lakhs and for stay of the entire payment thereof during the pendency and till the

LPA 2450/2005

Page 2 of 17

disposal of the appeal. On 13th January, 2004, the Appellate Tribunal passed
the following order:
“APPELLATE TRIBUNAL FOR FOREIGN EXCHANGE
NEW DELHI-110 001
Appeal No.239 of 1992
Date: 13.1.2004
Appellant appears in person. Mr. Mahendra Singh,
Advocate, propose to appear for the appellant. DLA Dr.
Shamsuddin appears for the respondent. Heard both sides on
the question of waiver of penalty; having heard either side
and on perusal of records, we find no justifiable grounds for
waiver of the entire penalty amounts for pre-deposit as prayed
for by the appellant. However, 50% of the penalty amounts
stand waived for pre-deposit; the appellant is directed to
deposit 50% of the penalty amount i.e. Rs.5,00,000/-, within
60 days from today failing which the appeal will stand
dismissed for default. For hearing on disposal, the matter be
listed on 23.3.2004.
Sd/(O.P. NAHAR)
MEMBER
Sd/(SMT. P.N. SANTHAKUMARI)
MEMBER
Appelant
Appellant's Counsel
Director, Directorate of Enforcement, New Delhi
Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Kolkota
DLA, Directorate of Enforcement, New Delhi
Office Folder”
4.

Despite the passing of the above order, the appellant failed to make pre-

deposit of 50% of the amount of penalty within 60 days and instead filed an
application for modification of the order, which was taken up for hearing on
28th May, 2004 and was also dismissed on the same day as not maintainable.
Eventually, on 8th September, 2004, the appeal itself was dismissed for noncompliance of the order dated 13.01.2004 directing the appellant to deposit
50% of the amount of penalty, that is, Rs.5 lakhs. A review petition seeking
recall/review of the order of the Appellate Tribunal dated 8th September, 2004
met with a similar fate and was also dismissed, resulting in the appellant filing
LPA 2450/2005

Page 3 of 17

a writ petition before this Court, being WP(C) No.10109/2005.
5.

The said writ petition came up for hearing before a learned Single Judge

of this Court on 31st May, 2005 when the following order was passed:
“IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 10109/2005
LAKSHMAN C. SAHA
....Petitioner
Through Mr. J. Nedumpara Mathews,
Adv.
Versus
SPECIAL DIRECTOR OF ENFORCEMEN ....Respondent
Through Mr. Rakesh Tiku, Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
ORDER
31.05.2005
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
inasmuch as by a judicial pronouncement of this court, the
proviso to Rule 5 of the notification reserving two posts of the
Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange for members of the
Indian Legal Service has been held to be unconstitutional
and void, the petitioner does not press prayer (iv) and leave
is sought to withdraw the same. Leave granted. The writ
petition is confined to consideration of prayers (i) to (iii) and
(v) to (x).
Issue notice to the respondents to show cause why rule
nisi be not issued, returnable on 13th September, 2005.
Mr. Rakesh Tiku, advocate accepts notice on behalf of
the respondents and prays for time to file a reply. Let the
reply be filed within four weeks. Rejoinder thereto within
two weeks thereafter.
List on 13th September, 2005.
CM No.7425/2005
Exemption allowed subject to just exceptions.
CM No.7423/2005
Issue notice.
Mr. Rakesh Tiku, advocate accepts notice on behalf of
the respondents. Let the reply be filed within four weeks.
Rejoinder thereto within two weeks thereafter.
It is directed that in the meantime, subject to the
petitioner depositing 25% of the penalty amount within six
weeks from today, no coercive action shall be taken for
recovery of the amount till the next date of hearing.
List on 13th September, 2005.
Dasti.
Sd/(GITA MITTAL, J.)
MAY 31, 2005”
LPA 2450/2005

Page 4 of 17

6.

Aggrieved by the order dated 31st May, 2005, the appellant/petitioner

filed a review application, being CM No.8235/2005, for modification of the
said order to the limited extent of waiver of the condition requiring him to
deposit 25% of the penalty imposed within six weeks as a pre-condition for
stay of the coercive recovery proceedings on the ground of financial
constraints.

On consideration of the application, the following order was

passed by the learned Single Judge of this Court (HMJ Vikramajit Sen) on July
12, 2005:
“IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM No.8235/2005 in W.P.(C) 10109/2005
LAKSHMAN C. SAHA
....Petitioner
Through Mr. J. Nedumpara Mathews,
Adv.
Versus
SPECIAL DIRECTOR OF ENFORCEMEN
....Respondent
Through None
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
ORDER
12.07.2005
On 31.5.2005, Ms. Gita Mittal, J. had directed the
Petitioner to deposit twenty five per cent of the penalty within
six weeks. A perusal of the Order shows that a detailed
hearing was granted to the Petitioner on that date. The only
intervening change is the change in the Roster. This is not a
ground for modifying an Order previously passed, which has
not even been complied with.
I find no merit in the application. Dismissed.
Sd/(VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.)
JULY 12, 2005”
7.

On 13th September, 2005, after perusal of the orders dated May 31, 2005

as well as July 12, 2005 passed on the review petition, the impugned order
dismissing the writ petition on the ground that the appellant's case did not
warrant the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution was
passed against which the present appeal has been preferred.
LPA 2450/2005

Page 5 of 17

8.

We have gone through the records and heard the learned counsel for the

appellant who has assailed the order of the learned Single Judge as cryptic and
submitted before us that the appellant's failure to comply with the interim order
can have only one consequence in law, i.e., that he will not be protected against
the prosecution proceedings. Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other
hand, sought to support the order on the ground that the appellant was involved
in a Hawala transaction involving a sum of Rs.1.55 crores on which he had
earned a profit/commission of about Rs.4 lakhs and that there was ample
evidence in support thereof as evidenced by the order of the Enforcement
Directorate, apart from the appellant's own statement of admission and the
statement of the 17 persons to whom payments to the tune of about Rs.1.51
crores had been made without any general or special permission from the
Reserve Bank of India. All the recipients had named the appellant as the
person from whom payments had been received by them.
9.

The limited question which arises for consideration in the present appeal

is whether the writ petition of the appellant, being WP(C) No.10109/2005 was
liable to be dismissed for non-compliance of the order of pre-deposit of 25% of
the penalty amount.
10.

Relying upon the provisions of Section 52(2) of the Foreign Exchange

Regulation Act, 1973, which are pari materia with Section 19(1) of the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999, the appellant contended that where the predeposit of the penalty amount would cause “undue hardship” to the person
appealing against the order of the adjudicating authority levying any penalty,
the Appellate Tribunal may dispense with such deposit. For the facility of
reference, the said provisions are extracted below:

LPA 2450/2005

Page 6 of 17

FERA 1973

FEMA 1999

52. Appeal to Appellate
Board
(2) Any person aggrieved by
such order my, on payment
of such fee as may be
prescribed
and
after
depositing the sum imposed
by way of penalty under
section 50 and within fortyfive days from the date on
which the order is served on
the person committing the
contravention, prefer an
appeal to the Appellate
Board:
Provided that the Appellate
Board may entertain any
appeal after the expiry of
the said period of forty-five
days, but not after ninety
days from the date aforesaid
if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing
the appeal in time:

19. Appeal to Appellate
Tribunal
(1) Save as provided in subsection (2), the Central
Government or any person
aggrieved by an order made
by an Adjudicating Authority,
other than those referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 17,
or the Special Director
(Appeals), may prefer an
appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal:

Provided further that where
the Appellate Board is of
opinion that the deposit to
be made will cause undue
hardship to the appellant, it
may, in its own discretion,
dispense with such a deposit
either unconditionally or
subject to such conditions
as it may deem fit.

11.

Provided that any person
appealing against the order of
the Adjudicating Authority or
the
Special
Director
(Appeals) levying any penalty,
shall while filing the appeal,
deposit the amount of such
penalty with such authority as
may be notified by the Central
Government:
Provided further that where
in any particular case, the
Appellate Tribunal is of the
opinion that the deposit of
such penalty would cause
undue hardship to such
person,
the
Appellate
Tribunal may dispense with
such deposit subject to such
conditions as it may deem fit
to impose so as to safeguard
the realisation of penalty.

A bare glance at the provisions of Sub-Section (2) of Section 52 is

sufficient to show that the pre-condition for the right to prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Board is the deposit of the sum imposed by way of penalty under
Section 50. The second proviso to Sub-Section (2), however, provides that
where the Appellate Board is of the opinion that the deposit to be made will

LPA 2450/2005

Page 7 of 17

cause “undue hardship” to the appellant, it may, in its own discretion, dispense
with such deposit either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may
deem fit.
12.

In a recent judgment, the Supreme Court in the case of Indu Nissan

Oxo Chemicals Ind. Ltd. vs. Union of India and Ors. 2008 AIR SCW 151
while dealing with a similar provision in Section 129E of the Customs Act (52
of 1962) held that while dealing with the application for waiver of deposit
pending appeal, twin requirements for consideration, i.e., consideration of
undue hardship aspect and imposition of conditions to safeguard the interest of
Revenue, have to be kept in view. Undue hardship is a matter within the
special knowledge of the applicant for waiver of deposit pending appeal and
has to be established by him. A mere assertion about undue hardship would not
be sufficient. For hardship to be “undue”, it must be shown that the particular
burden to have to observe or perform the requirement is out of proportion to
the nature of the requirement itself, and the benefit which the applicant would
derive from compliance with it.
13.

Reference is also invited to a decision rendered by the Supreme Court in

the case of Union of India and Anr. vs. Adani Exports Ltd. and Anr. 2007
AIR SCW 7134, wherein the relevant aspects while considering the prayer for
dispensation of pre-deposit have been highlighted thus:
“The three aspects to be focussed while dealing with such
applications are (a) prima facie case (b) balance of
convenience and (c) irreparable loss.”
It was further laid down by the Supreme Court in the said decision that
even when the Tribunal decides to grant full or partial stay relating to predeposit, it has to impose “such conditions as may be necessary to safeguard

LPA 2450/2005

Page 8 of 17

the interest of the revenue. This is an imperative requirement of Section
129E of the Act.”
14.

A Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in Keramos vs. CEGAT,

New Delhi (2003) 153 ELT 301 (Delhi) while dealing with a similar provision
in Section 35E of the Central Excise Act, 1944 noted as under:
“The provisions are mandatory in nature and failure to
deposit the amount in question renders the appeal
incompetent.
The factors to be kept in mind while
considering an application for waiver of deposit are well
established. These are a prima facie case in favour of the
applicant, the balance of convenience qua deposit or
otherwise, irreparable loss, if any, to be caused in case
waiver is not granted and safeguarding of public interest.”
15.

In S. Vasudeva vs. State of Karnataka and Ors. AIR 1994 SC 923, it

was held that under Indian conditions the expression “undue hardship” is
normally related to economic hardship, but it is now well established that
“undue hardship” means something which is not warranted by the conduct of
the claimant or is very much disproportionate to it. Undue hardship is caused
when hardship is not warranted by the circumstances. (see Indu Nissan Oxo
Chemicals Ind. Ltd. vs. Union of India and Ors. 2008 AIR SCW 151).
16.

In Oxford English Dictionary, the meaning of word “undue hardship” is

given as unwarranted or inappropriate because excessive or disproportionate.
Strouds Judicial Dictionary gives the following meaning to the word “undue
hardship” as per judicial decisions cited therein:
“For a hardship to be undue it must be shown in my opinion
that the particular burden to the applicant to have to observe
or perform the requirement is out of proportion to the nature
of requirement itself and the benefit which the applicant
would derive from compliance with it. (Re Walsh (1944) VLR
147).
Again in Liberian Shipping Corpn Pegorus v. Kingsons
(1967) 2 KB 86 it is given as But even if a claimant has been
at fault himself, it is an undue hardship, if the consequences
LPA 2450/2005

Page 9 of 17

17.

are out of proportion to his fault.”
In Bank of Baroda vs. Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange, a

Single Judge of this Court after noticing the legal provisions and the judicial
pronouncements with regard to pre-deposit of amount involved in disposal of
an appeal under Section 19 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
observed as follows:
“7. From the foregoing judicial pronouncements, as noted
above, the position, which emerges is that the Tribunal while
considering any application for waiver of deposit is to take
into account firstly the existence of a prima facie case In
case, it is found that a party has a very strong prima facie
case, and/or where the errors in the impugned order are writ
large on the record, in such a case, it would be competent for
the court in the exercise of its jurisdiction to grant waiver of
pre-deposit since in such a case requiring a pre-deposit itself
would amount to undue hardship. What is a prima facie case
is well settled? It refers to an arguable or triable case. The
Tribunal once it comes to the conclusion on perusal of the
pleadings, documents and on hearing of the parties that there
is a good prima facie case to be considered, the next step in
exercise of discretion is determining the quantum of waiver to
be granted. In determination of the quantum of waiver,
factors, such as, balance of convenience, financial hardship
of the parties, its capacity to pay or secure the amount and
irreparable loss are to be considered. The said discretion is
to be exercised in accordance with well settled principles for
exercise of judicial discretion.”
18.

In the instant case, the primary challenge of the appellant to the order of

the Tribunal and of the learned Single Judge is that financial hardship will be
caused to him in case dispensation of penalty is not granted to him. However,
in order to satisfy ourselves, we have considered the prima facie merits of the
appellant's case and keeping in view the overwhelming evidence produced by
the respondent before the Special Director, Enforcement, we are satisfied that
the direction given by the Appellate Tribunal for pre-deposit of 50% of the
amount of penalty as pre-condition for the disposal of the appeal was justified.
Despite this, the learned Single Judge, on a writ petition filed by the appellant
LPA 2450/2005

Page 10 of 17

assailing the order, not only issued notice of the writ petition but scaled down
the amount of pre-deposit to 25% of the penalty as a pre-condition for the
consideration of the writ petition. The appellant, however, failed to comply
even with the said condition and thus his writ petition came to be dismissed by
the order of the learned Single Judge, which is under challenge before us.
19.

While considering the effect of non-compliance of the order passed

under Section 129(1) of the Customs Act, 1962 for deposit of the penalty
amount, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Navin Chandra Chhotelal vs. Central
Board of Excise & Customs and Ors. (1971) 1 SCC 289 held that where predeposit was not made in compliance with the provisions of the Section or with
any order that may be passed thereunder, the Appellate Authority is fully
competent to reject the appeal for non-compliance with the statutory provisions
and in such a case the Appellate Authority cannot proceed to hear an appeal on
merits. Paragraphs 18 and 19 of the judgment are apposite and are extracted
below:
“18. No doubt Section 129 does not expressly provide for
the rejection of the appeal for non-compliance with the
requirement regarding the deposit of penalty or duty, but
when sub-section (1) of Section 129 makes it obligatory on an
appellant to deposit the duty or penalty pending the appeal
and if a party does not comply either with the main subsection or with any order that may be passed under the
proviso, the Appellate Authority is fully competent to reject
the appeal for non-compliance with the provisions of Section
129(1). That is exactly what the first respondent has done in
this case. Accepting the contention of Mr. Trevedi will mean
that the appeal will have to be kept on file for ever even when
the requirement of Section 129(1) has not been complied
with. Retention of such an appeal on file will serve no
purpose whatsoever because unless Section 129(1) is
complied with, the Appellate Authority cannot proceed to
hear an appeal on merits.
Therefore, the logical
consequence of failure to comply with Section 129(1) is the
rejection of appeal on that ground.
19. No doubt, the rejection of the appeal by the first
LPA 2450/2005

Page 11 of 17

respondent will mean that the appellant is bound by the order
of the third respondent levying penalty. Such a result has
been brought about only by the default of the appellant in
complying with the order of the first respondent to deposit
half the amount of penalty. Therefore, it follows that the
rejection of the appeal by the first respondent was legal and
the order of the High Court dismissing the writ petition is
valid.”
20.

A Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of

Anant Mills Co. Ltd. vs. State of Gujarat and Ors. (1975) 2 SCC 175 while
examining the right of a person to file a statutory appeal held that it was
perfectly within the power of the legislature while granting the right of appeal
to impose conditions for the exercise of such right. In paragraph 40 of its
judgment, the Constitution Bench held as follows:
“40. After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties, we
are unable to subscribe to the view taken by the High Court.
Section 406(2)(e) as amended states that no appeal against a
rateable value or tax fixed or charged under the Act shall be
entertained by the Judge in the case of an appeal against a
tax or in the case of an appeal made against a rateable value
after a bill for any property tax assessed upon such value has
been presented to the appellant, unless the amount claimed
from the appellant has been deposited by him with the
Commissioner. According to the proviso to the above clause,
where in any particular case the Judge is of opinion that the
deposit of the amount by the appellant will cause undue
hardship to him, the Judge may in his discretion dispense
with such deposit or part thereof, either unconditionally or
subject to such conditions as he may deem fit. The object of
the above provision apparently is to ensure the deposit of the
amount claimed from an appellant in case he seeks to file an
appeal against a tax or against a rateable value after a bill
for any property tax assessed upon such value has been
presented to him. Power at the same time is given to the
appellate Judge to relieve the appellant from the rigour of the
above provision in case the Judge is of the opinion that it
would cause undue hardship to the appellant.
The
requirement about the deposit of the amount claimed as a
condition precedent to the entertainment of an appeal which
seeks to challenge the imposition or the quantum of that tax,
in our opinion, has not the effect of nullifying the right of
appeal, especially when we keep in view the fact that
discretion is vested in the appellate Judge to dispense with
LPA 2450/2005

Page 12 of 17

the compliance of the above requirement. All that the
statutory provision seeks to do is to regulate the exercise of
the right of appeal. The object of the above provision is to
keep in balance the right of appeal, which is conferred upon a
person who is aggrieved with the demand of tax made from
him, and the right of the Corporation to speedy recovery of
the tax. The impugned provision accordingly confers a right
of appeal and at the same time prevents the delay in the
payment of the tax. We find ourselves unable to accede to the
argument that the impugned provision has the effect of
creating a discrimination as is offensive to the principle of
equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution. It is
significant that the right of appeal is conferred upon all
persons who are aggrieved against the determination of tax
or rateable value. The bar created by Section 406(2)(e) to
the entertainment of the appeal by a person who has not
deposited the amount of tax due from him and who is not able
to show to the appellate Judge that the deposit of the amount
would cause him undue hardship arises out of his own
omission and default. The above provision, in our opinion,
has not the effect of making invidious distinction or creating
two classes with the object of meting out differential
treatment to them; it only spells out the consequences flowing
from the omission and default of a person who despite the
fact that the deposit of the amount found due from him would
cause him no hardship, declines of his own volition to deposit
that amount. The right of appeal is the creature of a statute.
Without a statutory provision creating such a right the
person aggrieved is not entitled to file an appeal. We fail to
understand as to why the Legislature while granting the
right of appeal cannot impose conditions for the exercise of
such right. In the absence of any special reasons there
appears to be no legal or constitutional impediment to the
imposition of such conditions. It is permissible, for example,
to prescribe a condition in criminal cases that unless a
convicted person is released on bail, he must surrender to
custody before his appeal against the sentence of
imprisonment would be entertained.
Likewise, it is
permissible to enact a law that no appeal shall lie against an
order relating to an assessment of tax unless the tax had been
paid. Such a provision was on the statute book in Section 30
of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. The proviso to that
section provided that “. . . no appeal shall lie against an
order under sub-section (1) of Section 46 unless the tax had
been paid”. Such conditions merely regulate the exercise of
the right of appeal so that the same is not abused by a
recalcitrant party and there is no difficulty in the
enforcement of the order appealed against in case the
appeal is ultimately dismissed. It is open to the Legislature
to impose an accompanying liability upon a party upon
LPA 2450/2005

Page 13 of 17

whom legal right is conferred or to prescribe conditions for
the exercise of the right. Any requirement for the discharge
of that liability or the fulfilment of that condition in case the
party concerned seeks to avail of the said right is a valid
piece of legislation, and we can discern no contravention of
Article 14 in it. A disability or disadvantage arising out of a
party's own default or omission cannot be taken to be
tantamount to the creation of two classes offensive to Article
14 of the Constitution, especially when that disability or
disadvantage operates upon all persons who make the default
or omission.”
21.

A Full Bench of the Delhi High Court in Shri Shyam Kishore vs.

Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Ors. AIR (1991) Delhi 104 relying upon
the judgment of the Supreme Court in Anant Mills Co. Ltd. vs. State of
Gujarat and Ors. (1975) 2 SCC 175 and the subsequent decision of the
Supreme Court in Nand Lal vs. State of Haryana AIR 1980 SC 2097 on the
same lines, affirmed that the right to appeal is a statutory right and can be
circumscribed by the conditions in the grant and that there is no absolute right
of appeal and held as under:
“................................There is no absolute right of appeal and
it being not a right under the Constitution, there is nothing
wrong in the statute making a provision of conditional appeal
and a person desirous of availing the provision to appeal has
to comply with the conditions.”
22.

It was further held by the Full Bench in the aforesaid case that as a

matter of practice and procedure, the Court should not normally permit the
aggrieved party to abandon the normal remedies of appeal under the Act in
favour of a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, unless any
action is taken without jurisdiction or if the Court comes to the conclusion that
the alternative remedy provided under the Act is not adequate and cannot
inspire confidence inasmuch as it would amount to an appeal from “Caesar to
Caesar”. In such circumstances alone, the existence of an alternative remedy

LPA 2450/2005

Page 14 of 17

would not bar the exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution.
23.

Applying the above law to the instant case and on examination of the

records, we find that though the case of the appellant is that in view of his
extremely weak financial condition the appellant is not in a position to deposit
any amount as deposit towards penalty amount, the records of the writ petition,
being WP(C) No.10109/2005, reveal that the the appellant sought modification
of the order of the learned Single Judge dated 31st May, 2005 requiring him to
deposit 25% of the penalty imposed within six weeks as a pre-condition for
stay of the coercive recovery proceedings on the mere strength of a purported
certificate issued by a local MLA certifying that his monthly income did not
exceed Rs.15,000/- to Rs.18,000/- per annum. Significantly, only an unsigned
typed copy thereof was filed, without even placing the original on record. Not
only this, the appellant/petitioner averred that though he had sought income
certificates from the revenue authorities, the same had been refused to him, but
not a scrap of paper to substantiate even this contention was placed on record
by him.
24.

It is also not in dispute that in the meanwhile, the appellant has been

convicted by the Court of the Metropolitan Magistrate, 5th Court, Calcutta
under Section 57 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 for not
depositing the penalty which was the subject matter of the appeal before the
Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange and the said conviction has been
upheld by the District Court in the appeal preferred by him therefrom.
Apparently, the appellant thereafter preferred a criminal revision petition
before the High Court of Calcutta, which was listed for final hearing on 6th

LPA 2450/2005

Page 15 of 17

August, 2007. The fate of the said criminal revision petition, however, has not
been disclosed by the appellant to this Court.
25.

We are referring to the aforesaid facts to show that the conviction of the

appellant under Section 57 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 by
the Court of the Metropolitan Magistrate, 5th Court, Calcutta and the dismissal
of his appeal therefrom sufficiently indicate that the appellant has no prima
facie case in his favour, let alone a strong prima facie case. So far as financial
hardship is concerned, there is nothing on record to indicate that the appellant
has a meagre income as claimed by him. The writ records also show that a
sufficient hearing was afforded to the appellant before directing him to pay
25% of the penalty amount amounting to Rs.2.5 lakhs. The appellant having
failed to comply with the said order, the order for dismissal of his writ petition
cannot be faulted.
26.

In our considered opinion, both the Tribunal and the learned Single

Judge considered not only the aspect of whether or not a prima facie case is
made out, but have also considered the financial hardship aspect. The learned
Single Judge, on the plea of the appellant, scaled down the penalty amount
from 50% to 25% after considering all the facts and circumstances, but the
appellant failed to make payment of the pre-deposit amount despite
modification of the order and also regardless of several adjournments granted
to him for the aforesaid purpose.
27.

Having considered the findings recorded by the Special Director,

Enforcement, the Tribunal and the learned Single Judge, we do not think this to
be an appropriate case where the appellant is entitled to any relief. The appeal

LPA 2450/2005

Page 16 of 17

has no merit and is accordingly dismissed.

CM Nos.15345-47/2005 and

11793/2007 also stand disposed of.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

CHIEF JUSTICE
FEBRUARY
km

, 2008

LPA 2450/2005

Page 17 of 17

