*
+

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
LPA 21/2008 and CM Nos.548-551/2008

%

Date of Decision: 14th January, 2008
SUNITA RANI SHARMA
Through: In person
versus
DELHI BAR ASSOCIATION & ORS
Through

1.

..... Appellant
..... Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
JUDGMENT
14.01.2008

%
:
1.

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)
This appeal is directed against the order dated 06.09.2007 passed by the learned

Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant on the ground that the
grievances of the appellant should be raised before the appropriate forum and the said
dispute should be allowed to be resolved through arbitration.
2.

The appellant herein filed a writ petition in this Court seeking for issuance of a

direction to the Delhi Bar Association to hand over to her complete charge of the library
as she allegedly was elected to the post of Library In-charge on 29.09.2006.

LPA 21/2008

Page 1 of 4

3.

The appellant, who appears in person, has submitted before us that the learned

Single Judge erred in holding that a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India is not maintainable against the Delhi Bar Association as, according to her, the
Delhi Bar Association has failed to discharge statutory duties, which are cast upon them.
She has also assailed the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge contending, inter
alia, that the said findings are wrong and erroneous. She has specifically stated before us
that the Constitution of the Delhi Bar Association does not permit resolution of dispute
by filing a suit, but has fairly submitted that such disputes, if any, could be resolved
through the process of arbitration, for which there is a specific provision in the said
Constitution of the Delhi Bar Association.
4.

The learned Single Judge has held that the grievance of the appellant is directed

against the functioning of the Delhi Bar Association, which is a registered Society,
comprising of Advocates who practise in the law courts of Delhi. In the particular issue
which is raised, it was held that, there is no element of public law, and only because the
Delhi Bar Council donates money occasionally for the functioning of the Delhi Bar
Association, the same would not equate the Bar Association to an authority or a public
body against which proceedings are maintainable under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India.
5.

We find no error in the aforesaid findings of the learned Single Judge. The Delhi

Bar Council, no doubt, discharges a statutory obligation as cast upon it, but same
LPA 21/2008

Page 2 of 4

position cannot be said to be applicable so far as the Delhi Bar Association is concerned,
which is a registered Society. The Constitution of the Delhi Bar Association also
specifically provides that any dispute between a member of the Society and the Society,
i.e., the Delhi Bar Association should be resolved through the process of arbitration.
There is no element of public law involved in the issue which is sought to be raised nor
in the dispute which is sought to be raised in the present writ petition and the appeal
arising therefrom. The learned Single Judge was, therefore, right in holding that the writ
petition is not maintainable under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
6.

Appellant appearing in person relies upon a decision of the Kerala High Court in

the case of V. Abdul Azeez and Ors. vs. The Alappuzha Bar Association and
Anr. reported in AIR 1993 Kerala 201. The facts of the said case are completely
different as the Bar Association had expelled certain members. A learned Single Judge
of the Kerala High Court held that the fundamental right of the members concerned to
practise their profession was violated by their expulsion from the Bar Association and,
therefore, it was held that the writ petition is maintainable. It was observed that since
welfare stamps to be affixed on every vakalat could be sold by the Bar Association only
to members of the Association, expulsion from membership of the Bar Association
virtually disabled the petitioners from practising the profession. Clearly, the facts of the
said case are distinguishable from the facts of the present case and, therefore, have no
application in the present case, as we have already held, no issue of public law is
LPA 21/2008

Page 3 of 4

involved.
LPA 21/2008 and CM Nos.548-551/2008 are accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE
REVA KHETRAPAL, J
JANUARY 14, 2008
km

LPA 21/2008

Page 4 of 4

