*

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 69/2008

%

Date of Decision: 15th February, 2008
SHRI RAM PRAKASH
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. N.S. Dalal, Advocate
versus
GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Sanjay Poddar, Standing
Counsel (LA)
Ms. Nidhi Minocha, Advocate for
Ms. Suparna Srivastava, Standing
Counsel for MCD
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
JUDGMENT
15.02.2008

%
:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

The present appeal is filed against the order dated 20.12.2007

passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed.
2.

The appellant filed the writ petition contending, inter alia, and

admitting the position that large chunk of land including the land
standing in the name of predecessors in interest of the appellant
was required by the State Government.
LPA 69/2008

It is also an admitted
Page 1 of 4

position that the total area of Khasra No.30/8/2 measuring 2 bighas
9 biswas was also a part of the said land which was acquired under
notification issued by the respondents. However, possession of the
said land was taken in respect of only 2 bighas 6 biswas which is
indicated from the possession proceedings dated 13th July, 1978.
The appellant, however, in the writ petition restricts his complaint in
respect of the remaining 3 biswas of land contending, inter alia,
that the appellant had a built up property there and the said land
could not have been taken possession of.

It appears from the

records that the appellant had already filed another writ petition
registered as W.P.(C) No.5517/1993 assailing the acquisition and
seeking quashing of the award. In that writ petition, order of status
quo was passed.
3.

Counsel appearing for the respondents states that no

description of the aforesaid 3 biswas of land was submitted by the
appellant in the present proceedings and that the petition is vague
and that a suit is also filed for payment of damages which cannot
be determined in a writ petition of this nature. The learned Single
Judge held that possession is taken pursuant to an award which has
been passed in exercise of the powers under Land Acquisition Act
and, therefore, there is no merit in the writ petition. Admittedly also,
possession has already been taken over from the appellant in
respect of the aforesaid land and the property standing thereon
has been demolished as stated by the appellant. What is sought to
by this writ petition is restoration of possession and payment of
LPA 69/2008

Page 2 of 4

damages. So far as payment of damages are concerned, it cannot
be ascertained and determined in a writ petition of this nature for
which, in our considered opinion, a proper suit may have to be filed
claiming such damages, if not already filed. So far as the issue of
restoration of possession is concerned, the appellant has already
filed a writ petition assailing the acquisition.
4.

Counsel appearing for the respondents has rightly pointed out

that if the appellant has any grievance in respect of the possession,
the same can also be subject matter of the aforesaid writ petition.
We find force in the submission of the counsel appearing for the
respondents.
5.

We accordingly dismiss this writ petition with an observation

that if in the pending writ petition any such grievance is raised, the
same shall be considered.

CHIEF JUSTICE

FEBRUARY 15, 2008
km

LPA 69/2008

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

Page 3 of 4

+

* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
LPA 69/2008

SHRI RAM PRAKASH
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. N.S. Dalal, Advocate
versus
GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Sanjay Poddar, Standing Counsel
(LA)
Ms. Nidhi Minocha, Advocate for
Ms. Suparna Srivastava, Standing
Counsel for MCD

Registry has pointed out that by typographical error, the
word ‘writ petition’ has been inadvertently typed instead of the
word `appeal’ in the order dated 15th February, 2008. The same is
accordingly being corrected at all the relevant places.

CHIEF JUSTICE

FEBRUARY 29, 2008

LPA 69/2008

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

Page 4 of 4

