*

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 1315/2007 and CM No.14906/2007

%

Date of Decision: 17th January, 2008
FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Kamal Sawhney, Advocate
versus
SHRI GAURITOSH KAR
Through

..... Respondent

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

JUDGMENT
17.01.2008

%

:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 30.07.2007 passed by the learned

Single Judge on the review application filed by the appellant and also seeking recall of
the order dated 31.08.2005 passed by the learned Single Judge partly allowing the writ
petition filed by the respondent.
2.

The respondent filed a writ petition seeking for a direction to the appellant to

release the payment of the Contributory Provident Fund (CPF) amount – respondent's
contribution as well as the matching contribution of the appellant Corporation credited to
the account of the petitioner. In the counter-affidavit, the stand taken by the appellant
was that the respondent had not applied for release of the amount in the prescribed

LPA 1315/2007

Page 1 of 4

proforma and in accordance with the established procedure and, therefore, the said
amount was not released. During the course of arguments of the writ petition, it was also
stated by the counsel appearing for the appellant that the CPF amounts credited to the
account of the respondent as well as the employer's matching contribution could be
released if the respondent applies as per the proforma. In view of the nature of the
statements made, the learned Single Judge proceeded to dispose of the writ petition with
a direction that the respondent would approach the appellant Corporation and comply
with the necessary formalities required for the release of the CPF amount credited in his
account as well as the employer's matching contribution. The said orders were required
to be complied within a period of four weeks.
3.

It is thus established from the records that at that stage the only stand that was

taken by the appellant was that the respondent had not applied for the release of the
amount in the prescribed proforma and if he did so, the entire amount could be released
in his favour. However, it transpires that a review application was filed in which some
new facts were alleged by the appellant. It was submitted that Regulation 27(1)(c) of the
Regulation framed by the Food Corporation of India known as the Food Corporation of
India Contributory Fund Regulations, 1967 would apply and that in view of the
provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1944 the properties of the appellant
including his CPF Fund was liable to be attached.
4.

It was contended that the respondent alongwith Mr. V.P. Hasija and others

working in the CPF Department of the Food Corporation of India had allegedly
embezzled amounts to the tune of Rs.61 lakhs by making short payments to 2004
employees of the Corporation. On the basis of the aforesaid misconduct, a departmental
proceeding was also initiated against him and later an application under Section 11 of the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1944 was made for the attachment of his properties. The
said application filed was, however, rejected on 04.07.2005. It was also contended that
Regulation 27(1)(c) of the Regulations would be applicable and that in terms of the said
LPA 1315/2007

Page 2 of 4

provision, the appellant would be within its right to deduct the entire amount due to
liability incurred by the member of the fund. The said contentions, which are again
sought to be raised here, were considered by the learned Single Judge, but the same did
not find favour for the reasons given in the order on the review passed by the learned
Single Judge.
5.

It is submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant that the findings

recorded by the learned Single Judge are incorrect. The fact, however, remains that in
the counter-affidavit filed by the Corporation no such stand was taken that they had filed
an application under Section 11 seeking attachment of the property, which was
dismissed, nor any reliance was placed on Regulation 27. The said facts came to be
placed before the learned Single Judge only through the review application. Despite the
said fact, the learned Single Judge considered the applicability of the provisions of
Regulation 27(1)(c), which provides that the power to effect deduction from the
employer's contribution could be made in the event of liability incurred by the member of
the Corporation.
6.

However, the stage for deduction is yet to come, for, the criminal case has not

been decided and no order of punishment has been passed. The criminal proceedings
initiated against the respondent are yet not complete. A prayer was made for issuing an
order of attachment and also for passing an order on the basis of the application under
Section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act for attachment of the properties, but the
said application too was rejected. It was held by the learned Single Judge that the
expression “liability” would mean a determined legal liability. That stage having not
come as yet, in our considered opinion, it is too far fetched to argue that the appellant has
the power to deduct the amount at this stage.
7.

On going through the order recorded by the learned Single Judge, we find that the

order is just and proper and that it contains reasons, which are very cogent. We find no
ground to interfere with the aforesaid order passed by the learned Single Judge.
LPA 1315/2007

Page 3 of 4

LPA 1315/2007 and CM No.14906/2007 are accordingly dismissed. However,
we make it clear that in case the criminal case is ultimately decided against the
respondent, in that event the amount which is paid to the respondent could be recovered
and deducted from the respondent in accordance with law.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
JANUARY 17, 2008
km

LPA 1315/2007

Page 4 of 4

