UNREPORTED
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

LPA NO.424-426/2006

%

Date of decision : January 17, 2008

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

... Appellants
Through Mr. Ashwani Bhardwaj,
Advocate.
VERSUS

ASHOK KUMAR & ORS.

... Respondents
Through Mr. Varun Prasad,
Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment ?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ (ORAL) :
1.

This appeal arises out of the impugned order dated

7.12.2005 passed by the learned Single Judge in the writ
petition filed by the respondents. The writ petition was filed by
the respondents seeking the following reliefs:“(a) Issue writ, order or direction in the nature of
mandamus directing the Respondent No.1 to
instantly refer the dispute to the Industrial
Adjudicator; and
(b)

LPA-424/2006

issue writ, order or direction in the nature of
mandamus/prohibition
directing
the
Respondents No.2-4 to maintain status quo as
regards the services of the petitioner workers
till the industrial dispute is finally decided by
the industrial adjudicator with specific
direction to the respondent CPWD not to
substitute the services of the Petitioners with
Page No.1 of 5

any other workman even if they want to
change the contractor; and
(c)

(d)

2.

in the alternative, the above interim protection
as mentioned in prayer (b) be granted till the
disposal of the proposed application for stay
that the Petitioners would file before the
Industrial Tribunal after the dispute is referred
to the Tribunal so that the reference is not
made infructuous; and
Pass such other or further order or orders
and/or directions as this Hon'ble Court may
deem fit and proper to meet the ends of
justice.”

The learned Single Judge entertained the aforesaid writ

petition and while issuing notice, passed an interim order that
in the meanwhile status quo as to the engagement of the
respondents should be maintained.

The respondents filed a

contempt petition alleging wilful violation of the aforesaid
interim order passed by the learned Single Judge. It was also
alleged that despite the said interim order, the services of the
respondents were terminated and they were disengaged from
the work. The aforesaid writ petition and the contempt petition
came up for hearing before the learned Single Judge and the
same were disposed of by order dated 7th December, 2005 by
issuing the following directions:“(i) Status quo order made in these proceedings shall
enure in favour of the petitioners for a further period of
four weeks. They shall approach the tribunal within a
period of four weeks with the request to continue the
interim order. The status quo shall continue till the
disposal of that application. It is made clear that the
orders in these proceedings shall not be construed as
an expression on the merits of the case and the tribunal
is free to consider all the contentions even while
deciding the interim application.

LPA-424/2006

Page No.2 of 5

(ii)
The respondent Nos.1-3 shall ensure that full
payment of wages is given to the petitioners for the
period July 2004 to 01.12.2004 within a period of four
weeks from today;
(iii) That said respondents shall bear the liability of
50% of the wages payable for the period 02.12.2004 to
19.10.2005. These amount shall be paid within eight
weeks. This is subject to the final orders of the tribunal
which may pass appropriate order having regard to the
final outcome of the proceedings either varying or
modifying the direction for this period.”

3.

In the meantime and in terms of the prayer made in the

writ petition, the dispute between the parties was also referred
to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour
Court.

In the order dated 7th December, 2005 whereby the

learned Single Judge disposed of the writ petition, status quo
order was made effective for a further period of four weeks
with a direction to the workmen to approach the Tribunal for
further interim orders. However, a direction was issued to the
appellants herein to ensure that full payment of wages is given
to the respondents for the period from July, 2004 to 1st
December, 2004.

There was also a third direction that the

appellants should also bear the liability of 50% of the wages
payable for the period 2nd December, 2004 to 19th October,
2005. However, it was made clear in the said order itself that
the aforesaid order for payment of wages would be subject to
the final orders which the Tribunal might pass having regard to
the final outcome of the proceedings either varying or
modifying the direction for the aforesaid period i.e., 2nd
December, 2004 to 19th October, 2005. It is the specific case
of the appellants that they have complied with the directions
LPA-424/2006

Page No.3 of 5

given in (ii) as they ensured that full payment of wages has
been made for the period between July, 2004 to 1st December,
2004.
4.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid directions as given in

paragraph (iii) of the operative portion of the judgment, the
appellants filed the present appeal in which notice was issued
and an interim order was passed staying the operation of the
impugned order.
5.

During the pendency of the appeal in this Court, the

Central Government

Industrial

Tribunal

has

decided

the

reference in favour of the Management and against the
workmen. It was held in the said reference by the Tribunal that
the demand of the CPWD Karamchari Union, that is, the
present respondents who are working as wiremen through the
contractor in the establishment of the CPWD, for regularisation
of their services in the establishment of the CPWD is neither
legal nor justified and, therefore, the workmen are not entitled
to get any relief as prayed for. Since the said Tribunal has held
against the workmen, therefore, as of today there cannot be
any liability of making any payment of wages by the appellants
for the period between 2nd December, 2004 to 19th October,
2005 for, according to the final order passed by the Tribunal,
they cannot claim wages from the appellants as they are not
the direct employees of the appellants, but were engaged by a
contractor who is solely responsible for payment of such
wages, if any.
LPA-424/2006

Page No.4 of 5

6.

Counsel

appearing

for

the

respondents/workmen,

however, has stated before us that the said respondents are
now contemplating a further action and are filing a writ petition
in this Court challenging the legality and validity of the
aforesaid order passed by the Tribunal.
7.

In the facts and circumstances of this case, therefore, we

make it clear that if in case any writ petition is filed by the
respondents in this Court and the said writ petition is finally
allowed, then only the aforesaid issue regarding payment of
the wages by the appellants for the period between 2nd
December, 2004 to 19th October, 2005 would arise for
consideration in which event the said issue shall also form part
of the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
8.

In terms of the aforesaid order, this appeal is disposed of.

9.

We, however, make it clear that any observation made by

us in this order would not be construed by any authority or by
the learned Single Judge, if a writ petition is filed, as views
expressed by this Court on the merits as to whether or not the
respondents are direct employees of the appellants.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.
JANUARY 17, 2008
vk

LPA-424/2006

Page No.5 of 5

