*

REPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

(1)

LPA 617/2004 and CM Nos.7509-10/2004
RESERVED ON
: February 11, 2008
DATE OF DECISION : February 18, 2008

GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ANR.
..... Appellants
Through : Ms. Rachna Srivastava, Advocate
versus
SHRI RAN SINGH & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through : Mr. N.S. Dalal, Advocate
+

(2)

LPA 618/2004 and CM Nos.7529-30/2004

GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ANR.
..... Appellants
Through : Ms. Rachna Srivastava, Advocate
versus
SHRI PRATAP SINGH
..... Respondent
Through : Mr. N.S. Dalal, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
JUDGMENT

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.

1.

By this common judgment and order, we propose to

dispose of two appeals filed by the Government of NCT of Delhi
through the Settlement Officer (Rural) against the judgment and
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 1 of 18

order of the learned Single Judge dated March 04, 2004.
2.

The facts relevant to the disposal of the aforesaid appeal as

they emerge from the records of the case are that Shri Jai Dayal
and Shri Bhim Singh, sons of Siri Chand, who were the
predecessors in interest of the appellants herein, were Delhi
Colonists, i.e., parties who were possessing land in Delhi which
was taken over by the British Government for the construction of
the capital city of Delhi, and were allotted land in Punjab. On
representations made by them, it was decided that some lands
should be set apart for them within the State of Delhi to satisfy
their claims. Shri Bhim Singh accordingly received allotment of 10
SAS 8 units in village Barwala for which Sanad Nos.16 and 34
dated 20th December, 1958 and 28th November, 1967 were issued
and further allotment of agricultural land measuring 4 SAS 3½
units in village Alipur was also made. Thus, the total allotment of
agricultural land measuring 14 SAS 11½ units was made to Shri
Bhim Singh as communicated by the Assistant Registrar (Lands),
Jullundur, Punjab vide his letter 14275 dated 27th December, 1961.
Similarly, Shri Jai Dayal (now deceased) represented by Shri
Pratap Singh, received agricultural land measuring 13 SAS 8 units
in village Barwala, Delhi. The deceased Shri Jai Dayal also utilised
compensation of land on 5 SAS 13-1/3 in the shape of adjustment
towards the sale price of a residential plot purchased by him in
village Barwala. Thus, the total utilisation of land in his case came
to 19 SAS 5-1/3 units.
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 2 of 18

3.

Subsequently, however, a letter was received from the

Assistant

Registrar

(Lands),

Department

of

Rehabilitation,

Government of Punjab on 08.03.1985 intimating that the
Jamabandi of the village where both the aforesaid persons had
land had been received from West Pakistan according to which
the aforesaid persons were entitled to 8 SAS 4-1/3 units each,
which meant that excess allotment of land had been made to
the extent of 6 SAS and 6 ¼ units to Shri Bhim Singh and 11 SAS
7½ units to Shri Jai Dayal. Action for cancellation of the excess
allotment was requested by the Department.

Pursuant to the

receipt of the aforesaid verification report, notice was served
upon the allottees to show cause why the excess allotment of
land be not cancelled. Initially, Shri Partap Singh, son of Shri Bhim
Singh appeared before the Managing Officer and admitted to
having received the allotment as aforesaid and requested for
time to produce evidence to show that the allotment was in
accordance with their title. But subsequently, he failed to appear
despite the fact that the records were made available in
accordance

with

his

request.

Consequently,

ex

party

proceedings were taken against both the allottees and suo moto
reference

made

to

the

Authorised

Chief

Settlement

Commissioner under Section 24 of the Displaced Persons
(Compensation

and

Rehabilitation)

Act,

1954

(hereinafter

referred to as “the Act”) for setting aside the allotment to the
extent of the excess area allotted to them.
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 3 of 18

4.

The Authorised Chief Settlement Commissioner by a

common order dated 30th November, 1982 accepted the suo
moto reference in the aforesaid two cases of excess allotment. It
was held by him that the allotment of agricultural land was made
in satisfaction of the entitlement of the land claims of the two
allottees and not by way of rehabilitation measure and, as such,
the excess allotment found in both the cases was liable to be
retrieved.

It was also observed by the Authorised Chief

Settlement Commissioner that the main plea of learned counsel
for the respondents was that the provisions of Rule 62 of the
Displaced Persons (C&R) Rules, 1955 were attracted in this case
and the respondents were prepared to pay the price of the
excess allotment of agricultural land as the same was not
procured by them by fraud or misrepresentation of any fact. It
was also noticed by him that the allottees of the land had further
disposed of the land comprised in Khasra Nos.61/3, 61/4, 61/6
min, 61/19/2 and 61/18 village Barwala to one Shri Goverdhan,
son of Shri Behari Lal of Village Chirag Delhi, who had been made
a party to the suo moto reference, and to whom notice was
issued, but received back undelivered. As for the plea that the
provisions of Rule 62 are attracted in both the cases, the
Authorised

Chief

Settlement

Commissioner

held

that

the

aforesaid rule primarily dealt with the allotment of agricultural
lands which were made before the commencement of these
Rules, i.e., the land had been allotted to the displaced persons as
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 4 of 18

a rehabilitation measure. In the present two cases, the allotment
of agricultural lands was made in satisfaction of the entitlement
of the land claims of the two persons and not by way of
rehabilitation measure. The provisions of Rule 62 had, therefore,
no application to the present case. It was, however, directed by
the Authorised Chief Settlement Commissioner that the excess
allotment, which is found in both the cases, if retrieved, should not
harm the persons who had purchased the land from these
allottees and this aspect would be borne in mind by the
Settlement Officer (Rural) while retrieving the excess land from
both the allottees.
5.

Aggrieved by the aforesaid order passed by the Authorised

Chief Settlement Commissioner, New Delhi, the appellants
impugned the same before the Deputy Secretary, Government of
India under Section 33 of the Act.

The said challenge was

dismissed by the Deputy Secretary, Government of India by his
order dated 31st January, 1985.

Affirming the decision of the

Authorised Chief Settlement Commissioner, it was held by him
that the displaced persons from West Pakistan who were allotted
lands after partition of the sub-continent were broadly in two
categories, viz., those who were allotted lands by way of
rehabilitation measure and those who were allotted lands in
satisfaction of the compensation payable to them on their
verified claims for the properties left in Pakistan. In order to bring
about the speedy resettlement of displaced persons in some
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 5 of 18

categories of claimants, particularly in the case of Delhi colonists,
the allotment of lands was made in anticipation of the
verification of the record of their rights. In other words, it was
allotment made in good faith. Subsequently, when the authentic
record was prepared on the basis of Jamabandi received from
Pakistan in accordance with the established practice, their area
of entitlement was assessed, and the allottees were required to
surrender any excess allotment made in good faith to them. The
Sanads issued to the allottees carried a condition whereby the
Government could resume the whole or part of the property if the
transferee or his predecessor in interest had obtained the grant of
allotment or any compensation in any form whatsoever by fraud
or misrepresentation. The Department allotted the land to the
successors in interest of the allottees in the instant case in good
faith, who had made statements of their entitlement and
produced certain records which subsequently could not be
corroborated

when

compared

with

the

revenue

records

received from Pakistan. It was further observed by the Deputy
Secretary,

Government

of

India

that

inspite

of

all

the

opportunities given to the appellants in the present case to prove
their entitlement to the full area allotted to them, the appellants
had failed to do so. In view of all these considerations, the claim
of the appellants was rejected and dismissed.
6.

The appellants thereafter impugned the aforesaid decision

by filing writ petitions registered as WP(C) Nos.724 and 725/1985
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 6 of 18

impugning the order dated 31st January, 1985 passed by the
Deputy Secretary, Government of India under Section 33 of the
Act affirming the order dated 30.11.1982 of the Chief Settlement
Commissioner. The principal contention of the counsel for the
respondent before the learned Single Judge was that the Chief
Settlement Commissioner could not have invoked the provisions
of Section 24(2) of the said Act as a bare reading of the order of
the Chief Settlement Commissioner shows that no finding was
recorded by him about the conduct of the petitioners nor had
any finding been recorded that the petitioners had obtained the
land by fraud, false representation or concealment of material
facts.
7.

Support was sought to be drawn for the aforesaid

contention by placing reliance upon the decision of the Supreme
Court in Estates Development Ltd. vs. Union of India & Ors. (1970)
2 SCR 534, wherein the Supreme Court held that the order of the
Chief Settlement Commissioner must be quashed on the ground
that there was no finding of the Commissioner that the appellant
Company had obtained the allotment of the land “by means of
fraud, false representation or concealment of any material fact”.
It was further held that the finding recorded by the Chief
Settlement Commissioner that the appellant Company had not
proved its title to the land and the allotment was “undeserved”
was not tantamount to a finding that the allotment had been
obtained by a false representation or fraud or concealment of
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 7 of 18

material facts. Such a finding, it was further held, is a condition
precedent for taking action under Section 24(2) of the Act. The
condition imposed by the Section is mandatory and in the
absence of any such finding the Chief Settlement Commissioner
had no jurisdiction to cancel the allotment made to the
appellant Company under Section 24(2) of the Act.
8.

The learned Single Judge relying upon the aforesaid

judgment of the Supreme Court held that in the absence of any
finding of any fraud, false representation or concealment of
material facts, which has been held by the Supreme Court to be
a condition precedent to the exercise of powers under Section
24(2) of the Act, the Central Government cannot be entitled in
exercise the powers vested in it by Section 33 of the Act on
receipt of revenue records and on finding that entitlement of the
petitioners would have been less than what had been allotted to
the petitioners.

In view of the aforesaid, both the impugned

orders cannot be sustained and were liable to be quashed. The
same were accordingly quashed.
9.

Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of the

learned Single Judge, the present Letters Patent Appeals have
been filed by the appellants on which we have heard

Ms.

Rachna Srivastava, counsel for the appellants and Mr. N.S. Dalal,
counsel for the respondents and perused the records.
10.

For the sake of convenience, the provisions of Section 24 of

the Act, which are apposite, are reproduced hereunder:LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 8 of 18

“(1) The Chief Settlement Commissioner may at
any time call for the record of any proceeding
under this Act in which a Settlement Officer, an
Assistant Settlement Officer, an Assistant Settlement
Commissioner,
an
Additional
Settlement
Commissioner, a Settlement Commissioner, a
managing officer or a Managing Corporation has
passed an order for the purpose of satisfying himself
as to the legality or propriety of any such order and
may pass such order in relation thereto as he thinks
fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
forgoing power under sub-section (1), if the Chief
Settlement Commissioner is satisfied that any order
for payment of compensation to a displaced
person or any lease or allotment granted to such a
person has been obtained by him by means of
fraud, false representation or concealment of any
material fact, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, the Chief Settlement
Commissioner may pass an order directing that no
compensation shall be paid to such a person or
reducing the amount of compensation to be paid
to him, or as the case may be, cancelling the lease
or allotment granted to him; and if it is found that a
displaced person has been paid compensation
which is not payable to him, or which is in excess of
the amount payable to him, such amount or
excess, as the case may be, may on a certificate
issued by the Chief Settlement Commissioner, be
recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land
revenue.
*
11.

*

*

*

*”

The contention raised by the learned counsel for the

appellants is that the learned Single Judge did not consider that
the respondents did not even dispute the correctness of the
Jamabandi received from Pakistan, which clearly shows that the
respondents were aware of their entitlement and deliberately
concealed their entitlement, thereby obtaining excess allotment
in their favour.

Thus, it was a clear cut case of false

LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 9 of 18

representation and concealment of material facts. Accordingly,
the Settlement Officer-cum-Managing Officer, New Delhi made
suo moto reference under Section 24 of the Act to the Chief
Settlement Commissioner. The Chief Settlement Commissioner by
his order dated 30th November, 1982 rightly held that the
allotment of agricultural land was made to the respondents in
satisfaction of the land claims of Delhi colonists and not by way of
rehabilitation measure, which finding was affirmed by the Deputy
Secretary, Department of Rehabilitation, Government of India
under Section 33 of the Act. The Deputy Secretary by his order
dated 31st January, 1985 dismissed the appeal and unequivocally
held in the order that the respondents had obtained excess
allotment of land by misrepresentation and concealment of facts
and, therefore, the order passed by the Chief Settlement
Commissioner did not call for any interference. Against the said
order, writ petitions were filed in which the learned Single Judge
without considering that it was a clear cut case of false
representation and concealment of material facts and that
specific findings had been recorded by the Chief Settlement
Commissioner and by the Deputy Secretary that the allotment
was obtained by making false representations allowed the
aforesaid writ petitions.
12.

Learned counsel for the appellants also urged that the

learned Single Judge despite the specific plea taken by the
appellants, in the counter-affidavit filed by the appellants in
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 10 of 18

opposition to the writ petitions, did not consider the ramifications
of Rule 62 and their inapplicability to the present case, in as much
as the land was allotted to the respondents not as a rehabilitation
measure before the commencement of the Rules, but in
satisfaction of the entitlement of their land claims.

The

respondents, it was submitted, have been given land to which
they were entitled. Only the excess land is sought to be retrieved
which was obtained by them by false representation.
13.

Reliance is placed by learned counsel for the appellants on

the judgment of the Supreme Court in Sardari Lal and Anr. vs.
Union of India and Ors. (1974) 1 SCC 1, which was a case in which
the Chief Settlement Commissioner, Jullundur, in exercise of his
power under Section 24(2) of the Act issued notice to the
appellants to show cause why the allotment in their favour should
not be cancelled in view of fact that the Jamabandi in respect of
the land received from Pakistan showed that the appellants had
no occupancy rights therein and so no reliance could be placed
on the affidavits produced by the appellants.

The appellants

filed an application for revision of the order under Section 33 of
the Act before the Union of India, Department of Rehabilitation,
which too was dismissed for the same reasons. Dismissing the writ
petitions filed by the appellants under Article 226 and 227 of the
Constitution, the High Court held that the appellants were not
entitled to the exercise of writ jurisdiction.

On an appeal by

Special Leave Petition filed before the Supreme Court, the
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 11 of 18

Supreme Court held that the High Court was justified in declining
to exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 or 227 of the
Constitution and held as follows:
“10. It is noteworthy that in the objections filed by
the appellants to the notice by the Chief Settlement
Commissioner to show cause why the allotment
should not be cancelled, they never contended
that the Jamabandi did not represent the correct
state of affairs or that there is any mistake in it. In
other words, in spite of the opportunity given to the
appellants to support the allotment in their favour,
they never challenged the correctness of the
Jamabandi on the basis of which both the Chief
Settlement Commissioner and the revisional
authority came to the conclusion that the
appellants had no occupancy right in the land in
Pakistan. As there was a definite finding in the
orders of these authorities that the appellants had
no occupancy right in the land in Pakistan based
on relevant materials and as the inference
therefrom could only be that the appellants
obtained
the
allotment
by
making
false
representation, we think that the High Court was
justified in declining to exercise its jurisdiction under
Article 226 or 227 of the Constitution.”
14.

Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand,

categorically

denied

that

there

was

any

fraud,

false

representation or concealment of material facts on the part of
the respondents for the purpose of obtaining excess allotment of
land in their favour. The submission of learned counsel for the
respondents was that the Chief Settlement Commissioner had no
jurisdiction to cancel the allotment made in favour of the
respondents without recording the finding that fraud had been
committed by the respondents and/or that the respondents had
misrepresented the facts and/or that the respondents were guilty
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 12 of 18

of suppression of material facts. Sub-Section (2) of Section 24 of
the Act, it was contended, was wholly inapplicable to the facts of
the present case and in this context reliance was placed by the
respondents on the decision of the Supreme Court in Estates
Development Ltd. (supra) as being on all fours with the present
case.

Reliance was also placed by learned counsel for the

respondents on the provisions of Rule 62 of the Displaced Persons
(C&R) Rules, 1955, and hence it is deemed appropriate to
reproduce the said Rule which is in the following terms:
“62. Agricultural
land
allotted
before
commencement of these rules – Where any person
has been allotted any agricultural land before the
commencement of these rules in respect of his
verified claim relating to agricultural land left in
West Pakistan, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) If land allotted to such person is less than
the area which should have been allotted to him
under these rules, an additional area of land may, if
available, be allotted to him to make up the
deficiency.
(b) If the land allotted to such person
exceeds the area which should have been allotted
to him under these rules and if the allottee wishes to
retain the excess land, he shall be required to pay
the value of the excess land in such instalments as
the Settlement Commissioner may determine:
Provided that if such person holds a verified
claim in respect of any other property, the net
compensation in respect of such property may be
adjusted against the value of the excess land.
Explanation – For the purpose of this rule and
the next succeeding rule, the value of land shall be
determined at the rate mentioned in rule 56.”
15.

A bare glance at the said Rule shows that the said Rule has

no application to the facts of the present case, in as much as it is
clarified in the Rule itself that it will have application only to such

LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 13 of 18

cases of allotment of agricultural land which have been made
before the coming into force of the Rules in respect of verified
claims relating to agricultural land left in West Pakistan. It is not in
dispute that allotment of agricultural land in the instant case was
not made to the respondents prior to the commencement of the
Rules, which came into force in the year 1955. It is evident from
the records and indeed it was not disputed before us by the
counsel for the respondents that the allotment had been made
to the predecessors in interest of the respondents, much after the
coming into force of the Rules, i.e., on 20.02.1958 and 28.11.1967
to Shri Bhim Singh and on 28.11.1957 to Late Shri Jai Dayal. Thus,
quite clearly, Rule 62 has no application and the respondents
cannot be allowed to derive any benefit from the provisions
thereof.
16.

So far as the power vested under Section 24 of the Act in

the Central Government is concerned, there can be no manner
of doubt that the Chief Settlement Commissioner, on being
satisfied that any allotment granted to a person has been
obtained by him by means of fraud, false representation or
concealment

of

any

material

facts,

is

fully

empowered

notwithstanding anything contained in the Act to pass an order
directing cancellation of the said allotment. In the instant case,
in our considered opinion, there was false representation made
by the respondents who were fully aware of the fact that land in
excess of their entitlement had been obtained by them by
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 14 of 18

making false statements before the concerned authorities. On
receipt

of

the

Jamabandi

from

West

Pakistan

also

the

respondents were noticed and asked to produce evidence in
support of the claims filed by them, but they chose not to
produce any evidence in support of their claims and rather
absented themselves from the proceedings, thereby leading to
the inference that they were fully aware of the fact that they
were not entitled to the excess allotment. The Authorised Chief
Settlement

Commissioner

was,

therefore,

fully

justified

in

cancelling the excess allotment made to the respondents by
turning down their request for allowing them to retain the excess
land allotted to them by invoking Rule 2 of the Displaced Persons
(C&R) Rules. The Deputy Secretary, Department of Rehabilitation
in exercise of his revisional jurisdiction also rightly held as follows:
“The Sanads issued to the claimants carry a
condition whereby Government could resume the
whole or part of the property if the transferee or his
predecessor in interest had obtained the grant of
allotment or any compensation in any form
whatsoever by fraud or misrepresentation. The
Department allotted the land to the successors in
interest of the Petitioner in good faith. They also
made statements of their entitlement and
produced certain records which subsequently could
not be corroborated when compared with the
revenue record received from Pakistan. In spite of
all the opportunities given to the Petitioners to prove
their entitlement to full area allotted to them.”
17.

So far as reliance of the respondents on the decision in

Estates

Development

Ltd.

(supra)

is

concerned,

it

bears

mentioning that the said decision was considered by a three

LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 15 of 18

Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in a subsequent decision
rendered by the Supreme Court in Om Parkash and Ors. vs. Union
of India and Ors. AIR 1971 SC 771. In the said case, a contention
was raised relying on Sub-Section (2) of Section 24 that as no
fraud or false representation or concealment of any material fact
had been alleged or proved, the Chief Settlement Commissioner
could not have exercised the power vested in him under Section
24 of the Act.

The Supreme Court upon considering the said

contention and referring to the earlier decision rendered by it in
the case of Estates Development Ltd. held that where land was
allotted to a person on the basis of an oral verification and
subsequently the Section Officer-cum-Managing Officer, relying
on the Fard Taqsim and Khasra Girdawari, discovered that an
area of some acres was in excess of what the allottee was
entitled to and he cancelled the allotment to the extent of the
excess, he had jurisdiction to cancel the allotment under Section
19 of the Act. It was further held that the Fard Taqsim was an
important

revenue

record

and

the

Section

Officer-cum-

Managing Officer as well as the Chief Settlement Commissioner
were right in placing reliance on the Fard Taqsim and Khasra
Girdawari. Both of them had jurisdiction to cancel the allotment
under Sections 19 and 24 respectively.
18.

Reliance placed by the counsel for the respondents on the

decisions of the Supreme Court in Visra Singh vs. State of Punjab
and Ors. 1992 Supp (1) SCC 645
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

and Kapur Singh Mistri vs.
Page 16 of 18

Financial Commissioner & Revenue Secretary to Govt. of Punjab
and Ors. 1995 Supp (2) SCC 635 is also misplaced as the facts in
the said cases were entirely different and distinct from the facts of
the present cases. In Visra Singh's case (supra), the appellant
continued to be in possession of the allotted land and in the
meanwhile the entire properties in the compensation pool came
to be vested in the Punjab Government and came to be dealt
with by a new statute dealing with such properties popularly
known as “Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976”.
19.

In the case of Kapur Singh Mistri (supra), which was a case

under Section 8 of the Act, the appellant was in possession of
disputed property as a displaced person and was held entitled to
the purchase of the same in terms of the policy decision of the
Government. It was not a case of any fraud or misrepresentation
or concealment of material fact by the appellant and as a
matter of fact, the Settlement Officer by a specific order passed
in this regard had offered to sell land to the appellant at an
assessed price directing him to deposit a certain amount in terms
of the letter of the Settlement Officer, Jullundur dated

9 th

December, 1968.
20.

In view of the aforesaid, we have no hesitation in holding

that the learned Single Judge was not correct in observing that
there is no finding of any fraud, false representation or
concealment of material facts, which has been held by the
Supreme Court to be a condition precedent to exercise the
LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

Page 17 of 18

powers under Section 24(2) of the Act and that in the absence of
such finding the Central Government was not empowered to
exercise powers vested in it under Section 33 of the Act.

We

accordingly set aside the order passed by the learned Single
Judge and hold that the appellants shall be entitled to retrieve
excess land allotted to the respondents with the rider that while
retrieving the said excess land from both sets of respondents the
Settlement Officer (Rural) in terms of the orders passed by the
Chief Settlement Commissioner and affirmed by the Deputy
Secretary, Department of Rehabilitation, shall ensure that no
harm is caused to the persons who are bona fide purchasers of
the land from the respondents.
21.

The appeals are allowed in the above terms, leaving the

parties to bear their own costs.
CM Nos.7509-10/2004 and CM Nos.7529-30/2004 also stand
disposed of accordingly.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

FEBRUARY
km

18, 2008

LPA 617/2004 and LPA 618/2004

CHIEF JUSTICE

Page 18 of 18

