REPORTED
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) No.29/2008 and CM Nos.875-876/2008

%

Date of Decision: 18th January, 2008
M/S. ARINITS SALES PVT. LTD.
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Ajay Malviya, Advocate
versus
M/S. ROCKWELL PLASTIC PVT. LTD. & ORS.
Through

..... Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

%

JUDGMENT
18.01.2008

:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 20.12.2007 passed by the learned

Single Judge holding that Delhi Court shall have no jurisdiction to entertain and decide
the suit which is instituted by the appellant as plaintiff. Having held thus, a direction was
issued by the learned Single Judge to return the plaint to the appellant for presentation in
the competent court of jurisdiction.
2.

A suit was filed by the appellant herein as a summary suit seeking for recovery of

Rs.20,53,944/- against the defendants and also for interest @ 18% per annum. The
defendants entered appearance and thereafter the plaintiff moved an application for
service of summons for judgment upon the defendants. Summons for judgment were
duly served upon the defendants and immediately thereafter, they filed an application for
leave to defend the present suit. The defendants also moved an application under Order
VII Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure taking up the plea that this Court has no
FAO(OS) 29/2008

Page 1 of 6

territorial jurisdiction to entertain the suit and, therefore, the plaint should be returned.
Since an objection with regard to the territorial jurisdiction of Delhi Court was taken, the
said plea was taken up for consideration and upon hearing the counsel for the parties at
length, the learned Single Judge upheld the aforesaid preliminary objection regarding the
maintainability of the suit in view of the facts and circumstances stated in the impugned
order. Therefore, the plaint was directed to be returned for presentation in the competent
court of jurisdiction. The learned Single Judge had taken notice of the fact that the
plaintiff has supplied the goods and raised its invoices/bills from Faridabad. Notice was
also taken of the fact that the defendant Company is situated at village Kassar, Tehsil
Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar, Haryana and works for gain at the same address. Cheques
were also issued by the defendant Company in favour of the plaintiff drawn on State
Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, Delhi Rohtak Road, Bahadurgarh, District Rohtak in the
State of Haryana. Those cheques, on presentation, were dishonoured by the drawee bank
either for insufficiency of funds or payments stopped. In view of the said fact, it was also
held that cause of action if any on dishonourment of cheques arose at Bahadurgarh.
Reference was also made by the learned Single Judge to the fact that plaintiff has
categorically averred in the plaint that the defendant Company had issued form ST-15
towards their liability to pay the sales tax for the goods received at Bahadurgarh. After
referring to the aforesaid facts, it was held that merely because the aforesaid cheques
were presented in the Delhi account of the appellant, the same would not vest any
jurisdiction on this Court. Another plea raised by the appellant that the complaint under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act was filed at Delhi was dealt with by the
learned Single Judge, stating that simply because such a complaint has been filed at
Delhi would not confer any jurisdiction on the Civil Courts in Delhi.
3.

The aforesaid findings and conclusions arrived at by the learned Single Judge are

challenged in this appeal, on which we have heard the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant. We have also been taken through the records. Counsel appearing for the

FAO(OS) 29/2008

Page 2 of 6

appellant has drawn our pointed attention to the notice which is annexed as Annexure I.
Specific reference was made to Clause 2 of the terms and conditions of sale which states
that all disputes are subject to Delhi Jurisdiction only. Our attention was also drawn to
Clause 4 thereof, which provides as follows:
“4.
All cheque/drafts are to be drawn in the name of the Company
ARINITS SALES CORPORATION marked “A/C PAYEE” payable
at Delhi only unless otherwise specified to be made through our
Branch Office.”
4.

Counsel appearing for the appellant, in support of the contention that Delhi Court

will have jurisdiction because of the aforesaid stipulation in the terms and conditions of
the sale, refers to and relies upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in A.B.C.
Laminart Pvt. Ltd. vs. AP Agencies reported in AIR 1989 SC 1239.

It was also

submitted by the counsel appearing for the appellant that since the cheque was presented
in the bank account of the appellant in Delhi, therefore, Delhi Court will have
jurisdiction. We have considered the aforesaid submissions in the light of the records
which are placed before us. There is no denial of the fact that where cause of action has
arisen at different places, the parties would be entitled to vest and confer jurisdiction on a
particular Court where even a part of cause of action has arisen. The said proposition has
been made clear in the aforesaid decision and the same is a settled position of law in
view of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
5.

However, in the present case, the ratio of the aforesaid decisions could not be

applicable, for in our considered opinion, no part of cause of action has arisen in Delhi,
which is proved from the evidence on record. The defendant Company is situated at
Village Kassar, Tehsil Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar, Haryana and is working for gain
from the same address. The goods were supplied from Faridabad to Bahadurgarh, which
is also the case of the appellant as stated in the reply filed to the application under Order
VII Rule 10 CPC. It is, thus, established and proved that the goods were not supplied
from Delhi. All the invoices/bills were also issued by the appellant at Faridabad in the
name of the defendant No.1, who works for gain at Bahadurgarh and the goods were
FAO(OS) 29/2008

Page 3 of 6

delivered at Bahadurgarh, District Jhajjar, Haryana. Cheques issued by the defendant
No.1 towards payment of the due amount are drawn on the State Bank of Bikaner and
Jaipur, Bahadurgarh. The said cheques on presentation were dishonoured by the drawee
bank either for insufficiency of funds or payments stopped at Bahadurgarh. The plea of
the counsel appearing for the appellant that the cheques were presented for encashment at
Delhi and, therefore, in view of the said position and the clauses in the invoices, i.e.,
Clause 4 and Clause 2, the appellant would be entitled to file, institute and continue the
suit at Delhi is also considered by us.
6.

In this connection, we may refer to a similar contention which was urged before

us in the case of Mountain Mist Agro India (Pvt.) Ltd. & Anr. vs. S. Subramaniyam
disposed of on 14.01.2008. In the said case also, the territorial jurisdiction of Delhi
Court was sought to be invoked on the ground that the cheque was deposited in a bank at
Delhi, where the branch office of the company was located and, therefore, it was urged
that cause of action arose partly in Delhi. The said contention was negated both by the
Single Bench and also by the Division Bench. In the aforesaid decision, the Division
Bench of this Court referred to the decision delivered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Shri Ishar Alloy Steels Ltd. vs. Jayaswals Neco Ltd. (2001) 3 SCC 609, wherein it was
held that the bank referred to in clause (a) of the proviso to the Section 138 had reference
to the drawee bank on which the cheque is drawn and not all banks where the cheque is
presented for collection, including the bank of the payee in whose favour the cheque is
issued. In the said decision, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in paragrphs 9 and 10 held as
follows:
“9.
The use of the words “a bank” and “the bank” in the Section is
indicator of the intention of the Legislature. The former is indirect
article and the latter is pre-fixed by direct article. If the Legislature
intended to have the same meanings for “a bank” and “the bank”,
there was no cause or occasion for mentioning it distinctly and
differently by using two different articles. It is worth noticing that the
word “banker” in Section 3 of the Act is pre-fixed by the indefinite
article “a” and the word “bank” where the cheque is intended to be
presented under Section 138 is pre-fixed by the definite article “the”.
The same Section permits a person to issue a cheque on an account
FAO(OS) 29/2008

Page 4 of 6

maintained by him with “a bank” and makes him liable for criminal
prosecution if it is returned by “the bank” unpaid. The payment of the
cheque is contemplated by “the bank” meaning thereby where the
person issuing the cheque has an account. “The” is the word used
before nouns, with a specifying of particularising effect opposed to
the indefinite or generalising force of “a” or “an”. It determines what
particular thing is meant; that is, what particular thing we are to
assume to be meant. “The” is always mentioned to denote particular
thing or a person. “The” would, therefore, refer implicitly to a
specified bank and not any bank. “The bank” referred to in clause (a)
to the proviso to Section 138 of the Act would mean the drawee-bank
on which the cheque is drawn and not all banks where the cheque is
presented for collection including the bank of the payee, in whose
favour the cheque is issued.
10.
It, however, does not mean that the cheque is always to be
presented to the drawer's bank on which the cheque is issued. The
payee of the cheque has the option to present the cheque in any bank
inlcuding the collecting bank where he has his account but to attract
the criminal liability of the drawer of the cheque such collecting bank
is obliged to present the cheque in the drawee or payee bank on which
the cheque is drawn within the period of six months from the date on
which it is shown to have been issued. In other words a cheque issued
by (A) in favour of (B) drawn in a bank named (c) where the drawer
has an account can be presented by the payee to the bank upon which
it is drawn i.e. (c) bank with a period of six months or present it to
any other bank for collection of the cheque amount provided such
other bank including the collecting bank presents the cheque for
collection to the (C) bank. The non presentation of the cheque to the
drawee-bank within the period specified in the Section would absolve
the person issuing the cheque of his criminal liability under Section
138 of the Act, who shall otherwise may be liable to pay the cheque
amount to the payee in a civil action initiated under the law. A
combined reading of Section 2, 72 and 138 of the Act would leave no
doubt in our mind that the law mandates the cheque to be presented at
the bank on which it is drawn if the drawer is to be held criminally
liable. Such presentation is necessarily to be made within six months
at the bank of which the cheque is drawn, whether presented
personally or through another bank, namely, the collecting bank of the
payee.”
The decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in I.T. Commr. vs. M/s. Ogale Glass
Works Ltd. AIR 1954 SC 429 and of Patna High Court in Gauri Shankar vs. Ram
Banka AIR 1963 Patna 398 were also referred and distinguished. In the aforesaid
decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it was held that payment by a negotiable
instrument is a conditional payment and what is meant is that such payment is subject to
a condition subsequent that if the negotiable instrument is dishonoured on presentation,
the creditor may consider it as waste paper and resort to his original demand. As that
was a case of posting of the cheques in Delhi, it was held that the said decision has no
FAO(OS) 29/2008

Page 5 of 6

relevance to the facts of the present case.
7.

So far as the clause 2 of the terms and conditions of sale is concerned which

states that all disputes are subject to Delhi Jurisdiction, it is the settled position of law
that Court cannot derive jurisdiction in respect of a matter in respect of which otherwise
the said Court does not have jurisdiction merely because the parties have agreed to vest
jurisdiction in the said Court (See Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v. D.L.F. Universal Ltd.
Reported in 2000 (85) DLT 501) .
8.

We are of the considered opinion that in view of the facts and circumstances of

the case, the Delhi Court will have no jurisdiction.

The reasons and the findings

recorded by the learned Single Judge are found to be cogent, just and proper. We find no
ground to interfere with the aforesaid order passed by the learned Single Judge.
FAO(OS) No.29/2008 and CM Nos.875-876/2008 have no merit and are
accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
JANUARY 18, 2008
km

FAO(OS) 29/2008

Page 6 of 6

