*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
RESERVED ON :
January 31, 2008
DATE OF DECISION : March
20, 2008

+

LPA 770/2003 and CM Nos.511/2006 and 11749/2006
ANIRUDH SINGH KATOCH
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Avatar Singh Rawat, Advocate
versus
UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Suresh Kait, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.

1.

The challenge raised in this appeal is to the judgment and order of the
st

learned Single Judge dated 1 August, 2003 dismissing the writ petition filed by
the appellant.
2.

The background facts are as follows. The appellant, who is a citizen of

India, had gone to the United States of America (USA) in the pursuit of higher
studies in the year 1984. After finishing his studies, the appellant took up a job in
the USA with a Medical Instrumentation Firm and since then has resided in the
LPA No.770/2003

Page 1 of 16

USA as a non-resident Indian. On account of the ill health of his wife, however,
the appellant decided to return to India for good. Being an enthusiast of shooting
sports, he applied for and obtained the following three gun licenses in India under
the Arms Act, 1959:
(i)
(ii)

License No.3004/G(ii)-TNT/2000 dated 12.7.2000.

(iii)
3.

License No.482/G(ii)-TTAL/98 dated 3.10.98.

License No.496/G(ii) TTL/2000 dated 8.12.2000.

The appellant had also obtained requisite licenses from the United States of

America for acquiring and possessing the three firearms possessed by him. When
he decided to transfer his residence to India, he consulted the Indian Consulate in
San Francisco, USA regarding the firearms in question and was told that he could
take the arms back to India as “Baggage”, subject to the condition that he has
valid arms licenses from the Indian Government. The appellant having already
obtained valid licenses from the Indian Government brought with himself the
three licensed firearms mentioned hereinabove.
4.

On 01.10.2000, on the appellant's arrival at the Indira Gandhi International

Airport, New Delhi, however, he was told that he would be permitted to take only
one firearm under the Transfer of Residence Rules. The appellant was further
told by the custom officials that with regard to the two other firearms, he will
have to obtain import licenses from the Director General of Foreign Trade. The
reasons assigned for detention of the firearms was: “Detained for clearance as per

LPA No.770/2003

Page 2 of 16

Rules”.
5.

On 16th February, 2001, one only of the three firearms, viz., a Walther

P.P.KS.32 A.C.P. Handgun, was given to the appellant. The appellant thereupon
filed an application before the respondent No.4, i.e., the Director General of
Foreign Trade for grant of permission to bring in the remaining two firearms, but
the same was refused and the case of the appellant was referred to the Ministry of
Home Affairs for their recommendation. Thereafter, the appellant made various
representations to various authorities, but to no avail. Ultimately, he served legal
notice dated 16th October, 2001 followed by a reminder dated 12th November,
2001, requesting for release of the two detained firearms. By a communication
dated 26th March, 2001, the respondents replied that as per the existing policy,
there was a ban on the import of firearms under the “Gift Scheme” as well as the
“Baggage Rules” and the appellant could not be allowed to import more than one
firearm.
6.

Being aggrieved by the stand taken by the respondents, the appellant filed

a writ petition before this Court seeking for quashing of the detention order and
release of the firearms alongwith consequential relief. The learned Single Judge
by a detailed judgment dismissed the writ petition as being without merit, but
permitted the appellant to take back the detained firearms. It was further ordered
by the learned Single Judge that on the appellant's exercising such an option, the
said firearms would be released to him as and when he chose to go abroad with

LPA No.770/2003

Page 3 of 16

the condition that he would not be permitted to bring the same into India.
7.

The present appeal has been filed for the setting aside of the aforesaid

order. The sole question which arises, therefore, for consideration is whether a
non-resident Indian on transfer of his residence to India can be permitted to bring
more than one firearm under the provisions of the Arms Act or the Rules framed
thereunder or the existing Baggage Rules.
8.

The learned counsel for the appellant, Mr. Arvind Singh Rawat contended

that a conjoint reading of the provisions of the Arms Act, the rules framed
thereunder as well as the Baggage Rules clearly show that the appellant was
entitled to bring into India, on transfer of his residence, upto three firearms for
which he had the licenses. He further contended that the reliance placed upon
Rule 8 of the Baggage Rules, 1998 by the respondents to contend that the import
of only a single firearm was permissible, was misplaced as was evident from a
reading of the said Rule itself. The counsel relied upon Column 1 of Appendix 'F'
of the Baggage Rules to urge that the import of bonafide baggage to the extent
mentioned therein was permissible.
9.

The learned counsel for the respondents, Mr. Suresh Kait, on the contrary,

contended that the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, the rules made thereunder,
and the Baggage Rules, 1998 framed under Section 79 of the Customs Act, 1962
regulating the import of firearms were not exhaustive, but were supplemental to
other applicable laws. He submitted that the import of firearms is governed by

LPA No.770/2003

Page 4 of 16

the Export and Import Policy (for short “Exim Policy”) as laid down by the
Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT), Ministry of Commerce.

Under

Sections 3 and 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development of Regulation) Act, 1992, the
Central Government can make provisions prohibiting, restricting or otherwise
regulating the export and import of goods. In the exercise of the aforesaid powers
vested in the Central Government, he contended, the import of firearms is
prohibited under Rule 8 of the Baggage Rules, 1998 and the Exim Policy 1997–
2002 laid down by the DGFT. “Firearms” fall under the restricted category of
import policy as mentioned in the ITC(HS) classification and, as such, the import
of firearms is not permitted, except against an import license issued by the DGFT
to renowned Shooters/Rifle clubs for their own use and that too, on the
recommendation of the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of
India.
10.

Mr. Kait also pointed out that though the import of

firearms is not

permitted under the aforesaid Import Policy, the Ministry of Finance under
instructions dated 05.01.1988 has allowed import of one firearm of permissible
bore by persons transferring their residence to India, subject to certain conditions.
Pursuant to the said instructions, one firearm is allowed under the “Transfer of
Residence Form Revision” to persons concerned under the Circular No.63/95
Cus. dated 07.06.1995, which reads as under:
“F.No.605/74/95-DBK
Transfer of Residence Form Revision

LPA No.770/2003

Page 5 of 16

Circular No.63/95-Cus.
dated 7/6/95
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue, New Delhi
Subject: Transfer of Residence Form in vogue for claiming
benefits of Transfer of Residence under Chapter IV of
the Baggage Rules, 1994 – reg.
The undersigned is directed to say that it has been
brought to the notice of the Board that the Transfer of
Residence Form being used in your Collectorate contains a
clause that “the goods cleared by the passenger shall not be
sold, displayed or advertised or offered for sale until their
market price has depreciated to less than 50% of the market
price when new,” although in terms of the existing provisions,
there is no such restrictions on the goods cleared as baggage
by a passenger. A copy of the Transfer of Residence Form
received with the reference is enclosed for your ready
reference. As the Baggage (Conditions of Exemption) Rules,
1975 have already been rescinded, this clause in the Transfer
of Residence Form has to be deleted to avoid confusion in the
minds of passengers.
2.
It is, therefore, requested that necessary action in the
matter may be taken immediately under intimation to the
Board.
3.
In this connection, it is pointed out that one firearm of
permissible bore is allowed to be imported by persons
transferring their residence to India under Ministry's
instructions dated 5.1.88 issued from F.No.497/57/87-Cus.VI.
Such release is permitted subject to the condition that the
firearm so cleared shall not be sold, transferred, loaned or
otherwise parted with, for consideration or otherwise, to any
other person in India during the life time of the person
concerned. An endorsement to this effect is made in the arm
licence and the passport of the passenger concerned at the time
of clearance of the firearm. Such endorsement shall continue
to be made by the customs authorities at the time of clearance
of the firearm in question.
Sd/(T.R. Kapur)
Under Secretary (Cus.VI)”

LPA No.770/2003

Page 6 of 16

11.

A look at the relevant provisions of the Arms Act in the first instance, in

our view, is necessary for determining the question in controversy.
“3. License for acquisition and possession of firearms and
ammunition.
[1] No person shall acquire, have in his possession, or
carry any firearm or ammunition unless he holds in this behalf
a license issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and the rules made thereunder.
Provided that a person may, without himself holding a license,
carry any firearm or ammunition in the presence, or under the
written authority, of the holder of the license for repair or for
renewal of the license or for use by such holder.
[2] Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no person, other than a person referred to in sub-section (3),
shall acquire, and have in his possession or carry, at any time,
more than three firearms;
Provided that a person who has in his possession more
firearms than three at the commencement of the Arms
(Amendment) Act, 1983, may retain with him any three of such
firearms and shall deposit, within ninety days from such
commencement, the remaining firearms with the officer in
charge of the nearest police station or, subject to the
conditions prescribed for the purpose of sub-section (1) of
Section 21, with a licensed dealer, or, where such person is a
member of the armed forces of the Union, in a unit armoury
referred to in that sub-section.
[3] Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall apply to any
dealer in firearms or to any member of a rifle club or rifle
association licensed or recognised by the Central Government
using a point 22 bore rifle or an air rifle for target practice.
[4] The provisions of sub-section (2) to (6) (both inclusive)
of section 21 shall apply in relation to any deposit of firearms
under the proviso to sub-section (2) as they apply in relation to
the deposit of any arms or ammunition under sub-section (1) of
that section.”
*
*
*
*
“10. License for import and export of arms, etc.–
10(1) No person shall bring into, or take out of, India by sea,
land or air any arms or ammunition unless he holds in this
behalf a license issued in accordance with the provisions of

LPA No.770/2003

Page 7 of 16

this Act and the rules made thereunder.”
*
*
*
*
“11. Power to prohibit import of export of arms etc.–
The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, prohibit the bringing into, or the taking out of India,
arms or ammunition of such classes and description as may be
specified in the notification.”
12.

Sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Arms Act though couched in negative

terms mandates a license issued, in accordance with the provisions of the Act and
the Rules framed thereunder, for the acquisition and possession of firearms and
ammunition.

Sub-section (2) of Section 3 lays down that notwithstanding

anything contained in sub-section (1), no person [other than a person referred to in
sub-section (3)] shall acquire, and have in his possession or carry, at any time,
more than three firearms. Section 10, which is also couched in negative terms,
mandates that no person shall bring into, or take out of India any arm or
ammunition unless he holds a valid license in this behalf in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and the rules framed thereunder. Under Section 11 of the
Act, the Central Government is vested with the power to prohibit import of or
export of arms through notification in the official gazette. Thus, the Arms Act
though permits a person to hold three valid firearm licenses and to possess the
said firearms, but does not permit import thereof and, as a matter of fact, vests the
Central Government with the power to notify the prohibition of import and export
of any arm or ammunition. There is no other provision in the Arms Act dealing
with the import of arms into India.

LPA No.770/2003

Page 8 of 16

13.

Section 79 of the Customs Act which is titled “Bonafide baggage

exempted from duty” vests the Central Government to make rules subject to
which any baggage may be passed free of duty [Section 79(2)]. A look now at
Rule 8 of the Baggage Rules, 1998 framed under Section 79 of the Customs Act,
1962. Rule 8 is extracted below:
“8. Transfer of residence:
(1)
A person who is transferring his residence to India shall
be allowed clearance free of duty, in addition to what he is
allowed under Rule 3 or, the case may be, under Rule 4,
articles in his bona fide baggage to the extent mentioned in
column (1) of Appendix F, subject to the conditions, if any,
mentioned in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the said
Appendix.
(2)
The conditions may be relaxed to the extent mentioned
in column (3) of the said Appendix.”
14.

A plain reading of Rule 8 shows that on transferring his residence to India,

a person shall be allowed, in addition to what he is allowed under Rule 3 or under
Rule 4 depending upon the category of passenger, articles free of duty in his
bonafide baggage to the extent mentioned in Column 1 of Appendix 'F'. Column
1 of Appendix 'F' of the Baggage Rules is as under:
“Articles allowed free of duty:
(a)
Used personal and household articles, other than those
listed Annex I or Annex II, but including jewellery upto ten
thousand rupees by a gentleman passenger or rupees twenty
thousand by a lady passenger.”
15.

Thus, it is clear that a person on transferring his residence to India is

allowed in his baggage used personal and household articles to the extent
mentioned in Column 1 of Appendix 'F', other than those listed in Annexure-1 or

LPA No.770/2003

Page 9 of 16

Annexure-2, which means, that the person is not eligible to import the goods
listed in Annexure-1 or Annexure-2 to Appendix 'F'. Annexure-2 is not relevant
for the present purposes and accordingly, Annexure-1 alone is being reproduced
hereunder to show that import of firearms is not permitted under the Baggage
Rules since firearms is listed at serial No.1 of Annexure-1 of Appendix 'F':
“1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
16.

Fire arms.
Cartridges of fire arms exceeding 50.
Cigarettes exceeding 200 or cigars exceeding 50 or
tobacco exceeding 250 gms.
Alcoholic liquor and wines in excess of one litre each.
Gold or silver, in any form, other than ornaments.”

From the aforesaid it clearly emerges that Rule 8 stipulates that a person

who is transferring his residence to India shall be allowed free of duty clearance
of certain articles in his bonafide baggage to the extent mentioned in Column 1 of
Appendix 'F', subject to the conditions mentioned in the corresponding entry in
Column 2 of Appendix 'F'.

As already noticed, Column 1 of Appendix 'F'

mentions the articles allowed to be imported without payment of any duty with
the exception of those listed in Annexure-1 and Annexure-2.

Entry 1 of

Annexure-1 mentions firearms and accordingly firearms are not permitted to be
imported free of duty, but this by no stretch of imagination can be understood to
mean that there is no limitation of bringing any number of firearms into the
country and, on the contrary, the only effect would be that they are dutiable items.
17.

The submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that in so far as

Annexures-1 and 2 are concerned, the same also deal with personal goods and

LPA No.770/2003

Page 10 of 16

household articles, but they are distinguishable on the ground that they are not
free of duty, whereas the other used personal and household articles are allowed
to be brought into India under the Baggage Rules free of duty. This interpretation
placed on the Baggage Rules cannot be sustained for the simple reason that the
Baggage Rules merely deal with baggage which is allowed free of duty and
baggage which cannot be permitted without clearance of duty. Thus, Rule 1
pertains to the short title and commencement; Rule 2 gives the definitions; Rule 3
deals with passengers returning from countries other than Nepal, Bhutan,
Myanmar or China; Rule 4 with passengers returning from

Nepal, Bhutan,

Myanmar or China; Rule 5 with professionals returning to India; Rule 6 with
jewellery; Rule 7 with tourists; Rule 8 with transfer of residence of any person;
Rule 9 with unaccompanied baggage and Rule 10 with application of the rules to
members of the crew.

There is not a whisper in the Baggage Rules as to

prohibition of import of any article or baggage and, on the other hand, the rules
merely spell out the dutiable items and others and the conditions for relaxation
thereof. By a notification No.137/1990 Cus. dated 20th March, 1990, however,
issued with regard to duty on imported goods, imported under Transfer of
Residence Rules, firearms cannot be imported by a person on transfer of his
residence to India.
18.

A look now at the relevant extract of the ITC (HS) classification of export

and import items, as contained in Chapter 93 in the Exim Policy, which is

LPA No.770/2003

Page 11 of 16

extracted below:
“
EXIM
Code

Item Description

Policy

Conditions
Import
relating to the under
policy
Public
Notice

930320 Other
sporting, Restricted
00
hunting or targetshooting shotguns,
including
combination
shotgun-rifles

930330 Other
sporting, Restricted
00
hunting or targetshooting rifles

19.

Not permitted to
be
imported
except against a
licence
by
renowned
shooters/Rifle
Clubs for their
own use on the
recommendation
of
the
Department of
Youth
Affairs
and
Sports;
Government of
India
Not permitted to
be
imported
except against a
licence
by
renowned
shooters/Rifle
Clubs for their
own use on the
recommendation
of
the
Department of
Youth
Affairs
and
Sports;
Government of
India

The aforesaid extract of the Exim Policy clearly shows that the import of

sporting, hunting or target-shooting shotguns, including combination shotgunrifles is not permitted except against a license by renowned Shooters/Rifle Clubs
for their own use and that too on the recommendation of the Government of India.

LPA No.770/2003

Page 12 of 16

Thus, it stands clearly established that the import of firearms, which is governed
by the Exim Policy, is prohibited thereunder, except to the extent stated therein.
20.

A conjoint reading of the Arms Act and the Rules framed thereunder, the

Customs Act and the Baggage Rules framed thereunder and the Exim Policy
accordingly leads to the following results. The Arms Act, though permits the
appellant to hold three valid firearm licenses and to possess the said three
firearms, is altogether silent about the import thereof as the import of firearms is
governed by the Exim Policy. It is no doubt true that no person is entitled to bring
into India or take out of India any arms unless he holds in this behalf a valid
license issued in accordance with the provisions of the Arms Act and the Rules
framed thereunder, but this is as far as it goes. A person is not entitled by virtue
of the Arms Act or the Rules framed thereunder to bring into India such licensed
firearms if any provision of law prohibits or restricts the bringing of arms into
India. Likewise, as per Rule 8 of the Baggage Rules read with Appendix 'F' to
the Rules and Annexure-1 thereto, it is laid down that firearms on transfer of a
residence of a person to India cannot be allowed to be brought into India free of
customs duty. It is nowhere laid down in the Baggage Rules that any firearm or
firearms can form part of the baggage on payment of duty thereon. Thus, quite
clearly, for provisions with regard to import and export, it is the import policy
which has to be looked into. “Firearms” fall under the restricted category of
import policy mentioned in ITC(HS) classification wherein the import of firearms

LPA No.770/2003

Page 13 of 16

is not permitted except:
“a). against an Import License issued by Director General of
Foreign Trade to renowned shooter's/Rifle Clubs for their own
use on the recommendation of the Department of Youth Affairs
and Sports, Government of India.
b).
one fire arm to persons bringing their personal effects
on transfer of residence subject to the condition that (i) the
same was in his possession and use abroad for a minimum
period of an year (ii) such firearm after clearance shall not be
sold, transferred, loaned or otherwise parted with for
consideration or otherwise during the life time of person
concerned.”
21.

Read together, it is crystal clear from the aforesaid provisions that only

upto one firearm can be cleared on production of a valid license under the Arms
Act and on payment of the appropriate duty on the said firearm, in view of
exclusion of firearms under Rule 8 read with Appendix 'F' of the Baggage Rules
and para 2 of the notification No.137/90 Cus. dated 20th March, 1990. The release
of this one firearm is by virtue of the exercise of powers by the Central
Government, as vested in the Central Government under Section 11 of the Arms
Act, and the Central Government having by circular No.63/95-Cus. dated
07.06.1995 permitted the release of one firearm under the “Transfer of Residence
Form Revision” to the person concerned.
22.

It may be mentioned that it was with a view to facilitate the bringing of at

least one firearm into India on transfer of residence that the Government of India
had issued Circular dated 16th May, 1978 permitting the same subject to the
conditions stipulated therein, which included the condition that the person

LPA No.770/2003

Page 14 of 16

bringing the firearm would not transfer the same to any person in India during his
life time, for consideration or otherwise. This decision to allow one firearm was
reiterated vide Circulars dated 12th January, 1989 and 7th June, 1995. Thus, the
consistent policy of the respondents throughout has been to permit the import of
not more than one firearm into the country. The appellant, who would otherwise
have been debarred from bringing a firearm into the country by virtue of the Exim
Policy and the Baggage Rules framed under Section 79 of the Customs Act, both
of which have statutory force, by virtue of the Circular dated 7th June, 1995 has
been benefited and enabled to bring at least one licensed firearm into the country.
As already noticed, Section 11 of the Arms Act empowers the Central
Government by notification in the official gazette to prohibit the bringing into or
the taking out of India arms or ammunition of such classes and description as may
be specified in the notification and by virtue of this power vested in it, the Central
Government by issuance of the aforesaid circular has, on transfer of residence,
allowed to be imported to India one firearm of permissible bore subject to the
conditions stipulated in the said Circular. The appellant stands to gain by the said
Circular and even otherwise has not challenged the said Circular.
23.

Accordingly, in our view, the learned Single Judge has correctly

interpreted the statutory provisions, the rules and the circulars issued by the
Central Government. There is no warrant or justification for our interference with
his findings. The judgment of the learned Single Judge is accordingly upheld and

LPA No.770/2003

Page 15 of 16

the appeal is dismissed. CM Nos.511/2006 and 11749/2006 also stand disposed
of accordingly.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

CHIEF JUSTICE
MARCH 20, 2008
km

LPA No.770/2003

Page 16 of 16

