*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL. A. NO.361/2004
DATE OF DECISION : 20.03.2008
SURYA

..... Appellant
Through: Mr.Manoj Sharma, Amicus Curiae
versus

STATE

..... Respondent
Through: Dr. M.P. Singh, APP for the State

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.

1.

The appellant seeks to challenge the judgment dated 7th February, 2004

passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge convicting and sentencing him to
life imprisonment for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC.
2.

The case of the prosecution in a nutshell is that Sumiti (hereinafter referred

to as 'the deceased'), aged 27 years was married for the last 4-5 years with a
Nepalese boy named Surya (the appellant herein) after her first marriage with one
Lal Bahadur had broken up. She had two sons aged 11 years and 7 years from her
first marriage, who were living with her, but had no progeny from her marriage
with the appellant. The deceased was living in the same jhuggi with her parents.
On the ill-fated night intervening 16th February, 2000 and 17th February, 2000, at
about 12 midnight, when the deceased was sleeping with her two children,

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 1 of 18

allegedly the appellant in a drunken state woke her up and demanded that his food
be heated up by her. On her refusal to do so, he, in a fit of anger, caught hold of a
kerosene lamp burning in a bottle nearby, sprinkled kerosene oil on her and
applied a match stick to her clothes. On her raising a hue and cry, one Devi Singh
(PW-4) from an adjoining jhuggi came to their jhuggi to find the appellant
pouring water on his burning wife. PW-4 Devi Singh thereupon descended the
stairs to inform the parents of the deceased and the deceased was taken to the
hospital by her mother Smt.Shanti (PW-6) and her two brothers-in-law (PW-10
& PW-13).
3.

The further case of the prosecution is that on receipt of the information of

the burning of Smt. Sumiti and her having been admitted in the Safdarjung
Hospital vide DD No.35A, at about 6.40 a.m. by Duty Constable Mahesh, SubInspector Jagdish Prasad alongwith Constable Rakesh Kumar, reached the said
hospital, obtained the MLC of Smt. Sumiti, moved an application for recording of
her statement Ex.PW-19/A and recorded her statement Ex.PW19/B.
4.

The Sub-Divisional Magistrate was summoned, who reached the hospital at

12:30 p.m., but on account of the insertion of an endo-tracheal tube in the throat
of the patient, the SDM was unable to record the statement of the deceased. As per
the prosecution version, however, the deceased at that time was fully conscious
and able to give her answers in the form of nods signifying 'Yes' or 'No' and
accordingly the SDM got affirmed from the deceased the statement made by her to
the Investigating Officer by putting questions to her, to which she replied by
nodding in the affirmative.
5.

On the basis of the statement of the deceased Ex.PW-19/B, upon which the

SDM made his endorsement, a rukka was prepared by the Investigating Officer

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 2 of 18

being Ex.PW-19/C and despatched to the Police Station Lajpat Nagar for the
registration of the First Information Report. On the basis of the aforesaid rukka,
case FIR No.123/2000 under Section 307 IPC was registered against the appellant
herein.
6.

According to the prosecution version, subsequently, on 21.02.2000, the

SDM recorded the statement of the deceased in question-answer form in which
the deceased affirmed that she had been set ablaze by the appellant. On
02.03.2000 the deceased eventually succumbed to her burns. The postmortem of
her body was conducted and the FIR registered against the appellant under Section
307 IPC was converted into one Section 302 IPC. The investigation of the case
was, thereafter, handed-over to PW-17 Inspector Jai Singh, who got prepared the
scaled site plan of the place of occurrence (Ex.PW-11/A) from Sub-Inspector
Madan Pal (PW-11). The special report of the case was delivered by PW-12 Ct.
Bhagwat Prasad to the Ilaqa Magistrate, the SDM, the ACP and the DCP. The
Investigating Officer recorded the statements of the witnesses, sent the exhibits to
the CFSL for chemical analysis and on completion of the investigation prepared
and filed the challan in the Court.
7.

As stated above, on the completion of the trial of the case, the learned

Addl. Sessions Judge convicted the appellant for the murder of his wife and
sentenced him to imprisonment for life. The learned Addl. Sessions Judge noted
that the mainstay of the prosecution case were the three alleged dying declarations
of the deceased, Smt.Sumiti, i.e., the dying declaration firstly recorded by PW-2
Dr.Devesh in the form of alleged history given by the patient and noted on the
MLC of the injured (Ex.PW-2/A) prepared by this doctor; secondly, the statement
of the deceased recorded by the Investigating Officer of the case PW-19, Sub-

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 3 of 18

Inspector Jagdish on 17.2.2000 (Ex.PW-19/B) before the arrival of the S.D.M
which was also endorsed after verification by PW-9 Rajesh Kumar, the SDM after
his arrival, and thirdly the statement of the deceased recorded by PW-9 Rajesh
Kumar, the SDM (Ex.PW-9/A) on 21.2.2000 in question-answer form.
8.

The learned Addl. Sessions Judge relying upon the Constitution Bench

judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Laxman Vs. State of Maharashtra
reported in 2002 Vo.III AD (Crl.) S.C. 765 and the aforesaid dying declarations,
held as follows:
“27. No doubt the material public prosecution witnesses have
turned hostile and have not supported the prosecution case despite
best efforts made by the ld. APP for the State but alleged history
recorded by Dr. Devesh at the instance of patient herself in MLC
of the deceased and statement of injured/deceased recorded by the
IO of the case and dying declaration recorded by the SDM are in
the same vein and form dying declarations and go to show that the
accused himself poured kerosene on his wife from kerosene oil
lamp and set her on fire as a result of which she sustained burn
injuries which ultimately resulted in her death.
Neither to PW-2, Doctor Devesh who recorded alleged
history in MLC of the deceased nor to the first IO of the case PW19, SI Jagdish, who recorded statement/dying declaration of the
deceased before arrival of the SDM, duly supported by the
observation of the SDM with respect to the correctness and nor to
PW-9 Shri Rajesh Kumar, SDM, who recorded the statement of the
deceased any hostility or ulterior motive is alleged and therefore
the said dying declaration referred to herein above fully
corroborate each other and are found fully trustworthy, voluntary
and reliable.
The above dying declarations clearly go to show that the
accused had himself poured kerosene oil on his wife Smt. Sumiti
and had set her on fire with an intention to kill her as a result of
which she sustained burn injuries and ultimately succumbed to
death.
28. In view of the above discussion I have no hesitation in
holding that accused Surya has committed the murder of his wife
as defined in Section 300 of IPC punishable under Section 302 of
IPC and the prosecution has fully proved charge against the
accused beyond reasonable doubt and accordingly the accused is
held guilty for offence punishable under section 302 IPC.”
9.

The three alleged dying declarations being the basis of the conviction of the

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 4 of 18

appellant, in our view, a close scrutiny of the three statements attributed to the
deceased is imperative so as to enable us to ascertain and weigh their credibility.
We say so on account of the fact that the oral testimony of the prosecution
witnesses, to which we shall presently advert, is directly at variance with the
statements attributed to the deceased prior to her death. Before adverting to the
dying declarations, however, it deserves to be mentioned that the claim of the
prosecution that the alleged history recorded in the MLC of the deceased was the
first dying declaration of the deceased is belied by the testimony of PW-4, Devi
Singh @ Kale, who, it is not in dispute was the first person to visit the spot after
the occurrence and who according to the defence version was the person to whom
the deceased gave her sole dying declaration.
10.

According to PW-4 Devi Singh @ Kale, on the day in question, he had

heard some noise coming from the 'jhuggi' of the appellant and on his reaching
there, he saw that the wife of the appellant was sitting on the floor and the
appellant was pouring water on her. When he asked Sumiti, the wife of the
appellant as to how she had sustained burns, she informed him that a quarrel had
taken place between her and the accused and she had set herself on fire. He,
Devi Singh, thereafter went to the room of the parents of Smt.Sumiti, who used to
reside on the ground floor, to apprise them of the occurrence.
11.

Thus, if the version of Devi Singh (PW-4) is to be believed, the first dying

declaration was made by the deceased to him. Though this witness was subjected
to extensive cross-examination by the learned Addl. Public Prosecutor, but to no
avail. He stuck to the stand adopted by him in his examination-in-chief and in the
course of his cross-examination, he, in fact, on a suggestion put to him by the
learned defence counsel stated that Smt. Sumiti used to drink and fight with her

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 5 of 18

husband daily, and that Smt. Sumiti was drunk on that day as well. He also
admitted the suggestion put to him by the learned defence counsel that it was on
account of her temperament that the deceased had withdrawn from the company
of her earlier husband and had come to Delhi, where she had married the
appellant.
12.

It is in the backdrop of the testimony of PW-4 Devi Singh @ Kale that

MLC (Ex.PW-2/A) must be examined. This MLC bearing No.265947, which was
prepared at 1:15 a.m. on 17.02.2000, records the alleged history of the patient as
given by the patient herself of sustaining burn injuries when her husband in a
drunken state poured kerosene oil on her and set her on fire. It further records that
fire was extinguished when her husband poured water on her and she was directly
brought by her mother to the Safdarjung Hospital. It purports to bear the right toe
impression of Smt. Sumiti, presumably on account of the fact that the MLC
reflects that her upper limbs had been burnt.
13.

Dr. Devesh (PW-2), who recorded this MLC, in the course of his cross-

examination,

candidly admitted that he had not conducted any test for

consumption of liquor by the patient Sumiti and so he could not tell whether she
was drunk or not. He also admitted the suggestion put to him by the learned
defence counsel that the deceased had told him that her husband had poured water
on her to extinguish the fire. It strikes us as a bit odd and indeed it does not stand
to reason that the appellant would set fire to the deceased and thereafter instead of
immediately absconding, he would stay to pour water on her burns.
14.

Coming next to the alleged statement made by the deceased before the

Investigating Officer, (PW-19) Sub-Inspector Jagdish Prasad., it deserves to be
noticed at the outset that the said statement (Ex.PW-19/B) purports to bear the

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 6 of 18

RTI of the deceased. The right toe impression or the right thumb impression is not
mentioned, though the right thumb having sustained burns, the right toe
impression should have been mentioned. The contents of the statement are in an
auto-biographical form in which the deceased narrates that she lives in the same
premises as her father and mother and other members of her family, her mother
and father being the residents of the ground floor of the said premises. She further
states that her husband Lal Bahadur had left her and gone to Nepal from whom
she had two boys, namely, Manoj aged 11 years and Rajesh aged 7-8 years, that
her first husband had contracted a second marriage in Nepal and so about five
years ago, of her own volition she had married Surya (the appellant herein), who
resided in Gandhi Camp, Lajpat Nagar. She, however, had no progeny from
Surya. She worked in 'kothis' (bungalows) and was doing the work of 'safai'
(cleaning). Yesterday, on 16.2.2000 at about 8-8:30 p.m. after she returned home
from work, she had filled the water, prepared the meals, fed the children and
watched T.V. before going to sleep. At about 12 midnight her husband, the
appellant asked her to warm up the food for him, to which she replied that she was
tired. He immediately flared up and there was an exchange of hot words between
the two of them. He picked up a lamp and sprinkled kerosene oil upon her clothes
and set fire to her clothes. Her salwar suit and her body caught fire. He then
poured water upon her before the neighbours, her father, mother and others came
to the spot and her mother brought her to the Safdarjung Hospital and got her
admitted there.
15.

A number of glaring circumstances have been brought to our notice which

persuade us to hold that the above statement attributed to the deceased is not
worthy of credence as the deceased was mentally and physically unfit for

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 7 of 18

statement, which, inter alia, are as follows:
(i)

The admission made by the Investigating Officer PW-19 Sub-

Inspector Jagdish Prasad in his cross-examination that he could not tell the
name of the doctor who had certified: “Patient is fit for statement” on his
application for recording of the statement of the deceased (Ex.PW-19/A);
and the further admission that the said endorsement does not even bear the
stamp of the concerned doctor.
(ii)

The fact that though information of the occurrence was

communicated to Police Station Lajpat Nagar vide DD No.35A (Ex.PW14/A) at 6:40 a.m. on 17.2.2000, and the Investigating Officer has stated in
his cross-examination that he received DD No.35A at 6:45 p.m. and
reached the hospital at 7:45 p.m., it is not in dispute that at the point of
time when the Investigating Officer recorded her statement, the
endotracheal tube had been put in the mouth of the deceased, who was in
respiratory distress and was not in a position to speak, as is evident from
the endorsement made by PW-3 Dr. Aditya Aggarwal on the statement of
the deceased (PW-19/B), which reads as follows:
“17.2.2000
12:45 p.m.
At present the patient has been put on endo tracheal tube
so cannot speak, but is fully conscious and can understand
whatever is told to her verbally and gave her answers in
the form of nod signifying 'yes' or 'no'.”

(iii)

Even assuming that the statement was recorded prior to the

insertion of the tube in the mouth of the deceased, it is difficult to imagine
that the deceased, who must have been in considerable agony and
completely traumatized by the burn injuries was in a position to narrate

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 8 of 18

the aforementioned elaborate story of her life, replete with intricate
details, to the Investigating Officer. Equally, unbelievable is the version
given by the prosecution that the SDM, who arrived in the hospital after
the Investigating Officer, “after confirming the nodding pattern of the
patient”, read out to her the statement recorded by the I.O. to which she
nodded in the affirmative.
(iv)

Yet another circumstance which persuades us to disbelieve the

statement recorded by the Investigating Officer (Ex.PW-19/B) and
supposedly got verified by the SDM as the statement of the deceased is
that PW-9 Shri Rajesh Kumar, the SDM Defence Colony unequivocally
stated in the witness box that when he reached the hospital, the patient
was not fit for making a statement.
(v)

Then again, PW-3 Dr. Aditya Aggarwal who appeared in the

witness box to depose that he had observed at 12:45 p.m. that the patient
was on endotracheal tube, so, could not speak, but was fully conscious,
candidly admitted in his cross-examination that he could not tell whether
she was in a position to speak before that or not. He further stated that
the SDM had asked certain questions to the patient in Hindi language, but
admitted that he did not know whether the patient knew Hindi or not, nor
he knew whether the patient was a Nepalese or not. He was not sure
whether the SDM had been writing himself or some police official had
written on his dictation, nor he remembered as to whether the SDM had
signed on the statement of the patient.
(vi)

Further, PW-16 Ct. Rakesh Kumar, who according to the

prosecution accompanied the Investigating Officer to the Safdarjung
Crl.A.361/2004

Page 9 of 18

Hospital, is also not able to throw any light on the matter, as he stated that
he was standing outside the room when the Investigating Officer recorded
the statement of Smt. Sumiti, as also when the SDM recorded the
statement of Smt. Sumiti. The I.O., on the other hand, categorically
asserted that Ct. Rakesh Kumar was present in the room with him when he
recorded the statement Ex.PW-19/B.
(vii)

It is also borne out from the document Ex.PW-19/F dated

18.2.2000 whereby permission was sought by the Investigating Officer for
recording of the statement of the patient that on the following day, i.e., on
18.02.2000 also the patient was declared unfit for statement by Dr.Swain,
CMO, Safdarjung Hospital.

Had the statement of the patient been

recorded by the I.O. and the S.D.M. on 17.02.2000, there was no occasion
for again recording her statement on the very next day.
16.

In such circumstances, in our view, it was incumbent upon the prosecution

to prove beyond a shadow of doubt that the statement Ex.PW-19/B was recorded
when the deceased was mentally and physically fit for statement. This, the
prosecution, in our view, has miserably failed to prove. PW-9, the SDM on the
other hand, has categorically stated that when he reached the hospital, the patient
was not fit for statement while PW-19, the Investigating Officer is unable to
name the doctor who declared the patient fit for statement before 12.45 p.m. on
the day in question when the tube was inserted in her mouth.
17.

Adverting next to the statement recorded by PW-9, the SDM on 21.2.2000,

PW-9 Shri Rajesh Kumar deposed that on 21.2.2000 at 6 p.m., the Investigating
Officer again informed him that Smt. Sumiti was fit for statement, whereupon he
immediately reached the hospital and recorded the statement of Smt. Sumiti, in

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 10 of 18

which she alleged that her husband was responsible for the act of burning her,
though she did not allege any harassment or any demand for dowry. The said
statement of Smt.Sumiti (Ex.PW-9/A) purports to be recorded at 7 p.m. and
contains the endorsement that Smt.Sumiti was declared fit for statement by the
doctor at 6:45 p.m. In the course of cross-examination, however, the SDM (PW-9)
candidly admitted that he could not tell the name of the doctor who had declared
Smt. Sumiti fit for statement. Not only this, the Investigating officer PW-19 Sub
Inspector Jagdish Prasad in his cross-examination went so far as to admit that he
had not even move an application to know about the condition of the patient on
21.2.2000. On further cross-examination, he stated that he could not tell the name
of the doctor who had written portion 'X' to 'X', i.e., “Patient fit for statement” on
Ex.PW-9/A and admitted that the said portion did not bear the stamp of the
concerned doctor.
18.

Matters are worst confounded by the testimonies of PW-5 Dil Bahadur and

PW-6 Smt.Shanti, the parents of the deceased. PW-5 Dil Bahadur deposed that
Sumiti was his daughter, who was married to the appellant. He deposed that he
was told by his wife that she had poured kerosene oil on herself and set herself on
fire. He asserted that she was of a stubborn (ziddi) nature and categorically stated
that the appellant had not burnt his daughter. On a query put to him in crossexamination, he stated that he was unaware whether the police or the SDM had
recorded his statement as he was illiterate, but he remembered having affixed his
thumb impression on document Ex.PW-5/A in token of identifying the dead body
of his daughter Sumiti.
19.

The testimony of PW-6 Smt.Shanti is on the same lines. She stated that her

daughter Sumiti was under the influence of liquor and had refused to warm the

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 11 of 18

food of the appellant despite the appellant telling her that he was hungry. She
(PW-6) was hearing this conversation between the appellant and her daughter as
she was in the staircase. Thereafter, she (PW-6) came down, but in the meantime,
Devi Singh @ Kale also came down and told her that her daughter had got burnt.
She immediately rushed to the jhuggi of her daughter and saw that the accused
was extinguishing the fire. She stated that her daughter Sumiti had told her that
accused Surya had burnt her, but she had given a wrong statement and had stated
so under the influence of liquor. PW-6 also categorically denied having made any
statement before the police or the SDM that the appellant had tried to kill her
daughter by burning her. She further stated that her daughter had told her 3/ 4 days
prior to her death that she had burnt herself and that the appellant had done
nothing.
20.

PW-10 Raju son of Ram Prasad and PW-13 Ram Singh son of Man Singh,

the two brothers-in-laws of the deceased, though appeared in the witness box to
depose that Sumiti had died of burns and they had taken her to the Safdarjung
Hospital, also categorically stated that she had not told them as to how she had
received the burn injuries. Thus, not only the neighbour (PW-4 Devi Singh) but
the father, mother and two brothers-in-law of the deceased refused to inculpate the
appellant. PW-6 Smt. Shanti, the mother of the deceased even went so far as to
state that the appellant used to keep the two sons of the deceased, who were the
offspring of her first marriage, affectionately.
21.

The above facts and circumstances taken cumulatively, in our view, cast a

grave doubt on the veracity of the dying declarations on which implicit reliance
has been placed by the learned Addl. Sessions Judge. This apart, in the instant
case it cannot be lost sight of that the deceased was discharged from the hospital

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 12 of 18

on 23.02.2000 and again re-admitted on 29.02.2000. She ultimately succumbed to
her burn injuries on 2.3.2000, and immediately prior to her death no dying
declaration was given by her as she was stated to be in a critical condition on
account of septicaemia having set in. Whether the statements attributed to her
which were made much prior to her death, would qualify for the epithet of “dying
declarations” is again a moot question, which assumes significance for the reason
that the statement of an injured person and a dying declaration have altogether
different probative value. While a certain degree of sanctity is attributed to a
dying declaration, the statement of an injured person may or may not be given
credence having regard to all the attendant facts and circumstances. We, however,
do not propose to dwell upon this aspect in view of the fact that we are satisfied
from the testimonies of the Investigating Officer and the SDM, that no attempt
was made by either the I.O. or the S.D.M. to ascertain whether the deceased was
mentally and physically fit for making the statement/s recorded by them. While
the SDM's testimony shows that he placed implicit reliance on the word of the
Investigating officer that the deceased was fit to make statement, the Investigating
Officer admits that he made no attempt to even move an application to ascertain
the medical condition of the patient on 21.2.2000, when the statement of the
deceased (Ex PW9/A) was recorded by the SDM. As regards the statement
(Ex.PW-19/B) recorded by the I.O. on 17.2.2000, as stated above, it is not in
dispute that the endotracheal tube had been inserted into the mouth of the
deceased at that point of time as she was suffering from respiratory problems and,
therefore, presumably she was not in a fit condition to make any statement, let
alone the lengthy narrative placed on record, which is to say the least nothing
short of a piece of oration.

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 13 of 18

22.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down the guidelines as how a dying

declaration be scrutinized in K. Ramachandra Reddy vs. Public Prosecutor
(1976) 3 SCC 618. In paragraph 6 of the judgment, it was observed as follows:
(SCC, p.627)
“6..........................................................................................The
dying declaration is undoubtedly admissible under Section 32
of the Evidence Act and not being a statement on oath so that
its truth could be tested by cross-examination, the courts have
to apply the strictest scrutiny and the closest circumspection to
the statement before acting upon it. While great solemnity and
sanctity is attached to the words of a dying man because a
person on the verge of death is not likely to tell lies or to
concoct a case so as to implicate an innocent person yet the
court has to be on guard against the statement of the deceased
being a result of either tutoring, prompting or a product of his
imagination. The court must be satisfied that the deceased
was in a fit state of mind to make the statement after the
deceased had a clear opportunity to observe and identify his
assailants and that he was making the statement without any
influence or rancour.................................................................”
23.

In the aforesaid case, a large number of discrepancies were found in the

evidence of the doctor vis-a-vis the Magistrate who had recorded the dying
declaration. Rejecting the prosecution case as not reliable at all, the Supreme
Court noticed:
“11......................................................................The magistrate
PW 11 who recorded the dying declaration has admitted that
the injured was suffering from pain and he was not in a
position to sign and so his thumb impression was taken. The
magistrate further admitted that the injured was taking time to
answer the questions. The magistrate further admitted that the
injured was very much suffering with pain. In spite of these
facts the magistrate appears to have committed a serious
irregularity in not putting a direct question to the injured
whether he was capable mentally to make any statement. In
the case of Lallubhai Devchand Shah referred to by us (supra)
the omission of the person who recorded the dying declaration
to question the deceased regarding his state of mind to make
the statement was considered to be a very serious one and in
our opinion in the instant case the omission of the Judicial
Magistrate who knew the law well throws a good deal of doubt
on the fact whether the deceased was really in a fit state of
Crl.A.361/2004

Page 14 of 18

mind to make a statement..........................................................”
24.

In the case of Laxman (supra), a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court

observed as follows:
“3. The juristic theory regarding acceptability of a dying
declaration is that such declaration is made in extremity, when
the party is at the point of death and when every hope of this
world is gone, when every motive to falsehood is silenced, and
the man is induced by the most powerful consideration to speak
only the truth. Notwithstanding the same, great caution must
be exercised in considering the weight to be given to this
species of evidence on account of the existence of many
circumstances which may affect their truth. The situation in
which a man is on the deathbed is so solemn and serene, is the
reason in law to accept the veracity of his statement. It is for
this reason the requirements of oath and cross-examination are
dispensed with. Since the accused has no power of crossexamination, the courts insist that the dying declaration should
be of such a nature as to inspire full confidence of the court in
its truthfulness and correctness. The court, however, has
always to be on guard to see that the statement of the deceased
was not as a result of either tutoring or prompting or a product
of imagination. The court also must further decide that the
deceased was in a fit state of mind and had the opportunity to
observe and identify the assailant. Normally, therefore, the
court in order to satisfy whether the deceased was in a fit
mental condition to make the dying declaration looks up to the
medical opinion. But where the eyewitnesses state that the
deceased was in a fit and conscious state to make the
declaration, the medical opinion will not prevail, nor can it be
said that since there is no certification of the doctor as to the
fitness of the mind of the declarant, the dying declaration is not
acceptable..................................................................................”
25.

The Supreme Court in the cases of Ramilaben Hasmukhbhai Khristi &

Anr. vs. State of Gujarat (2002) 7 SCC 56, Laxmi (Smt.) vs. Om Prakash (2001)
6 SCC 118 and Nallapati Sivaiah vs. Sub-Division Officer, Guntur, A.P. JT
2007 (11) SC 313 observed that dying declaration can form the sole basis of
conviction only if it is free from any kind of doubt and it has been recorded in the
manner as provided under the law. The Court, however, has to scrutinize the
dying declarations carefully and must ensure that the dying declaration is not the

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 15 of 18

result of torturing, prompting or imagination and the deceased was in a fit state of
mind to make the declaration.
26.

In the case of Nallapati Sivaiah (supra), it was held thus:
“20. The Court has to consider each case in the circumstances
of the case. What value should be given to a dying declaration
is left to Court, which on assessment of the circumstances and
the evidence and materials on record, will come to a conclusion
about the truth or otherwise of the version, be it written, oral,
verbal or by sign or by gestures. It is also a settled principle of
law that dying declaration is a substantive evidence and an
order of conviction can be safely recorded on the basis of dying
declaration provided the Court is fully satisfied that the dying
declaration made by the deceased was voluntary and reliable
and the author recorded the dying declaration as stated by the
deceased. This Court laid down the principle that for relying
upon the dying declaration the Court must be conscious that the
dying declaration was voluntary and further it was recorded
correctly and above all the maker was in a fit condition –
mentally and physically – to make such statement.”

27.

In the case of Laxmi (Smt.) (supra), it was observed as follows:
“One of the important tests of the reliability of the dying
declaration is a finding arrived at by the court as to satisfaction
that the deceased was in a fit state of mind and capable of
making a statement at the point of time when the dying
declaration purports to have been made and/or recorded. The
statement may be brief or longish. It is not the length of the
statement but the fit state of mind of the victim to narrate the
facts of occurrence which has relevance. If the court finds that
the capacity of the maker of the statement to narrate the facts
was impaired or the court entertains grave doubts whether the
deceased was in a fit physical and mental state to make the
statement the court may in the absence of corroborating
evidence lending assurance to the contents of the declaration
refuse to act on it.”

28.

The minute details delineated in the statement, in our view, entirely take

away from the statement any probative value it may have otherwise possessed.
Thus, for instance, the statement purports to record that the ex-husband of the
deceased had re-married and that he was residing in Nepal, that she had got
remarried about 4/5 years ago, that she had two sons, namely, Manoj aged 11

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 16 of 18

years and Rajesh aged 7/8 years from her first husband and from her second
husband, she had no issue. To say the least, such kind of intricate and extraneous
matter interwoven into the statement purporting to be the dying declaration of a
critically injured person casts serious doubt on the veracity of the statement,
which, as already stated, in any case has very little evidentiary value having been
recorded at a time when, according to the SDM himself, the patient was not fit for
making statement.
29.

Another circumstance which we cannot help but notice in the instant case is

that admittedly the Investigating Officer took no steps to produce the children of
the deceased in the witness box to depose about the occurrence. The children of
the deceased who were sleeping in the same room as the deceased must
undoubtedly have been the first to witness the quarrel and what ensued thereafter.
Since, even according to the prosecution, the deceased was burnt after a verbal
battle had taken place between the appellant and the deceased, and the cries of the
deceased had attracted even the neighbour PW-4 Devi Singh, the best evidence
would have been the children. The best evidence having been suppressed by the
prosecution from this Court for reasons best known to the prosecution, we feel
impelled to conjecture that had the children been produced in the witness box,
they would have shattered the prosecution story by betraying the truth and,
therefore, the elder son who was 11 years of age and younger son who was 7/8
years have been carefully kept out of the witness box. On this score also, we feel
compelled to draw adverse inference against the prosecution.
30.

Accordingly, we are of the view that it would be highly unsafe to rely upon

the alleged statements of the deceased recorded by the investigating agencies in
the face of the other telling circumstances of the case coupled with the oral

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 17 of 18

testimonies of the eye-witnesses, who though were related to the deceased and not
the appellant, yet have chosen to exonerate the appellant and declare him free
from blame. There does not appear to us any cogent reason why the father, the
mother, the husbands of the two sisters of the deceased and even the neighbour
would refuse to support the prosecution case if the appellant had cruelly cut short
the life span of the deceased on account of a sudden bout of temper, and, have
chosen instead to certify that the deceased herself was a stubborn (ziddi) lady,
given to drink, who in a fit of obduracy had chosen to ignite herself rather than
bend to the wishes of her husband on so a petty a matter as warming up of his
food.
31.

We accordingly set aside the judgment of the learned Additional Sessions

Judge convicting the appellant and acquit him of the charge of murder of his wife.
His bail bond and surety bond shall stand discharged. Though the appellant had
been granted bail by the modified order of this Court dated 17 th September, 2007
but if he has not been able to avail of the said order and is still in jail, he shall be
released forthwith.
32.

We record our appreciation for the efforts put in by the learned Amicus

Curiae Shri Manoj Sharma in the appeal.
Crl. A. No.361/2004 stands disposed of accordingly.

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

MUKUL MUDGAL,J
March 20, 2008
km/dc

Crl.A.361/2004

Page 18 of 18

