*

REPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 418-19/2006
Date of Decision: 21st February, 2008

%

M/S HANDA OFFSET
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Pradeep Kr. Arya and
Mr. Narinder Chaudhry, Advocates
versus
GOVT. OF NCT & ANR
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. S. Sirish Kumar, Advocate for R-1
Mr. Rishi Pal Singh, Advocate for R-2
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
JUDGMENT

%

21.02.2008

:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 20.01.2006

passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the review
application filed by the appellant.
2.

The respondent No.2 was working with the appellant for about

four years when his services were terminated with effect from 9 th
LPA 418-19/2006

Page 1 of 5

August, 1994.

It was alleged that the aforesaid termination was

illegal and unjustified as it was passed in violation of the provisions of
Section 25(f) and also other provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Since a dispute was raised by the respondent No.2, the appropriate
Government referred the dispute on the following terms:
“Whether the services of Sh. Bindu Prasad have been
terminated illegallly and/or unjustifiably by the
management and if so, to what relief is he entitled
and what directions are necessary in this respect?”
3.

Before the Industrial Adjudicator, the stand taken by the

appellant was that the workman had joined the services of the
appellant only effective from 1st June, 1994 and that he left the
service of his own, after submitting a resignation letter and taking full
and final payment from the appellant. Parties led evidence before
the Industrial Adjudicator and on conclusion of the trial, the Labour
Court found that the aforesaid termination was illegal and
unjustified and directed for reinstatement of the workman with 50%
of the back wages.
4.

The appellant being aggrieved by the aforesaid award filed a

writ petition which was considered by the learned Single Judge.
Although the appellant had taken up a plea that the respondent
No.2 submitted a resignation letter and left the services of his own
after taking full and final payment, the appellant could not produce
any alleged resignation letter or any receipt suggesting that there
had been a full and final settlement between the parties. In that

LPA 418-19/2006

Page 2 of 5

view of the matter, the learned Single Judge held that the stand
taken by the appellant cannot be accepted since the appellant
was unable to produce any evidence in support of his case. The
learned Single Judge believed the plea taken by the respondent
No.2 that he had been working with the appellant for four years and
that his services were illegally terminated. Consequently, the writ
petition was dismissed giving cogent grounds. Subsequent thereto,
it appears that a review application was filed. In the said review
application, for the first time, a stand was taken by the appellant
that the respondent No.2 was working elsewhere.
application was dismissed by the

The said

learned Single Judge by the

impugned order dated 20.01.2006. The present appeal is filed by
the appellant challenging both the orders that are passed by the
learned Single Judge on the writ petition as also on the review
application.
5.

In the light of the aforesaid challenge made, we have heard

the learned counsel appearing for the parties and also perused the
records. What is contended before us is that the learned Single
Judge acted illegally in not accepting the contention of the
appellant that the respondent No.2 was working elsewhere.

We

have considered the said statement in the light of the records
placed before us.

The specific plea which was taken by the

appellant before the Industrial Adjudicator as also before the
learned Single Judge was that the respondent No.2 submitted his
LPA 418-19/2006

Page 3 of 5

resignation and then abandoned the service of his own, after
accepting the full and final payment. The aforesaid plea which was
taken up in the pleadings of the appellant was required to be
proved by leading cogent evidence in support of the said
contention. No such resignation letter was placed on record. The
appellant also could not prove and establish that the respondent
No.2 had accepted any payment in full and final settlement of all
his claims.

These are findings of fact recorded by the Industrial

Adjudicator which were also considered by the

learned Single

Judge. The learned Single Judge also came to the conclusion that
there is no such proof of either the respondent No.2 submitting his
resignation from the work or of his accepting any payment in full
and final settlement of all his claims. The same being concurrent
findings of facts, this Court would not like to reappreciate the
evidence.
6.

So far the contention that the respondent No.2 was working

elsewhere is concerned, such evidence should have been
adduced at the very first instance and not at the stage when a
review application was filed, which, if would have been accepted,
would have deprived the respondent No.2 of his right of crossexamining and disproving the said evidence on record.

In any

case, the Labour Court has awarded 50% back wages to the
respondent No.2, which is also upheld by the learned Single Judge.
Therefore, the said contention would in any case have no merit.
LPA 418-19/2006

Page 4 of 5

7.

The appeal has no merit and is accordingly dismissed.

CHIEF JUSTICE

FEBRUARY 21, 2008
km

LPA 418-19/2006

REVA KHETRAPAL, J

Page 5 of 5

