*

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 121/2006 and CM Nos.1265/2006, 1268/2006 and 17459/2007
Date of Decision: 21st January, 2008

%
MCD

..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Vibhu
Shankar and Mr. Lakshay Sahani, Advocates
versus

ASAF ALI ROAD TYPIST WELFARE
ASSOCIATION (REGD.) & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. R.K. Saini, Advocate for R-1 to 14
Ms. Zubeda Begum, Advocate for R-15 & 16
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

JUDGMENT
21.01.2008

%
:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties on this appeal.

During the course of hearing, it was suggested by us that some alternative
accommodation be found out in the same building or in the vicinity of the same building
to accommodate some of the typists, who are required for the purpose of typing out the
deeds and documents. We also constituted a committee consisting of Mr. Sandeep Sethi,
Sr. Advocate; Mr. R.K. Saini, Advocate and Ms. Zubeda Begum, Advocate. Mr. Sethi
was assisted by Mr. Vibhu Shankar, the instructing counsel in the process.
2.

Pursuant to our request, all of them visited the concerned building in order to find
LPA 121/2006

Page 1 of 3

out if some place could be made available for some typists either in the same building
where the office of the Sub-Registrar is located or in the vicinity thereof so that some of
the typists could be accommodated who can type out the documents, which are put up for
the registration. They have now submitted a report which discloses that there is neither
any space inside the Sub-Registrar's Office nor in its vicinity or in the other buildings
nearby which could be made available to the typists. It is also reported that the typists
are sitting in the verandah.
3.

Considering the aforesaid position and as suggested by the committee members,

we accept the proposal given by the MCD for demolition of certain kiosks in the market
area called as 'Tikona Park', which shall now be reconstructed and in which one hall with
sufficient space shall be made available to the NCT of Delhi, to be used for typists,
stamp vendors, deed writers and notary public. We, therefore, pass an order accepting
the aforesaid report submitted to us. We also direct that the MCD, in terms of the
aforesaid proposal given to us, would demolish the kiosks in the market area known as
'Tikona Park' and construct a big hall, which can accommodate all the aforesaid
categories of persons, and the same shall be handed over to the State Government, who
shall thereafter allot places to all these persons on lease as per their requirement. The
steps for demolition and construction shall be taken up as expeditiouly as possible. Once
the typists are accommodated in the big hall, which is going to be constructed pursuant to
this order, the typists, who are now accommodated in the open verandah, shall
immediately shift to the new place and there shall be no impediment to ingress and
egress in the Sub-Registrar's Office and the verandah shall be made free. The number of
the typists, who are occupying the verandah at the moment, shall be ascertained by the
NCT of Delhi immediately so that no other person can later on claim benefit of these
orders. It is also made clear that there is a certificate placed in our record as Annexure-P1, which indicates that there is a Typists Welfare Association, which is a registered
Society. The names of the members of the said registered Society shall be obtained by

LPA 121/2006

Page 2 of 3

the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the State Government as of today.
4.

LPA 121/2006 and CM Nos.1265/2006, 1268/2006 and 17459/2007 stand

disposed of accordingly.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
JANUARY 21, 2008
km

LPA 121/2006

Page 3 of 3

