UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI: NEW DELHI

*
+

FAO(OS) No.34/2008
Date of decision: January 21, 2008

DURGA CHARAN HANSDAH
..... Appellant
Through : Mr. Anukul Chandra Pradhan,
Advocate.
Versus
SURAJA MANI STELLA KHUJUR & ANR.
Through : Nemo.

..... Respondents

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether the Reports of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ(ORAL):
1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 3.9.2007

and also the order dated 11.12.2007 passed by the learned Single
Judge whereby the learned Single Judge referred to earlier order for
personal appearance of the defendant No.1/appellant herein for
recording of his statement under Order 10 CPC and for noncompliance of the said order, direction for issuance of bailable warrant
in the sum of Rs.5000/- was given. In the order dated 3.9.2007, the
learned Single Judge referred to the earlier order dated 10.7.2007
issuing direction to the defendant No.1 to appear before the Court for
recording of his statement.

Reference was also made to the order

passed on the next date, i.e., 20.07.2007 when the statement of the

FAO(OS) No.34/2008

Page No.1 of 4

counsel for the defendant No.1 was recorded to the effect that his
client does not wish to come to the Court.
2.

Since the defendant No.1 did not appear before the Court

despite the orders passed by the Court for recording his statement
under Order 10 CPC before the Court, the Court directed that he
should appear before the Court on the next date, i.e., on 11.12.2007
for recording his statement.

When on 11.12.2007, the matter was

again listed before the Court, the defendant No.1 again did not appear
which fact was recorded. The Court considered the pleadings of the
parties and held that since a preliminary objection about the territorial
jurisdiction of the Court is taken by the defendant No.1, therefore, his
statement is required to be recorded before his objection with regard
to want of territorial jurisdiction could be taken up for final hearing.
Consequently, it was held that the defendant No.1/appellant should
appear for recording his statement under Order 10 CPC.

The Court

also recorded that he had earlier failed to appear before the Court
despite directions for his appearance given on 10.7.2007 and
3.9.2007.

The Court considered the statement of the counsel

appearing for the defendant No.1 and found that no reasonable
excuse had been furnished on behalf of defendant No.1 as to why
defendant No.1 had not appeared before the Court.

Accordingly, a

direction was issued for issuance of bailable warrant for ensuring the
presence of defendant No.1 before the Court. Being aggrieved by the
said orders, this appeal is filed on which we have heard learned
counsel appearing for the appellant.
3.

Counsel for the appellant relied upon the provision of

Order 10 CPC and after making special reference to Rule 4 thereof

FAO(OS) No.34/2008

Page No.2 of 4

submitted that if a party fails without lawful excuse to appear in
person on the day so appointed for personal appearance, the Court
could pronounce judgment against him or could make such order in
relation to the suit as it thinks fit. Relying on the said provision, it is
submitted by the counsel that directing for personal appearance and
issuance of bailable warrant against the defendant No.1 cannot be
said to be an order passed in relation to the suit. A similar contention
was also raised before the learned Single Judge who considered the
same but rejected the said contention on the ground that such an
order directing for his personal appearance in Court for recording his
statement having not been complied with, a bailable warrant could be
issued for ensuring his presence in Court and that the same should be
held to be an order which could be passed in terms of Order 10 Rule
4(2) CPC. It is held by the learned Single Judge that the orders which
are passed are orders passed under the second option which is
available to the Court.

Reference was also made by the learned

Single Judge to the decision of the Supreme Court in Jagraj Singh Vs.
Birpal Kaur; reported in (2007) 2 SCC 564, wherein the Supreme
Court in a matrimonial case upheld the order for issuance of nonbailable warrants to secure presence of the defendant through
warrants.
4.

The defendant No.1 has taken up a preliminary objection

regarding want of territorial jurisdiction of the Court.

The learned

Single Judge on appreciation of records has felt that the statement of
defendant No.1 should be recorded for deciding issue No.1. In that
view of the matter, the defendant No.1 should have been present in
Court to get his statement recorded and if he had any objection, he

FAO(OS) No.34/2008

Page No.3 of 4

should have pointed out the same to the Court after being present in
Court.

Since he refused to appear before the Court, therefore, the

learned Single Judge was justified in issuing a bailable warrant against
him so as to ensure his presence for recording his statement in terms
of the provisions of Order 10 CPC.
5.

We are informed by counsel appearing for the appellant

that the appellant has to appear before the Court tomorrow i.e.
22.1.2008.

Once he appears before the Court in terms of the

directions, only then he should be allowed to take up all such pleas as
may be available to him, which could be considered by the learned
Single Judge in accordance with law.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J.
JANUARY 21, 2008.
vk.

FAO(OS) No.34/2008

Page No.4 of 4

