*
+
%

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO(OS) 17/2008 and CM Nos.528-29/2008
Date of Decision: 25th February, 2008

TULSIENT TECHNOLOGIES (I) P.LTD.

.... Appellant

Through: Mr. Subhash Oberoi, Advocate
versus

MODI CARE LIMITED

.... Respondent

Through
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.
Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

%
:

JUDGMENT
25.02.2008
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

This appeal is directed against the order dated 24.10.2007 passed by the

learned Single Judge dismissing the application filed by the appellant praying
for setting aside the ex parte decree and also the application seeking for
condonation of delay.
2.

The respondent herein filed a suit for declaration, permanent injunction

and mandatory injunction in respect of the Master Licensing Agreement dated

08.10.2002 and the Supplementary Agreement dated 16.01.2003. In the said
suit, summons were directed to be issued. The learned Single Judge on going
through the records found that the summons had been served on the
defendant and held that despite the said service, defendant had not entered
appearance and, therefore, the suit would proceed ex parte. Consequent
thereto and with the passage of time, an ex parte decree was also passed by
the learned Single Judge on 14.09.2006. After expiry of about a year of passing
the aforesaid decree, two applications came to be filed by the appellant, one
under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC and the other under Section 5 of the Limitation
Act, 1963. Both the applications were taken up for consideration by the
learned Single Judge. The ground given for setting aside the ex parte decree
by the appellant was that the person who received the aforesaid summons
was not authorized on behalf of the appellant to receive the same. The said
contention was considered by the learned Single Judge, who on appreciation
of records came to the conclusion that the aforesaid ground which is taken is
misconceived.
3.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid finding and the reasoning given by the

learned Single Judge for dismissing the applications, the present appeal is filed
on which we have heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant. Mr.
Subhash Oberoi, Advocate appearing for the appellant has submitted before
us that Mrs. Sunita Braganza, who received the said notice, had no authority to

receive any communication on behalf of the appellant Company and there
was one Mr. Shukla, who was receiving the dak for the appellant Company.
There is, however, no denial of the fact, rather it is an admitted fact that both
the companies, i.e., M/s. Tulsient Information System Pvt. Ltd. and appellant
company are located in the same building and that both the companies are
sister companies. There is no denial also of the fact that Mrs. Sunita Braganza
receives dak on behalf of M/s. Tulsient Technologies (I) Pvt. Ltd. and that he
had received the summons in this case and put the seal of the appellant
Company.
4.

We have considered the records as also the aforesaid summons. It is

clearly indicated therefrom that she has received the aforesaid summons on
behalf of M/s. Tulsient Technologies (I) Pvt. Ltd., which is the appellant
Company. The process server has also stated that all the papers were served
on her and she has accepted the same on behalf of the appellant Company.
In that view of the matter, the stand taken that she was not authorized to
receive any such communication cannot be accepted. Even if there was
another person receiving the dak usually that was an internal arrangement
between the companies. Both being the sister companies and being housed
in the same location, it cannot be said that Mrs. Sunita Braganza had no
authority to receive the aforesaid summons. It may also be mentioned that
the appellant has never put up a case that the aforesaid seal at any point of

time could have been stolen or was stolen or misused by Mrs. Sunita Braganza.
That being the position, the contention raised before us cannot be accepted.
5.

We find no reason to interfere with the order passed by the learned

Single Judge. The appeal has no merit and is dismissed. CM Nos.528-29/2008
also stand disposed of accordingly.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
FEBRUARY 25, 2008
km

