*

REPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: 27th March, 2008

%
+

LPA 2529/2005

D.T.C.

..... Appellant
Through Mr. J.N. Aggarwal, Advocate.
versus

TARA CHAND

..... Respondent
Through Mr. K.P. Tomas, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

:

DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)
1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 24

th

August, 2005, passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ
petition filed by the appellant herein. The appellant contended that the
respondent-workman was absent unauthorisedly and, therefore, an order
th

was passed by the appellant on 7 March, 1988 holding that the respondent
is deemed to have resigned from his job as he was unauthorisedly absent.
LPA No.2529/2005

Page No.1 of 7

By the same order, the period of his unauthorised absence from 6th
November, 1987 to 12th February, 1988 was regularised. Being aggrieved
by the aforesaid order passed by the Management-appellant, the
respondent-workman raised a dispute which the appropriate Government
referred to the Industrial Adjudicator. The Industrial Adjudicator registered
the said reference as ID Case No.206/89, wherein the following reference
was considered:“Whether the termination of services of Sh. Tara Chand is
legal and/or justified and if not, to what relief is he entitled
and what directions are necessary in this respect?”
2.

The learned Labour Court received the pleadings filed by the parties

and also recorded the evidence adduced by the parties and, thereafter passed
an award holding that the order of termination passed against the
respondent by the Management was illegal and unjustified. After holding
in the aforesaid manner, it was further held as follows:“The claimant has stated in his statement recorded on
07.12.1998 that he is unemployed since the date of
termination of his services. He stated that he did not try to
find out alternative employment as he was not keeping good
health. He stated that he was not in a condition to work at all
after the termination of his services. The claimant, therefore,
is not entitled to any back wages. Again, the claimant has
already crossed the age of superannuation. As stated
hereinabove, the claimant had already worked for long 24
years with the DTC before he was deemed to have resigned
the job. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the relief
of reinstatement and back wages cannot be granted to the
claimant. However, since the claimant could not be deemed
to have resigned from the services for the reasons stated
LPA No.2529/2005

Page No.2 of 7

above, he will be treated to have taken voluntary retirement
with effect from 07.03.1988 when the impugned order was
passed. The claimant would be entitled to all the benefits
including pension, gratuity, encashment of leave, if any, to
his credit etc. as if he had worked in the DTC upto
07.03.1988.
The issue is decided and the reference is
answered accordingly.”

3.

Being aggrieved by the aforesaid Award of the Labour Court, the

appellant filed a writ petition which was registered as CWP No.5225/2000.
The said writ petition was considered by the learned Single Judge and the
same was dismissed by an order passed on 11th September, 2000. The
learned Single Judge held as follows:“The petitioner has challenged an award dated 29th
January, 1999 passed by the Labour Court No.III.
The respondent workman had been working with the
petitioner for the last 24 years. The Respondent was deemed
to have resigned from service with effect from 7th March,
1988. The Ld. Labour court was of the view that the deeming
provision regarding resignation was not applicable so far as
the respondent-workman is concerned. Accordingly, it was
directed that the respondent workman be treated to have taken
voluntary retirement with effect from 7th March, 1988.
I see no infirmity in the order passed by the Ld. Labour
Court. The Respondent workman will be treated as having
been voluntarily retired from service with effect from 7th
March, 1988 as directed by the Ld. Labour Court and he will
be entitled to benefits in this regard as if he had worked up to
7th March, 1988.
Dismissed.”
4.

Being still aggrieved, the appellant filed an appeal which was

LPA No.2529/2005

Page No.3 of 7

registered as LPA No.63/2001. The said appeal was dismissed by the
Division Bench by an order passed on 5th February, 2001, holding that there
was no merit in the said appeal.
5.

In that view of the matter, the findings and the conclusions arrived at

by the Industrial Adjudicator that the appellant would be considered as
having taken voluntary retirement effective from 7th March, 1988 have
become final and binding on all the parties.
6.

A Pension Scheme was introduced for the employees of the DTC by

the appellant on 27th November, 1992. It is, therefore, explicitly clear that
the aforesaid Pension Scheme came to be introduced while the aforesaid
reference was pending before the learned Industrial Adjudicator. We may
extract the relevant portions of the said Pension Scheme, which are at
paragraphs 2 and 3:“2.
The date of effect of Pension Scheme would be
3.8.1981.
3.
All the existing employees including those retired w.e.f.
03.08.1981 onwards would have the option to opt for the
Pension Scheme or the Employees Contributory Provident
Funds as at present, within 30 days from the date of issue of
this o.o. for the implementation of the Pension Scheme as
approved by the govt. of India.”
7.

A bare perusal of the aforesaid Pension Scheme and the aforesaid

Clauses contained therein would indicate that the effective date of
applicability of the Pension Scheme was made as 3.8.1981, when the

LPA No.2529/2005

Page No.4 of 7

respondent-workman was admittedly working with the DTC. Clause 3 of
the said Pension Scheme makes it more explicit when it states that all the
existing employees including those retired with effect from 3.8.1981
onwards would have the option to opt for the Pension Scheme or the
Employees Contributory Provident Funds as at present, within 30 days from
the date of issue of the Office Order. Therefore, all employee who were
working and those who had retried with effect from 3.8.1981 were entitled
to the benefit of exercising their option and becoming a member of the
Pension Scheme.

The respondent on the date when the Scheme was

introduced i.e., 27th November, 1992 was deemed to have resigned by the
appellant and his matter was pending before the Industrial Adjudicator.
Therefore, he could not have exercised his option in the manner sought for
by the appellant.

He could submit his option, opting for becoming a

member of the Pension Scheme, only on the disposal of the proceedings,
which culminated in the award dated 29th January, 1999. When the award
was passed in the aforesaid manner, and even thereafter the matter remained
subjudice as the appellant filed a writ petition which was dismissed on 11th
September, 2000 and the writ appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed
on 5th February, 2001. Therefore, we find justification in the order passed
by the learned Single Judge, who by a detailed reasoned order has held that
the respondent would be entitled to the benefit of the Pension Scheme. The

LPA No.2529/2005

Page No.5 of 7

learned Single Judge was justified in holding that the respondent could have
exercised his option only upon setting aside of the order of deemed
resignation passed by the appellant, which was finally set aside when the
award dated 29th January, 1999, was passed. The learned Single Judge was
also justified in making reference to the order passed by the learned Single
Judge dismissing the writ petition and also the order of dismissal passed by
the Division Bench, and in holding that in any case, an opportunity to
exercise the option would have been available to the respondent-workman
only upon the passing of the award as the respondent was not given any
such opportunity to exercise his option before the passing of the award of
the Industrial Tribunal.
8.

We find no reason to take a different view than what was taken by

the learned Single Judge. In our considered opinion, the respondent having
stated that he would desire to be a member of the Pension Scheme, he
would be entitled to get all the benefits under the said Scheme, and
whatever benefit he is entitled to pursuant to the order of the learned Single
Judge should be given to him, if not given already, within a period of four
weeks, failing which the said amount shall be paid with interest at the rate
of 12% per annum from the date of the same falling due till the date of
payment.
9.

Mr. J.N. Aggarwal, counsel appearing for the appellant, during the

LPA No.2529/2005

Page No.6 of 7

course of his submissions relies upon a decision of the Supreme Court in
Life Insurance Corporation of India Vs. R.Dhandapani; reported in JT
2005 (10) SC 245 in support of his contention that the relief of grant of
pension cannot be given to the respondent as the respondent had resigned
from his post. The said decision is clearly distinguishable on facts and,
even otherwise, although the appellant treated the respondent as deemed to
have resigned, the said order was set aside by the Industrial Adjudicator,
which was upheld by the learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of
this Court, holding that the respondent should be treated to have taken
voluntary retirement.

The said decision has no relevance to the facts of the

present case as, in the meantime, the respondent has reached the age of
superannuation.
10.

The appeal stands dismissed with costs of Rs.10,000/- payable to the

respondent within four weeks from today.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
MARCH
VK.

LPA No.2529/2005

27, 2008

Page No.7 of 7

