*
+
1.

UNREPORTED
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
LPA 154/2008, 155/2008 and 156/2008
UOI & ORS.
..... Appellants
Through: Mr.Mohan Parasharan, Addl.Solicitor General
with Mr.D.L.Chidananda and Ms.Geetanjali
Mohan, Advocates.
versus
MADAN SINGH & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.M.R.Shamshad, Advocate

2.

UOI & ORS.

..... Appellants
Through: Mr.Mohan Parasharan, Addl.Solicitor General
with Mr.D.L.Chidananda and Ms.Geetanjali
Mohan, Advocates.

versus
ROSHAN LAL & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.M.R.Shamshad, Advocate
3.

UOI & ORS.

versus
LEKH RAJ & ORS.

1.

..... Appellants
Through: Mr.Mohan Parasharan, Addl.Solicitor General
with Mr.D.L.Chidananda and Ms.Geetanjali
Mohan, Advocates.
Mr.Saurav Aggarwal and Mr.Arjun Krishnan,
Advocates for Appellant No.4.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.M.R.Shamshad, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?

%
:

JUDGMENT
27.03.2008
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ. (ORAL)

1.

All these appeals involve identical issues and, therefore, we propose to dispose
LPA 154/2008

Page 1 of 4

of all these appeals by this common judgment and order.
2.

th

The appellants are aggrieved by the order dated 7 March, 2008 passed by the

learned Single Judge in which certain directions have been issued. As it appears from
the writ petitions and also from the impugned order passed in all the writ petitions, an
th

order was passed by the learned Single Judge on 4 February, 2008 directing and
permitting the respondents to appear before the Medical Board for assessment of their
medical fitness for the purpose of regularization. A dispute is subsisting between the
parties as to whether the respondents could be regularized as against Group-D posts or
Group C posts. According to the respondents, they are entitled to be regularized as
against Group C posts, whereas the contention of the appellants is that they are not
entitled to be regularized as against Group C posts, but are are entitled to be
regularized only against Group D posts. The said dispute would have to be decided by
the learned Single Judge after hearing the learned counsel for the parties when the writ
petitions are finally heard. However, at this stage, the only order passed by the learned
Single Judge is that the medical suitability of all the respondents be also assessed for
Group C posts along with their assessment for Group D posts. A classification is also
made by the learned Single Judge while passing the aforesaid order that the
respondents be medically examined for considering their suitability for regularization
as against Category C posts without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the
appellants that the respondents are only entitled for regularization for Group D posts.
The said order appears to us to be a very innocuous order, for, we are of the
considered opinion that the aforesaid order was passed by the learned Single Judge on

LPA 154/2008

Page 2 of 4

the basis of the concession made before him by the counsel for the appellant that the
medical assessment of the respondents be done without going into the aspect of terms
of regularization at that stage. Be that as it may, the said order and directions issued by
the learned Single Judge appear to be totally innocuous for they do not intend to
create any right in favour of the respondents to be regularized as against Group C
posts. This is a dispute which will have to be adjudicated upon and decided while
deciding the writ petitions.
3.

Therefore, we are also reiterating that the aforesaid order would not, in any

manner, create any right or equity in favour of the respondents, even if they are found
to be medically suitable on their assessment for Category C posts to be absorbed or
regularized as against Group C posts, and the same will have to be decided and abide
by a final order to be passed by the learned Single Judge in the writ petitions.
4.

At this stage, counsel for the appellants states that the aforesaid order passed

by us would protect the interests of the appellants and, therefore, they may be
permitted to withdraw this appeal.

Permission is granted. The appeals are dismissed

as withdrawn.
5.

The writ petitions shall now be heard by the learned Single Judge as

expeditiously as possible. It is also made clear that the aforesaid order which is passed
by the learned Single Judge in these writ petitions shall be construed as directions only
in the facts and circumstances of these three cases and would not, in any manner, be
construed as a binding precedent in any other case.
6.

Counsel appearing for the appellants states that now the dates for appearance

LPA 154/2008

Page 3 of 4

of the respondents before the Medical Board will have to be re-fixed as the dates
earlier fixed are going to be expire shortly. We accordingly, re-fix the dates for
appearance of the respondents before the Medical Board since the respondents are
represented through their counsel. The respondents shall appear before the concerned
st

nd

Medical Board on 21 , 22

rd

and 23 of April, 2008. It is also made clear that the

medical assessment which is going to be made so far as the respondents are concerned
for Group D posts, would not in any manner be treated as causing any prejudice to
their rights and contentions in the main writ petitions.
7.

With the aforesaid observations and directions, these appeals stand disposed of.

CHIEF JUSTICE

REVA KHETRAPAL, J
MARCH
dc

27, 2008

LPA 154/2008

Page 4 of 4

