*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 13214 of 2004
Date of Decision: April 3, 2007

Ghanshyam Singh
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. D.R.Gupta, Advocate
versus
C.E.O.BSES POWER LTD. & Anr.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Jayant Nath, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Rajnish Kr. Jha, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1. Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see the
judgment? Yes
2. To be referred to the reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
REKHA SHARMA, J.

The petitioner was working as Assistant Engineer in the
erstwhile Delhi Vidhyut Board (DVB). In the year 1998 he faced a
departmental enquiry. We need not go into the charges or the
report of the Enquiry officer. They are not material so far as the
present order is concerned. What, however, needs to be noticed is
that the Enquiry Officer exonerated him of all the charges but not
the Disciplinary Authority which found the order of the Enquiry
Officer unsustainable and not only returned a finding of guilt
against the petitioner but also imposed upon him the penalty of
“reduction by three stages for a period of three years with further
stipulation that during the period of reduction he will earn
WP(C) No. 13214 of 2004

Page 1 of 7

increments of pay and on expiry of this period reduction will not
have the effect of postponing his future increments of pay.”
It is alleged that the Disciplinary Authority before reversing
the finding of the Enquiry Officer neither gave a copy of the
Enquiry report to the petitioner nor his tentative reasons for
disagreeing with the finding. The whole edifice of the petitioner's
case is raised on the non-issuance of notice to him by the
Disciplinary Authority requiring him to show cause against its
tentative decision to differ with the finding of the Enquiry Officer.
This lapse on the part of the Disciplinary Authority was sought to
be justified by the respondents with reference to Memo dated
February 8, 2000, the relevant part of which reads as under : -----------------------------------AND WHEREAS the Inquiry Officer submitted
his report dated 16.2.99 holding the charge against
the said Shri Ghanshyam Singh as not proved.
AND WHEREAS
the undersigned has
considered the Inquiry report submitted by the
Inquiry Officer with reference to the records of the
case. It is observed that the originals of Ex.S-6 to S8 were not produced before the Inquiry Officer. The
Inquiry Officer has observed that Ex.S-6 does not
confirm that the said IR had at all been delivered to
AE(Zone). Moreover, Inquiry Officer has cast
aspersions on the signatures of the charged official
on Ex.S-1 and has observed that it is of no
evidential value. Records, however, reveal that
Ex.S-6 and Ex.S-7 were delivered by Shri Uma Ram
Rathore to the diarist as was the practice. In view
of the above I propose to hold the charges against
the said Shri Ghanshyam Singh, AE as proved in
disagreement with the findings of the Inquiry
Officer. Keeping in view the proven aspect of the
WP(C) No. 13214 of 2004

Page 2 of 7

charge and totality of the circumstances of the
case, I propose to impose upon the said Shri
Ghansyam Singh , major penalty of reduction by
three stages for a period of three years with further
stipulation that during the period of reduction he
will earn increments and on expiry of this period
the reduction will not have the effect of postponing
his future increments of pay.
The above quoted paragraphs by no stretch of imagination
can be interpretated to hold that before disagreeing with the
report of the Enquiry Officer the Disciplinary Authority had issued
notice

to

the

petitioner

giving

his

tentative

reasons

for

disagreeing with the finding of the Enquiry Officer and calling
upon him to show cause why the report of the Enquiry officer be
not reversed. The Memo dated February 8, 2000 merely called
upon the petitioner to show cause why the penalty mentioned
therein be not imposed upon him. This surely did not meet with
the requirement of giving hearing against the tentative decision
to differ with the Enquiry Officer. He skipped that requirement.
And, this he could not do. It was unacceptable. It went against
the principles of natural justice as old as the hills and, time and
again, reiterated by the Apex Court. To that extent, I find myself
one with the petitioner.
But then this is not the end of the matter.
The order of the Disciplinary Authority imposing penalty in
question was passed as far back as on March 27,2000. The
petitioner had a legal right to go against the order. He allowed the

WP(C) No. 13214 of 2004

Page 3 of 7

requisite time to pass-by. He sat over the matter not for a few
months but for more than four long years. He filed a Revision
Petition on May 20, 2004 by which time even the period of
penalty had long expired. The Competent Authority by order
dated July 14, 2004 dismissed the Revision Petition apparently for
two reasons. First, revision petition was not maintainable and
secondly, only an appeal lay, and that too, only within a period of
six months from the date of the order. It was after the passing of
the said order

that the petitioner preferred the present writ

petition challenging the enquiry proceedings which as noticed
above commenced on April 16, 1998 and culminated in the
imposition of penalty on March 27,2000.
Should I come to the rescue of the petitioner who chose to
file the revision petition against the order of punishment after a
lapse of four years making the order passed thereon as the basis
to re-open the enquiry proceedings?
Law is by the side of the vigilant and not with those who let
the cause pass by them without even a whimper of protest. And,
what is the reason put forth by the petitioner for sleeping over the
matter, remaining dormant and letting the years pass by? Why
did he sit over the matter for four long years? He says that he
preferred a Revision Petition under Rule 29(iv) of the Central Civil
Services (CCA) Rules, 1965 which does not prescribe any
limitation. He further says that the Competent Authority wrongly
WP(C) No. 13214 of 2004

Page 4 of 7

treated his Revision Petition as an appeal under Rule 29(v) of the
said Rules which prescribes time limit of six months for preferring
the same from the date of the impugned order.
In order to test the validity of the explanation rendered by
the petitioner, it will be appropriate to reproduce the relevant
provision of Rule 29(iv) and (v). This is how it reads:29.[Revision]
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
these rules(i)...................
(ii)....................
(iii)................
(iv) the Head of a Department directly
under the Central Government, in the case
of a Government servant serving in a
department or office (not being the
Secretariat or the Posts and Telegraphs
Board), under the control of such Head of a
Department; or
(v) the Appellate Authority, within six
months of the date of the order proposed
to be [revised]; or
(vi) ...............
may at any time, either on his or its own
motion or otherwise call for the records of any
inquiry and [revise] any order under these rules
or under the rules repealed by Rule 34 from
which an appeal is allowed, but from which no
appeal has been preferred or from which no
appeal is allowed, after consultation with the
Commission
where
such
consultation
is
WP(C) No. 13214 of 2004

Page 5 of 7

necessary, and mayIt is true that Rule 29(iv) prescribes no limitation for
preferring a revision but the question is whether the said Rule is
applicable to the case of the petitioner. The answer is in the
negative. This Rule comes to the aid of such an employee whose
Head of the Department is directly under the Central Government.
Admittedly BSES is not a department which comes under the
Central Government. The Rule which applies to the petitioner is
Rule 29(v). He should have taken recourse to this provision and
preferred an appeal within six months from the date of the order
which he did not. Does the petitioner with such conduct deserve
any relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India? I feel the
answer has to be in the negative. He should have gone in appeal
without loss of time and in any case within the prescribed period
of six months from the date of the order. Four years of inactivity
and then choosing of the wrong forum. The doors need to be
closed to him. The order need not be burdened with any
references but if any is required the judgment of the Apex Court
in Life Insurance Corporation of India Vs. Jyotish Chandra Biswas
AIR 2000 Supreme Court 3666

comes to mind.

The relevant

passage of the judgment reads as under:“The order terminating the services of the
respondent was passed on 28.1.1969.
The writ
petition was filed challenging the said order on
25.3.1975, almost after a period of six years. There
was no explanation in the writ petition whatsoever for
this inordinate delay. The respondent sought for his
WP(C) No. 13214 of 2004

Page 6 of 7

re-employment in the Corporation by his letter dated
9.1.1974 almost after a period of five years from the
date of termination of his services. It only indicated
that he accepted the order of termination of his
services, if not expressly but impliedly. In the writ
petition no ground was raised as to deprivation of
right of appeal to the respondent against the order of
the termination of his services.”
The writ petition is dismissed but with no order as to cost.

REKHA SHARMA, J
April 3, 2007
g

WP(C) No. 13214 of 2004

Page 7 of 7

