REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CIVIL REVISION PETITION NO. 17 OF 2007
Date of Decision : 04-12-2007

Ravinder Kumar Sharma

........ Petitioner
through Mr.R.K.Srivastava, Advocate
Versus

O.P.Sharma & Anr.

........Respondents
Through Mr. Surender K. Gupta, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? Yes.

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the `Digest?' Yes.

Yes.

REKHA SHARMA, J.
The petitioner is a tenant and has filed this Revision Petition
under Section 25B(8) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (hereinafter
referred to as the “Rent Act”) against the order dated November
30,2006 passed by the learned Additional Rent Controller, Delhi
directing his eviction from the suit premises bearing flat No.1104, LIG,
Pocket C, Loni (East) Shahdara, Delhi – 95 on the ground of bonafide
requirement of respondent No.1.
The factual matrix of the case giving rise to the Revision petition
is as follows: Respondent No.1 is the owner and landlord of the suit property
which was let out to the petitioner by his brother (respondent No.2) at
RCR No. 17/07

Page 1 of 4

Rs.1000/- per month vide Rent Agreement dated July, 24 1998. At the
time the suit premises were let out, respondent No.1 was employed in
private job at Ludhiana. About 4-5 years prior to the filing of the
eviction petition he lost his job and could not find an alternate job in
Ludhiana. He shifted to Delhi where his brother and other relatives are
settled. He managed to get a job as a Paint chemist in a private
company in Delhi on regular monthly salary and is working as such
since April 2006. However, he has not been able to find suitable
accommodation at Delhi for himself and his family which comprises of
his wife, three grown up daughters and one son. Hence, his family is
still living in Ludhiana whereas he is residing with his brother.
In these circumstances he filed the eviction petition against the
petitioner on the ground that he requires the premises in question for
himself and his family's bonafide need and that he has no other
suitable accomodation except the suit premises.
The petitioner in response to the service of notice of the eviction
petition filed application for leave to defend and stated therein that the
petition was liable to be dismissed as respondent No.1 had not stated
as to under whose employment he worked in Ludhiana and also on
what charges his services at Ludhiana were terminated. He also stated
that his hardship was greater than that of respondent No.1 as he has
two children, namely, Sahurabh Sharma aged about 21 years and
Benica Sharma aged about 14 years who were studying in B.Com Final
and 10th class respectively. Except for these two grounds the petitioner
raised no other plea in the application for leave to defend.
In order to succeed in a claim for eviction on the ground of
RCR No. 17/07

Page 2 of 4

bonafide requirement under Section 14(1)(e) read with section 25(B) of
the Rent Act, a landlord has to plead and prove the following
ingredients :

i)

that he is the owner and landlord of the suit
property;

ii)

that the suit premises were let out for residential
purposes;

iii)

that the landlord (petitioner) has no other reasonably
suitable residential accommodation;

iv)

that the premises are required bonafide by the
petitioner for occupation as residence for himself and
member of his family dependent upon him.

In the present case the petitioner has not disputed the first three
ingredients mentioned above. He has not denied that respondent No.1
is the owner and landlord of the suit property. He has also not disputed
that the premises were let out to him for residential purposes. He has
further not disputed that respondent No.1 does not possess any other
reasonably suitable residential accommodation for himself and his
family members except the suit premises. As already noticed above all
that he stated in his application for leave to defend is that respondent
No.1 has not given the particulars of his employment at Ludhiana and
has also not disclosed why his services were terminated. He has also
claimed his hardship in shifting from the accommodation under his
occupation to be greater than that of respondent No.1.
The question is whether the said pleas raised by the petitioner
constitute sufficient and cogent ground to grant him leave to defend to
contest the eviction petition. The answer without any hesitation is in
RCR No. 17/07

Page 3 of 4

the negative.
The non-disclosure of particulars of employment at Ludhiana by
respondent No.1 and the reason for termination of his employment
cannot deprive him of his right to claim possession of his premises
under occupation of the petitioner. It is sufficient if he has stated that
he is no longer in the employment at Ludhiana and that he has shifted
to Delhi where he has found another job. He cannot be denied the right
to shift to his own accommodation alongwith his family members
unless the tenant alleges that he is not working in Delhi or that he has
other reasonably suitable accommodation where he can shift with his
family. As noticed above no such plea has been raised. As regards the
plea of comparative hardship raised by the petitioner this again is no
ground to deny respondent No.1 his premises. In any case family of
respondent No.1 comprises of his wife, marriageable daughters and
one son which is less than the family of the petitioner.
In view of the above and having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case this Court does not find any merit in the
present revision petition. The same is therefore, dismissed with no
order as to cost. However, since the time of six months granted by the
court below for vacating the suit premises has already expired during
the pendency of the present revision proceedings, the petitioner is
granted three months more time from today for vacating the suit
premises.
REKHA SHARMA,J.

December 04, 2007
g
RCR No. 17/07

Page 4 of 4

