REPORTABLE
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) Nos. 8899-8906 of 2006
Date of Decision :October 12, 2007
Savita Bhatnagar & Ors.

........ Petitioners

through Mr. VSR Krishna, Advocate
Versus
Union of India & Ors.

........Respondents
through Mr. Alakh Kumar , Advocate for
respondent No.1
Mr.V.K.Rao Advocate with Mr.Saket Sikri,
Advocate for respondents 3 - 28.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1. Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? YES
2. To be referred to the reporter or not ? YES
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the `Digest?' YES
REKHA SHARMA, J.
The petitioners are erstwhile employees of the Department of
Telecommunication (DOT) and presently of Mahanagar Telephone
Nigam Limited (MTNL). They joined the DOT on various dates

WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 1 of 11

between July 1986 to November 1993 as Group D stenographers
after qualifying the examination conducted by the Staff Selection
Commission.
It so happened that the Government of India took a decision to
corporatise the telecommunication network in the country and
consequently two companies, namely, Mahanagar Telephone Nigam
Limited (MTNL) and Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) came into
existence w.e.f October 1, 2000. On bifurcation of DOT, officials
were allotted to BSNL initially on ‘as is where is basis’, and were
treated

on ‘deemed

deputation’.

The

process

of permanent

absorption of DOT employees in BSNL was undertaken sometime
between August- September 2001 by calling options from various
categories of Central Secretariat Staff borne on the cadres of DOT
including Grade D Stenographers. The petitioners are those Grade D
Stenographers who opted for absorption in BSNL. Their options were
accepted and they were placed at the disposal of BSNL w.e.f
January 1, 2002 while the absorption was given effect from
January 1, 2000 the day the BSNL had come into existence.
The next promotion for a Grade D Stenographer is to the post
of Personal Assistant or Grade C Stenographer. On July 4, 2003 the
BSNL framed and published Recruitment Rules for appointment/
promotion to the post of Personal Assistants together with that of
other Secretarial cadre. The said Rules provide that appointment to
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 2 of 11

the post of Personal Assistant shall be 50% by promotion from
Grade D Stenographer with 5 years regular service in the grade on
the basis of 'limited internal competitive examination.' Pursuant
thereto, on February 23, 2006, a notification was issued proposing
to hold the aforesaid examination for promotion to the

posts of

Personal Assistants.
The facts noticed above are not in dispute.
The dispute starts with the issuance of notification of February
23,2006 inviting applications from Grade D stenographers to take
the examination in terms of the Recruitment Rules for promotion to
the post of Personal Assistants. The notification is unacceptable to
the petitioners. They say it does not apply to them and they cannot
be subjected to the rigours of a 'limited internal competitive
examination'. According to them at the time of their absorption in
BSNL they were given to understand, rather assured, that their
promotion to the next grade would be made on the same criteria as
was applicable to them when they were working in DOT. They
further say that it was on the basis of such assurance that they
opted for absorption in BSNL. Therefore they contend that BSNL
cannot go back from its assurance and change the criteria of
promotion which when they were in DOT was 'seniority-cum-fitness'
to the holding of a 'limited internal competitive examination.'
It is further the case of the petitioners that the DOT vide its
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 3 of 11

letter dated January 8, 2002 transferred 96 posts of Personal
Assistants to BSNL w.e.f. October 1, 2000 out of which only 69 were
absorbed on permanent absorption basis. The remaining 27
vacancies were thus available to be filled by promotion from
Grade D Stenographers. The submission is that these 27 vacancies
which were in existence prior to the coming into force of the
Recruitment Rules on July 4 2003 can only be filled on the basis of
assurance given to the petitioners at the time of their absorption in
BSNL on the criteria of 'seniority-cum- fitness'.
The petitioners also complain of unequal treatment vis-a-vis
21 Stenographers. It is stated that the said stenographers while they
were in DOT were working as Personal Assistants on adhoc basis. On
their absorption in BSNL they have been regularized

as Personal

Assistants without subjecting them to any test while the petitioners
are

being

asked

to

take

the

'limited

internal

competitive

examination'. This dual policy of the BSNL, it is alleged is
discriminatory.
On the basis of the above facts and submissions the
petitioners have preferred the present writ petitions seeking
quashing of notification dated February 23, 2006 in so far as it
proposes to conduct examination for promotion to Grade C
Stenographer and also a direction to the respondent, BSNL to fill up
the promotional vacancies of Grade C Stenographers on the basis of
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 4 of 11

'seniority-cum-fitness.'
The question whether the petitioners are liable to be
promoted as Personal Assistants/ Stenographer Grade C on the basis
of 'seniority-cum- fitness' which was the criteria in existence when
they were working in DOT has not arisen before this Court for the
first time. A similar issue has already been dealt with in a judgment
delivered on

March 3, 2006 in writ petition No. 22094-22120/2005

titled Nagendu Bhattacharya Vs. BSNL & Anr. The petitioners in the
said writ petition were Upper Division Clerks in the Department of
Telecommunication and like the present petitioners they too were
absorbed in BSNL and in their case also the same set of Rules
providing

for

'limited

internal

competitive

examination'

for

promotion to next rank which in their case was to the posts of
Assistant were framed and notified in 2003. They also raised the
similar plea that they were entitled to be promoted to the next
grade of Assistant on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness and not on
the basis of “limited internal competitive examination”. They too
contended that they were assured that the Rules which applied to
them before their absorption in BSNL would continue to govern
them for the purpose of their promotion to the next higher grade
and that the employer would not change such Rules to their
disadvantage.
After noticing a number of judgments of the Supreme Court
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 5 of 11

such as State of Maharashtra Vs. Chandrakant Anant Kulkarni
1981(4) SCC 130; All India State Bank Officers Federation Vs. UOI
(1997) 9 SCC 151; P.U.Joshi Vs.Accountant General (2003) 2 SCC
632 and State of J&K Vs. Shiv Ram Sharma (1999) 3 SCC 653 it was
held by a learned Single Judge of this court that reduction in the
chances of promotion by itself does not constitute an actionable
wrong warranting intervention of the Court in judicial review. It was
further held that the mere fact that the petitioners were given some
assurance about continuation of their service conditions could not
fetter the power of the BSNL to bonafide formulate a new
recruitment policy and that if such restrictions were to be read into
what is in exclusive executive domain, the Courts would be placing
unwarranted impediments upon administrative functioning. The
decision so rendered by the learned Single Judge was taken in
appeal before the Division Bench in LPA Nos.626-49/2006 . The
Division Bench by its judgment dated May 15,2006 endorsed the
view taken by the learned Single Judge.
The case of the petitioners is no different from the Upper
Division Clerks as they too were being subjected to 'limited internal
competitive examination' and they also claimed that they were
given assurance that the criteria of promotion of 'seniority-cum
-fitness' which was in existence when they were employees of DOT
would be continued. I find myself in full accord with the reasoning
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 6 of 11

and conclusion of the learned Single Judge in the case of Nagendu
Bhattacharya (Supra). Therefore, I adopt the same. The added
reason why I must necessarily follow the said judgment is the
approval accorded to it by the Division Bench of this Court.
Therefore, in so far as this Court is concerned the issue is no longer
res-integra. However, before I proceed to deal with the next
submission I must refer to the 'Option Forms' filled up by petitioners
copies of which have been annexed as Annexure R-V alongwith
counter-affidavit to the writ petition.

All the Forms bear the

signatures of each of the petitioners and are identically worded. In
paragraph 1 of the Form it is stated that “ I hereby agree to be
absorbed in BSNL on 1.10. 2000” and in paragraph 3 it is stated, “ I
understand that on absorption in BSNL I shall be governed by the
Rules and Regulations of BSNL.” Where is that assurance which the
petitioners are talking about? The above Forms prove to be their
nemesis. The said Forms strike at the very foundation of the
submission that they were given an assurance that on absorption in
BSNL they would be governed by the Rules and Regulations as were
applicable to them in DOT. Rather the Forms go to show that the
petitioners agreed to be governed by the Rules and Regulations of
BSNL.
This brings me to the contention of the petitioners that the
DOT vide its letter dated January 8, 2002 had transferred 96 posts of
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 7 of 11

Personal Assistants to the BSNL w.e.f. October 1,2000 out of which
only 69 were absorbed on permanent basis leaving 27 vacancies
which, it is submitted, the BSNL was supposed to fill up by
promotion on the basis of 'seniority-cum-fitness' as they arose much
prior to the coming into force of the Recruitment Rules . The BSNL
in its counter affidavit to the writ petition has disputed this fact . As
per the BSNL, the cadre of Personal Assistants actually came under
its administrative control on completion of exercise regarding the
absorption of Group B BSNL optees by transfer of the services of
Personal Assistants and other Group B Secretariat Cadre from DOT
to BSNL we.f. March 24,2004 (afternoon). Prior to this date the
Personal Assistants and other Group B cadre Central Secretariat
posts were centrally controlled and managed by the DOT. Therefore,
it is further stated in the counter affidavit that in so far as the BSNL
is concerned any action to make recruitment/ promotion in the
grade of Personal Assistant in BSNL could be undertaken only on or
after March 24,2004 in terms of the Recruitment Rules notified by
BSNL on July 4,2003. To substantiate the averment the BSNL has
placed on record a communication dated March 22, 2004 as
annexure R1 to the counter affidavit . A perusal of the same shows
that as many as 105 employees were working either in DOT or BSNL
as Private Secretaries, Personal Assistants or Stenographer Grade D
but the services of all those 105 employees were actually placed at
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 8 of 11

the disposal of BSNL on permanent absorption basis w.e.f March 24,
2004. This being so the BSNL is fully justified in taking the position
that it could not undertake any exercise for promotion to the posts
of Personal Assistants till such time the absorption in the BSNL of
the employees working against those posts had actually taken
place, which as noticed above, happened on March 24,2004. Soon
thereafter, on July 4, 2003 the Recruitment Rules had come into
existence in terms of which the notification for holding the 'limited
internal competitive examination' was issued. The petitioners have
placed reliance upon a decision of the Apex Court in Y.V.Rangaiah &
Ors Vs.J.Sreenivasa Rao and Ors. 1983 (3) SCC 284 and on the
strength of the same have contended that the vacancies which
existed prior to the coming into force of the new Rules could only be
filled up in terms of the old Rules. The judgment in Rangaiah case
was also relied upon in the case before the Single Judge in Nagendu
Case (Supra). It was held by this Court with which I am in agreement
that in Rangaiah’s case there was an obligation on the part of the
authorities to prepare promotion panel in time as per the Rules then
in force, whereas, in the case before the learned Single Judge or
before me nothing has been shown that there was any obligation to
prepare periodical panels. In any case this court in Nagendu’s case
(Supra) relied upon a later judgment of the Supreme Court rendered
in Delhi Judicial Services Association Vs. Delhi High Court 2001(5)
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 9 of 11

SCC 145 where it has been held that where the process of selection
not having been started and even the advertisement itself not
having been issued the contention that posts had to be filled up
under the pre-amended rules, merely because the posts were
created when the amended rules had not come into force, could not
be countenanced. Admittedly, in the present case too no process of
recruitment was initiated prior to the coming into force of the Rules.
Now the last submission. The petitioners say that the BSNL
has regularized 21 Grade D stenographers as Personal Assistants/
Grade C Stenographers without subjecting them to 'limited internal
competitive

examination.'

The

BSNL

refutes

the

charge

of

discrimination. It says that all the 21 Personal Assistants referred to
by the petitioners had already been given promotion to the Grade of
Personal Assistants on adhoc basis by DOT prior to their transfer to
the BSNL for their absorption therein. It further says that on their
absorption in BSNL their substantive posts of Stenographers Grade
D were upgraded to the grade of Personal Assistant by the BSNL so
that they could continue to function as Personal Assistants on adhoc
basis and draw the pay of the posts. They were subsequently
regularized in the Grade of Personal Assistants consequent upon the
approval given by the Management Committee of the Board of
Directors of BSNL. It may be noted that the petitioners filed no
rejoinder controverting the factual position as stated by the BSNL.
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 10 of 11

Therefore, if the very posts against which 21 Grade-D Stenographers
were promoted as Personal Assistants were upgraded and if, as
stated by the BSNL, they were working as Personal Assistants even
though on adhoc basis prior to their absorption in the BSNL their
case cannot be equated with that of the petitioners. They fall in a
category different from the petitioners and form a class apart. In any
case the petitioners have not made any one of the 21 stenographers
as party in the writ petition nor have they sought quashing of their
such appointments.
The petitioners have without prejudice to their right in the writ
petition taken the 'limited internal competitive examination' but
because of the order passed by this Court on May 22,2006
restraining the BSNL from declaring the results it has been kept
under wraps. Besides the petitioners there are others also who have
taken the examination. Why should they be deprived of their
results? Test has been held to test merit. Merit has to prevail. The
petitioners may be senior in service. More experienced too. Let
them come out of the ordeal of the test too. Why shy away from it?
The writ petitions are dismissed. The stay against the BSNL
from declaring the result is lifted.

REKHA SHARMA,J.

October 12, 2007
g
WP(C) 8899-906/06

Page 11 of 11

