*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CM(M) 842/2007
Date of Decision : October 12, 2007

Devender Pal & Ors.

........ Petitioners
through Mr. I.C.Kumar, Advocate
Versus

Ramesh Chander & Anr.
........Respondent
Through Mr. Sanjeev Sachdeva , Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment ?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the `Digest?'

REKHA SHARMA, J.

The

petitioners

are

the

successors-in-interest

of

Shri Bakshi Ram. They are tenants of a room bearing private
No.5 in property bearing number 12/30, East Patel Nagar, New
Delhi and are facing eviction proceedings in the court of
Additional Rent Controller under Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi
Rent Control Act 1958 on the allegation that late Bakshi Ram
had sublet the premises to Shri Tirath Ram.
CM(M) 842/2007

Page 1 of 7

At the stage of evidence before the Additional Rent
Controller, the landlord

Shri Ramesh Chander by way of his

examination-in-chief filed his affidavit dated October 24,2002
and alongwith it besides other documents filed cheque dated
May 25,1992 and a covering letter of the same date. On
January 28,2004 he entered the witness box and tendered his
affidavit in evidence which was exhibited as P1. The cheque
dated May 25,1992 and the covering letter were exhibited as
Ext.PW1/2 & PW1/3. The exhibiting of these two documents
was objected to by learned counsel for the tenant. It is so
mentioned in the evidence of PW1 recorded on that day in the
following words :
“ objected to the documents Ext.PW1/2 and Ext.PW1/3.”
Notwithstanding the objection taken counsel for the
tenant went ahead with the cross examination of PW1 and
thereafter

he

further

cross-examined

him

on

September 28,2004. However, on December 23, 2004, the
tenants filed an application under Order 13 Rule 4 of the Code
of Civil Procedure stating that as they had taken an objection to
the cheques and the covering letter dated May 25,1992 being
exhibited as PW1/2 & PW1/3 those documents could not be

CM(M) 842/2007

Page 2 of 7

taken to have been admitted in evidence and therefore should
be returned to the landlord before proceeding further in the
matter. Reliance in this regard was placed upon a judgment of
the Apex Court titled R.V.E.Venkatachala Gounder V. Arulmigu
Viswesaraswami and V.P.Temple and another AIR 2003 SC
4548.

The

Additional

Rent

Controller

vide

order

dated

April 24,2007 dismissed the application. It is against this order
that the tenants have preferred the present petition.
The aforementioned judgment on which reliance was
placed before the Additional Rent Controller as also before me
lays down that Order 13 Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure
provides for every document admitted in evidence in the suit
being

endorsed

by

or

on

behalf

of

the

Court,

which

endorsement signed or initiated by the Judge amounts to
admission of the document in evidence. An objection to the
admissibility of the document should be raised before such
endorsement is made and the Court is obliged to form its
opinion on the question of admissibility and express the same
on which opinion would depend the document being endorsed
as admitted or not admitted in evidence. In the latter case the
document may be returned by the Court to the person from

CM(M) 842/2007

Page 3 of 7

whose custody it was produced. It is further laid down in the
judgment that the objection as to the admissibility of a
document can be of two kinds. One to the admissibility of the
document itself and the other to the manner of proof of the
document though it may be otherwise admissible. The Court
says that so far as the first category of objection is concerned
it can be raised at any stage of the proceedings but with regard
to the other category where it relates to the mode of proof of
the document the objection should be taken at the earliest
possible so that the party seeking to prove the same

in

evidence is able to take remedial steps in proving it as per the
law of evidence.
In the present case the tenants though objected to the
exhibiting of documents as Ext.PW1/2 & PW1/3 but did not
specify the nature of the objection. It is not discernible from the
evidence recorded on January 28,2004 whether the objection
taken was to the admissibility of the document itself or to its
mode of proof.

As noticed above having taken an objection

counsel for the tenants did not insist that the matter should not
be proceeded further till the objection raised was heard and
decided. He went ahead with the cross-examination of PW1 not

CM(M) 842/2007

Page 4 of 7

only on that day but also on September 28,2004. It was after
about 11 months of the first date of recording of evidence of
PW1 that the tenants chose to file an application under Order
13 Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure. This goes to show that
the tenants were not serious in pursuing the objection promptly
and the application was filed only to delay the progress of the
case. What is of significance is that the Additional Rent
Controller in his order dated April 24,2007 has not declined to
deal with the objection. He has rather left the question open by
stating that the objection regarding the admissibility of two
documents exhibited as Ext.PW1/2 & PW1/3 shall be decided at
the time of final disposal of the case and the tenant shall be at
liberty to address arguments at the time of final adjudication as
per law.
The approach adopted by the learned Additional Rent
Controller is in consonance with the judgment of the Apex
Court titled Bipin Shantilal Panchal Vs. State of Gujarat and
another AIR (2001) 3 SCC 1. The following paragraph of the
judgment needs to be reproduced:It is an archaic practice that during the evidence
-collecting stage, whenever any objection is raised regarding
admissibility of any material in evidence the court does not
proceed further without passing order on such objection. Such
CM(M) 842/2007

Page 5 of 7

practices when realised through the course of long period to
be hindrances which impede steady and swift progress of trial
proceedings must be recast or remoulded to give way for
better substitutes which would help acceleration of trial
proceedings.
When so recast, the practice which can be a better
substitute is this: Whenever an objection is raised during
evidence-taking stage regarding the admissibility of any
material or item of oral evidence the trial court can make a
note of such objection and mark the objected document
tentatively as an exhibit in the case(or record the objected
part of the oral evidence) subject to such objections to be
decided at the last stage in the final judgment. If the court
finds at the final stage that the objection so raised is
sustainable the Judge or Magistrate can keep such evidence
excluded from consideration. There is no illegality in adopting
such a course.

In view of what has been noticed above, I hold, that the
petition has no merit. The tenants are guilty of causing
unnecessary hurdles in the progress of the case. If they were so
keen to get the objection raised by them decided they should
have insisted for a decision on the objection taken and ought
not to have proceeded with the cross-examination of PW1. The
approach of the tenants was casual. Not only they did not insist
upon a prompt decision but also did not specify the nature of
objection regarding its admissibility. Be that as it may the
impugned order fully safeguards their interest and I find no
reason whatsoever to direct the Additional Rent Controller to
return the documents Ext.PW1/2 & PW1/3 to the landlord at the
present stage of the proceedings. Ofcourse, if after the tenants

CM(M) 842/2007

Page 6 of 7

have been heard by the learned Additional Rent Controller and
in case it is found that the documents as tendered by the
landlord cannot be taken in evidence the Additional Rent
Controller will pass appropriate orders with regard to the return
of documents.
For the foregoing reasons the petition is dismissed.
Parties shall appear before the Additional Rent Controller on
November 5,2007.

REKHA SHARMA,J.

October 12, 2007
g

CM(M) 842/2007

Page 7 of 7

