*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Civil Miscl.(Main) No. 1103 of 2007
Date of Decision: DECEMBER 12, 2007
Kishan Chand

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. G.D.Gandhi, Advocate

versus
Smt.Sarla Goel & others
.... Respondent
Through Mr. Arvind K.Gupta, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1. Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see the
judgment? Yes
2. To be referred to the reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
REKHA SHARMA, J.
This petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India is
directed against the order dated July 11, 2007 passed by the
Additional Rent Control Tribunal, Delhi in RCA No.33/07 titled Smt.
Sarla Goel & Ors. Vs. Kishan Chand. By virtue of the impugned order
the petitioner has been ordered to be evicted from the suit premises
under Section 14(1)(a) read with Section 14(2) of the Delhi Rent
Control Act, 1958. (hereinafter to be referred to as 'Act').
It is not disputed by the petitioner that he has already availed
of the benefit of Section 14(2) read with Section 15 of the Act
pursuant to an order dated December 3, 2001 passed by Shri Rajiv
CM(M) No. 1103 of 2007

Page 1 of 5

Mehra the Additional Rent Controller, Delhi in eviction case No. E105/99 titled Jagdish Kumar Goel Vs.Kishan Chand. The petitioner is
now facing the charge of committing second default in payment of
rent to the respondent in respect of the suit premises. It is also not
disputed that on the date the demand notice dated March 31,2003
was served upon him by the respondent, he was in arrears of rent
for three consecutive months from January 2003 onwards. On
receipt of demand notice from the respondent the petitioner had
sent the arrears of rent for three months for the period from
January 1, 2003 to March 31, 2003 by money-order on April 22,
2003. The respondents do not dispute that they refused to accept
the money order and consequently the same was received back by
the petitioner. Their case is that on their refusal to receive the
money order the petitioner ought to have taken recourse to Section
27 of the Act by depositing the arrears of rent with the Rent
Controller and he having not done so he was liable to be evicted
from the suit premises on the ground of second default under
Section 14(1)(a) read with provisio to Section 14(2) of the Act. In
support reliance has been placed upon a judgment of the Apex
Court reported in (2005) 7 SCC 211 Atma Ram Vs. Shakuntala Rani.
The tenant however submits that he having tendered the
entire arrears of rent within less than a month of service of notice of
demand by means of a money order he is protected, and has not
CM(M) No. 1103 of 2007

Page 2 of 5

committed second default.
Having heard learned counsels from both sides, I feel, that
reliance upon the above said judgment of the Supreme Court is
misplaced. It was entirely on different facts. That was a case where
the tenant had deposited a part of the arrears of rent under the
Punjab Relief of Indebtedness, Act 1934 (“the Punjab Act”) and his
defence was that the rent so deposited

ought to be treated as

having been paid to the landlord. The Court held that the case being
under the Delhi Rent Control Act the deposit made under the Punjab
Act could be of no avail to the tenant and since the deposit is not
made under Section 27 of the Delhi Rent Control Act the tenant
could not claim the benefit sought by him. In other words in the said
case the court was only considering as to whether the deposit of
arrears of rent under the Punjab Act could be treated as payment of
rent to the landlord. In the case before me the tenant has not made
any deposit and it is not his case that the arrears stood paid to the
landlord. His case is that he tendered the rent by money order
which the landlord refused to receive. It is this which makes the
judgment of the Supreme Court inapplicable. The Supreme Court
nowhere held that in case of vaild tender within two months of
service of notice of demand the tenant further, in order to seek
protection of the Act must necessarily deposit the arrears of rent so
tendered and refused under Section 27 of the Act nor has the
CM(M) No. 1103 of 2007

Page 3 of 5

Supreme Court held that if after refusal of the arrears validly
tendered the tenant does not thereafter deposit the arrears under
Section 27 of the Act then, in that case he must be taken to have
committed second default. In fact the argument that since the
tenant after the refusal of the landlord to accept the arrears
tendered to him did not deposit the arrears under Section 27 of the
Act he must be taken to have committed the second default runs
counter to what is provided in Section 14(1)(a) of the Act. The
Section itself says that the tenant would be entitleld to protection if
he either pays or tenders the arrears of rent within two months of
the service of demand. In other words the tenant is required to
either tender or pay the rent to earn protection. The words “neither”
and “nor” leaves no manner of doubt that if there is a valid tender
of the arrears of rent within two months of service of demand he
would be protected. As already noticed above the tenant through
the money order tendered the entire arrears of rent within two
months of the notice of demand.

That tender fully satisfy the

requirement of the provision leading to only one conclusion and that
is that he has not committed the second default.
In above view of the matter the Controller rightly dismissed
the eviction petition holding it to be not a case of second default.
The learned Tribunal, however, with respect, fell in error and
allowed the eviction petition. I find myself by the side of the learned
CM(M) No. 1103 of 2007

Page 4 of 5

Controller. As a result the order of the Additional Rent Tribunal is set
aside. The petition is allowed.

December 12,2007
g

CM(M) No. 1103 of 2007

REKHA SHARMA,J.

Page 5 of 5

