REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 888 of 2007
Date of Decision : 20-02-2007
RANJANA NARAYAN
..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Chandra Prakash, Advocate.
versus
BAL SAHYOG THR.ITS DIRECTOR G
..... Respondent
Through Mr.U.N.Tiwari, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.
2.
3.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? Yes.
To be referred to the reporter or not ? Yes.
Whether the judgment should be reported in
the `Digest?'
Yes

REKHA SHARMA, J. (ORAL)

Smt.Ranjana Narayan, the petitioner herein, was appointed as
Social Worker on 26.11.1996 in the respondent's organisation, namely,
Bal Sahyog. It so happened that in August, 2001 she was assigned the
additional responsibility of 'House Parent' and was also provided with
one bed room flat in the main campus of Bal Sahyog. The petitioner is
aggrieved by the order of the respondent dated 24.1.2007, whereby,
the additional responsibility of 'House Parent' has been taken away
from her and she has been asked to vacate the residential
accommodation provided to her.
WP(C) No. 888/07

The said order, however, clarifies
Page 1 of 4

that she will continue to function as a Social Worker.
Although the writ petition proceeds on the basis that the order
dated 24.1.2007 as it takes away the additional responsibility of a
House Parent from the petitioner is bad for the reason that it causes
aspersion

on her for it is stated therein that she had not been

performing the responsibility of a House Parent properly but, the
underlying grievance appears to be the further order asking her to
vacate the residential accommodation.
It is true that in the letter dated 24.1.2007 it has been stated
that the petitioner has not been performing the responsibility of a
House Parent properly but the petitioner, to my mind, can have no
claim to continue as a House Parent because it was only an additional
charge that was given to her and her actual appointment was as a
Social Worker. It was, therefore, open to the respondent to take away
the additional responsibility from its employee if it is not satisfied with
his/her performance in that capacity.

One could understand if the

petitioner was being sought to be removed from her post as a Social
Worker on account of her non-performance or under performance in
that capacity. In that eventuality, the respondent may be required to
give proper notice and to follow the procedure required under the rules
to remove her from that post.

Such a procedure

would not be

required to be followed in a case where an employee is only being
relieved of the additional responsibility which was not the main
responsibility for which he/she was appointed.

The petitioner,

therefore, cannot insist upon a show cause notice from the respondent

WP(C) No. 888/07

Page 2 of 4

before being relieved from the responsibility of the additional charge.
The rub of the matter appears to be the accommodation which was
provided to the petitioner.

According to learned counsel for the

petitioner, the said accommodation was given to her prior to giving her
the additional charge of a 'House Parent' whereas, as per the learned
counsel for the respondent the accommodation was provided to her in
order to enable her to discharge properly the responsibility of a House
Parent as the House Parent is required to look after the children who
reside in the hostel located in the premises. Therefore, it is submitted
by learned counsel for the respondent that the accommodation so
provided

will

be

co-terminus

with

duties

of

a

House

Parent.

Consequently, if the petitioner is relieved from the responsibility of a
'House

Parent',

she

will

cease

to

have

the

facility

of

the

accommodation.
The case as initially set up by the petitioner in the writ petition
has been that on August, 2001 the respondent after being satisfied
with

her

sincerity

and

dedication

assigned

her

the

additional

responsibility of a House Parent and provided her with one bed room
flat in the campus of Bal Sahyog. However, she tried to change her
stance in the rejoinder by stating that the accommodation was
provided to her prior to her being given the responsibility of a House
Parent. Be that as it may, for I do not want to be drawn into this
disputed question of fact. It sounds to reason that the nature and the
functions of a 'House Parent' are such that it would require an
accommodation in the premises itself but once the person performing
such responsibility has been relieved of the same, he/she would not be
WP(C) No. 888/07

Page 3 of 4

entitled to the accommodation.
For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in the writ
petition. The same is dismissed. However, keeping in view the fact
that it takes time to shift from one accommodation to another, I grant
two months' time to the petitioner to make alternate arrangement.

REKHA SHARMA, J
FEBRUARY 20, 2007
as

WP(C) No. 888/07

Page 4 of 4

