*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 15089 of 2006
Date of Decision: March 21, 2007

RAM NARAIN

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Sanjay Ghose, Advocate with
Ms. Pragaya Routray & Mr. Vimal Dubey,
Advocates

versus
THE MANAGMT OF M/S DELHI SCSC
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Ayushya Kumar, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1. Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see the
judgment? Yes
2. To be referred to the reporter or not? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
REKHA SHARMA, J.
Ram Narain was employed with M/s Delhi State Civil Supplies
Corporation Limited as Assistant Grade III purely on daily wage basis
but against a vacant post. He continued as such till 8.11.94 when his
services were terminated without assigning any reason. Feeling
aggrieved, he raised an Industrial dispute which was referred to the
Labour Court for adjudication with the following terms of reference:“ Whether the termination of services of Shri Ram
Narain is illegal and /or unjustified and if so, to
what relief is he entitled and what directions are
necessary in this respect?”
The Management raised a preliminary objection before the
Labour Court that it was not an industry and consequently Ram Narain
was not a workman in terms of Section 2(S) of the Industrial Disputes

WP(C) No. 15089/06

Page 1 of 6

Act, 1947. Therefore the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to entertain
the reference. On merits, the Management submitted that Ram Narain
was employed purely as a casual labour on daily wage. He agreed to
his such employment and in token of his acceptance signed on the
appointment letter. Hence, as per the terms and conditions, his
services were liable to be terminated at any time without assigning
any reason.
The Labour Court, vide its Award dated 22.4.2006 decided the
preliminary objection in favour of the workman and against the
management but on merits, it held, that the workman had not worked
continuously for 240 days in the

year prior to his termination and

therefore in terms of the conditions of his employment his services
could be done away with at any time without assigning any reason. As
a result, the workman was not granted any relief. Aggrieved by the
aforesaid finding the workman has preferred the present writ petition.
The preliminary objection taken before the Labour Court as to the
maintainability of the reference is not an issue before me as it was
decided

in favour of the workman. The Management chose not to

question the finding thereon. The only issue which I am called upon to
determine is whether the services of the petitioner were illegally and
unjustifiably terminated.
It is not in dispute and as a matter of fact, the workman himself
has stated in the writ petition and so also before the Labour Court that
he was employed by Delhi State Civil Supply Corporation Limited as a
daily wager on muster role basis. It is also not in dispute that his
appointment letter dated 18.6.93 provided that he was liable to be
WP(C) No. 15089/06

Page 2 of 6

terminated without assigning any reason and that he was not entitled
to claim any right of seniority or regular appointment on this post or
any other equivalent post.
The core issue is whether the workman had worked for 240 days
in the year preceding his termination from the service and if so, could
his services still be terminated without assigning any reason in terms
of the appointment letter or was the Management required to follow
the provision of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947?
The aforesaid section mandates that no workman employed in
any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one
year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until (a) the workman has been given one month's notice in writing
indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice has
expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for
the period of the notice;
How the period of 240 days has to be calculated is laid down in
Section 25 B of the Act, the relevant part of which reads as under :25B Definition of continuous service- For the
purpose of this Chapter(1)...........
(2)where a workman is not in continuous service within
the meaning of clause(1) for a period of one year or
six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous
service under an employer(a) for a period of one year, if the workman, during a
period of twelve calendar months preceding the date
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has
actually worked under the employer for not less than(i)..............................
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case;

WP(C) No. 15089/06

Page 3 of 6

It should be borne in mind that there is no distinction in industrial
law between a permanent employee and a temporary employee. As
long as a person is employed to do any manual, unskilled, skilled,
technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward,
he is a workman under the Industrial Disputes Act, and will get the
benefits of that Act. Therefore, Section 25F read with Section 25B shall
come in aid of even those workmen who are employed on muster roll
on casual basis and their services can only be terminated by giving
them notice as provided in the said sections subject of course to the
condition that they have rendered more than 240 days of service in the
year prior to the proposed termination. In view of the said mandate of
law, the terms of appointment of the petitioner, as per which, his
services could be terminated at any time without assigning any reason
were inconsequential and could not be pressed into service to contend
that no notice was required to be given.

What needs to be seen is

whether the workman had worked for 240 days? The answer is not far
to seek. One has only to look to the statement of the witness of the
Management made before the Labour Court. It was Shri R.P.Seghal, the
Company Secretary of the Management who appeared and deposed on
its behalf. The relevant part of his testimony which is material to
determine whether the workman had worked for 240 days is as under :
It is correct that the workman joined the
employment of the management w.e.f.21.6.93 and
worked upto 7.11.94 continuously and interruptly(sic)
except break given by the management from 17.12.93 to
1.2.94 and one day break on 1.3.94 and one day break
on 1.4.94 and four days break between 1.6.94 to
4.6.94.................................................................................
............................................................. I have not brought
the attendance register in court. The workman has
WP(C) No. 15089/06

Page 4 of 6

worked continuously and interruptly(sic) from 21.6.93 to
7.11.94, except the days of break as mentioned above. It
is correct that workman has worked for more than 240
days. No notice or notice pay in lieu of notice was given
to the workman or offered. Like wise no service
compensation was either offered or paid to the
workman.................................................. The job of
assistant grade III is still continuing. I cannot tell as to
how many assistant grade III are working with the
management or what is their respective their date of
appointment. Vol. At this point of time I cannot say. It is
correct that juniors the workman Shri Ram Narain are
working with the management at present also Vol. but
they were sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
There is no adverse entries about the work and conduct
of the workman during his tenure of service. Vol.I have
not seen the personal file of the workman. The
management does not have any material or document to
show that workman is gainfully employed elsewhere after
8.11.94.
In the face of the above testimony of the Management's witness
it is not understood as to how the Labour Court has come to the
conclusion that the workman had not worked for 240 days in terms of
Section 25B of the Industrial Disputes Act. This finding, in the
circumstances, is liable to be set aside. Since no notice as required by
Section 25F

was given to the workman it is held, that his services

were illegally terminated.
The workman in his evidence before the Labour Court had made
a categorical statement on affidavit that he remained unemployed
after his services were terminated. The Management's witness, on the
other hand, stated that he was not in possession of any material or
document to show that the workman was gainfully employed
elsewhere after 8.11.94. In view of this evidence which was before the
Labour Court the workman is directed to be reinstated in service with
full back wages.
The writ petition stands disposed of.
WP(C) No. 15089/06

Page 5 of 6

REKHA SHARMA, J
March 21, 2007
g

WP(C) No. 15089/06

Page 6 of 6

