REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) Nos. 14312-13 of 2006
Date of Decision : 22-02-2007
MOHD.TAHIR SIDDIQUI & ANR
..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Anzar Hussain, Advocate.
versus
THE VICE CHANCELLOR J.M.I. & O
..... Respondent
Through Mr.M.A.Siddiqui, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.
2.
3.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? Yes
To be referred to the reporter or not ? Yes
Whether the judgment should be reported in
the `Digest?' Yes.

REKHA SHARMA, J. (ORAL)
The petitioners, namely, Mohd. Tahir Siddiqui and Deepak
Kumar Ambuj had applied for appointment to the post of lecturers in
the Department of Fine Arts and Art Education pursuant to an
advertisement issued by Jamia Millia Islamia University for filling up
the said posts. The advertisement specified the following qualification
:“Qualification for post of Lecturer in : History
of Art, Art Education (Painting), Fine Arts
(Painting), Fine Arts (Method & Material):
4/5 years Degree/Diploma in an appropriate branch
of Fine Arts after 10+2
WP(C) 14312-13/06

Page 1 of 6

And
Master of Fine Arts (MFA) with first division in
relevant branch of Fine Arts or Art Education
And
At least two years of teaching at +2 level or college
level.”
Admittedly, the petitioners did not possess one of the
essential qualifications so prescribed i.e. 'At least two years of
teaching at +2 level or college level'.
possessed the requisite qualification.

Yet, they claim that they

According to them, they have

qualified the National Educational Test (NET) which is a qualification
laid down by the University Grants Commission as an alternative to
the two years of experience at +2 or college level and that this
qualification was also recommended by the Board of Studies of the
Department of Fine Arts and Art Education for appointment to the
post of lecturers. It is alleged that respondent Nos. 1 to 3 in order to
favour their own candidates intentionally left out NET as one of the
eligibility criteria for the appointments to the posts in question.
Hence, this writ petition by them praying for quashing the whole
process of appointment and also seeking a direction for making NET
as a compulsory qualification for the post of lecturers in the
Department of Fine Arts and Art Education.
It is submitted by the respondents that the writ petition is
liable to be dismissed at the threshold itself for it has been filed
belatedly when the whole process of appointment has been completed
and even the persons selected have been put in place. It is further
WP(C) 14312-13/06

Page 2 of 6

submitted that the writ petition suffers from the vice of nonimpleadment of those persons as respondents who have been selected
to the post for it is they who will be most affected, in case, as prayed,
the process of selection is quashed.

On merits, the respondents have

filed a short affidavit refuting the case set up by the petitioners. It is
stated that the University can lay down its own qualification for
appointments to the post in question and in this regard it derives
power from Section 19(1) of the Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1988 read
with Statute 14(2) of the Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1988.
Since reliance has been made on these two provisions, it will be
appropriate to reproduce the same insofar as they are relevant to the
issue.
Section 19(1) of the Jamia Millia Islamia Act reads as under:
“19(1) – The Majlis–i–Muntazimah (Executive
Council) shall be the principal executive body of the
University.”
Statute 14(2) of the Jamia Millia Islamia Act reads as
under:
“14(2) – Subject to the provisions of the Act, the
Statutes and the Ordinances, the Majlis–i–Muntazimah
(Executive Council) shall, in addition to all other powers
vested in it, have the following powers, namely: (i)

to create teaching and academic posts, to determine
the number and emoluments of such posts and to
define the duties and conditions of service of
Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic
staff and Principals to Institutions and Schools:
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Majlis–
i–Muntazimah (Executive Council) in respect of the
number, qualifications and the emoluments of
teachers and academic staff otherwise than after

WP(C) 14312-13/06

Page 3 of 6

consideration of the recommendation of the Majlis–i–
Talimi (Academic Council).
(ii)

to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and
other academic staff, as may be necessary and
Principals of Institutions on the recommendations of
the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose
under Statute 25 and to fill up temporary vacancies
therein;
A perusal of the above quoted provisions of the Act does

go to support the case of the respondents. It is apparent from Statute
14(2) of the Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1988 that the Executive Council
i.e. the Majlis–i–Muntazimah can lay down qualifications for the post
of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff provided it
does so after consideration of the recommendations of the Majlis–i–
Talimi (Academic Council).

The respondents, along with the counter

affidavit, have filed on record the recommendations of the Academic
Council. The relevant part of the recommendations reads as under:“After deliberation, the Majlis (AC) approved the
recommendations of the Board of Studies of the
Department of Fine Arts & Art Education in respect of
qualifications for direct recruitment and promotion
guidelines for the post of Lecturer, Reader and Professor
of the said Department endorsed by the Faculty
Committee with slight modification in the prescribed
qualification for the post of Professor under promotion as
given at Annexure VII.”
The qualifications to the post of Lecturer recommended by
the Academic Council do not provide for National Educational Test
(NET) as one of the criteria for appointment to the said post. The
respondents along with the counter affidavit have also filed the
approval granted by the Executive Council to the recommendations
made by the Academic Council.
WP(C) 14312-13/06

Page 4 of 6

It is well settled that if power is derived from a Statute
and no fetters are attached to it other than those laid down in the
Statute itself, any other recommendations by any other Body cannot
whittle down the powers as vested by the Act.

Therefore, to say, that

the recommendations of the Board of Studies or the University Grants
Commission laying down NET as one of the qualifications would be
binding on the Academic Council and Executive Council of the Jamia
Millia Islamia University would be putting fetters on their powers.
In this connection, reference may also be made to a
judgment of the Supreme Court in University of Delhi v. Raj Singh
and others AIR 1995 Supreme Court 336. The question which arose
in this case was whether the Regulations which lay down the
qualifications by the University Grants Commission for a person to be
appointed to the teaching staff of a University and institutions
affiliated to it were valid and mandatory and the University or the
institution were bound to comply with the qualification so laid down.
In this connection, it has been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that the
qualifications laid down by the University Grants Commission do not
impinge upon the powers of the University to select its teachers and it
is not entrenched by regulations framed under the University Grants
Commission.
For the aforesaid reasons, I find no merit in the writ petition and
the same is dismissed.
CM 11264/2006 in W.P.(C) 14312-13/2006
Since the writ petition has been dismissed, the application
WP(C) 14312-13/06

Page 5 of 6

does not survive. The same is accordingly dismissed.
CM 11263/2006 in W.P.(C) 14312-13/2006
This application is for stay. As the writ petition has been
dismissed, no question of stay arises. The application is accordingly
dismissed.

REKHA SHARMA, J
FEBRUARY 22, 2007
sl

WP(C) 14312-13/06

Page 6 of 6

