REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 5822 of 2002
Date of Decision : 23-02-2007
M/S JANTA GRAMUDYOG SAMITI,DEL
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Saurabh Prakash, Advocate.
versus
VIDYDHAR MISHRA & ORS.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Suryakant Singla, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.
2.
3.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment ? Yes.
To be referred to the reporter or not ?
Yes
Whether the judgment should be reported in
the `Digest?'
Yes

REKHA SHARMA, J. (ORAL)
The petitioner, namely M/s Janta Gramudyog Samiti, Nangloi,
Delhi, is aggrieved by the order of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court
No.5, Karkardooma, Delhi, dated 01st February, 2002 passed in ID
No. 605/94.

The reference made to the Labour Court was to the

following effect:“Whether the services of Shri Vidya Dhar Mishra have
been terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably and if so, to
what relief is he entitled and what directions are necessary
in this respect?”
The Labour Court has held that the respondent, namely, Shri
Vidyadhar Mishra, was wrongly retired by the petitioner at the age of
WP(C) No. 5822/02

Page 1 of 5

56 years and that he was entitled to continue in service till he attained
the age of 58 years. Accordingly, the petitioner was directed to pay to
the respondent full back wages with all consequential benefits which
he

would have

received

had he

remained

in service

of the

management from the date of his alleged retirement at the age of 56
years i.e. 15.7.93 till he would have attained the age of 58 years i.e.
14.7.95.
The case of the petitioner is that the respondent who was
working as a Manager in its organization was bound by the rules and
regulations which were framed on 18th May, 1993 by the Administrator
who was appointed by the Khadi Village and Industries Commissioner
in the year 1988 as the petitioner's organization was not doing well
financially.

It appears that prior to 18th May, 1993, there was no

prescribed age for the retirement of the employees working with the
petitioner and as a matter of practice, they used to continue to serve
the organization till the age of 60 years.

However, Rule 11 of the said

Order which came to govern the employees of the petitioner lays down
different age of retirement for different categories of employees. The
said Rule reads as under:
“11. Period of service
The age of retirement for an employee who gets
salary from the organization shall be 56 years of age;
for an employee who is a member of the General Body
(Aam Sabha) shall be 58 years of age and for an
employee who is a Trustee member (Trustee Mandal)
shall be 60 years of age; and after completion of the
above mentioned period the employee will be retired
from service. The employee who get gratuity etc. as
per applicable labour laws.
Submission of birth
certificate by the employee for the receipt of gratuity
WP(C) No. 5822/02

Page 2 of 5

shall be compulsory. Gratuity etc. shall be paid in six
months in lump sum or in equated installments. If the
period exceeds this interest @ 12% shall be paid to the
employee by the Samiti. The Working Committee of
the Samiti/Manager shall have the right to re-appoint.
An employee who at the time of retirement was a
member of the Samiti shall remain a member.”
It is apparent from the aforesaid Rule 11 that the age of
retirement of a person who is an employee simpliciter in the
petitioner's organization is fixed at 56 years while an employee who is
also a member of the General Body (Aam Sabha) at 58 years and an
employee who is a Trustee Member (Trustee Mandal) at 60 years. It is
not disputed that the petitioner was an employee simplicitor and he
was neither a member of the General Body nor a Trustee Member. The
Labour Court, however, has held that the petitioner was entitled to
continue in service till the age of 58 years. The order of the Labour
Court does not indicate as to how it has come to the conclusion that
the age of retirement of respondent in terms of Rule 11 was 58 years.
The Labour Court itself has stated in its order that the respondent was
not a Trustee Member and, therefore, he could not continue till the age
of 60 years.

The only other two categories are the categories of

employee simplicitor and an employee who is a member of the General
Body.

The respondent placed nothing on record before the Labour

Court that he was an employee who was a member of the General
Body. Therefore, the Labour Court, to my mind, could not return the
finding that the respondent ought to have continued in service till the
age of 58 years. The finding is unwarranted and cannot be sustained.
It was argued by the learned counsel for the respondent that

WP(C) No. 5822/02

Page 3 of 5

even if it is assumed that the finding of the Labour Court in terms of
Rule 11 is not supported by the evidence on record, the respondent
still could not be retired at the age of 56 years because when he joined
the service there were no rules and regulations in force and the
employees were being retired at the age of 60 years as a matter of
practice.

According to the counsel the introduction of the rules and

regulations dated 18th May, 1993 and fixing the age limit of 56 years,
58 years and 60 years tantamounts to changing the service conditions
of the employees in violation of Section 9A of the Industrial Disputes
Act 1947 which provides that an employer who proposes to effect any
change in the conditions of service applicable to any workman in
respect of any matter specified in the 4th Schedule, shall not effect
such change without giving, to the workman likely to be affected by
such change, a notice in the prescribed manner of the nature of
change proposed to be effected.
As against this submission, learned counsel for the petitioner has
relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in Harmohinder
Singh Vs. Kharga Canteen, Ambala Cantt. 2001-II-LLJ.

I have gone

through this judgment. It says that conditions of service for change of
which notice has to be given under the 4th Schedule does not in terms
include the subject matter of Para 3-A, namely, the fixation of a period
of service or date of retirement.

It may be noticed that in the said

judgment by virtue of Para 3-A maximum age limit for an employee
was fixed at 60 years and maximum permissible service for an
employee was fixed at

15 years.

On a change made to the said

condition before the Supreme Court, it was held that fixation of period
WP(C) No. 5822/02

Page 4 of 5

of service or date of retirement will not fall within the ambit of 4th
Schedule, referred to in Section 9A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Having regard to what has been discussed above, the writ
petition is allowed.

The award of the Industrial Tribunal dated 1 st

February, 2002 passed in ID No. 605/94 is set aside.

REKHA SHARMA, J
FEBRUARY 23, 2007
da/sl

WP(C) No. 5822/02

Page 5 of 5

