*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 5382 of 2007
Date of Decision : 25-07-2007
RAJENDRA SINGH

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Sanjay Kumar Das, Advocate

versus
UOI & ORS.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Suresh Kait, Advocate for R-1.
Ms. Raavi Birbal, Advocate for R- 2 & 3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA

1.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? Yes

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the `Digest?' Yes

Yes

REKHA SHARMA, J. (ORAL)
The petitioner is working as Deputy Director in National
Federation of Fishermen's Cooperatives Limited (FISHCOPFED). He has
been transferred to Raipur (Chhattisgarh) to head the Federation at
Raipur (Chhattisgarh) Project. The order to this effect was passed on
July 5, 2007 and though it has been signed by respondent No. 3,
namely, B.K.Mishra (Managing Director), Incharge of FISHCOPFED, it is
mentioned

therein that the decision to transfer the petitioner was

taken in a meeting of the Board of Directors held on May 25, 2007.
Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the petitioner has
preferred the present writ petition.
WP(C) No. 5382 of 2007

He alleges that the order of
Page 1 of 3

transfer has been passed in mala fide exercise of the power and he
holds respondent No. 3 – Shri B.K.Mishra responsible for the same.
According to him, he was Presenting Officer in a disciplinary inquiry
held against Shri B.K.Mishra in the year 2002 which resulted in his
reversion from the post of Deputy Director to Assitant Director – first
state.

It is alleged that since then the said Shri B.K.Mishra is

harbouring a grudge against him. It is also alleged that Shri B.K.Mishra
even though was reduced in rank yet by manipulation, he managed to
supersede the petitioner.

He is now holding the post of Managing

Director (Incharge) and in his such capacity has exercised influence on
the Board of Directors and has got the transfer order issued against
him. It is also the case of the petitioner that there is no post of Deputy
Director in existence at Chhattisgarh and that the petitioner is being
sent on a lower post.
Learned counsel for the respondent who is present on
advance notice submits that the transfer of the petitioner has no
relevance to the disciplinary proceedings which were conducted
against respondent No. 3 – Shri B.K.Mishra as far back as five years. It
is stated that the transfer has been done in exigencies of service and
no influence whatsoever was exercised on the Board of Directors.
Having considered the rival submissions, I am of the view
that the imputation by the petitioner that his transfer to Raipur
(Chhatisgarh) has been done at the instance of respondent No. 3 –
Shri B.K.Mishra has no basis.

The fact that the petitioner was the

Presenting Officer in the disciplinary proceedings conducted against
respondent No. 3 can by itself is no ground to allege that respondent
WP(C) No. 5382 of 2007

Page 2 of 3

No. 3 harboured a grudge against him.

The petitioner was merely

discharging his official duties. It will be too far-fetched to presume any
co-relation between the two events.
As regards the submission that there is no post of Deputy
Director, learned counsel for the respondent states that the petitioner
is being sent as Head of the new project and the post which he will
occupy is equivalent to the post of Deputy Director.
For the foregoing reasons, the transfer order is held to be
valid. The writ petition is dismissed.
At this stage, it is submitted by the counsel for the
petitioner that he has not been paid the TTA (Transfer Travelling
Allowance). Counsel for the respondent states that it will be released
to the petitioner within 2-3 days in accordance with the provisions of
TTA.
CM Nos. 9978/2007, 9979/2007 & 9980/2007
In view of the order passed in the writ petition, the
applications have become infructuous and the same are dismissed as
such.

REKHA SHARMA,J
JULY 25, 2007
sl

WP(C) No. 5382 of 2007

Page 3 of 3

