*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 4141 of 2006
Date of Decision :
GANESH GOYAL

26-07-2007

..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Pragnya Routray, Advocate

versus
SECRETARY, DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ..... Respondent
Through Mr. Yeeshu Jain, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA

1.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? Yes

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the `Digest?' Yes

Yes

REKHA SHARMA, J.
One Om Goyal was employed as Beldar with Delhi
Development Authority (in short 'DDA') since 1982. Unfortunately, on
July 24, 1992 while still in service, he died.
members, he died in an accident.

According to his family

As per the DDA, he committed

suicide. This, however, is not an issue before me. The issue is denial
of compassionate appointment to his son Ganesh Goyal.
It so happened that three years after the death of Om
Goyal, his widow Lakshmi Devi made an application to DDA for

WP(C) No. 4141 of 2006

Page 1 of 6

compassionate appointment in his place. The same did not find favour
with the DDA and accordingly vide communication dated July 26, 1995,
she was so informed. She made no grievance of the rejection of her
application. However, on April 5, 1999, the demand for compassionate
appointment re-surfaced. This time it emanated from Ganesh Goyal,
son of deceased Om Goyal. As per him, his father left behind him his
wife and three children including him and that the family has been
living in a state of penury ever since his death.

He moved the

application after he had attained the age of majority on the basis that
he was IXth pass and was suitable for any class IV job. The DDA, it
seems was not inclined to accede to his request.

His case, therefore,

was taken up by the Municipal Employees Union who sent legal notice
to the Secretary, DDA on June 26, 1999.

As nothing happened, the

Union raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Industrial
Tribunal for adjudication with the following terms of reference:
“Whether Shri Ganesh Goyal son of late Om Goyal is
entitled to be appointed on compassionate ground
and if so, what directions are necessary in this
respect?”
The Industrial Tribunal, vide its award dated March 3, 2005
decided the reference against Ganesh Goyal holding that the decision
of the DDA in not providing him the job was neither illegal nor
unjustified.

Aggrieved by the said decision, he has preferred the

present writ petition.
It needs to be borne in mind that a person seeking

WP(C) No. 4141 of 2006

Page 2 of 6

compassionate appointment has only a right to be considered within
the framework of the provisions governing such appointments and if
there are no provisions then within the parameters laid down by the
authorities from time to time. Such a person has no indefeasible right
to be appointed.
A perusal of the award of the Industrial Tribunal reveals
that the DDA had constituted a 'Screening Committee' to recommend
compassionate appointments. The Committee was headed by no less
a person than the Finance Member of the DDA and three other senior
Officers, namely, Commissioner (Personnel), Director (Personnel) and
Joint Director (Vigilance).

The

Committee decided to make an

assessment of the deservability of compassionate

appointment by

taking an overall position of liabilities of the candidates as against
existence of supporting circumstances. The supporting circumstances
which were considered were income of the applicants from various
sources;

the movable and immovable assets in their possession;

income from pension and other sources. The liabilities which were
taken into account were the number of minor children and unmarried
daughters left behind by the deceased, and also the fact whether the
applicant in a given case was a widow and not the son of the deceased
employee and whether the applicant was working and not waiting for
compassionate appointment only. Having set out these parameters, it
considered 30 cases including that of the petitioner and after
deliberations recommended 11 names for appointment out of which
four were kept in the panel for further vacancies. True, the name of
the petitioner did not figure in the 11 candidates who were
WP(C) No. 4141 of 2006

Page 3 of 6

recommended but that was because the Committee did not find him
deserving enough in comparison to others. In this background, the
petitioner cannot have any grouse that his case was not considered or
if considered, it was dealt in a slip-shod or cavalier manner. Therefore,
I see no reason to interfere with the decision making process of the
Screening Committee, for that was its prerogative.
The

object

and

purpose

of

providing

employment

on

compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship which befalls on the
family members due to the death of the only bread earner in the
family.

In this context, it will be appropriate to quote the following

paragraph from the judgment of Supreme Court in Punjab National
Bank and others v. Ashwini Kumar Taneja (2004) 7 Supreme Court
Cases 265:
“In Sushma Gosain v. Union of India (1989) 4 SCC
468,

it

was

observed

that

in

all

claims

of

appointment on compassionate grounds, there
should not be any delay in appointment.
purpose

of

providing

appointment

The
on

compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship
due to death of the bread-earner in the family.
Such appointments should, therefore, be provided
immediately to redeem the family in distress. The
fact that the ward was a minor at the time of death
of his father is no ground, unless the Scheme itself
envisages specifically otherwise, to state that as
and when such minor becomes a major he can be
appointed without any time consciousness or limit.
The above view was reiterated in Phoolwati v.
Union of India 1991 Supp (2) SCC 689 and Union of
India v. Bhagwan Singh (1995) 6 SCC 476.
WP(C) No. 4141 of 2006

In
Page 4 of 6

Director of Education (Secondary) v. Pushpendra
Kumar (1998) 5 SCC 192 it was observed that in
matter

of

compassionate

appointment

there

cannot be insistence for a particular post. Out of
purely

humanitarian

consideration

and having

regard to the fact that unless some source of
livelihood is provided the family would not be able
to make both ends meet, provisions are made for
giving appointment to one of the dependants of
the deceased who may be eligible for appointment.
Care has, however, to be taken that provision for
ground of compassionate employment which is in
the

nature

of

an

exception

to

the

general

provisions does not unduly interfere with the right
of those other persons who are eligible for
appointment to seek appointment against the post
which would have been available, but for the
provision enabling appointment being made on
compassionate grounds of the dependant of the
deceased employee.

As it is in the nature of

exception to the general provisions, it cannot
substitute the provision to which it is an exception
and thereby nullify the main provision by taking
away completely the right conferred by the main
provision.”
The Supreme Court in the aforementioned judgment has
laid

emphasis

on

early

disposal

of

cases

of

compassionate

appointments. Here, however, is a case where it is not the authorities
but the family of the deceased which has been slack. The first request
for compassionate appointment came from the wife of the deceased
but it was after three years of his death. The present petitioner had
applied on the same ground four years after the rejection of the
WP(C) No. 4141 of 2006

Page 5 of 6

application of his mother. Of course, he has taken the plea that he was
minor at the time of death of his father but that has been held by the
Supreme Court in the aforementioned judgment as no ground “unless
the Scheme itself envisages specifically otherwise, to state that as and
when such minor becomes a major he can be appointed without any
time

consciousness

or

limit.”

Having

regard

to

the

belated

applications, firstly moved by the wife of the deceased and then by the
petitioner, an adverse inference can be drawn that the family was not
in dire need of job consequent upon the death of Om Goyal and that
they were able to fend for themselves.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in the writ
petition. The same is dismissed.

REKHA SHARMA,J
JULY 26, 2007
sl/g

WP(C) No. 4141 of 2006

Page 6 of 6

