*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RC.REV. 9/2007
ABDUL HAMID

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. T S Upadhyay, Advocate

versus
AHSAN ILAHI & ORS.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Sanjay Agnihotri with Mr.
Arvind Upadhyaya, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
%

ORDER
26.11.2007

CM NO. 12565/2007
It is submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that the
respondent/landlord had filed two separate petitions against the
petitioner for eviction under Sections 14 (1) (e) and 14 (1) (h) of the
Delhi rent Control Act, 1958. By a common judgment dated
18.10.2006, the Additional Rent Controller passed eviction orders on
both the counts. The respondent preferred an appeal before the
Rent Control Tribunal in so far as the order pertaining to Section 14
(1) (h) is concerned. The Rent Control Tribunal vide its order dated
28.3.2007 remanded the case back to the Additional Rent Controller
with the directions to determine whether there exists relationship of
landlord and tenant between the parties. Against the said order of
the Tribunal, the landlord preferred Revision Petition under Article

227 of the Constitution of India. The same was dismissed in limine.
The present Revision Petition has been preferred against the
order of the Additional Rent Controller whereby eviction has been
ordered against the petitioner under Section 14 (1) (e) of the Delhi
Rent Control Act, 1958. It is submitted by learned counsel for the
petitioner that since the issue whether there exists relationship of
landlord and tenant between the parties has been remanded to the
Additional Rent Controller by the Rent Control Tribunal against the
order passed under Section 14 (1) (h) of the Delhi Rent Control Act,
1958, it would be appropriate if the present revision petition is
disposed of with the direction to the Additional Rent Controller to
decide the question of relationship of landlord and tenant between
the parties.
Learned counsel appearing for the landlord has opposed the
prayer. He submits that this Court should itself examine whether
the order passed by the Additional Rent Controller is justified or not
and that there is no occasion to remand the case back to the
Additional Rent Control Tribunal. It is however not disputed by the
counsel that the revision petition preferred against the order of the
Rent Control Tribunal remanding the case back to the Additional
Rent Controller to determine the issue whether there exists
relationship of landlord and the tenant was dismissed by this Court.
In the above facts and circumstances, I am of the view that
since the common issue arises both in the petition under Sections

14 (1) (e) and 14 (1) (h) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, it would
be appropriate if this revision petition is disposed of with the
direction to the Additional Rent Controller to determine the issue of
relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties in this case
as well. Accordingly, the matter is remanded back to the Additional
Rent Controller who shall determine the aforesaid issue along with
case under Section 14 (1) (h) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958,
which is listed before Ms. Savita Rao, the Additional Rent Controller,
Delhi, on 31.1.2008. The Additional Rent Controller will confine the
inquiry limited only to relationship of the landlord and the tenant in
terms of the directions of the Tribunal.

REKHA SHARMA, J.
NOVEMBER 26, 2007
PC.

