REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 17238/2006
Date of Decision: February 27, 2007
SURESH KUMAR

..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Vimal Wadhawan, Advocate.

versus
LT. GOVERNOR & ORS
..... Respondent
Through Mr.V.K.Tandon for R. 1 to 4.
Mr.Arun Arya for respondent No.5.
Mr.Atul Kumar for respondent No.6.
CORAM:HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA

1. Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see the
judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
REKHA SHARMA, J.

Suresh Kumar is a teacher on the post of TGT (Maths) in
C.L.Bhalla DAV Senior Secondary School, Jhandewalan, Karol
Bagh, New Delhi. He seeks his promotion to the post of PGT
(Maths). According to the respondents he does not possess the
requisite qualification and therefore the prayer sought cannot be
granted.
As per the Recruitment Rules to the post of Lecturer/ PGT a
copy of which has been placed on record by the respondents, the
WP(C) No. 17238/06

Page 1 of 4

requisite qualification for appointment to the said post is a
Masters degree in the subject concerned from a recognised
university. Admittedly, the petitioner does not possess a Masters
degree in Mathematics. What he possess is a Masters degree in
Statistics.

He is M.Sc (Statistics). His case is that a degree in

M.Sc (Statistics) is as good as holding a degree of M.Sc (Maths)
and on that basis he claims that he fulfills the qualification
required for appointment to the post of

PGT (Maths).

It is common knowledge and it was also so submitted by
counsel for the respondents that 'Statistics' is only one of the
branches of Mathematics.

Whereas a degree in M.Sc (Maths)

includes in its curriculum 'Statistics' as one of the subjects, vice
versa is not true. Mathematics is a wider course than Statistics.
It not only includes Statistics but many other related branches of
Mathematics such as Algebra and Geometry etc. In this view of
the matter, M.Sc (Statistics) cannot be treated as equivalent to
M.Sc (Maths).
Learned counsel for the petitioner tried to draw a parallel
with those teachers who have either done Masters degree in
'Zoology' or 'Botany' yet they are considered as eligible to the
post of PGT (Biology). To this, the answer of learned counsel for
the respondent was that there is no course of M.Sc (Biology). It is
either M.Sc (Botany) or M.Sc (Zoology). Therefore, any teacher

WP(C) No. 17238/06

Page 2 of 4

possessing either of the qualification is eligible for promotion to
the post of PGT( Biology). Faced with this, learned counsel for the
petitioner had no counter submission to offer.
It was also sought to be argued that there have been cases
where respondents appointed M.Sc (Statistics) to the post of PGT
(Mathematics). However, nothing to the said effect finds mention
in the writ petition.

Even during the course of arguments, no

specific instance was brought to the notice of the court.
The submission thus was without basis.
Lastly it was argued that the petitioner had moved an
application under the Right to Information Act, 2005 seeking to
know from the Directorate of Education whether TGT (Maths)
having qualification of M.Sc. (Statistics) with Maths as the main
subject at graduation level and possessing teaching experience of
more than five years could be considered as eligible for
promotion to the post of PGT (Maths).
received was in the affirmative.

The response that he

On being confronted with this

position, it was submitted by learned counsel for respondents that
the information which was passed on to the petitioner was false
and contrary to the Recruitment Rules and he therefore could not
stake any claim on such information. It was also submitted that
departmental action was being taken against the person who had
provided incorrect information to the petitioner.

WP(C) No. 17238/06

Since, as has

Page 3 of 4

been noticed above, the Recruitment Rules do not contemplate
that a person possessing a degree of M.Sc (Statistics) is eligible to
be promoted to the post of PGT (Maths), the mere fact that some
incorrect information was supplied to the petitioner on his
application under the RTI Act will not confer any right for any such
appointment.
For

the

foregoing

reasons

the

writ

petition

is

dismissed.

REKHA SHARMA, J
FEBRUARY 27, 2007
g

WP(C) No. 17238/06

Page 4 of 4

