REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition(C).No.5228/2005

Date of Decision : February 28, 2007
SH. RAM NIWAS JAIN

..... Petitioner
Through:

Mr. Ajay Jain, Advocate

Versus
CENTRAL GOVT. HEALTH SCHEME & ANR
Through:

..... Respondent

Ms. Barkha Babbar , Advocate

CORAM:HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1. Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see the
judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Yes
REKHA SHARMA, J.
It was April 25, 2002. The petitioner, little knowing what
was ordained for him, went to attend a function at a relative's house.
While he was there he felt pain in his chest and became unconscious.
This was unforeseen emergency and called for emergent action. He
was rushed to Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre (EHIRC)
where he underwent bypass surgery and remained admitted as an
indoor patient from April 25, 1992 till May 10, 2002. He escaped death
alright but not what was to follow.
The petitioner had retired from the post of Upper Division

WP(C).No.5228/2005

Page No.1 of 6

Clerk from the office of Central Public Works Department (CPWD) on
March 31, 2002.

A card No.058538 was issued to him on

May 30, 2002 on the basis of which he and his wife became entitled to
medical treatment in semi private wards of all the hospitals approved
by the Central Government under the Central Government Health
Scheme.

It appears that under the said scheme, some Office

Memorandums were issued by the Central Government from time to
time.

One such Memorandum is dated September 18, 1996.

It

recognised number of private hospitals/diagnostics centres mentioned
therein

for

different

specialties

and

provided

that

the

CGHS

beneficiaries taking treatment in those hospitals would become
entitled for reimbursement as per package deal rates mentioned
therein. The next relevant Memorandum is dated 7.9.2001. By this
Memorandum, more private hospitals were recognised for the purpose
of reimbursement and besides that the rates as contained in the
Memorandum of September, 1996 were revised. It also provided that
the recognised hospitals/diagnostic centres will not charge more than
the package rate from the beneficiaries.

This, it seems, was not

acceptable to Escorts hospital. Therefore, its name did not figure in
the list of recognised hospitals. However, the Director General, CGHS
vide its letter dated 25.10.2001 allowed the CGHS beneficiaries to take
treatment in six private hospitals mentioned therein including Escorts
hospital but limited the reimbursement as per the old rates notified in
Office Memorandum dated 18.9.96. It appears that later on Escorts
hospital also agreed to the rates specified in the Office Memorandum
dated 7.9.2001. Hence, another circular dated 26.8.2002 was issued
WP(C).No.5228/2005

Page No.2 of 6

bringing Escorts hospital also within the ambit of circular dated
7.9.2002.
Coming back to the petitioner, he was billed for a sum of
Rs.2,11,060/- by the Escorts hospital. He paid the bill and thereafter
claimed reimbursement for the same from the respondents. He was
reimbursed but only to the tune of Rs.1,14,420/-. As for the balance
amounting to Rs.96,640/- he was told that he was not entitled as the
scheme then in force did not cover his case for full reimbursement.
He also incurred an expense of Rs.783/- on the medicines which too
was not paid to him. It is the refusal to pay the sum of Rs.96,640/- and
Rs.783/- which has brought the petitioner knocking the door of this
Court.
What have the respondents to say? According to them, the
case of the petitioner for reimbursement is to be regulated as per the
rates notified vide Office Memorandum dated September 18, 1996 and
not by the Office Memorandum dated September 7, 2001 because the
same

was

made

applicable

to

Escorts

hospital

only

from

August 26, 2002.
It is nobody's case that the Escorts hospital was not one of
the recognised hospitals under the CGHS where a beneficiary covered
by the scheme could take treatment.

It was.

The point at issue is

whether the petitioner who took treatment in the Escort hospital
between April 25, 2002 and May 10, 2002 during which period the said
hospital had not agreed to the revised rates as contained in the Office
Memorandum dated August 26, 2002 is to be governed by the prior
Memorandum of September, 1996
WP(C).No.5228/2005

or by the Memorandum of
Page No.3 of 6

August, 2002. What is of significance in this regard is that barely three
months after the petitioner was discharged from the Escorts hospital,
the said hospital agreed to the rates as notified in the Memorandum of
September, 2001. Should the petitioner be deprived of the benefit of
full reimbursement merely because Escorts hospital was dilly-dallying
to agree to the rates notified in the circular dated 26.8.2002?
The respondents have resisted full reimbursement by taking
refuge in a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of
Punjab & Others Vs. Ram Lubhaya Bagga & Others reported in
(1998) 4 SCC 117. In the said judgment, the beneficiary of a health
scheme was aggrieved by the change in the policy of the Government
in regard to the reimbursement of medical expenses to its serving and
retired employees. It appears from the judgment that previously there
was a policy promulgated in 1991 whereby reimbursement of medical
expenses charged by the designated hospitals were admissible but
subsequently a new policy dated 30.2.95 was promulgated which
provided that treatment could be taken from any hospital but the
reimbursement of medical expenses was restricted. In the context of
these facts the Apex Court held as under : “It is not normally within the domain of any
court to weigh the pros and cons of the policy
or to scrutinise it and test the degree of its
beneficial or equitable disposition for the
purpose of varying, modifying or annulling it,
based on howsoever sound and good
reasoning, except where it is arbitrary or
violative of any Constitutional, statutory or any
other provision of law.
When Government
forms its policy, it is based on a number of
circumstances
on
facts,
law
including
constraints based on its resources. It is also
based on expert opinion.
It would be
WP(C).No.5228/2005

Page No.4 of 6

dangerous if Court is asked to test the utility,
beneficial effect of the policy or its appraisal
based on facts set out on affidavits. The Court
would dissuade itself from entering into this
realm which belong to the executive. It is
within this matrix that it is to be seen whether
the new policy violates Article 21 when it
restricts reimbursement on account of its
financial constraints.”
Reliance by the respondents on the aforementioned
judgment, in my view, is totally misconceived. We are not dealing with
a case where there is any challenge to the policy of the Government.
As a matter of fact, this is a case where the Government wanted to
make full reimbursement.

Its thinking and intention is evident from

Office Memorandum dated 7.9.2001.

It was only because of the

vacillating attitude of the Escorts hospital that it took a little more time
for the Government to bring the said hospital within the ambit of the
Office Memorandum dated 7.9.2001. This is not a case where 'Barkes'
was not willing. It was Peggotty [Escorts hospital in this case] who was
playing difficult. It is thus not a case where there was no policy. It was
already there. It was in full play. There is no challenge to the policy.
The challenge is only to the effect of the Escorts hospital first resisting
and then surrendering. It is this what distinguishes this case from the
above cited judgment of the Supreme Court.
Why, in the circumstances noted above, should the
petitioner suffer?

Had the petitioner gone himself or had he been

taken to a hospital which had accepted the ongoing rates, in that case,
would the Government not have fully reimbursed him as per the Office
Memorandum of September, 2001?

If so, why deprive him of that

benefit merely because, in an unconscious state, he was rushed to

WP(C).No.5228/2005

Page No.5 of 6

another hospital which too figured in the approved list of hospitals but,
at that point of time, though asked to, was not agreeing to come under
the umbrella of Office Memorandum of 7.9.2001 but agreed shortly
thereafter.
It was a welfare scheme by a welfare State.

A welfare

State needs to be benevolent and benevolence does not lie in escaping
a welfare scheme by resorting to such technicalities as may take away
the sheen from it.
For what has been noticed above, the writ petition is
allowed. The petitioner is held entitled to full reimbursement of
medical claim. Consequently, the respondents are directed to pay the
balance amount of Escorts hospital amounting to Rs.96,640/- and also
medical expenses of Rs.783/- within a period of one month failing
which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest on the said amount at
12% per annum from the date he has submitted his bills for
reimbursement till payment is actually made to him.

REKHA SHARMA
(JUDGE)
FEBRUARY 28, 2007
'sn'

WP(C).No.5228/2005

Page No.6 of 6

