IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 2729 of 1989
Date of Decision: May 29, 2007
Premjit Kaur Takhi
…
…
…
Petitioner
Through: Mr.J.Buther, Advocate
Versus
Hindustan Paper Corp. Ltd. …
…
Respondent
Through: Mr.Parag P.Tripathi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.R.K.Gupta & Mr.B.P.Gupta Advocate

CORAM:
HON’BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.

Whether Reporters of the Local Papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? Yes

REKHA SHARMA, J.
In the year 1988 the petitioner Smt. Premjit Kaur Takhi
was working as a confirmed Junior Stenographer in Hindustan
Paper Corporation Limited at New Delhi while her husband lived in
Africa. It so happened that on May 16,1988 the Corporation in
order to solve the problem of surplus staff in its Delhi office came
out with a package deal for its employees who were willing to
retire and relinquish their jobs. For Smt. Premjit Kaur it was a
WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 1 of 11

God-sent opportunity to join her husband in Africa and at the
same time reap the benefits of service so far rendered by her. So
quick was her response to the offer that on the very same day she
sent her application opting for the scheme. At about the same
time she applied for earned leave of two months with permission
to go to Africa to join her husband. The Corporation vide a
communication of May 30,1988 informed her that her application
opting for one time package deal had been recommended and
sent to CHQ for consideration/ approval which was awaited. She
was further informed that her earned leave had been sanctioned
w.e.f May 30,1988 and had also been granted permission to go to
Africa. Armed with the communication of May 30, 1998, she left
for Africa in the hope that her request for retirement in terms of
the package deal would be acceded to in due course. With this
legitimate expectation once in Africa, she made all arrangements
to settle there and even got her son admitted in an international
school of Africa. However things did not work out her way. On
September 20,1988 she was informed that her application for
voluntary retirement under the package deal had not been
accepted and she was asked to report for duty immediately as
she had no leave to her credit. On October 10,1988 she received
another communication asking her to report for duty immediately.
She wrote back to the Corporation on November 1, 1988 stating
therein that being sure of getting retirement under the package

WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 2 of 11

deal she had made arrangements to settle in Africa along with her
husband and had even got her son admitted in an international
school whose session was to come to an end on December
31,1988. Accordingly, she requested for grant of 'leave not due'
uptill January 17, 1989. The Corporation vide telegram dated
November 29,1988 which, according to her was received by her
on December 14,1988 informed her that her request for grant of
“leave not due” had not been accepted and further informed that
her extra ordinary leave limit of 365 days in entire service shall be
reached on December 12,1988. Accordingly, she was asked to
return to duty latest by December 13,1988.

Before I proceed to narrate further facts, I deem it
appropriate to reproduce the contents of the telegram for it is on
this telegram that the Corporation has rested its case. This is how
it reads:
Express Telegram
Smt. Premjit Kaur Takhi
C/o. Mr. G S Takhi
Post Box No. 4742
Africa
Refer your application dated 1.11.88
regarding sanction of leave. Your request
for grant of “leave not due” not accepted.
EOL limit of 365 days in entire service shall
be reached on 12.12.88. Report for duty
latest by 13.12.88 failing which you will lose
lien on your post of Junior Steno in HPC in
terms of HPC Conduct, Discipline and Appeal
Rules which inter alia provide that the lien of
an employee may be terminated on overWP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 3 of 11

staying the sanctioned/extended leave for
more than 8 (eight) days.
C L Gera

C L Gera
Sr. Manager (L&A)
29.11.88

To continue with the narration, Smt. Premjit Kaur on
receiving the telegram responded to the same by a telegram
dated December 14, 1988 informing the Corporation that she was
suffering from Spondylitis of cervical and lumber for the last two
months and was taking treatment. This was followed by a letter
dated December 19,1988 wherein she referred again to her
aforesaid ailment and expressed her inability to report till January
18, 1989. Accordingly she requested that she be granted medical
leave upto January18, 1989. She also enclosed with her letter the
medical

certificate

advising

her

complete

bed

rest

and

hospitalised treatment till January 18, 1989. Thereafter, she wrote
another letter to the Corporation dated January 17, 1989 in which
she made a request for further three weeks leave upto February
7,1989 and also enclosed with it

a medical certificate from an

Orthopedic Surgeon, Maputo. She received no response either to
her letter of

December 19, 1988 or to

January 17, 1989.

However, on being declared medically fit she undertook overseas
journey and reached New Delhi in the afternoon of February 9,
1989. On the following day i.e. on February 10,1989 she joined
her duties. Whereas according to her, her immediate Boss
WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 4 of 11

accepted her joining report and allowed her to mark attendance in
the office register, the Corporation has alleged that she was not
allowed to join and that she was given a memo dated February
10, 1989 informing her that since she had not reported for duty
by December 13, 1989 as was required of her by telegram dated
November 29, 1988 she had lost her lien on the post of Junior
Stenographer w.e.f December 12,1988 in terms of HPC Conduct,
Discipline & Appeal Rules which inter alia provide that the lien of
an employee may be terminated on

over-staying the

sanctioned/extended leave for more than 8 days.

It is this order of February 10,1989 which is the subject
matter of challenge in this writ petition by Smt. Premjit Kaur.

The only ground on which the order dated February
10,1989 has been assailed is that before terminating the lien of
the petitioner on the post of Junior Stenographer in terms of HPC
Conduct, Discipline & Appeal Rules, she ought to have given
notice to show cause and to explain the circumstances in which
she could not join the duties. Elaborating on the same, it was
contended

that

she

was

a

permanent

employee

of

the

Corporation having 10 years of service to her credit yet the
Corporation dealt with her in a cavalier manner and terminated
her lien on the post without affording an opportunity to explain
her case. It was argued that though Rule 23(IV) E under which her
WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 5 of 11

lien was terminated does not specifically provide for giving of a
show cause notice and for providing a hearing, the requirement of
a show cause notice and compliance of principles of natural
justice must be taken to be inherent.

In this regard, reference

was made to a judgment of the Apex Court reported in 1996 (2)
SCC page 404 titled Hindustan Paper Corporation Limited Vs.
Upendra Chakravarty. In the said judgment this very Rule came
up for consideration and there the counsel appearing for the
Corporation conceded that the Rule had to be construed by
reading into it the principles of natural justice. Accordingly the
court held as under :

We consider that in view of this
concession made by learned counsel on
behalf of the appellant- Corporation that the
said Rule must be read and given effect to,
subject to the compliance of the principles of
natural justice, it cannot be said that the
Rule is arbitrary or unreasonable or ultra
vires Article 14 of the Constitution. In other
words, before taking action under the said
clause, an opportunity should be given to
the employee to show cause against the
action proposed and if the cause shown by
the employee is good and acceptable, it
follows that no action in terms of the said
clause will be taken. Understood in this
sense, it cannot be said that the said clause
is either unreasonable or violative of Article
16 of the Constitution.
No doubt, the judgment proceeds on the basis of a
concession but it does show that the concession, which to my
mind was based on well established principles of natural justice,
WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 6 of 11

did find approval of the Apex Court.

The Corporation in its counter affidavit to the writ
petition has raised

number of preliminary objections as to the

maintainability of the writ petition but none of those objections
were pressed at the time of hearing. As has been noticed above,
it is the telegram dated November 29, 1988 which forms the
sheet anchor of the respondent's case. It was contended that by
means of the telegram, petitioner was unequivocally told that her
application for leave had not been accepted and that the limit of
her extra ordinary leave would come to an end on December 12,
1988. She was asked to join duty latest by December 13, 1988
failing which she was warned that she would lose her lien in terms
of HPC Conduct, Discipline & Appeal Rules. It was thus argued
that it was fully made known to her that if she did not join the
duties she would lose her job and she therefore was not taken offguard. According to the Corporation if despite the telegram she
chose not to join duty on February 10,1989 she alone was to be
blamed for the consequences.

The question before me is not whether the petitioner
was made aware of the consequences which would flow in case
she failed to join duty by December 13, 1988 as was sought to be
contended by the respondent, but whether before her lien on the
post of Junior Stenographer was terminated she was given a show
WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 7 of 11

cause notice to explain the circumstances in which she did not
join duty by December 13,1988 and why no action under Rule
23(IV)(E)

be

not

taken

against

her.

In

other

words,

notwithstanding the telegram which undoubtedly did not amount
to show cause notice, were the principles of natural justice
followed?

True, the Corporation by means of the telegram did
inform the petitioner that in case she did not join by December
13, 1988 she would lose her lien on the post of Junior
Stenographer.

But this was not sufficient.

I feel that on her

having failed to join duty on December 13, 1988, the Corporation
was under an obligation to give her a notice to show cause why
action in terms of the HPC Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules
terminating her lien be not taken against her. It was only upon
receiving a response from her or on not getting any response and
after

objectively

considering

her

explanation

or

lack

of

explanation that a further order terminating her lien or allowing
her to continue on duty could be passed. Had this been done, it
could be said that the principles of natural justice were met. The
Corporation rather than adopting this course simply relied upon
the telegram which was pre-emptory in nature. Its contents were
such that no scope was left for a show cause notice or for
submitting an explanation.

It virtually pronounced the order of

termination except that in terms thereof it was to take effect after
WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 8 of 11

December 13, 1988. As a result, when the petitioner came to join
duty she was unceremoniously told that she stood already
relieved from the service.

This became all the more harsh

considering she had worked for 10 years and more so when she
had been writing from Africa that she was suffering from
spondylitis of cervical and lumber and had sent medical evidence
in support.

The Corporation having not taken recourse to the

principles of natural justice, the order cannot be sustained. The
same is, therefore, quashed. Consequently, petitioner is ordered
to be reinstated in service.

Now the vexed question “whether

the petitioner is

entitled to salary from the date of termination of her lien till her
reinstatement.” In this regard I propose to follow a judgment of
the Apex Court in Municipal Corporation of Limited Vs. Prem
Chand Gupta and another reported in (2000) 10 SCC cases 115. In
the said case the termination order was passed on 29.4.1966 and
it was set aside after more than 33 years. However, the court did
not grant full back wages. It directed payment of 50% of the back
wages on the following reasoning :

The reasons for non-granting full back
wages from the date of his termination of
29-4-1966 till actual reinstatement pursuant
to the present order can now be indicated.
Firstly, for no fault of the contesting parties,
the litigation has lingered on for more than
three decades. The termination order was
as early as on 29-4-1966 and after 33 years
WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 9 of 11

and more it is being set aside. To saddle the
appellant Corporation and its exchequer,
which is meant for public benefit, with full
back wages for the entire period would be
too harsh to the appellant Corporation. It is
the delay in disposal of cases in the courts
that has created this unfortunate situation
for both the sides. The respondent workman
is also not at fault as he was clamouring for
justice for all these years. However, this
delay in court proceedings for no fault of
either side permits us not to burden the
appellant Corporation, being a public body,
with the full back wages for the entire period
of
the
respondent
workman's
unemployment, especially when for no fault
of either side actual work could not be taken
from the respondent workman by the
appellant Corporation. It is true that the
respondent workman was always willing to
work but he could not be permitted to work
so long as the termination order stood
against him.

The present case is no different. Respectfully, I adopt the
reasoning.

Here also the order terminating the lien of the

petitioner was passed on February 10, 1989. It is after a
considerable lapse of time that the proceedings in this Court have
come to an end. In this case too, the petitioner had reported for
duty and had thereby shown her willingness to work. Therefore, it
will be appropriate in the facts and circumstances of the case to
direct the Corporation to pay 50% of the salary of the petitioner
along with other consequential benefits from the date of the
termination order. I order accordingly.

WP(C) No. 2729/89

Page 10 of 11

MAY 29, 2007
g

WP(C) No. 2729/89

(REKHA SHRMA)
JUDGE

Page 11 of 11

