REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 1305 of 1994
Date of Decision : 29 -08-2007

Hawa Singh Khatri & Ors.

........ Petitioners
through Mr. S.M.Hooda, Advocate
Versus

Union of India & Ors.

........Respondents
Through Mr. Rajan Sabharwal and Ms.Seema
Bhaduriya , Advocate
WITH

Writ Petition (C) No. 1398 of 1996
DEVENDRA KUMAR KHARAB & ORS.
..... Petitioners
Through Mr. R.V.Naik, Mr.S.K.Tandon and
Mr.R.R.Naik, Advocates
Versus
UOI & ORS.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Rajan Sabharwal and Ms.Seema
Bhaduriya , Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? Yes

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the `Digest?' Yes

Yes

REKHA SHARMA, J.
1.

Both the writ petitions are inter-linked and are based on

common facts.

Hence, they are being disposed of by this common

judgment.

WP(C) No. 1305/94 with WP(C) No. 1398/96

Page 1 of 8

2.

It so happened that in the year 1994, ten petitioners led by

Hawa Singh Khatri filed Writ Petition (C) No. 1305 of 1994 alleging that
though they were selected for appointment to the posts of Fire
Operators, they were not so appointed. Accordingly, they prayed for a
writ of mandamus seeking a direction to the respondents to appoint
them as Fire Operators.
3.

The facts on which they laid their claim were that they

were sponsored through employment exchange for selection to the
posts of Fire Operators and were asked to report to Personnel
Department of Indira Gandhi International Airport on July 30, 1991 for
physical standard verification, driving test, stamina test and interview.
As directed, they took all the aforementioned tests.

They were found

fit but before their actual appointments as Fire Operators could take
place, they were required to undergo basic training for Operators in
IAAI.

The letters to this effect were issued on November 22, 1991.

One such letter addressed to Devender Kumar has been placed on
record and it is not in dispute that similar letters were issued to other
petitioners as well. Relevant part of said letter which has a bearing on
the disposal of this writ petition reads as under:
“You have been selected for basic course for
Operator in IAAI before you are actually appointed
as Fire Operator on the following terms and
conditions : a) that you are required to undergo basic course
training in FTC conducted by IAAI Headquarters.
b) Your actual appointment will be subject to
successful completion of the basic courses and
passing out the prescribed examination from the
FTC.”
WP(C) No. 1305/94 with WP(C) No. 1398/96

Page 2 of 8

4.

By another letter dated December 6, 1991, they were

directed to report to the Fire Training Centre Hostel (Palam Airport) to
undergo training. This letter contained the names of 29 trainees
including the petitioners.
5.

On the basis of the above averments, notice to show cause

was issued to the respondents. Although the respondents entered
appearance, no response to the show-cause was filed either at the
show cause stage or after 'Rule' was issued on May 6,1994.

In the

meantime, one of the petitioners, namely, Hawa Singh Khatri filed an
application stating that he wanted to pursue the matter with the
department and accordingly prayed for deletion of his name from the
array of the petitioners. His application was accepted and his name
was deleted from the case.
6.

In the year 1996, the same petitioners sans Hawa Singh

Khatri and Ram Chander filed Writ Petition (C) No. 1398 of 1996 on the
same set of facts as were set out in Writ Petition No. 1305 of 1994 and
also on an additional ground alleging that though they were similarly
placed as Hawa Singh Khatri and like him had successfully completed
the training imparted for appointment to the posts of Fire Operators, a
letter dated February 26, 1996 was issued by the Airport Authority of
India to Hawa Singh Khatri permitting him to appear in the examination
for undergoing test for basic course along with final examination of 31 st
batch Basic/Re-Orientation Course for Fire Operators while no such
letter was issued to them.

Therefore, they prayed that the

respondents should be directed to issue similar letters to them as was
issued to Hawa Singh Khatri.
WP(C) No. 1305/94 with WP(C) No. 1398/96

Page 3 of 8

7.

On being issued notice in Writ Petition (C) No. 1398 of

1996, the respondents filed counter affidavit and therein took number
of preliminary objections as to its maintainability. However, the main
objection taken was with regard to the suppression of material facts by
the petitioners. It was stated that in terms of letter dated November
21, 1991 (the relevant extract of which has already been quoted
hereinabove), the actual appointment of the petitioner to the posts of
Fire Operators was to take place subject to successful completion of
the basic course and passing of the prescribed examination from FTC.
In view of this clause the petitioners and so also Hawa Singh were
asked to take the test but none of them qualified in the test. Three of
the petitioners namely, Devender Kumar, Rajesh Kumar and Jagbir
Singh were also found indulging in mal-practices inasmuch as slips on
which answers to various questions were written were recovered from
their possession.

The same were seized by the invigilator and were

attached to their answer sheets. It was thus stated that none of the
petitioners were entitled to any relief.
8.

In so far as the case of Hawa Singh Khatri is concerned, it

has not been disputed that he too was found in possession of a slip on
which answers to some questions were written and his answer sheet
was also seized by the Invigilator in the examination hall. However, in
his case, it is stated that after he had withdrawn his name from Writ
Petition (C) No. 1305/94 he made a representation to the General
Manager (Personnel) with a request to consider his candidature for the
post of Fire Operator. On receipt of representation his case was
examined and it was found that Hawa Singh Khatri had secured 54%
WP(C) No. 1305/94 with WP(C) No. 1398/96

Page 4 of 8

marks in the examination whereas the qualifying marks were 50%. It
was also found that the chit recovered from his possession did not
have any relevance to the questions answered by him. In this view of
the matter he was permitted to again appear in the examination for
the basic course at FTC without undergoing any training. He took the
test and was declared successful. As such he was issued offer of
appointment on February 26,1996. On these facts, the case of Hawa
Singh Khatri

was sought to be distinguished from that of the

petitioner.
9.

The petitioners though filed rejoinder to the counter-

affidavit of the respondents but significantly it contained no rebuttal to
the allegation made against them that examination in terms of letter
dated November 22,1991 was held in which they not only failed to
qualify but three of them were found to be indulging in unfair means
as answer slips were found from their possession. In response to these
allegations, the petitioners stated nothing except reiterating the
averments made by them in the writ petition.
10.

Should

the

respondents

be

directed

to appoint the

petitioners to the posts of Fire Operators on the basis of training
undergone by them notwithstanding the fact that they did not clear the
test held subsequent to the training, and also, should the petitioners
be treated on parity with Hawa Singh Khatri

who was permitted to

take the test along with final examination of 31st Batch Basic/reorientation course for Fire Operators and on his qualifying the same
was appointed as Fire Operator?

WP(C) No. 1305/94 with WP(C) No. 1398/96

Page 5 of 8

11.

Admittedly the letter dated November 22,1991 whereby

the petitioners were informed that they were selected for basic course
for Fire Operator in IAI contained a clause that their actual
appointment was subject to successful completion of the basic course
and passing of

the prescribed examination from FTC.

I say

'admittedly' for the reason that this letter of November 22,1991 was
annexed to the writ petition by the petitioners themselves.

There can,

therefore, be no dispute with regard to its correctness.

As noticed

hereinabove the petitioners have not specifically denied the allegations
of the respondents that in terms of the aforesaid letter examination
was conducted in which the petitioners not only failed but three of
them also indulged in mal-practices inasmuch as they were found to
be in possession of answer slips. The non-disclosure of these facts by
the petitioners either in the earlier writ petition of 1994 and later in
1996,

to say the

least, is highly improper. Those who seek

discretionary relief from the Court must come clean and if there is any
suppression of material facts it will per-se dis-entitle them from any
relief whatsoever. The petitioners have not only held back material
facts from the Court but as noticed some of them were also found to be
indulging in cheating.

Hence, they do not deserve the relief prayed

for.
12.

Coming now to the case of Hawa Singh Khatri, the

respondents have tried to draw a distinction between his case and that
of the petitioners by stating in the counter affidavit and so also at the
time of oral submissions that he had qualified the examination,
whereas, the petitioners had not. It was also sought to be stated that
WP(C) No. 1305/94 with WP(C) No. 1398/96

Page 6 of 8

the answers slips which were found from Hawa Singh Khatri did not
relate to the questions attempted by him.
13.

Whatever may be the explanation of the respondents in the

case of Hawa Singh, it cannot be ignored that he too made an attempt
to qualify the examination by means other than fair. To that extent, I
feel, the respondents have not acquitted themselves with credibility.
But then, the appointment of Hawa Singh Khatri has not been called
into question by the petitioners. Therefore, I will say no more.

What

the petitioners are seeking is parity with Hawa Singh Khatri. Parity can
be claimed on the basis of a legal right which has been made available
to one but denied to others similarly placed. The petitioners must first
establish their legal right to be appointed as Fire Operators.

They

must stand on their own legs. They have failed to establish that they
were entitled to be appointed as Fire Operators solely on the basis of
training undergone by them.
14.

As a last ditch effort learned counsel for the petitioners

submitted that if not for any other reason the petitioners may be
appointed to the posts on humanitarian grounds and in this regard
placed reliance on H.C.Puttaswamy V. Hon'ble Chief Justice of
Karnataka reported in AIR 1991 SC 295. This was a case where the
Chief Justice of Karnataka High Court had made appointments to the
Karnataka Civil Services (Ministerial Posts) without consulting Public
Service Commission and also by-passing the power of the District
Judge. Although the action of Chief Justice was held to be improper and
illegal the court did not do away with the services of those having been
appointed on the ground that they were in service for the past 10
WP(C) No. 1305/94 with WP(C) No. 1398/96

Page 7 of 8

years and some of them had even earned higher promotions while
some other were found to be more qualified than the minimum
qualification required for the purpose. So far as the case of the
petitioners is concerned no parallel can be drawn vis-a-vis the case
relied upon by their counsel. The petitioners, as has been noticed
above, failed in the examination which was one of the requirements
before their actual appointments could take place.
15.

For the foregoing reasons both the writ petitions have no

merit and deserve to be dismissed. I do so accordingly.

REKHA SHARMA,J.

August 29 , 2007
g

WP(C) No. 1305/94 with WP(C) No. 1398/96

Page 8 of 8

