*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 1713 of 1993
Date of Decision : 30-07-2007
P.K.CHOPRA

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. V.K.Shali, Advocate

versus
ADMINSTRATOR NDMC
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Rajesh Mahajan, Advocate with
Mr. R.K.Kedia, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA

1.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? Yes

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the `Digest?' Yes

Yes

REKHA SHARMA, J. (ORAL)
The petitioner – P.K.Chopra was working as Vaccinator in
the Health Department of New Delhi Municipal Committee (for short
'NDMC'). On August 2, 1991, he was placed under suspension on the
ground that disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against him.
About eight months thereafter, on April 3, 1992, he was informed that
action under Section 16 of the CCS(CCA) Rules, 1965 was proposed
against him.

He was served with the statement of imputation of

WP(C) No. 1713 of 1993

Page 1 of 6

misconduct and was asked to submit his representation against the
action proposed. The statement of imputation was as under:
“During July, 1991, Shri P.K.Chopra was
working as Vaccinator at Death & Birth Registration
Centre in Palika Maternity Hospital, Lodhi Road, New
Delhi and was handling the work for issue of Death
& Birth Certificates.
In the last week of July, 1991, a representative
of a family residing at 18, Jor Bagh, New Delhi
approached Shri P.K.Chopra with the request for
early issue of Death Certificate in respect of late
Maj. Abinash Chandra who had expired on 20.6.91.
Shri Chopra did not respond to the request made by
the said representative properly and told that it
would take 3 months time. He also told that the
said certificate could be issued within 2 days in
consideration of certain amount.
However, the
Death Certificate was issued later on after the
matter was brought to the notice of higher
authorities.
Obviously, Sh. P.K.Chopra, Vaccinator failed to
respond properly to the feelings and requirement of
a member of public who was in abnormal state of
mind due to death of a near-one in their family.
The above acts on the part of Sh. P.K.Chopra,
Vaccinator constitute gross misconduct which is
unbecoming of a Municipal servant and also
constitute violation of Rule 3 of the CCS (Conduct)
Rules, 1964.”
In response to the afore-mentioned allegations, petitioner
submitted representation which did not find favour with the NDMC.
Accordingly, inquiry was conducted against him. By order dated June
10, 1992, he was found guilty of the allegations resulting in imposition
of minor penalty of 'withholding of one increment of pay without
cumulative effect' and by the same order, his period of suspension was
treated 'as not spent on duty'.

WP(C) No. 1713 of 1993

Page 2 of 6

Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of June 10, 1992, the
petitioner preferred the present writ petition in the year 1993.
Admittedly, the penalty of withholding of one increment of
pay without cumulative effect imposed against the petitioner has run
its course and the petitioner has since been restored the benefit of the
increment. Having regard to the minor nature of the penalty, I am not
inclined to interfere with the same.
As regards the further part of the order dated June 10,
1992, whereby, the period of suspension of the petitioner was treated
'as not spent on duty', learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my
attention to Administrative Instruction issued by the Department of
Personnel vide OM No. 43/56/64-AVD dated October 22, 1964
containing the guidelines for placing the government servants under
suspension. It, inter alia, lays down that a government servant could
be placed under suspension, if a prima facie case is made out justifying
his prosecution or disciplinary proceedings which are likely to end in
his dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement.

In other words, it

says that suspension should be resorted to in those cases where a
major and not minor penalty is likely to be imposed on conclusion of
the proceedings. In view of this Circular, the staff side of the
Committee of the National Council set up to review the CCS(CCA)
Rules, 1965 had suggested that in cases where a Government servant,
against whom an inquiry has been held for imposition of a major
penalty, is finally awarded only a minor penalty, the suspension should
be considered unjustified and full pay and allowances be paid for

WP(C) No. 1713 of 1993

Page 3 of 6

suspension period.

The said suggestion of the staff side was accepted

by the Government.
It is submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that in
view of the above Circular, there was no justification on the part of the
respondent – NDMC to have treated the suspension period of the
petitioner 'as not spent on duty' as the penalty which ultimately came
to be imposed against him was of a minor nature. On the other hand,
it is submitted by learned counsel for the respondent that the OM on
which reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner
talks

of

those

disciplinary

proceedings

which are

initiated for

imposition of a major penalty but results into a minor penalty and it is
only in such cases that the suspension period has to be treated 'as not
spent on duty'. According to the counsel, in the case of the petitioner,
the disciplinary proceedings were initiated for imposition of a minor
penalty and the same resulted in awarding of a minor penalty,
therefore, the circular has no applicability to his case.
Does the Circular dated October 22, 1964 applies to the
case of the petitioner?
The petitioner was suspended from service on August 2,
1991.

The order simply stated that he was being placed under

suspension in contemplation of disciplinary proceedings against him. It
did not indicate whether the proceedings proposed to be held were
likely to be for a major or minor penalty.

Therefore, when the order of

suspension was passed, it was not in contemplation of the respondent
that the disciplinary proceedings for imposition of a minor penalty were

WP(C) No. 1713 of 1993

Page 4 of 6

proposed

to

be

held

against

him.

This

decision

was

taken

subsequently on April 3, 1992 when he was issued a memorandum
intimating him that inquiry under Section 16 of the CCS(CCA) Rules,
1965 for imposition of minor penalty was proposed to be instituted
against him. In this view of the matter, the submission of the learned
counsel for the respondent that when the petitioner was placed under
suspension, the proceedings for minor penalty were in contemplation
has no basis. The decision thereto was taken eight months after the
order of suspension was passed.
Even otherwise, under Rule 54-B of the Fundamental Rules
after the disciplinary proceedings come to an end, the authorities are
required to pass an order whether or not the period of suspension has
to be treated 'as spent on duty'. Such an order is not to be passed
mechanically.

If it is decided that the period of suspension is to be

treated 'as not spent on duty', then the reasons thereto should be
indicated. Here in the present case, nothing has been stated why the
period of suspension is to be treated 'as not spent on duty' especially
when the penalty that came to be imposed upon the petitioner was
merely withholding of one increment of pay and that too without
cumulative effect.
For the foregoing reasons, I see no justification why the
period of suspension of the petitioner should not be treated 'as spent
on duty' in terms of the circular issued by Department of Personnel
vide OM No. 43/56/64-AVD dated October 22, 1964.

Accordingly, I

direct the respondent to treat the petitioner's suspension period 'as

WP(C) No. 1713 of 1993

Page 5 of 6

spent on duty' and pay the balance emoluments to the petitioner after
taking into the subsistence allowance that he has already received.
This shall be done within eight weeks.
With the afore-mentioned directions, the writ petition
stands disposed of.

REKHA SHARMA, J.
JULY 30, 2007
sl

WP(C) No. 1713 of 1993

Page 6 of 6

