*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 5655 of 2003
Date of Decision : April 30, 2007
M.C.D.

..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Saroj Bidawat, Advocate
versus

VIJAY PAL & ORS.

..... Respondent
Through Ms. Pragnya, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.
2.
3.

Whether the reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment ? Yes
To be referred to the reporter or not ?
Yes.
Whether the judgment should be reported in
the `Digest?'
Yes.

REKHA SHARMA, J.
Shri Vijay Pal was engaged in the Horticulture Department
of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi with effect from February 25,
2001 as a 'Muster Roll Mali' on daily wage basis on a monthly salary of
Rs. 875/- subject to revision from time to time under the Minimum
Wages Act.

It so happened that on

terminated his services.

June 26, 1992, the MCD

Feeling aggrieved, he raised an industrial

dispute which was referred to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication.
The terms of reference were as under:“Whether the services of Shri Vijay Pal – Muster Roll
Mali/Beldar
WP(C) 5655/03

have

been

terminated

illegally

and/or
Page 1 of 5

unjustifiably by the management and if so, to what relief is
he entitled and what directions are necessary in this
respect?”
The Industrial Tribunal decided the reference in favour of
the workman holding that his services were illegally and unjustifiably
terminated as the MCD before doing so did not comply with the
provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Accordingly, it directed his reinstatement with continuity of service and
full back wages with effect from February 26, 1992 onwards.
It was now the turn of the MCD to feel aggrieved and that is
why this writ petition assailing the order of the Tribunal.
The stand of the MCD before the Tribunal as also before
this Court has been that workman had himself abandoned the job and,
therefore, there was no question of the MCD terminating his services
or not complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial
Disputes Act. In any case, it was argued that the aforesaid section did
not apply to the case of Vijay Pal as he had not worked with the MCD
for a continuous period of not less than one year and it was only in that
event that he was entitled to one month's notice or wages in lieu
thereof.
Needless to say that the workman asserted that he had worked
for a continuous period of one year before his services were
terminated.
The Tribunal held against the MCD on both the counts, and
consequently, as noticed above, directed reinstatement of the
WP(C) 5655/03

Page 2 of 5

workman with continuity of service and full back wages.
It is well settled that in the case of abandonment of service
the employer has to give one month's notice to the workman calling
upon him to resume his duties and also to hold an enquiry before
terminating his services on that ground. The onus obviously is on the
employer to prove the same.
Having regard to the above settled position of law and in
view of the stand taken by the MCD, it should have led evidence to
prove that the workman was sent notices calling upon him to resume
duties and on his failure to respond to the same, an inquiry was held
against him before terminating his services.

It did lead evidence but

its witness Shri A.K.Chauhan, Assistant Director (Hort.), who appeared
before the Tribunal deposed to the contrary. It was admitted by him in
cross-examination that no letter was sent by the MCD calling upon the
workman to resume duties and no memo, charge-sheet or show cause
notice was given to him nor any departmental enquiry was conducted
against

him.

His

evidence

thus

was

such

that

rather

than

substantiating or furthering the case of the MCD, it had the negative
effect of disproving its own defence that the workman had abandoned
the job of his own.
The other defence raised by the MCD that the workman
had not worked continuously for a period of one year also fell flat on
the strength of the evidence of the aforesaid witness.

In response to

a query to him during his cross-examination, he stated that the
workman must have worked from 25th February, 1991 to 26th June,

WP(C) 5655/03

Page 3 of 5

1992 as a mali/beldar continuously. He further stated that no notice or
notice pay or service compensation was either offered or paid to the
workman.
As per Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, no
workman employed in any industry, who has been in continuous
service for not less than one year under an employer shall be
retrenched by that employer until the workman has been given one
month's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and
the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu
of such notice, wages for the period of the notice.
In the face of the above oral evidence which came from the
lips of none other than the MCD's witness, it cannot but be held that
Vijay Pal had worked continuously for a period of one year when his
services were terminated and before the MCD did so, it did not comply
with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act. It may also be noticed
that the MCD did not produce the muster roll register which was
exclusively in its possession. Had it done so, it would have revealed
whether the workman had worked from 25th February, 1991 to 26th
June, 1992.
The workman on his part had appeared as its own witness
and made assertions to the effect that his services were illegally
terminated and that he had worked continuously for a period of one
year preceding his termination. It was for the MCD to effectively rebut
his evidence either by producing the muser roll register or by leading
such other evidence as has been indicated above.

WP(C) 5655/03

The MCD did lead

Page 4 of 5

evidence but it was such that it lent support to the case of the
respondent / workman.
There is no merit in the writ petition and the same is
dismissed with no order as to costs. .

APRIL 30 , 2007
sl

WP(C) 5655/03

REKHA SHARMA, J.

Page 5 of 5

