IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Writ Petition (C) No. 3797 of 2006
Date of Decision: May 31,
Anu Mohela

…
Through:

2007

…
…
Petitioner
Mr.Umesh Sharma, Advocate
Versus

Union of India & Ors.
Through:

…
…
Respondent
Ms.Raman Oberio, Advocate for UOI
Mr.Prashant Khatana, Advocate for
respondent No.2

CORAM:
HON’BLE MISS JUSTICE REKHA SHARMA
1.

Whether Reporters of the Local Papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest? Yes

REKHA SHARMA, J.
On July 23, 2004, National Council for Promotion of Urdu
Language (hereinafter referred to as 'the respondent') advertised one
post of Junior Stenographer carrying the pay scale of Rs. 4000-1006000.

Pursuant thereto, the respondent undertook the selection

process which included holding of a written test, skill test and
interview. A panel of two candidates was prepared, one of whom, Ijju
Sumant was placed at No. 1 while the other Anu Mohela (hereinafter
referred to as 'the petitioner') at No. 2. Consequent to the selection,

WP(C) No. 3797/06

Page 1 of 5

Ijju Sumant joined the service on February 4, 2005. However, three
months thereafter on May 16, 2005, he resigned. Upon his resignation,
on June 23, 2005, the respondent sent an e-mail message to the
petitioner requesting her to visit its office on June 24, 2005.

As

desired, she went to the office and upon her visit she was asked to join
as Junior Stenographer (English) with effect from June 29, 2005 which
she did and continued to work till November 30, 2005. Thereafter, her
services were discontinued.

Aggrieved by the said action of the

respondent, she has preferred the present writ petition.
According to the petitioner, after Ijju Sumant resigned from
the post, she had a legitimate claim to be appointed against the
vacancy caused by his resignation being Number 2 on the panel. She
has alleged that though she was asked to work on the post but she was
not given any appointment letter and when she requested for issuance
of the same, the respondent without assigning any reason disengaged
her w.e.f. December 1, 2005.

She has further alleged that ignoring

her claim to the post, the respondent is proposing to fill up the same
from a departmental candidate. Therefore, she has prayed for a writ of
mandamus in the nature of a direction to the respondent to issue
appointment letter to her on the basis of selection made pursuant to
the advertisement published in the Employment News of June, 2004
and has further prayed for a direction restraining the respondent from
filling up the post from a departmental candidate.
The facts as stated by the petitioner have not been
disputed by the respondent. What has been disputed is the claim of the
WP(C) No. 3797/06

Page 2 of 5

petitioner that upon resignation of Ijju Sumant, she was entitled to be
appointed to the post on regular basis.
As per the respondent, after the appointment of Ijju
Sumant to the post, the recruitment process that was initiated
pursuant to the advertisement of June 26, 2004 came to an end and
attained finality for all purposes.

Consequently, the panel prepared

thereunder also ceased to exist. Therefore, it was submitted that the
vacancy which was caused upon the resignation of Ijju Sumant had to
be treated as a fresh vacancy and could only be filled in terms of the
Recruitment Rules which provides for filling up of the post by
promotion failing which by direct recruitment. Hence, it was the turn
of the departmental candidates to be considered for the post.
However, as the process of promotion was likely to take some time,
the petitioner was asked to take up the job in the interregnum not as a
regular Junior Stenographer but purely on contract basis as a pro-tem
measure on a consolidated remuneration of Rs. 7,000/- per month
(calculated on the basis of basic pay plus DA) without any other
allowances which are normally payable in case of appointment on
regular basis. The petitioner, it was stated was fully aware that her
appointment was not regular but on contractual basis. She has been
receiving salary from July till November, 2005 which was not as per the
pay-scale and she had been appending her signatures on the salary bill
as a contractual employee like many others who were similarly
engaged like her. Therefore, it was further stated that it was not open
to her to contend that she was given an impression that she would be

WP(C) No. 3797/06

Page 3 of 5

issued the appointment letter.
In the above facts and circumstances, the question which
arises for consideration is whether after the appointment of Ijju
Sumant, the selection process which was initiated pursuant to the
advertisement dated July 23, 2004 came to an end?
The answer is not far to seek. It is found in the judgment of
the Supreme Court in State of Punjab Vs. Raghbir Chand Sharma and
another (2002) 1 SCC 113. The Apex Court was dealing with a similar
situation. In the said case, the State of Punjab had invited applications
for the post of Assistant Advocate General.

From amongst the

applicants, a panel of three candidates was made by the Committee
which had interviewed them. The respondent was placed at Sr. No. 3
in the panel.

The first in the panel was appointed and joined the

service but resigned after about a month. The second candidate on
the select panel by his own letter expressed that he was not interested
and even if offered, would not accept the appointment.

Thereupon,

the State filled the post by promotion from a lower post. The third on
the panel staked his claim to the post but it was not accepted
whereupon he preferred a writ petition in the Punjab & Haryana High
Court which was allowed. Aggrieved by the order of the High Court,
the State came to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court reversed
the order of the High Court and held as under:“As rightly contended for the appellant State, the
notification issued inviting applications was in
respect of one post and the first candidate in the
select panel was not only offered but on his
WP(C) No. 3797/06

Page 4 of 5

acceptance of offer came to be appointed and it
was only subsequently that he came to resign.
With the appointment of the first candidate for the
only post in respect of which the consideration
came to be made and select panel prepared, the
panel ceased to exist and has outlived its utility
and, at any rate, no one else in the panel can
legitimately contend that he should have been
offered appointment either in the vacancy arising
on account of the subsequent resignation of the
person appointed from the panel or any other
vacancies arising subsequently.”
The facts of the present case are almost identical to the
afore-mentioned judgment of the Apex Court. Here also the selection
was made for one post and a panel was prepared as in the case before
the Supreme Court.

In this case too, the first person on the select

panel resigned the post after joining. The Supreme Court, as has been
noticed above has held that after the appointment of the first
candidate for the only post, the panel ceases to exist. I am bound by
the judgment of the Supreme Court. Accordingly, following the same, I
hold that the petitioner has no right to the post of Junior Stenographer
(English) on the basis of her selection pursuant to the advertisement
published in the Employment News of June, 2004. The writ petition is
accordingly dismissed.

May 31, 2007.
g/sl

WP(C) No. 3797/06

REKHA SHARMA, J.

Page 5 of 5

