*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 15424-27/2006

#
!

WG.CDR Y.S.SOLANKI RETD. & ORS
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. B. S. Maan, Adv.

Date of Decision: 4th April, 2008

versus
$
^

UOI & ORS.

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see

Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. Gaurav Sarin, Mr. Ms. Charul
Sarin and Mr. Yatinder Chaudhary,
Advs. for DDA.
Ms. Monika Garg and Ms. Parminder
Kaur, Adv. for R-1, UOI.
Mr. R. C. Ray with Mr. H. P. Sahu,
Advs for L&B.
Mr. Sanjay Kumar Pathak, Adv. for
Respondent-L&B Deptt.

the judgment? Not necessary.
Not necessary.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Not
necessary.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J(oral)
This writ petition calls in question a preliminary notification dated
07.09.2005 issued under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act and a final
declaration dated 07.09.2006 issued under Section 6 of the Land
Acquisition Act whereunder a parcel of land measuring 1 bigha situated
in Khasra No. 178/2, Village, Shahbad Mohammedpur, New Delhi has
WP(C) 15424-27/2006

Page 1 of 4

been notified for acquisition for the public purposes of planned
development of Delhi.
2.

Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Maan made a solitary submission

in support of the challenge mounted in the writ petition. He submitted
that even in the year 1984 the land in question had been notified for
acquisition by the Government but was excluded from the process of
acquisition in the light of the objections filed by the father of the
petitioner. The objection, precisely, was that the land in question
constituted a Samadhi built in the memory of the mother of the petitioner
who was cremated at the place where a Samadhi stands erected, is in the
form of a tomb, 15 feet tall. He urged that in response to the impugned
notification the petitioner had filed objections before the Collector and
pointed out that the land in question had been earlier exempted from
acquisition and could not, therefore, be notified again. This objection
was, according to Mr. Maan, neither noticed nor discussed by the
Collector which rendered the acquisition proceedings illegal hence liable
to be quashed.
3.

Mr. Ray, counsel appearing for the Collector, Land Acquisition

further drew our attention to the official record of Collector and argued
that the contention urged by Mr. Maan regarding the non-consideration
of objections filed by the land owner was factually incorrect. He argued
on the basis of the said record that the objections to the acquisition of
the land, based on the exclusion from acquisition in the year 1984, had
not only been noted by the Collector but rejected in specific terms. There
was, therefore, no failure on the part of the Collector to deal with the
WP(C) 15424-27/2006

Page 2 of 4

objections raised by petitioner to warrant interference with the
acquisition proceedings.
4.

A perusal of official record, in particular the report submitted by

the Collector, reveals that he was conscious of the land in question
having been earlier exempted on the ground that a Samadhi had been
built in the memory of the mother of the petitioner. The question,
therefore, is whether the exemption of any such land in the first round of
acquisition proceedings would exempt for good the said land even when
it is admittedly required for the construction of a 30 meter wide sector
road in Sector 22 of Dwarka. Our answer to that question is in the
negative. In fairness to Mr. Maan we may mention that he did not dispute
the legal position that Samadhies erected are not exempt from
acquisition proceedings so long as the purpose for the acquisition is a
public purpose and the procedure established by law is strictly followed.
It is also not in dispute that land in question has been notified and is
being acquired for a road which is obviously a public purpose. The only
question then is whether the procedure established by law is being
properly followed. Our answer to that is in the affirmative as the
respondents have issued the requisite preliminary notification followed
by a declaration, upon consideration of the report filed by the Collector
under Section 5A in which he has dealt with the objections raised by the
land owner. In the circumstances, therefore, the mere fact that on an
earlier occasion the land in question has been exempted from acquisition,
would not mean that said land is exempted from acquisition for good.
With the change in time and the emerging need for acquisition, if the
WP(C) 15424-27/2006

Page 3 of 4

authorities come to the conclusion that the acquisition is inevitable there
is no reason why they should be prevented from doing it.
5.

Mr. Maan next argued that the aspect regarding the shifting of the

Samadhi could be examined by a committee nominated by the DDA. He
urged that the petitioner may be permitted to approach the said
committee for allotment of an alternative plot of land for shifting of the
Samadhi. Mr. Sarin on the other hand pointed out that the said
committee was examining only cases of religious institutions and other
places which are visited by the people out of devotion to the person in
whose memory the same have been erected. It is not the case of the
petitioner that the Samadhi has attained any public character or is place
of worship. There is, therefore, no room for any interference. We do not
for the present wish to make any comment as to whether the petitioner
has a remedy before the Committee. All that we now say is that if the
petitioner is advised to file a representation to the Committee, the
committee shall be free to examine the same and pass appropriate order
having regard to the nature of the brief it holds and the scope of its
powers and jurisdiction. With these observations the writ petition fails
and is accordingly dismissed. No costs.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

APRIL 04, 2008
mk

WP(C) 15424-27/2006

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J.

Page 4 of 4

