*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 8090/2007

#

ASHWANI GARG

!

Date of Decision: 8th April, 2008
..... Petitioner

Through:

Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Adv.

versus
$
^

N.D.M.C

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see

Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. Arvind Shah, Adv.

the judgment? Yes.
Yes.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J(oral)
The petitioner is a contractor by profession. He has, in this petition,
assailed the validity of Clause 17 of the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT),
issued by

the respondent-New

Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC),

according to which any contractor who has a near relative posted as a
Divisional Accountant or as an officer in any capacity between the grades
of Engineer in Chief and Junior Engineer in the NDMC is not eligible.
2.

The petitioner argues that the condition aforementioned offends his

fundamental right to carry on his trade and profession guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. A similar question arose for
WP(C) 8090/2007

Page 1 of 4

consideration before a Division Bench of this Court in S.N. Engineering

Works vs. Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd.: 1996 (37) DRJ (DB) 446.
The Court was in that case examining a similar disability arising in terms
of a tender condition stipulated by the MTNL.

As in the present case,

the tender condition stipulated by the MTNL also stated that a contractor
would be ineligible for submitting a tender in case any of his near
relative was posted as JAO/AAO/AO or an officer in any capacity between
the grades of SE and AE, both inclusive. The question, therefore, was
whether the said condition was violative of the fundamental right
guaranteed to the petitioner/contractor to carry on his profession as a
contractor. Relying upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in CK

Achuten v. State of Kerala: AIR 1959 SC 490, Raamana Daya Rama
Shetty v. IAAI: AIR 1979 SC 1628, Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy v. The
State of Jammu & Kashmir: AIR 1980 SC 1992, Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya
Kapur & Ors v. State of Punjab: AIR 1955 SC 549, State of Madras v.
V.G. Row: AIR 1952 SC 196, and Narayan Dass v. State of M.P.: AIR 1974
SC 1232, the Division Bench held that the condition under challenge was
not offensive to Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. The Court
observed:
“It follows that the petitioners were not entitled to
bid tenders with the MTNL. Even at the risk of
repetition we may state and sum up that the
petitioners have not been totally prohibited from
carrying on the activity of digging ducts, trenching,
laying cable lines and pulling cables through ducts
WP(C) 8090/2007

Page 2 of 4

and allied works. All that the respondent has done is
to restrain itself from entering into the contract with
such contractors as have their relations of defined
category serving in the MTNL. As the test of eligibility
is to be applied on the date of bidding the tenders and
maintained throughout the execution of the work
under the contract, the question

whether such

relation in the MTNL has actually influenced the
tender or the work is immaterial. What is sought to be
achieved is avoiding the possibility of such influence
being

exercised

and

maintaining

fairness

and

neatness in the dealings of MTNL. The restriction can
be imposed by an executive fiat and is neither
arbitrary nor unreasonable. It does not offend Art. 14
of the Constitution. It satisfies the test laid down by
the Supreme Court in the State of Madras vs V.G. Rao
(Supra)
3.

The above decision was then followed by a Single Bench of this

Court in Hindustan Trading Corporation & Anr. v. Mahanagar Telephone

Nigam Ltd. & others: 75(1998) DLT 399. There also a similar question
had fallen for consideration of the Court and the stipulation contained in
the NIT assailed as being offensive to Article 19(1)(g).
4.

In the light of the above two decisions which are directly on the

point, we see no room for taking a different view. The argument that,
since the prohibition is total the option of prescribing a lesser alternative
WP(C) 8090/2007

Page 3 of 4

should have been explored, has not impressed us. The prohibition, in our
opinion, is not total as argued by the learned counsel. It is not as though
the petitioner is totally barred from carrying on his profession as a
contractor. It is only qua contracts in the NDMC where the petitioner’s
brother is working as a Junior Engineer that the petitioner falls within
the purview of the disabling provision contained in the NIT. The
petitioner is indeed free to carry on his profession as a contractor in
respect

of

other

contracts

offered

by

any

government

or

non-

governmental agency.
5.

There is no merit in this writ petition which fails and is hereby

dismissed but in the circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J.
APRIL 08, 2008
mk

WP(C) 8090/2007

Page 4 of 4

