*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) ) 8472/2007

Date of Decision: 9th April, 2008

#
!

RICHARDSON & CRUDDAS LTD. EMPLOYEES UNION & ANR.... Petitioner
Through:
Mr. D.S. Narula with Ms.Manmeet
Arora and Mr. A.S. Narula,
Advocates
versus

$
^

UOI & ORS.

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see

Through:

the judgment?

..... Respondents
Mr. J.P. Sengh, Sr. Advocate with
Ms.Rimple Jain, Advocates for
respondent No.9.
Mr. Ranvir singh with Mr. Varun
Tyagi, Advocates for Respondent
No.2.
Mr. Ashish Dholakia with Mr.Adarsh
Priyadarshi, Advocates for
respondents.
Mr. Anurag Mathur, Advocate for
SBI.

Not necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?Not necessary
JUDGMENT

Per Thakur, J(oral)
1.

Respondent No.2 – M/s Richardson & Cruddas (1972) Ltd. is a wholly

W.P.(C) No. 8472/2007

Page 1 of 5

Government owned company which has gone sick for the past nearly fifteen
years resulting in a reference being made for its rehabilitation before the
BIFR under Sick Industrial Company (Special Provisions) Act, 1985. Efforts
appear to have been made to explore the possibilities of its rehabilitation by
appointing different operating agencies and inviting different rehabilitation
proposals from them. The BIFR, eventually, came to the conclusion that the
company could not be revived and that the only option left was to wind-up
the same. An order directing winding up of the company was accordingly
passed by the BIFR on 25th July, 2003.

Aggrieved by the said order, the

Government of India, the Sick Industrial Company concerned and the
workers employed in the same, filed three different appeals before the
Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, New Delhi.
While the said appeals were pending the petitioner Employees Union
appears to have presented a draft scheme before the Appellate Authority for
the proposed rehabilitation of the company. That scheme was referred by
the AAIFR to the operating agency, namely, the State Bank of India for the
same and submitted to the AAIFR on 7th February, 2005. The petitioner’s
case appears to be that the scheme so approved by the operating agency
was upon consideration by the AAIFR duly sanctioned and circulated.

No

such order of sanction or specific approval of the scheme has been passed
by the AAIFR or is available on record.

On the contrary, the AAIFR has by an

order dated 24th September, 2007 impugned in this writ petition recorded a
specific finding that the scheme presented by the operating agency was not
W.P.(C) No. 8472/2007

Page 2 of 5

tenable and could not, therefore, be circulated. The AAIFR was of the opinion
that a fresh revival proposal had to be formulated which could then be
considered by the BIFR after giving an opportunity to the parties concerned
to submit their respective proposals. The AAIFR observed:“Having regard to the submissions of the Govt. and
other parties, the facts and circumstances of the case,
the different considerations discussed earlier we are of
the opinion that there are tenable reasons why the
revival proposal as it has been prepared by the O.A.
cannot be circulated.
In our view, a fresh revival
proposal, instead, has to be formulated. We are of the
opinion that the company can be revived through a
disinvestment process which is being increasingly
followed by Govt. of India provided it is done in a fair and
transparent manner and having regard to the norms
which have been laid down by the Apex Court in the
Balco case and other cases relating to disinvestment.
We, therefore, allow the Appeal 395/03 filed by the
Union of India and set aside the winding up order dated
25.07.03 passed by BIFR and remand the case to BIFR
and direct that the parties concerned must approach the
BIFR within a period of 8 weeks from the date of this
order with concrete propositions, plan of action and
obtain further detailed directions from BIFR and,
thereafter, submit a proposal as expeditiously as
possible within the timeframe to be decided by BIFR to
enable the Board thereafter to proceed further according
to law.”
The present writ petition filed by the Union assails the above direction.
Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Narula, made a two fold submission
before us. Firstly, he contended that keeping in view the observations made
by AAIFR in the order under challenge the Board of Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction was likely to get prejudiced against the scheme presented by
the Union while considering the proposals for revival of the company. He
W.P.(C) No. 8472/2007

Page 3 of 5

contended that the petitioner Union could be protected against any such
prejudice by making a suitable observation to that effect.

Secondly, he

argued that the efforts for revival of the sick company have remained
pending before the BIFR for a considerable period of time and unless this
Court were to fix a timeframe within which the entire issue is examined and
finally disposed of, the matter is likely to hang fire for an indefinitely long
time to come.
M/s J.P. Sengh and Ranvir Singh, counsel appearing for the respondents
have no objection to both these submissions being accepted and this Court
making appropriate observations in regard to the same. It was submitted by
them that since the matter has been remanded back to the BIFR for
reconsideration of the proposals, all the parties are free to file their revised
proposal and advance arguments in support of the same, in which event the
BIFR would examine the merits of each proposal and take appropriate
measures.

So also any observation made by this Court regarding

expeditious conclusion of the proceedings would be in the interest of all
concerned.
In the circumstances, therefore, and keeping in view the statements
made above, we dispose of this petition with the observation that the BIFR
shall not, while reconsidering the revival proposal given by the operating
agency and which the other parties may file before it in terms of the order
passed by the AAIFR, be prejudiced by any observation made by the AAIFR in
regard to the feasibility, or otherwise, of any scheme presented before it.
W.P.(C) No. 8472/2007

Page 4 of 5

The BIFR shall be free to take an objective view of the matter on a fair and
proper consideration and evaluation of the revival proposal presented before
it in terms of the order made by the AAIFR including that which the petitioner
Union may choose to make. That should, in our opinion, take care of the
apprehension expressed by the petitioner.

As regards the apprehension

regarding the matter continuing to hang fire for an indefinite period, we are
of the view that since the case has been pending for nearly fifteen years or
so, the BIFR would do well to expedite the conclusion of the proceedings and
pass appropriate orders on the subject as early as possible and preferably
within a period of one year. No costs.

ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J
APRIL 09, 2008
ns

W.P.(C) No. 8472/2007

Page 5 of 5

