*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA 74/1998

#

SAVITRI DEVI NIJHAWAN

!

Date of Decision: 8th May, 2008
..... Appellant

Through:

Mr. Rishi Kesh, Adv.

versus
$
^

NEMA NARAIN SHARMA
Through:

..... Respondent
Respondent in person

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment? Not necessary.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Not necessary.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

in the Digest? Not

necessary.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J(oral)
This appeal arises out of a judgment and decree passed by the
court of Additional District Judge in a suit for recovery of arrears of rent.
The court below has, while decreeing the suit recorded a clear finding to
the effect that the rate of rent settled between the parties was Rs.500/per month and not Rs.2000/-, as alleged by the plaintiff-appellant. It has
accordingly decreed the suit for a period of 3 years @ Rs.500/- per month
besides Rs.25/- towards water charges. Aggrieved, the plaintiff-appellant
has filed the present appeal seeking a decree for arrears @ Rs.2000/- per
month.
RFA 74/1998

Page 1 of 2

2.

When this appeal came up for hearing before us on 30th April, 2008,

learned counsel for the parties and the parties who were also present in
person, agreed that the entire claim in the suit could be amicably settled
upon payment of a sum of Rs.36000/- (rupees thirty six thousand) by the
defendant-respondent in full and final settlement of the suit claim. This
appeal was accordingly adjourned to enable the respondent-judgment
debtor to arrange the payment of the aforementioned amount. The
respondent has today handed over to Smt. Chand Passi the legal
representative of late Smt. Savitri Devi Nijhawan, a bank draft of
Rs.36000/-, drawn on Indian Overseas Bank which the latter has
accepted in full and final settlement of the claim made by her in the suit
as also the present appeal. The parties submit that in the light of the
above payment this appeal can be disposed of as fully settled and the
liability

outstanding against the respondent fully

and completely

discharged.
3.

In the result, this appeal is disposed of as settled, in the light of the

submissions made at Bar and the payment which the parties have made
and received pursuant to the same. Decree passed by the Trial Court
shall to that extent stand modified.
4.

Parties are left to bear their own costs.

ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE, J.

MAY 08, 2008
mk
RFA 74/1998

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J.

Page 2 of 2

