*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA 163/2008

#

PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK

!

Date of Decision: 1st May, 2008

Through:

..... Appellant
Mr. S. S. Katyal and Mr. Rajesh
Katyal, Advs. with Mr. K.L.
Jagga, AGM of appellant.

versus
$
^

AMRIT KAUR

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see

Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. Vipin Nandwani, Adv.
alongwith respondent in person.

the judgment? Not necessary.
Not necessary.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Not
necessary.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J(oral)
This appeal arises out of a judgment and decree passed by the
Court of Additional District Judge, Delhi in Suit No. 39/2006/2005 filed by
the plaintiff-respondent for possession of a commercial premises
comprising

the

basement,

ground

floor

and

mezzanine

with

an

approximate covered area of 1940 Sq. ft., situated at Community Centre,
Mayapuri, Phase-I, New Delhi. The appellant, it appears, has been
running one of its branches from the said premises. Since the contractual
RFA 163/2008

Page 1 of 4

period of tenancy agreed between the parties had expired, the plaintiffrespondent appears to have filed the suit mentioned above for vacation of
the premises upon failure of the tenant occupant to vacate the same.
That same was decreed by judgment and order dated 18.03.2008 passed
in favour of the respondent-plaintiff with a direction holding the plaintiff
entitled to recovery of compensation for use and occupation of the
premises @ Rs.70,000/-(rupees seventy thousand) per month for the
period from 1st October, 2004 onwards till the date the premises is
vacated by the bank. The present appeal seeks to assail the correctness
of the said decree as already indicated earlier.
2.

When the matter came up before us on 23rd April, 2008 for

admission, learned counsel for the parties made a joint request for a
short adjournment to enable them to explore the possibility of an
amicable settlement. The parties have today appeared to report
settlement mutually arrived at between them. Mr. K.L. Jagga, Assistant
General Manager of the appellant-bank has made a statement which has
been separately recorded by us, inter alia, stating that the bank would be
ready and willing to vacate the premises, if time till 31st December, 2009
is granted to it for that purpose. He further stated that the bank would be
ready to pay compensation for use and occupation of the premises @
Rs.70,000/- per month for the entire period commencing 1st October,
2004 till 31st December, 2009 or earlier when the premises is vacated.
3.

That prayer is acceptable to Mr. Nandwani, counsel appearing for

the plaintiff-respondent who has no objection to the grant of time subject
to the condition that the appellate-bank pays the arrears recoverable
RFA 163/2008

Page 2 of 4

from it within the time stipulated by this Court and continues to pay the
current user charges at the rate mentioned above till the date the
premises is vacated.
4.

In the circumstances, therefore, it is unnecessary for us to examine

the grounds of challenge set out in the memo of appeal, for the parties
are agreeable to the arrangement that has been worked out between
them under which all that needs to be done is to grant time to the
appellant to vacate the premises by the 31st December, 2009 on the
conditions referred to earlier. We accordingly affirm the judgment and
decree passed by the Trial Court, dismiss this appeal and grant time to
appellant to vacate the premises by the 31st December, 2009 subject to
the following conditions:
1. The

appellant

pays/deposits

in

the

account

of

plaintiff-

respondent arrears of compensation for use and occupation of
the premises, calculated @ Rs.70,000/- per month less the
amount already paid and the TDS, if any, deducted. The service
tax liability, if any, shall, in relation to the premises, be
discharged by the respondent. The amount of arrears shall be
calculated and deposited within 4 weeks. The amount of costs
awarded by the Trial Court shall also be deposited in the
account of the respondent within same period.
2. The bank pays on a regular basis current user charges @
Rs.70,000/- per month less TDS by the 10th of every calendar
month. In the event of 2 defaults in payment of the said charges
the decree passed by the Trial Court in favour of the respondent
RFA 163/2008

Page 3 of 4

shall become executable forthwith.
3. In the event of the failure of the bank to vacate the premises
voluntarily by 31st December, 2009, in keeping with the
undertaking given in the statement made by the Assistant
General Manager of the appellant-bank, the decree holder shall
be free to execute the decree apart from instituting appropriate
proceedings for disobedience/contempt in accordance with law
5.

No costs.

6.

Dasti.
ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J.
MAY 01, 2008
mk

RFA 163/2008

Page 4 of 4

