*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 20509/2005

#

KUSTH ASHA DEEP FEDERATION

!

Date of Decision: 6th May, 2008

Through:

..... Petitioner

Mr. Brahm Dutt and Mr. Vinay
Garg, Advs.

versus
$
^

GOVT. OF N.C.T. OF DELHI & ORS
..... Respondent
Through:
Ms. Zubeda Begum, Adv.

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment? Not necessary.
Not necessary.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

in the Digest? Not

necessary.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J(oral)
This petition has been filed in public interest alleging rampant
corruption in the implementation of Integrated Child Development
Services(ICDS) schemes formulated by the Department of Social Welfare.
These schemes are intended to provide supplementary nutrition,
immunization, health checkup and referral services to children below six
years,

pregnant

and

nursing

mothers

and

non-formal

pre-school

education to children etc. In Delhi alone there are about 28 such projects
being run by the Department of Social Welfare including those at
WP(C) 20509/2005

Page 1 of 5

Shahdara, Govindpuri, Seemapuri, Nand Nagri, Wazirpur, Sangam Vihar
and Okhla.
2.

The petition alleges that the purchases of a number of items for

utilization and consumption in connection with the above projects are
made by the concerned officers of the Government of NCT of Delhi and in
the course of such purchases amounts are misappropriated to the
detriment of the beneficiaries of the schemes in question. A number of
irregularities are alleged to have been noticed in the implementation of
the schemes in the course of a special audit of expenditure incurred
during the financial year 1997-98. The petitioner in that backdrop prays
for a mandamus directing the respondent to investigate the matter in
relation to the misappropriation of the funds and to recover the funds
meant for the children and other beneficiaries of the schemes from the
concerned officers of the State Government. Directions for initiating
disciplinary action against the officers responsible for misconduct,
misuse of official position, violation of the rules and norms for the
purchase of the supplies have also been prayed for apart from a direction
for conducting an audit for all the projects and the funds spent on the
same.
3.

A series of interim orders were passed by this Court in the present

writ petition from time to time with a view to finding out whether the
allegations of misappropriation and misdirection of funds were factually
correct.

By

an

order

dated

22nd

November,

2007,

the

Deputy

Commissioner (Enforcement) of Sales Tax Department was directed to
complete the investigation and report about the genuineness of the firms
WP(C) 20509/2005

Page 2 of 5

from whom the supplies meant for the use of ICDS were purchased. This
was followed by another order dated 15th February, 2008 in which the
direction for completion of the investigation was reiterated and the
officers concerned were directed to verify the genuineness of the
establishments from whom the purchases were made by reference to the
year during which the same were made.
4.

Ms. Zubeda Begum, has pursuant to the above directions filed an

additional affidavit dated 04.04.2008 sworn by Sh. Arun Kumar Mishra,
Deputy Commissioner (Enforcement), Sales Tax Department apart from
an affidavit sworn by Sh. S. K. Saxena, Director, Department of Women &
Child Development, Govt. of NCT of Delhi. From reading of the affidavit
filed by Deputy Commissioner (Enforcement), Sales Tax Department, it
would appear that most of the firms being investigated were not
registered with the Sales Tax Department with the result that it was
difficult to verify its existence during the year 1997-98. The affidavit filed
by the Director, Department of Women and Child Development, on the
other hand, points out that a detailed enquiry was conducted into the
genuineness of the firms from which local purchases were made in
connection with the schemes. The enquiry revealed that the purchases
were made from concerns that were in existence, although, the same
were not registered with the Sales Tax Department. The affidavit further
states that the ICDS schemes were being directly monitored by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court and that by an order dated 7th October, 2004
passed by their Lordships in Peoples Union of Civil Liberties vs. Union of

India and Ors., WP NO. 196/2001,
WP(C) 20509/2005

the Apex Court has, inter alia,
Page 3 of 5

directed that “the contractors shall not be used for supply of nutrition in
Anganwadis and preferably ICDS funds shall be spent by making use of
village communities, self-help groups and Mahila Mandals for buying of
grains and preparation of meals.” Ms. Zubeda Begum has also placed on
record a copy of order dated 30th May, 2007, rejecting the closure report
submitted by the investigating agency in FIR No. 22/2003 and directing
further

investigation

in

the

matter

relating

to

the

alleged

misappropriation of funds by the officers concerned. She submitted that
in the light of the investigation which is in progress as also the fact that
the matter is being directly monitored by the Supreme Court there is no
necessity or justification for any further enquiry or investigation in the
present proceedings.
5.

There is, in our opinion, considerable merit in the submission made

by Ms. Zubeda Begum. Although, by different orders passed from time to
time in these proceedings, an effort was made to verify whether there
was anything stark in terms of misappropriation of funds to call for any
directions from this court, the reports submitted, do not warrant any
further monitoring or investigation by this Court in exercise of its public
interest jurisdiction. That is so because the jurisdictional police is already
seized of the matter and is investigating FIR NO. 22/2003 in terms of the
directions issued by the Special Judge, Tis Hazari Court, Delhi referred
above. That apart the question whether the schemes formulated for the
benefit of the weaker sections of the society especially children and
women, were being properly implemented, is being directly examined by
their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the petition filed by Peoples
WP(C) 20509/2005

Page 4 of 5

Union of Civil Liberties vs. Union of India in which the Supreme Court
has issued a comprehensive direction reported in 2006 (13) Scale 399.
6.

In the light of the pendency of the said proceedings as also the

pendency of the investigation with the concerned police agency we see
no need for any further directions in the present writ petition except that
the

investigating

agency

shall

expedite

the

completion

of

the

investigation and submit a proper report to the jurisdictional court no
sooner the same is completed. The writ petition is, with the above
direction, disposed of.
7.

Parties shall bear their own costs.

ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE

MAY 06, 2008
mk

WP(C) 20509/2005

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J

Page 5 of 5

