*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA 501/2007

#
!

SHASHI MANCHANDA
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Sunil Malhotra, Advocate
versus

$
^

AJAY KUMAR SABHARWAL & ANR
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Sanjay Gupta, Advocate

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?

Date of Decision:

15th May, 2008

Not necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not necessary
JUDGMENT

Per Thakur, J(oral)
1.

This appeal arises out of a final decree passed by the Court

of Additional District Judge, Delhi in a suit for partition filed by
respondent No.1 against the appellant and respondent No.2. The
parties have now filed a joint application under Order 23 Rule 3 of
the CPC for disposal of the appeal on terms that have been
RFA No. 33/2008

Page No. 1 of 3

mutually agreed between the parties.

The terms of settlement

have been enumerated in para 9 (a) to (e) of the said application.
Counsel for the parties submit that the appeal can be disposed of
in terms of the said terms which read as under:“(a) That the appellant shall pay a sum of Rs.78 lacs (Rs.39
lacs each) to the respondents namely, Shri Ajay Sabharwal &
Smt. Mamta Kochar, towards the agreed value of their
respective share in the said purpose, within a period of 2
months from the date of the recording of this settlement by
this Hon’ble Court on 15.05.2008.
(b) That on the payment of this sum of Rs.78 lacs by the
appellant to the Respondents, the appellant shall become
absolute owner of property No.2A/42, Ramesh Nagar, New
Delhi and the respondents shall be left with no right, title or
interest of any kind whatsoever in respect of the property
No.2A/42, Ramesh Nagar, New Delhi.
(c) That the respondent Shri Ajay Sabharwal has handed
over the copy of the sale deed/conveyance deed of property
No.2A/42, Ramesh Nagar, New Delhi to the appellant. Upon
receipt of aforesaid amount by the respondents, the
respondents shall hand over the original title deed to the
appellant alongwith all other original documents pertaining
to the property No.2A/42, Ramesh Nagar, New Delhi.
(d) That in the event of the appellant not praying a sum of
Rs.78 Lacs (Rupees Seventy Eight Lacs only) to the
respondents within a period of 2 months, the respondents
shall pay a sum of Rs.39 lacs to the appellant towards the
agreed value of her share in the said purpose within a period
of 2 months thereafter and upon receipt f the same the
appellant shall be left with no right, that or title in the
property in any manner whatsoever. The appellant shall
execute all the documents for the transfer of the transfer of
RFA No. 33/2008

Page No. 2 of 3

the property No.2A/42, Ramesh Nagar, New Delhi in favour
of the respondents.
(e) That the parties undertake to sign and execute all other
necessary documents, as required by concerned authorities
to transfer of name of the owner in their records.”
2.

In the circumstances, therefore, and keeping in view the

settlement arrived at between the parties, we see no reason why
a decree on the above terms should not be passed in favour of
the parties in modification of the decree made by the Court
below. We, accordingly, allow this appeal to the extent indicated
above and direct that in substitution of the decree passed by the
Trial Court, the suit filed by respondent No.1 shall stand decreed
on the terms indicated in para 9 (a) to (e) of the application
extracted above.
3.

The parties shall bear their own costs.

T.S. THAKUR, J

MAY 15, 2008
ns

RFA No. 33/2008

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J

Page No. 3 of 3

