*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA No. 31/2008

#
!

Rajesh Bansal & Anr.
Through:

Date of Decision: 14th May, 2008
..... Appellant
Mr. Amit Jagga, Adv.

Versus
$
^

Shashi Bhushan Dhamija
Through:

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?

..... Respondent
Mr. Naveen Pushkarna, Adv.

Not necessary.
Not necessary.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

in the Digest? Not

necessary.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J(oral)
This appeal arises out of an order passed by the Court of Additional
District Judge, Delhi in a suit for recovery of a sum of Rs.9,71,384/-.
Since the suit was filed under Order 37 of the CPC. The appellants
appear to have made an application for leave to defend which application
has been dismissed by the court below holding that the same did not
disclose any triable issue. The suit was consequently decreed aggrieved
whereof the appellants have filed the present appeal.
When the appeal came up before us for admission today, Mr. Jagga,
counsel for the appellant made a statement which we have separately
RFA No. 31/2008

Page 1 of 3

recorded, that the appellants are ready and willing to deposit the entire
suit amount in the Trial Court as a condition precedent for the grant of
leave to defend the suit. Learned counsel for the respondent has also
made a statement which too has been separately recorded stating that
the plaintiff/respondent is agreeable to the matter being remitted back
for a full fledged trial provided the appellants deposit the entire suit
amount in the Trial Court.
In the circumstances, therefore, and keeping in view the broad
agreement that has been arrived at between the parties, we are of the
view that the impugned judgment and decree can be set aside and the
appellants granted leave to defend the suit subject to their depositing the
entire suit amount in the Trial Court.
We, accordingly, allow the appeal set aside the impugned judgment
and decree, grant leave to the appellants to defend the suit and remit the
matter back to the Trial Court for a full fledged trial, subject to the
appellants depositing the entire suit amount in the said court within a
period of six weeks from today. We make it clear that, in case, the entire
suit amount is not deposited by the defendant/appellant within the time
allowed by this Court, this appeal shall stand dismissed without any
further reference to the Court. The Trial Court shall, upon deposit of the
amount, invest the same in a term deposit to enure for the benefit of the
successful party in the suit.
The appeal is with the above direction, disposed of, leaving the
parties to bear their own costs.

RFA No. 31/2008

Page 2 of 3

The parties are directed to appear before the Trial Court for
direction on 26th May, 2008.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

MAY 14, 2008
ns

RFA No. 31/2008

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J.

Page 3 of 3

