*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 2034/2008

#
!

RAJENDRA DORIAN PUNJ

Date of Decision: 20th March, 2008

Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Harish Malhotra, Senior Advocate
with Mr. Anupam Sharma, Adv.

versus
$
^

I.F.C.I. & ORS.

..... Respondent
Through:

Mr. Atul Sharma, Adv. for IFCI.

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment? Not necessary.
Not necessary.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

in the Digest? Not

necessary.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J(oral)
This Writ Petition arises out of an order passed by the Debt
Recovery Tribunal (DRT) substituting the LRs of the deceased, Sh. V. P.
Punj-defendant no.2 in OA No. 16/2003 and an order passed by the Debt
Recovery Appellate Tribunal (DRAT) dismissing the appeal against the
said order. The controversy arises in the following circumstances:
2.

OA No. 16/2003 was filed before the DRT, Delhi by the respondent-

IFCI for the recovery of a sum of Rs.55.12 crores. Among others,
WP(C) 2034/2007

Page 1 of 6

deceased defendant no.2 was represented in the said OM by M/s U. K.
Chaudhary and Associates. A perusal of the interim orders passed by the
Tribunal, copies whereof have been filed by the Petitioner, shows that
deceased-defendant no.2 was represented by his counsel till as late as
05.10.2006. On 08.10.2006, Sh. Punj passed away, whereupon the
plaintiff, respondent/Bank appears to have filed IA No. 139/2007 seeking
substitution of the LRs of the deceased Sh. Punj. The Tribunal examined
the said IA and allowed the prayer for substitution without issuing any
notice to the proposed LRs, one of whom is the Petitioner in the present
Writ Petition. Aggrieved by the said order the Petitioner preferred
Miscellaneous Appeal No. 6/2008 before the DRAT, Delhi to inter alia
argue that the Tribunal had committed a mistake in not issuing notice to
proposed LRs and also that the suit had, on account of the failure of the
plaintiff to substitute the LRs of Sh. Punj, abated. It was also contended
that the application for substitution filed by the plaintiff, respondent
herein was beyond the period of limitation prescribed for the same. By its
order dated 26.02.2008, the Appellate Tribunal has dismissed the said
appeal and upheld the order of substitution passed by the DRT. The
present Writ Petition, as already noticed above, assails the correctness of
the said two orders.
3.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length and

perused the record. The material facts are not in dispute before us. It is
not in dispute that Sh. Punj had engaged a counsel and was represented
in the proceedings before the DRT till as late as 05.10.2006. It is also not
in dispute that Sh. Punj passed away on 08.10.2006 but the counsel
WP(C) 2034/2007

Page 2 of 6

appearing on his behalf had not reported the said event to the Tribunal at
any point of time. An application for substitution of the LRs was filed by
the counsel for plaintiff-respondent on 09.04.2007. The application inter

alia stated that the plaintiff-respondent had come to know about the
death of Sh. Punj in the connected proceedings in which the counsel
appearing on his behalf had informed the counsel for the plaintiff about
that development. The Tribunal had taken note of these facts and allowed
the substitution, bringing on record the only two legal representatives
left behind by Sh. Punj. It was in the above background argued by Mr.
Malhotra, Senior Advocate for the Petitioner that the Tribunal committed
an error of law and procedure both. Firstly, it should have but did not
issue any notice to the proposed LRs of the application filed for the
substitution and secondly, the Tribunal ought to have first set aside the
abatement before directing the substitution of the LRs. Mr. Malhotra,
however, fairly conceded that the Petitioner and his sister-respondent
no.3 of this petition were the only two legal representatives left behind
by Sh. Punj. It is also not in dispute that the Appellate Tribunal had made
it clear that the substitution of the petitioner and his sister would limit
their liability to the extent of the estate of the deceased in their hands.
Such being the position, the only question is – “whether the failure of the
Tribunal to issue a notice to the proposed LRs vitiates the order passed
by it?” Our answer to that question is in negative. It is true that, in the
ordinary course, any Court or Tribunal, dealing with an application for
substitution of LRs ought to issue a notice to proposed LRs and hear
them before passing an order of substitution, but the very fact that such
WP(C) 2034/2007

Page 3 of 6

a notice was not given does not in the peculiar facts and circumstances of
the present case, make any material difference. So long as, petitioner
and his sister do not allege that there are any other LRs who were
required to be brought on record and so long as they do not deny their
relationship with the deceased or the fact of his estate having fallen in
their hands, the non-issue of a notice makes little difference.
4.

The alternative submission of Mr. Malhotra, that the substitution

ought to have been preceded by an order of setting aside of abatement
and that absence of such an order vitiated the substitution itself has not
impressed us. It is correct to say that the failure of the plaintiff to
substitute the LRs of the deceased in a case where the cause of action
survives against them results in the abatement of the suit against the
deceased and his LRs. But the very fact that an order of substitution is
made without a formal direction regarding setting aside of such
abatement will not necessarily constitute an irregularity of a kind that
would prove fatal to the substitution order. On the contrary, we are of
the view that once the Court directs substitution, on being satisfied that
the application is within time, the absence of a formal order directing
setting aside of abatement would not invalidate the order of substitution.
The order of substitution must in itself be deemed to be setting aside the
abatement if any.
5.

The factual position, in the present case, is that the deceased was

represented all through in the proceedings and at no stages was a
statement made by his counsel before the Tribunal about his death. This
was necessary if Order 22 of the CPC, upon which reliance was placed
WP(C) 2034/2007

Page 4 of 6

by Mr. Malhotra was

applicable. Order 22 Rule 10A is in this regard

relevant. It reads:
“10A. Duty of pleader to communicate to Court
death of a party.– Whenever a pleader appearing
for a party to the suit comes to know of the death of
that party, he shall inform the Court about it, and
the Court shall thereupon give notice of such death
to the other party, and, for this purpose, the
contract between the pleader and the deceased
party shall be deemed to subsist.”
6.

The Pleader for the deceased having failed in his duty to report the

death of his client, it is not open to the LRs left behind by the deceased to
contend that even when they had failed or the counsel appearing for the
deceased had failed in his professional and legal obligation, the party
who was to file an application for substitution should suffer. So also the
fact that the plaintiff-respondent had based on some information given to
it in some other proceedings, filed an application for substitution, even
without an intimation in terms of Rule 10A above does not make its
position worse. The essence of the matter is, that from the date the
counsel for the deceased party had reported the event of death to the
Tribunal, an application for substitution was made within a reasonable
time which the Debt Recovery Tribunal as also Debt Recovery Appellate
Tribunal have considered and granted. There is no illegality or material
irregularity in the proceedings causing miscarriage of justice to warrant

WP(C) 2034/2007

Page 5 of 6

our interference. The Writ petition has no merit and is hereby dismissed
with costs of Rs.5000/-(rupees five thousand).

T. S. THAKUR, J.

MARCH 20, 2008
mk

WP(C) 2034/2007

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J.

Page 6 of 6

