*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 749/2007

#
!

NEERAJ & ORS.

Date of Decision: 31st March, 2008

Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Manish Maini, Adv.

versus
$
^

UOI

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Vineet Malhotra, Adv.

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment? Not necessary.
Not necessary.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Not
necessary.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J(oral)
1.

Section 163-A of the Motor Vehicles Act empowers the Central

Government to amend, from time to time, the Second Schedule to the
said Act, keeping in view the cost of living, by issuing a suitable
notification in the Official Gazette. The petitioner’s grievance in the
present writ petition is that despite lapse of considerable period and a
significant rise in the cost of living, the Government have not revised the
Second Schedule in exercise of the powers vested in it under the said
provision. They have, therefore, prayed for a mandamus directing the
WP(C) 749/2007

Page 1 of 3

respondent to amend, within a fixed time frame, the said Schedule and
also rectify and remove errors noticed in the same.
2.

In response to a notice issued by this Court, Mr. P. P. Malhotra,

learned ASG had appeared and was given time to take instructions
whether the Government were revising the Second Schedule in terms of
the above provisions. Mr. Vineet Malhotra, counsel appearing on behalf
of respondent today draws our attention to two communications, one
dated 5th March, 2008 and the second dated 14th March, 2008. In first of
these communications, Mr. P. P. Malhotra has written to Secretary,
Ministry of Surface Transport, whether the Government are ready to
undertake an exercise in keeping with the spirit of Section 163-A(3). The
letter points out that the petitioner does not ask for a comprehensive
amendment of the Law but simply a revision of the Second Schedule in
exercise of the powers which is admittedly vested in the Central
Government.
3.

By second communication, Sh. Anand Prakash, Director, Ministry of

Shipping, Road Transport and Highways has informed Mr. Malhotra that
the Union Cabinet has already cleared an amendment to the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 which was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 15 th May,
2007 and is presently under the consideration of the Standing Committee
on Trourism, Transport and Culture. The communication further points
out that the proposal contained a comprehensive amendment to the Act
and

the

Second

Schedule

thereby

enhancing

the

compensation

awardable to road accident victims. It also envisages revision and
upgradation of the amount in the Second Schedule including upward
WP(C) 749/2007

Page 2 of 3

revision of the annual income and amount of compensation payable to the
victim. In the circumstances, therefore, and in keeping in view the
proposal for a comprehensive amendment already under consideration of
the Standing Committee of the Parliament, we see no reason for the
present to intervene or issue any direction as prayed for. We, however,
give liberty to the petitioner to file a fresh petition or have the present
proceedings revived if no fruitful steps are taken by the respondents in
the direction of a suitable revision/amendment of the Schedule within a
reasonable time. The writ petition is, with the above observation,
disposed of. No costs.

T. S. THAKUR, J.

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J.
MARCH 31, 2008
mk

WP(C) 749/2007

Page 3 of 3

