*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 2423/2008

#

DEEPALI DESIGNS & EXHIBITS P.LTD. & ANR.
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. P.S.Bindra.

!

Date of Decision: 31st March, 2008

versus
$
^

UOI & ANR.

%

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T. S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see

Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Sandeep Aggarwal, Advocate for
Respondent no.1

the judgment? Not necessary.
Not necessary.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

in the Digest? Not

necessary.

JUDGMENT
Per Thakur, J (oral)
1.

In this petition for a writ of certiorari, the petitioner has prayed for

quashing of the bid submitted by a consortium comprising respondent
no.2, ITE India Pvt. Ltd. and other members pursuant to a tender notice
issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, copy
whereof has been enclosed as Annexure P/1 to the petition.
2.

The petitioner’s case appears to be that respondent no.2 is not

eligible to submit a bid keeping in view the conditions of eligibility
stipulated in the tender notice. Mr.Sandeep Aggarwal, learned counsel
WP(C) 2423/2008

Page 1 of 3

for respondent no.1, appears on advance notice and submits that the writ
petition is premature till such time the competent authority takes a final
decision and awards the contract to one or the other intending parties.
No infraction of any right vested in the petitioner can be said to have
taken place till any decision. He urged that this writ petition was not
maintainable for the present and ought to be dismissed.
3.

Mr.Sandeep

Sethi,

learned

Sr.Advocate

appearing

for

the

petitioner, on the other hand, argued that the respondents are not taking
a decision in the matter on one pretext or the other.
disputed

by

Mr.Aggarwal,

learned

counsel

for

That position is

respondent

no.1,

according to whom the petitioner has not only filed a representation
against the bid submitted by respondent no.2 and they moved the
present petition but represented to the competent authority that since
the matter is subjudice, no decision be taken in the matter. He further
submitted that once this petition is disposed of a proper decision can be
taken by the competent authority and intimated to all concerned. That
submission, in our opinion, should sufficiently allay the apprehension of
the petitioner that no decision one way or the other may be taken by the
competent authority pursuant to the tender notice. Mr. Sethi is also
satisfied with the statement made by Mr. Aggarwal and seeks leave to
withdraw this writ petition with liberty for the petitioner to question the
decision taken by the competent authority if the need so arises.
4.

The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed as withdrawn with the

liberty prayed for.

The competent authority, we hope and trust shall

examine the issue regarding the award of contract and take a final
WP(C) 2423/2008

Page 2 of 3

decision in the matter under intimation to the parties. We make it clear
that this order shall not be interpreted to mean that the competent
authority is bound to accept the bid offer by one or the other party. We
also make it clear that the competent authority would be free to take any
decision in the matter uninfluenced by the fact that the petitioner had
agitated the issue regarding eligibility of respondent no.2 in this Court.
5.

A copy of this order be given dasti to counsel for the parties.

T. S. THAKUR, J.

MARCH 31, 2008

SIDDHARTH MRIDUL, J.

bp

WP(C) 2423/2008

Page 3 of 3

