*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007
Date of Decision : 05.02.2008

%

ANIL MAHAJAN & ANR. ...
...
Through:

...
...
...
... PETITIONERS
Mr. Sandeep Sethi,
Senior Advocate with
Mr. Prem Ranjan Kumar,
Advocate.

-VERSUSUNION OF INDIA & ANR.
...
Through:

...
...
...
.RESPONDENTS
Mr. Vineet Malhotra,
Advocate for R – 1 / UOI.
Mr. Sunil Sharma,
Advocate for R – 2 / Customs.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1. A search was carried out by the customs authorities on
30.07.1999 in the premises of New India Agencies, which is
stated to be a proprietorship concern of petitioner No. 1 and
petitioner No. 2 was stated to be the Executive–Cum–Caretaker
of the said concern.

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

The said concern was engaged in the

Page No.1 of 12

business of import in trading of textiles and some other
consumable goods.

The statements of both the petitioners

were recorded and the petitioners were arrested for the
offences under Section 132 and 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 (
hereinafter to be referred to as, 'the said Act' ) on account of
alleged false declaration, false documents and evasion of
customs duty.

Simultaneously adjudication proceedings were

also initiated under the said Act.
2. In the course of adjudication proceedings, on the written
request made by the petitioners, the Commissioner of Customs
appointed three Officers to examine the goods afresh in order
to find out whether the goods were co-related with the
documents produced. This was in pursuance to an order dated
12.06.2001 and the Officers were directed to record detailed
findings giving the nature and description of the goods and as
to whether the particulars tallied with the bills of entry and the
reasons to be recorded for any goods not tallying with the bills
of entry produced. The said Committee submitted a report on
28.09.2001.
3. The Commissioner, however, in terms of the order dated
27.11.2001

found

against

the

petitioners

and

directed

confiscation of goods and imposition of penalty. The petitioners
aggrieved by the said order filed a statutory appeal before the
CESTAT, which found in favour of the petitioners in terms of the
order dated 03.02.2003. A conclusion was reached that the

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.2 of 12

documents did tally with the particulars of the case and there
was no justification for confiscation of the goods and imposition
of penalty.

The goods were not released and, thus, the

petitioners filed a writ petition being CWP No. 7021/2003
wherein a direction was issued on 18.12.2003 for release of the
goods.
4. The customs authorities then filed an appeal before the Court
against the order of the CESTAT, but in terms of the Order of
this Court dated 06.01.2004 sought leave to withdraw the said
appeal to enable the customs authorities to move the Tribunal
under Section 129(B)(ii) of the said Act for rectification of
mistake.

The application was so filed, but was rejected vide

order dated 18.01.2005. There was no further challenge and,
thus, the adjudicatory proceedings rested at that.
5. The criminal proceedings carried on simultaneously and the
complaint was filed alleging that the accused persons had
illegally imported into India goods, which were covered under
Section 123 of the said Act and had acquired possession and
were concerned in carrying, removing, storing, deposition,
harbouring,

transporting,

keeping,

selling,

purchasing

or

dealing with the seized goods which they knew or had reasons
to believe were liable to confiscation under Section 111 of the
said Act and had, thus, committed offences punishable under
Sections 132 and 135(1)(b) of the said Act. It is not disputed
that it is these very goods which form the subject matter of

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.3 of 12

adjudication proceedings as is apparent from the show-cause
notice dated 27.01.2000.

In the adjudication proceedings, it

was alleged that 4447 rolls measuring 1,28,745.80 metres of
synthetic fabric of foreign origin of assorted colours valued at
Rs.1,28,745.80 have been seized from the premises which had
been

smuggled

into

India

in

contravention

of

various

prohibitions which restrictions were imposed on import thereof
under Section 111 of the said Act.
6. The Court of learned ACMM framed charges in C.C. No.
1/2/1999 in terms of the impugned order dated 24.11.2006. In
the said order, while there is a reference to the aspect of the
Commissioner awarding penalty and setting aside of the same
by the CESTAT, the grievance is that there is no further
discussion on that behalf, although it is a detailed order.
7. The sum and substance of the plea advanced by learned senior
counsel for the petitioners is that once the adjudicatory process
in relation to the same subject matter has come to the
conclusion that there was no illegality committed by the
petitioners under the said Act, the prosecution against the
petitioners would not survive.

In this regard, learned senior

counsel referred to the judgment of learned Single Judge of this
Court in Sunil Gulati v. R.K. Vohra and other connected cases,
2007 (1) JCC 220. The legal position was succinctly set out by
A.K. Sikri, J. on conspectus of various judgments of the Supreme
Court dealing with different situations in such matters. There

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.4 of 12

were four eventualities discussed and the principles culled out
from the various judgments were set out as under :“1.
On the same violation alleged against a
person, if adjudication proceedings as well as
criminal proceedings are permissible, both can be
initiated simultaneously.
For initiating criminal
proceedings, one does not have to wait for the
outcome of the proceedings are independent in
nature.
2.
The
findings
in
the
departmental
proceedings would not amount to res judicata and
initiation of criminal proceedings in these
circumstances can be treated as double jeopardy
as they are not in the nature of “prosecution”.
3.
In case adjudication proceedings are
decided against a person who is facing prosecution
as well and the Tribunal has also upheld the
findings of the adjudicators / assessing authority,
that would have no bearing on the criminal
proceedings and the criminal proceedings are to be
determined on its own merits in accordance with
law, uninhibited by the findings of the Tribunal. It
is because of the reason that in so far as criminal
action is concerned, it has to be proved as per the
strict standards fixed for criminal cases before the
criminal court by producing necessary evidence.
4. In case of converse situation namely where the
accused persons are exonerated by the competent
authorities / Tribunal in adjudication proceedings,
one will have to see the reasons for such
exoneration to determine whether these criminal
proceedings could still continue. If the exoneration
in departmental adjudication is on technical ground
or by giving benefit of doubt and not on merits or
the adjudication proceedings were on different
facts, it would have no bearing on criminal
proceedings.
If, on the other hand, the
exoneration in the adjudication proceedings is on
merits and it is found that allegations are not
substantiated at all and the concerned person(s)
is/are innocent, and the criminal prosecution is also
on the same set of facts and circumstances, the
criminal prosecution is also on the same set of
facts and circumstances, the criminal prosecution

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.5 of 12

cannot be allowed to continue.
The reason is obvious criminal complaint is filed by
the departmental authorities alleging violation /
contravention of the provisions of the Act on the
part of the accused persons.
However, if the
departmental
authorities
themselves,
in
adjudication proceedings, record a categorical and
unambiguous finding that there is no such
contravention of the provisions of the Act, it would
be unjust for such departmental authorities to
continue with the criminal complaint and say that
there is sufficient evidence to foist the accused
persons with criminal liability when it is stated in
the departmental proceedings that ex facie there is
no such violation. The yardstick would, therefore,
be to see as to whether charges in the
departmental proceedings as well as criminal
complaint are identical and the exoneration of the
concerned
persons
in
the
departmental
proceedings is on merits holding that there is no
contravention of the provisions of any Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
8. The aforesaid judgment has been followed by another learned
Single Judge of this Court inter alia in Crl. Misc. (Case) No.
938/2005 titled M/s. Bihariji Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. & Ors. v.
Commissioner of Central Excise, Anti Evasion, Delhi decided on
14.02.2007 where adjudicatory proceedings culminated in
orders favouring the accused / assessee and where in exercise
of independent powers of prosecution, complaints were lodged.
It was pointed out that there was a distinction between saying
that two proceedings can be maintained as a matter of law and
to say that after suffering an adjudication order on the same
facts, the Department or prosecuting agencies ought not to be
allowed to proceed and prosecute the assessee having failed to
establish the basic facts.

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.6 of 12

9. It is, thus, the submission of learned senior counsel for the
petitioners that the facts of the present case also are identical
to these two cases where though the adjudicating process went
in favour of the Department initially,

the accused had

subsequently succeeded.
10.

Learned counsel for the Department, however, strenuously

opposed the petition by relying on the same set of judgments
to contend that there was no ground for quashing the order of
framing charges.
11.

In order to appreciate the controversy, the ratio of the

aforesaid judgments has to be examined.

The present case

would fall in the 4th category of Sunil Gulati's case (supra)
inasmuch as the accused persons were exonerated by the
competent authority / Tribunal in the adjudication proceedings.
If such exoneration in the departmental adjudication is on a
technical ground or by giving benefit of doubt and not on merits
or the adjudication proceedings were on different facts, it would
have no bearing on the criminal proceedings. However, on the
other hand, if the exoneration in the adjudication proceedings
were on merits and the allegations were found not to be
substantiated with the concerned persons being found innocent
of the same, then criminal prosecution cannot be permitted to
continue. The obvious reason for the same is that the criminal
complaint is filed by the departmental authorities alleging
violation or contravention of the provisions of the said Act while

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.7 of 12

simultaneously in the adjudication proceedings, there is a
categorical and unambiguous finding that there is no such
contravention of the provisions of the said Act.

Thus, it was

held that it would be unjust for such departmental authorities to
continue with the criminal complaint and say that there is
sufficient evidence to foist the accused persons with criminal
liability when in the departmental proceedings, it has been
found that ex facie there was no such violation. The yardstick
fixed was that the charges in the departmental proceedings as
well as the criminal complaint must be of identical nature and
the exoneration of the concerned person in the departmental
proceedings is on merits holding that there is no contravention
of the provisions of the said Act.
12.

It is the latter aspect, which is sought to be emphasized by

learned counsel for the respondents by seeking to contend that
the only reason for the adjudication process going against the
Department was the inability to produce relevant evidence and,
thus, it is a technical nature of decision.
13.

I am afraid, the said plea is only to be stated to be rejected.

14.

If on the basis of the evidence and material

produced a

finding is reached by the adjudicatory authority on merits, it
cannot be said to be a technical finding. To accept the plea of
learned counsel for the respondents would imply that the
Department would have the right not to produce material
before the adjudicating authority, invite an unfavourable

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.8 of 12

decision and yet prosecute the complaint on the basis that it
would produce further evidence in support of its case.
15.

The matter, in fact, is also not so simple as is made out by

learned counsel for the respondents.

The Commissioner of

Customs brought all the evidence produced before himself and
even inspection of goods was carried out by the Committee of
Officers appointed at the request of the petitioners.

On the

conspectus of all the aforesaid material, a finding was reached
against the petitioners by the customs authorities. It was held
that the report of the Committee lent no support to the
contention of the petitioners that the goods seized are covered
under the documents produced by them. Thus, the substratum
of the finding was that the goods were not found to be the
same, which could be relatable to the documents. The CESTAT,
however, found to the contrary.

A categorical finding was

reached that to the extent the particulars existed and could be
co-related, the Committee had found the goods to be covered
by the documents. It had found the physical appearance, the
nature and description of the fabrics to be the same as in the
bills of entry and had found the width to tally wherever the
width was given in the documents.

The finding of the

Commissioner was found to be incorrect that the Committee
could not co-relate the goods in regard to the width for the
reason that this parameter was in itself quite vague and no
definite opinion as to conformity followed.

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

It concluded in

Page No.9 of 12

favour of the petitioners that the goods were covered by the
bills of entry and they confirmed the claim of the petitioners.
The adverse finding reached on account of the transport
company not responding to the summons was also not upheld
by reason of the fact that the same did not imply that the
documents did not exist since copies of documents had been
produced.

The petitioners were held to have produced

evidence relating to carriage of goods and it was up to the
Department to rebut that evidence by appropriate measures,
which it failed to do.

It was, thus, held that there was no

justification for confiscation of the goods or imposition of
penalty.
16.

The present case is, thus, not one where it could be said

that the adjudication proceedings are based on technical
ground or by giving benefit of doubt or that the merits have not
been examined.

I am unable to accept the plea of learned

counsel for the respondents that the observation to the effect
that the Department did not produce any evidence in rebuttal
and the evidence produced by the petitioners in this behalf
would imply that the findings arrived at is of technical nature.
17.

I am, thus, of the considered view that the charges cannot

be framed and the criminal prosecution cannot be permitted to
continue

against

the

petitioners

once

the

adjudication

proceedings on merits have been found in favour of the
petitioners.

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.10 of 12

18.

In the end, it must be observed that in view of the findings

of the adjudicatory process, it was a fit case where the
Department ought to have conceded the matter on the basis of
the settled legal position.

The Department had failed in the

adjudicatory process against the petitioners and yet continued
to contend that the criminal proceedings must go on. The legal
system by which we are governed is adversarial in nature, but
there is a special responsibility on the Government and public
authorities to act reasonably and in a fair manner. The overburdened

legal

system

cannot

be

further

burdened

by

unnecessary cases or contest in the form of luxury litigation on
the part of the Government authorities.

Learned counsel for

the respondents, in fact, pleaded that no one had even come to
instruct him after the brief had been handed over to him, which
itself shows the lack of seriousness on the part of the
Department in defending the present case. It appears that only
the formality of a seal of approval from the Court is sought to
be obtained without the Department acting in a just and fair
manner resulting in unnecessary wastage of time of the Court.
I, thus, deem it appropriate to burden the respondents with
costs of the present petition and it is open to the Department to
recover the same from any Officer, who may be negligent in
the performance of his duties.
19.

The petition is accordingly allowed, the impugned order of

framing charges is quashed and the petitioners are discharged.

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

Page No.11 of 12

The petitioners shall be entitled to costs from the respondents
quantified at Rs.20,000/-.

Crl. M. A. No. 3150/2007 IN CRL. REV. P. No. 160/2007
The application does not survive for consideration in view of
disposal of the main petition.
Application stands disposed of.

February 05, 2008
madan

Crl. Rev. P. No. 160 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.12 of 12

