*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Ex. P. No.321 of 2003
Reserved on: 06.12.2007
Date of decision: 04.01.2008

%
AJAY RELAN
Through:

...DECREE HOLDER
Mr. Rajiv S. Endlaw with
Mr. A.T. Patra, Advocates.

Versus
PRANAY SOMAIA & ORS.

...JUDGEMENT DEBTORS
AND

CE CONSTRUCTION LIMITED
Through:

...OBSTRUCTIONIST
Mr. Aman Lekhi, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Rakesh Kumar &
Mr. Jaspreet S. Rai, Advocates
for the Obstructionist.
None for Judgement Debtors 1-4.
Mr. Sharad K. Agrawal with
Ms. Sangeeta Grover, Advocates
for Judgement Debtors 5-7.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. Shri K.D. Somaia (HUF), through its karta Shri K.D. Somaia was the
owner of property No.S-23, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi in
pursuance to a sale deed dated 3.2.1979 (Exhibit A-15) executed
by Shri Balwant Singh Nag. Shri Balwant Singh Nag had acquired

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.1 of 22

the right of the property as a perpetual lessee in pursuance to a
perpetual sub-lease deed dated 13.12.1967 (Exhibit A-3) executed
by the President of India as the lessor with the Panchsheel Cooperative House Building Society Limited as the lessee.
2. An agreement to sell & purchase was executed on 16.9.1992
(Exhibit A-28) by Shri K.D. Somaia (HUF) through its karta Shri K.D.
Somaia in favour of M/s. Durga Builders Private Limited (for short
'M/s. Durga Builders') in respect of the suit property. On receipt of
full consideration, the possession of the property was handed over
to M/s. Durga Builders in part performance of the agreement. A
further agreement to sell was executed on 30.4.1993 in favour of
the decree holder after necessary formalities in respect of the
earlier agreement were completed including with the Income Tax
Authorities.

In respect of the agreement dated 30.4.1993, the

competent authority under the Income Tax is stated to have
granted permission on 23.7.1993 after verification at site that M/s.
Durga Builders was holding the vacant and physical possession.
3. There was dispute which arose between the decree holder and the
sellers with the result that the suit for specific performance was
filed in this Court being CS (OS) No.749/1994.

Since Shri K.D.

Somaia, the registered owner passed away in the mean time, his
legal heirs were impleaded as the first four defendants. The suit
remained pending for nine (9) years when finally a compromise
was arrived at between the parties resulting in a compromise
decree dated 28.3.2003.
4. The decree holder claims that the possession of the first floor of

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.2 of 22

the property was not handed over nor was the sale deed executed
as per the compromise decree and thus the present execution
petition was filed. In the objections filed by judgement debtors 5
to 7 being M/s. Durga Builders and its two Directors, the Nandas, it
was stated that there was some third party occupying the first
floor on behalf of judgement debtors 5 to 7 and that judgement
debtors 5 to 7 were unable to remove him. The possession of the
remaining portion had been handed over to the decree holder.
5. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances a Local
Commissioner was appointed vide order dated 21.7.2004 of this
Court to visit the premises and report the status of possession. It
was found that the first floor was in occupation of one Colonel
Jairath, who claimed that he was in such occupation as a
representative of the obstructionist, i.e. CE Constructions Limited.
It is thereafter that objections were filed by the said obstructionist.
6. The case of the obstructionist is that M/s. Durga Builders had
awarded construction work to the obstructionist at Faridabad in
1992-93 in respect of a project of M/s. Durga Builders but the
obstructionist was not paid the outstanding sum of Rs.3.15 crore.
It is at that stage that an understanding was arrived at between
M/s. Durga Builders and the obstructionist that instead of M/s.
Durga Builders making the said payment to the obstructionist, the
money would be utilised for purchase of property for office
purposes, which would be shared by the said two parties.

In

pursuance to the said arrangement, the original title deeds of the
property were also deposited by M/s. Durga Builders to the

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.3 of 22

obstructionist as collateral.

Thus, when M/s. Durga Builders got

possession of the suit property from Shri K.D. Somaia on
27.1.1993, on the very next day the possession of the first floor
was handed over to the obstructionist.

Not only that, the

Directors of M/s. Durga Builders also got executed a Will and a
GPA in favour of Shri Arun Mehra, Managing Director of the
obstructionist from Shri K.D. Somaia.
7. The obstructionist claimed that at the time of taking over of
possession of the first floor on 28.1.1993, the intent was to have a
small office set up but within a month of taking possession, the
obstructionist realised that it would not be practical and thus the
first floor was used by the obstructionist only for the purposes of
storage of files and drawings. Such user continued till 1995 and
towards the end of that year the obstructionist started using the
first floor as a guest house. The first floor was so used as a guest
house till 2000 and thereafter Col. Jairath, the Executive Director
of the obstructionist moved into the first floor. The plea, thus, of
the obstructionist is that they are not bound by a decree between
the decree holder and the judgement debtors and it was alleged
that the same was a collusive one.
8. The decree holder naturally controverted what was stated by the
obstructionist and since the matter could not be decided without
framing of issues and leading of evidence, on 16.5.2007, the
following issues wee framed:
“1. Whether the obstructionists acquired any
right or interest in the suit property? If so, the
date thereof? Onus on the obstructionists

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.4 of 22

2. Whether the decree in question was obtained
in collusion between the parties to the suit and
suffers from any fraud in turn affecting the rights
of obstructionists? Onus on the obstructionists
3. Relief.”
9. Since the onus was on the obstructionists, they were directed to
file affidavits of evidence and retired Additional District Judge was
appointed as the Local Commissioner to record evidence. The
parties led their respective evidence by filing of affidavits and
thereafter cross-examined the opposite party.

The objectors

produced Mr. Arun Mehra as a witness and thereafter in pursuance
to the leave granted filed even a supplementary affidavit to
produce certain documents. The decree holder appeared in the
witness box himself.
10.Learned counsels for the parties were heard and on perusal of
the pleadings and the submissions advanced by learned counsels
for the parties, the findings on the issues are recorded hereinafter:
Issue No.1:
Whether the obstructionists acquired any right or
interest in the suit property? If so, the date
thereof? Onus on the obstructionists
11.The decree holder contended that the obstructionist has failed to
prove any independent right to the suit property as they were put
in possession by judgement debtors 5 to 7 and thus on the decree
being passed they have to go out of the property along with the
said judgement debtors. The decree holder claims that at best the
claim of the obstructionist could be for recovery of money against
judgement debtors 5 to 7 against which the obstructionist claimed
to have been put in possession and handed over title documents
as a collateral.
Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

There was no mortgage created and there is
Page No.5 of 22

nothing to evidence the same. The period of twelve (12) years had
passed and the obstructionist had not taken any action for
enforcement of the said alleged security and thus no defence on
the basis of the said mortgage could be entertained.

This was

apart from the plea that there could only be a registered
mortgage in such a situation and in any case there is no document
evidencing deposit of title documents for securing any loan by
way of equitable mortgage on deposit of such title documents.
Learned counsel referred to the judgement of this Court in
Ramesh Kumar & Ors. Vs. Yashpal Batra & Anr. AIR 2006 Delhi
286.

It was held that in case of a simple mortgage where the

defendant had executed a mortgage deed in respect of the suit
property to secure loans from the plaintiff, the defendant ought to
have exercised right to redeem the mortgage within the stipulated
time and does not automatically become the owner of the
property. A suit had to be filed for recovery of the amount within
a period of twelve (12) years as per Article 62 of the Limitation
Act, 1963 where a period of limitation of 12 years is prescribed to
enforce payment of money secured by a mortgage or otherwise
charged upon immovable property. The period had to commence
when the money became due. Thus, the defendant was required
to file a suit for fore-closure in respect of the mortgages as per
Clause (a) of Section 67 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(hereinafter referred to as the TP Act).
12.Learned counsel for the decree holder drew the attention of this
Court to the testimony of Mr. Mehra where it had been stated that

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.6 of 22

at the stage of handing over of the title documents to the
obstructionist, a writing was made.

However, no such writing

about the handing over of the documents has been filed on
record. On a query being posed the witness could not say as to
how much amount was sought to be secured by the deposit of title
documents and only stated that during the period of JanuaryFebruary 1993 about Rs.2.00 to 3.00 crore were due.
13.Learned counsel for the decree holder, thus pleaded that since
the obstructionist is claiming that the property was a security for
the

amount

due,

title

documents

were

handed

over

and

simultaneously even possession was given to the obstructionist, it
is at best a case of usufructuary mortgage, which is defined under
Section 58 Clause (d) of the TP Act, which reads as under:
“58. "Mortgage", "mortgagor", "mortgagee",
"mortgage-money"
and
"mortgaged"
defined.
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
(d) Usufructuary mortgage-Where the mortgagor
delivers possession or expressly or by implication
binds himself to deliver possession of the
mortgaged property to the mortgagee, and
authorises him to retain such possession until
payment of the mortgage-money, and to receive
the rents and profits accruing from the property or
any part of such rents and profits and to
appropriate the same in lieu of interest or in
payment of the mortgage-money, or partly in lieu
of interest or partly in payment of the mortgagemoney, the transaction is called a usufructuary
mortgage and the mortgagee a usufructuary
mortgagee.”
14.In view of the provisions of Section 59 of the TP Act, which are
reproduced hereinafter such a mortgage could have been created
only by registered document.
“59. Mortgage when to be by assurance
Where the principal money secured is one hundred
Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.7 of 22

rupees or upwards, a mortgage other than a
mortgage by deposit of title deeds can be effected
only by a registered instrument signed by the
mortgagor and attested by at least two witnesses.
Where the principal money secured is less than
one hundred rupees, a mortgage may be effected
either by a registered instrument signed and
attested as aforesaid or (except in the case of a
simple mortgage) by delivery of the property.”
15.The testimony of the said Mr. Mehra also shows that where in
response to a question on one hand he had stated that he had
checked the books of the obstructionist and Rs.2.00 to 3.00 crore
was due from M/s. Durga Builders and balance sheet was prepared
and filed with the Registrar of Companies on the basis of the said
books, on the other hand he conceded thereafter that he had not
checked the balance sheet and thus could not say whether in the
balance sheet the said amount was shown as due from M/s. Durga
Builders. The witness in order to cover up the said aspect sought
to state that the balance sheet was prepared on a cash basis but
could not indicate from which year the balance sheet was changed
from cash to accrual basis.
16.The aforesaid aspect is important as urged by learned counsel for
the decree holder, on account of the fact that under Section 209
of the Companies Act, 1956, the making of a balance sheet on
accrual basis was made mandatory from 1988.

The relevant

provision has been shown to have been amended in the
Companies Act by Companies Amendment Act, 1988 w.e.f
15.6.1988. Thus, when monies are claimed due from 1993 and
remained due thereafter, the balance sheet which had to be on
accrual basis had to reflect the said amount. In the alternative it

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.8 of 22

was pleaded that at least for the year 1992-93 when the monies
accrued and had not been paid the balance sheet of that year
would have reflected the said amount.

No balance sheet

whatsoever was produced by the obstructionist to substantiate the
plea of such outstanding from judgement debtors 5 to 7.
17.The decree holder obtained the certified copies of balance sheet
from the Office of the Registrar of Companies.

Such balance

sheets are for the period 1996 to 2003 (Exhibits D-1 & D-2). The
balance sheets reflect no amount being due to the obstructionist
from M/s. Durga Builders. On the other hand there is an entry of
some amount having been received from M/s. Durga Builders in
the year 1996.
18.The other aspect emphasised by learned counsel for the decree
holder from the testimony of the said witness is that no charge
was recorded with the Registrar of Companies in respect of the
mortgage in favour of the obstructionist. This is in context of the
mandatory requirement of Section 125 of the Companies Act that
a charge on the assets of a company have to be compulsory
lodged and cannot be enforced against a company otherwise. In
the absence of the charge being registered by M/s. Durga Builders
and not being insisted upon by the obstructionist as stated, the
alleged mortgage in any case will not be enforceable.
19.Learned counsel for the decree holder also drew the attention of
this Court to the perpetual sub-lease deed where Clause 6
prescribes the requirement of prior permission to be obtained
from the perpetual lessor for a mortgage. The testimony of Mr.

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.9 of 22

Mehra shows that no such permission was obtained from the DDA.
20.In the cross-examination, the counsel for the decree holder had
posed specific question to the witness about the electricity, water
and telephone bills in respect of the first floor of the suit property
in view of the controversy as to whether the obstructionist had at
all occupied the property. The witness answered that such bills
were available from the year 1999 to 2000 but for the prior period
it was claimed that it is M/s. Durga Builders, who was paying the
amount.

Learned counsel has emphasised that there was no

continuing relationship between M/s. Durga Builders and the
obstructionist since the work allegedly done by the obstructionist
was finished in the year 1996 and on re-examination claimed that
the accounts were being maintained on accrual basis since the
maintenance of accounts on accrual basis became mandatory in
1995, which is a falsity as the requirement came into existence in
the year 1988. The witness was also confronted with the balance
sheet for the year 1996 more specifically the list of debtors where
the name of M/s. Durga Builders was not mentioned.

Learned

counsel emphasised that the onus to prove the issue was on the
obstructionist but the obstructionist has failed to discharge the
onus to prove any right or interest in the suit properties at least as
could be permissible and enforceable in law. No account books or
balance sheet were shown even though the obstructionist is a
limited company. The requirement for creation of a security was
also not proved.
21.Learned counsel also drew the attention of this Court to the

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.10 of 22

report

of

the

No.749/1994,

Local
who

Commissioner

visited

the

appointed

property

on

in

CS

22.5.1994

(OS)
and

25.5.1994. The report of the said Local Commissioner is Exhibit
DHW-1/1 which showed that the possession of the property was
only with M/s. Durga Builders. Learned counsel emphasised that
the principles in relation to contract and disposition of property
are also enshrined under Sections 91 & 92 of the Indian Evidence
Act and thus a claim not borne out from the account books
maintained by the party cannot be allowed. In this behalf learned
counsel drew strength from the observations of the Division Bench
of this Court in Liberty Sales Services Vs. M/s. Jakki Mull & Sons
1997 II AD (Delhi) 917 where it was observed in paragraph 11 that
it was not open to a party to plead one case before the tax
authorities and another case before the Court.
22.In the end learned counsel for the decree holder emphasised that
obviously the obstructionist had come into possession either
during the pendency of the suit or thereafter when interim orders
were operating against judgement debtors 5 to 7.

The original

injunction order was passed on 18.4.1994 restraining taking over
of possession by judgement debtors 6 & 7, but since judgement
debtors 5 to 7 claimed to be in possession the same was modified
on 20.5.1998 to the extent that the said judgement debtors were
not to part with possession or alienate the property without leave
of the Court.
23.Learned senior counsel for the obstructionist on the other hand
sought to emphasise that the arrangement pleaded between

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.11 of 22

judgement debtors 5 to 7 and the obstructionist was of sharing of
the property against the outstandings owned to the obstructionist
by M/s. Durga Builders. This plea is fortified by the fact that the
original documents were deposited with the obstructionist and
documents in the form of a Will and a Power of Attorney were in
addition obtained from Shri K.D. Somaia in favour of the
obstructionist, the original of which are in possession of the
obstructionist.

It is, thus, pleaded that merely because the

obstructionist did not see Shri Somaia signing these documents as
stated in the cross-examination the admissibility of the said
documents would not be affected as the documents may form a
part of correspondence from which a presumption may be drawn
that the same was genuine. Learned counsel sought to support
this plea by reference to the judgement of the Supreme Court in
Mobarik Ali Ahmed Vs. The State of Bombay AIR 1957 SC 857
where it was observed as under:
“11. ....The proof of the genuineness of a
document is proof of the authorship of the
document and is proof of a fact like that of any
other fact. The evidence relating thereto may be
direct or circumstantial. It may consist of direct
evidence of a person who saw the document being
written or the signature being affixed. It may be
proof of the handwriting of the contents, or of the
signature, by one of the modes provided in Ss. 45
and 47 of the Indian Evidence Act.
It may also be proved by internal evidence
afforded by the contents of the documents. This
last mode of proof by the contents may be of
considerable value where the disputed document
purports to be a link in a chain of correspondence,
some links in which are proved to the satisfaction of
the Court. In such a situation the person who is the
recipient of the document, be it either a letter or a
telegram, would be in a reasonably good position
Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.12 of 22

both with reference to his prior knowledge of the
writing or the signature of the alleged sender
limited though it may be, as also his knowledge of
the subject-matter of the chain of correspondence,
to speak to its authorship.”
24.Learned counsel emphasised that all that Mr. Mehra had stated
was that possession was also given for securing the amount while
referring to the aspect of security of the property. There was no
formalisation of the relationship as the settlement of dues did not
take place but undisputedly possession of the property was
handed over along with handing over of the title deed and thus
the presumption is in existence under Section 114 of the Indian
Evidence Act. It is claimed that the majority of the shareholding in
M/s. Durga Builders was transferred to Mr. Arun Mehra and Ms.
Seema Mehra and their companies by Nandas in 1997 and thus
the obstructionist was assured of the security of its possession.
Learned counsel pleaded that in view of Section 110 of the Indian
Evidence Act an imperative presumption would be raised that the
ownership of the possessor is proved until it is disproved. Learned
counsel referred to the commentary of Sarkar, 16th Edition where
it has been observed that presumption of law or artificial
presumptions are inferences or propositions established by law, the inferences, which the law peremptorily requires to be made
whenever the facts appear which it assumes as the basis of that
inference.

Learned counsel emphasised that in law one can

recover from own's strength and not the opponent's weaknesses
in view of the legal maxim Aequali Jure Melior Est Conditio
Possidentis.

In this behalf learned counsel referred to Broom's

Legal Maxim at pages 486 & 487, which has explained the said
Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.13 of 22

maxim. The English translation of the said maxim means where
the right is equal, the claim of the party in actual possession shall
prevail. Commentary on this maxim shows that the general rule is
that possession constitutes a sufficient title against every person
not having better title. In this context it was observed as under:
“The general rule is, that possession
constitutes a sufficient title against every person
not having a better title. “He that hath possession
of lands, though it be by disseisin, hath a right
against all men but against him that hath right” for,
“till some act be done by the rightful owner to
divest this possession and assert his title, such
actual possession is prima facie evidence fa legal
title in the possessor, so that, speaking general, the
burthen of proof of title is thrown upon any one who
claims to oust him: this possessory title, moreover,
may, by length of time and negligence of him who
had the right, by degrees ripen into a perfect and
indefeasible title:
Hence, it is a familiar rule that, in ejectment,
the party controverting my title must recover by his
own strength, and not by my weakness;”
25.Learned counsel emphasised that the obstructionist had stated
that the transaction was reflected in books even if the same was
not in the balance sheet.

In such a case the Nandas/Durga

Builders cannot be said to have superior right or better title from
whom the decree holder derived title.
26.Learned senior counsel emphasised that even if the title of the
obstructionist was denied it could not be shown that the
possession of the obstructionist was not juridical or that the
obstructionist could not have resisted the possession under
Section 91 of the Trusts Act and Section 60 of the Easements Act
1882.
27.Learned counsel referred to the observations of the Apex Court in

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.14 of 22

Ram Sarup Gupta (Dead) By LRs. Vs. Bishun Narain Inter College &
Ors. (1987) 2 SCC 555 for the proposition that even in the
absence of a written document the terms and conditions could be
inferred from the attending circumstances and the conduct of the
parties.

Learned counsel also referred to the commentary of

Snell's Equity, 13th Edition to advance the proposition that in case
of a constructive trust the objector could not be turned out. It is
stated in paragraph 9-45 at page 225 as under:
“1. General
A constructive trust may be imposed as a result of
personal fraud. “It is a jurisdiction by which a Court
of Equity, proceeding on the ground of fraud,
converts the party who has committed it into a
trustee for the party who is injured by that fraud.”
It is does not follow, however, that wherever there
is fraud, the fraudster is trustee for the injured
party.”
28.Learned counsel thus contended that the nature of transaction
had to be proved and liabilities worked out before relief against
the objector could be conceded or denied.

It was thus claimed

that the collusion between Nandas and the decree holders could
not deny the obstructionist of possession.
29.Learned counsel pleaded that the decree holder was aware of the
possession of the obstructionist and the decree holder has merely
indulged in denial in cross-examination.

It was further pleaded

that there was no cross-examination of Mr. Mehra with regard to
what he had stated in part of his affidavit and in this behalf
referred to the observations in Yelu Pillai Padakalingam Vs.
Paramanandam Yesudasan AIR 1954 Travancore 152 where it was
held that the trial of a cause is aimed at arriving at the truth of the

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.15 of 22

conflicting cases that are presented before the Court.

Every

witness entering the box does so as a witness of truth and thus
cross-examination is a powerful and valuable weapon for the
purpose of testing the veracity of a witness and the accuracy and
completeness of his story.

The extent of its effectiveness no

doubt depends upon the dexterity of the wielder of the weapon,
but every cross-examiner should and can if he is careful, indicate
in cross-examination, whichever part of the evidence given in
examination-in-chief is challenged and an omission to do so would
lead to the inference that the evidence is accepted subject of
course to its being assailed as inherently improbable.
30.The aforesaid submissions advanced by learned counsels for the
parties, in my considered view, had to be considered within the
parameters of the present proceedings. The present proceedings
are not one of a trial between the claim of title of the
obstructionist and that of judgement debtors 5 to 7. The decree
has been passed in favour of the decree holder and against
judgement debtors 5 to 7.

It is not in dispute that the

obstructionist stake its claim only from judgement debtors 5 to 7.
Thus, the onus was put on the obstructionist to show that they had
any right in the suit property.
31.I am thus unable to accept the plea of the learned counsel for the
obstructionist that the testimony of the decree holder has to be
looked at with any greater degree of scrutiny than for the said
purpose.

It is not for the decree holder to answer queries in

respect of transactions alleged between judgement debtors 5 to 7

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.16 of 22

and the obstructionist.

The decree holder would have no

knowledge of such transactions. It is the obstructionist who was
claiming right to occupy the property and for that had to establish
that some interest had been acquired in the suit property.
32.The obstructionist other than claiming possession of the original
documents has not been able to substantiate any of its pleas and
thus has miserably failed to discharge the onus. The transaction
thus pleaded by the obstructionist is vague. No exact amount has
been stated in the testimony of the witness. The amount is stated
to be at the relevant stage varying between Rs.2.00 to 3.00 crore.
There is no document evidencing such dues owned from M/s.
Durga Builders to the obstructionist.
33.Learned counsel for the decree holder was rightly able to point
out that none of the balance sheets reflected such amount as due
and owning. The plea of the obstructionist that the accounts were
being maintained on

cash

basis is

contrary

to the

legal

requirement as stipulated under Section 209 of the Companies Act
whereby the making of a balance sheet on accrual basis was
made mandatory from 1988.

Not only that at least for the

relevant financial year 1992-93 there would have been a reflection
of the dues payable. The obstructionist failed to produce either
the books of accounts or the balance sheet.

It is the decree

holder who produced the certified copies of the balance sheets
obtained from the Office of the Registrar of Companies to
establish that the dues were not reflected in the same.

Other

than the oral statement the obstructionist has not produced even

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.17 of 22

any books of accounts to establish that amount. There is also no
compliance of the mandatory requirement of Section 125 of the
Companies Act of the charge on the assets of the company to be
compulsory created with the Registrar of Companies failing which
it would not be enforceable.

The charge was never created by

M/s. Durga Builders nor was it insisted upon to be so done by the
obstructionist. Thus the very sub-stratum of the claim is absent.
34.The second important aspect is that on the one hand it is pleaded
that the transaction was in the nature of a security of immovable
property and on the other hand in the oral submission the learned
senior counsel for the obstructionist has sought to emphasise
some

sharing

arrangement.

arrangement placed on record.

There

is

no

such

sharing

If the property was taken as a

security there was a mandatory requirement under the Companies
Act to file relevant documents in that behalf which have
undisputedly not been filed. The claim of the obstructionist not
being borne out from either any account books (not produced) or
the balance sheets (filed by the decree holder), it would not be
really open even for the obstructionist to plead a case contrary to
the same in view of the observations in Liberty Sales Services
case (supra). I am also unable to accept the plea of the learned
counsel for the obstructionist that there are any attending
circumstances or conduct of parties in the absence of written
documents, which would give rise to a conclusion that the terms &
conditions alleged by the obstructionist were so arrived at.
35.The other aspect which stands as a wall in the way of the

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.18 of 22

obstructionist is that even assuming that there was such
transaction the legal requirements for the same in respect of the
requirement of a registered mortgage has not been fulfilled. This
is apparent from the reading of Sections 58 & 59 of the TP Act.
The only escape route for the obstructionist was to have
established that it was an equitable mortgage by deposit of title
documents not requiring such registration.

However, in that

eventuality the requirement in writing is necessary to show such
deposit of title documents, which is absent. The witness of the
obstructionist stated that there was such writing but no such
writing has ever been produced. The obstructionist actually was
required to file appropriate proceedings for recovery of the
amount and for foreclosure of the mortgage, in case such a
mortgage had been created.

The obstructionist failed to take

steps within the prescribed period of time to enforce the payment
of money.

The obstructionist cannot exercise its right in this

indirect fashion in view of the observations in Ramesh Kumar &
Ors. case (supra).

Thus, on this account also the obstructionist

has failed to establish the nature of transaction.
36.The obstructionist has really not been able to establish the date
from which they came into possession because there is no writing
and evidence for the same. The Local Commissioner who went to
visit the premises during the pendency of the suit found no such
possession. No doubt the visit of the Local Commissioner is stated
to be not for verifying possession but on his visit the status of
possession has been put in the report. There were no boards or

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.19 of 22

any other material to show such user by the obstructionist. It is
the own case of the obstructionist that after the initial use, the
room was used only as a storage space. The bills for electricity,
water, telephone, etc. have also not been produced to establish
any user or occupation of the same at the relevant period of time.
The only defence of the obstructionist is that it is M/s. Durga
Builders, which was paying the same pre-2000.

This plea is

difficult to accept.
37.The only conclusion which, thus, has to be arrived at is that
though the obstructionist did come into possession, the same was
only at some subsequent stage after the injunction order
restraining the handing over of possession was passed. It is
apparent

that

the

obstructionist

derived

their

claim

from

judgement debtors 5 to 7, they have to go with judgement debtors
5 to 7. The present proceeding is not for settlement of inter se
claims between judgement debtors 5 to 7 and the obstructionist.
38.I am thus of the considered view that the issue has to be
answered against the obstructionist.
Issue No.2:
Whether the decree in question was obtained in
collusion between the parties to the suit and
suffers from any fraud in turn affecting the rights
of obstructionists? Onus on the obstructionists
39.The onus was put on the obstructionist to establish that the
decree was accentuated by any fraud or collusion. In this behalf
learned counsel for the obstructionist referred to the observations
of the Apex Court in Nagubai Ammal & Ors. Vs. B. Shama Rao &
Ors. 1956 SC 593. Learned counsel emphasised that there is a

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.20 of 22

fundamental

distinction

between

the

proceedings

which

is

collusive and which is fraudulent. It was observed in paragraph 15
as under:
“15. Now, there is a fundamental distinction
between a proceeding which is collusive and one
which is fraudulent.
“Collusion in judicial
proceedings is a secret arrangement between two
persons that the one should institute a suit against
the other in order to obtain the decision of a judicial
tribunal for some sinister purpose.” (Wharton's Law
Lexicon, 14th Edn., p. 212).
In such a proceedings, the claim put forward
is fictitious, the contest over it is unreal, the decree
passed therein is a mere mask having the
similitude of a judicial determination and worn by
the parties with the object of confounding third
parties....”
40.Learned counsel also relied upon the commentary in the case of
Kerr on the law of Fraud and Mistake 7th Edition where it was
observed at page 658 that it is a general rule that a Court will not
interpose actively in favour of a man who is particeps criminis in
an illegal or fraudulent transaction.

It is submitted by learned

senior counsel for the obstructionist that the decree holder chose
not to have a trial in the suit and even in the present execution
proceedings the judgement debtors gave up their objections. The
decree holder did not even choose to wait for the original
documents to be handed over and thus the possession of the
obstructionist being undisputed should be maintained.
41.I am afraid the aforesaid plea cannot be accepted.

It is not

necessary that the parties must keep on fighting endlessly and go
in trial. The suit was contested for a period of nine years which
itself belies that there was any immediate development.

The

litigation fatigue had set in and the parties compromised. There is
Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

Page No.21 of 22

thus no collusion or fraud established by the obstructionist of
which the onus had been put on it.
Issue No.3:
Relief.
42.In view of the findings arrived at on the aforesaid issues being
against the obstructionist, the obstructionist is held not entitled to
the continued possession of the first floor of the property and
must forthwith hand over possession to the decree holder within a
period of thirty (30) days from the date of the judgement failing
which warrants of possession would be liable to be issued. Since
the decree holder is the owner of the property, the original
documents of transaction filed by the obstructionist in Court are
liable to be handed over to the decree holder on certified copies of
the same being placed on record. The objections are accordingly
dismissed with costs of Rs.15,000.00 against the obstructionists.
43.List for compliance/issuance of warrants of possession on
8.2.2008.

JANUARY 04, 2008
b'nesh

Ex.P. No.321 of 2003

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.22 of 22

