IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

•

•

+

CRL. REV. PETITION NO.393/2006 and CRL.M.A.5484/2006

%

Date of decision: 07.02.2008

ANUPAM MAZUMDAR[

… … … … ... PETITIONER
Through: Nalin Tripathi, Adv.
-VERSUS-

STATE OF DELHI

... ... ... ... ...RESPONDENT
Through: Pawan Sharma, Adv.

CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2.To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3.Whether the judgment should be

No

reported in the Digest?
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. The petitioner being the sole proprietor of one M/s Equinox
International, carrying on the business of Freight Forwarding
agreed to render his services as a forwarding agent for
transportation of a consignment of M/s Wave International
(hereinafter referred to as the complainant) to Moscow before
20-05-2001 for which a sum of Rs. 2, 21,890/- and Rs. 4,621/vide two different cheques was given to the petitioner by the
complainant at the time of booking itself. A bill of lading was
issued by the petitioner whereby the said consignment was to
be delivered to M/s OOO Pharma Market, the consignee at
Moscow on ware house delivery basis. However, in the Ocean
bill of lading, M/s Northeuro Logistics OY (the principal of the
CRL. REV. PETITION NO.393/2006

Pg. No. 1 of6

petitioner agent in India vide transportation agreement dated
18-10-2000) was mentioned as the consignee and the invoiced
party and the delivery port was given as Kotka in Finland
instead of Moscow.
2. It is stated that the said consignment was received by the
principal of the petitioner at Kotka and further transported to
Moscow to M/s OOO Pharma Market but for doing so, the
complainant had to shell out an additional sum of US $ 10570
to the said principal for which the complainant felt cheated
and registered an FIR with the P.S. Malviya Nagar on 25-102001 under section 406/420/120 of the Indian Penal Code,
1908 (in short ‘IPC’). The charge sheet was filed and the Ld.
MM after taking note of the factual matrix of the case and
hearing the parties, framed a charge against the petitioner u/s
420 IPC, against which the petitioner is aggrieved and has
filed the present revision petition.
3. A perusal of the impugned order shows that the Ld. MM has
taken into account the fact which is asserted from the material
placed on record that the said principal had refused to send
the goods to Moscow on the ground that it had not been paid
to transport goods from Kotka to Moscow as also that the
Ocean bill of lading mentioned the place of delivery of goods
as Kotka in Finland and not Moscow. The factum of the
petitioner despite having received the payment for delivery of
goods till Moscow and not making payment of transportation
charges to his counterpart, M/s Northeuro Logistics OY was
considered prima facie enough to infer dishonest intention of
CRL. REV. PETITION NO.393/2006

Pg. No. 2 of6

the petitioner. The question as to whether the complainant
paid any money to M/s Northeuro Logistics at Kotka or not or
whether even such payment was released by the complainant
in violation of provisions of FERA could not be considered at
this stage and could not be of any benefit to the petitioner.
4. The Ld. MM has also examined the general principles for
framing of charges relying on the cases of UOI v. Prafful
Kumar AIR 1979 SC 366, State of Maharashtra v. Somnath &
Ors. JT 1996 (4) SC 615, State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh AIR
1977 SC 2018, Umar Abdullah Sakur Sorathia v. Intelligence
Officer of Narcotic Control Bureau JT 1999 (5) SC 394 and
Kalumal Gupta v. state 2000 I AD Delhi 107 that only sifting of
evidence is necessary and as long as there is strong suspicion
which leaves the court to think that there is ground for
presuming that the accused has committed an offence, it is
not open to the court to say that there is no sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused. It was thus held that there
was sufficient material to frame charges.
5. It is the case of the petitioner that the delivery of goods was
made before the registration of the FIR by the complainant. It
is also contented that no money as alleged was paid by the
complainant to the said principal and that the Ocean bill of
lading issued by a shipping company barely indicates the
transportation of goods from one port to another and thus
does not reflect any dishonest intention on the part of the
petitioner.
6. The learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended
CRL. REV. PETITION NO.393/2006

Pg. No. 3 of6

that the averments made in the complaint and the documents
placed on record do not disclose any offence, much less the
offence of cheating as defined u/s 420 IPC. Reliance is placed
on the decision of the Kerela High Court in Unnie Menon v.
Kerela Film Artists and Critics Society & Ors, Crl. M.C. No.
365/1996 decided on 26-09-1986 wherein it was held that to
hold a person guilty of the offence of cheating, it has to be
shown that his intention was dishonest at the time of making
of the promise and such intention cannot be inferred from the
mere fact that he could not subsequently fulfill the promise.
7. The case of the prosecution on the other hand is that the
petitioner had induced the complainant to obtain such
contract and promised to deliver the goods at Moscow for
which

the

petitioner

had

taken

the

entire

money

for

transportation but instead the said goods were delivered at
Kotka in Finland and that a further amount had to be paid by
the complainant to the principal of the petitioner to get the
goods delivered at Moscow whereas such payment should
have been made by the petitioner since the complainant had
already paid the petitioner for such delivery of goods.
8. On hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am unable to
accept the plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner that
in order to extract money from the petitioner, the petitioner
was blackmailed and that there was a conspiracy hatched by
the petitioner’s principal and the complainant. It is an
admitted

position

that

the

goods

which

were

to

be

delivered/shipped at Moscow were delivered at Kotka and that
CRL. REV. PETITION NO.393/2006

Pg. No. 4 of6

the petitioner’s principal had refused to send the goods
further to Moscow on account of having not been paid the
transportation charges by the petitioner.
9. I find myself in full agreement with the Ld. MM that at this
stage, it cannot be said as to whether any amount was paid by
the complainant to the said principal or not as alleged in the
complaint and that can be determined only at a later stage in
the trial. The Court at the stage of framing charges has to sift
and weigh the evidence on record and other documents only
for the limited purpose of ascertaining whether prima facie
case is made out against the accused. Thus, if such material is
available, charges should be framed under Section 228 of the
Cr.P.C. and, if there is absence of such material, then the
accused should be discharged under Section 227 of the Cr.P.C.
as held in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Niranjan
Singh Karam Singh Punjabi, Advocate & Ors. Vs. Jitendra
Bhimraj Bijjaya and others, (1990) 4 SCC 76. In Dilawar Babu
Kurane Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2002 CRL.L.J.980 it was held
that the Court while exercising powers under Section 227 of
the Cr.P.C. does not act as a mere post-office or a mouthpiece
of the prosecution but has to consider the broad probabilities
of the case, the total effect of the evidence and the
documents produced before the Court, and should not make a
roving inquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh
the evidence as if he was conducting a trial. In the present
case, the petitioner inspite of having been paid, did not pay
the transportation charges to the principal which in itself, in
CRL. REV. PETITION NO.393/2006

Pg. No. 5 of6

my considered view, laid a strong suspicion on the petitioner
for having the Ld. MM to think that there is sufficient ground
for presuming dishonest intention of the petitioner. I am thus
of the considered view that there is no ground made out to set
aside the impugned order dated 16-08-2005 of framing
charges.
10.The trial court has discharged the function of sifting through
the material on record to come to the conclusion that there
was sufficient material to frame the charges.
11.In view of the aforesaid, the correctness, legality and
propriety of the order framing the charges cannot be doubted.
12.Dismissed.
CRL.M.A.5484/2006
Application does not survive for consideration and is disposed of.

February 07, 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

‘RA’

CRL. REV. PETITION NO.393/2006

Pg. No. 6 of6

