*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P.476/2007 & CRL.M.8289/2007

%

Date of decision:04.02.2008

SHRI SANJIV KUMAR
Through:

...PETITIONER
Mr.Anil Kumar Gupta, Mr.Vipin
Chaudhary and Mr.Dinesh
Malhotra, Advocates

Versus
THE STATE & ORS
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Mr. R.N. Vats, APP for the
State/R-1.
Mr.R.S.Juneja, Advocate for
the complainant.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1. A complaint was lodged by Manjeet Singh, s/o Shri Nihal Singh
with

the

Police

Station

Mansarovar

Park,

Shahdara

on

13.3.2006 about non-return of his brother Paramjeet Singh, who
was stated to be carrying about Rs.2.00 lacs. Paramjeet Singh
was stated to be going to Haridwar and informed that he would
be back at night.

At the earlier stage of time, even mobile

contact had been made with him where he had informed that if

Crl. Rev. P. No.476 of 2007

Page No.1 of 7

he did not reach in time, he would come the next morning, but
even that had not happened. The complaint also stated that
the endeavour to talk with Paramjeet Singh was not successful
though his phone was open and voices could be heard,
including of one lady.

Since there was a voice heard on

telephone that Muzaffar Nagar from this petrol pump is about
30 K.M., the complainant along with his Bhabhi drove towards
the

said

destination.

It

was

found

that

there

were

conversations between one Kartar Singh, Paramjeet Singh and
one Ms.Anjana.
2. An FIR 167/2006 dated 14.3.2006 was registered at P.S. Seema
Puri and in pursuance to the investigation carried out by the
police, a charge-sheet was filed on 7.8.2006.
Paramjeet

Singh

was

recovered

under

The body of
Police

Station

Mansoorpur. In the charge-sheet it was recorded that Manjeet
Singh had given a statement that his brother Paramjeet Singh
used to carry on business of kabadi/scraps and there were
certain other persons also carrying on business from the same
address. Paramjeet Singh had left the godown with Saleem @
Sabbu who carried out business from the said address stating
that he was going to Agra, U.P. The programme for going to
Agra was cancelled and after that Saleem @ Sabbu and
Paramjeet Singh left for Ghaziabad regarding some business.
Due to traffic jam, Paramjeet Singh turned around and talked to
his wife when it was informed that he was having Rs.2.00 lacs

Crl. Rev. P. No.476 of 2007

Page No.2 of 7

in his possession. The voice of Anjana was heard when the
phone was again dialled.

Subsequently the telephone was

switched off. The Black Santro car, being driven by Paramjeet
Singh, was found inside the Roadways Bus Stand at Roorkie,
which was admitted to belong to Paramjeet Singh. The dead
body was subsequently recovered. There were three suspects
who were stated to have all talked to each other, including the
petitioner herein. The trail led to a rented house in Khatauli.
Three accused were ultimately arrested when they disclosed
the name of their associate Sanjiv Kumar and the factum of
their having murdered Paramjeet singh by cutting his throat by
Ustara on the fateful night at the said house at Khatauli. The
dead body was rolled in clothes and taken in the car of the
deceased and thrown at the site where it was found.

The

investigation u/s 365/302/201/34 IPC was, thus, completed and
placed before the court.
3. The learned trial court in terms of the order dated 6.3.2007
framed charges against all the three accused persons, being
the petitioner, Ravinder Singh @ Kundu and Anjana. The trial
court found that the intimacy of Paramjeet Singh led to the
accused persons to hatch a conspiracy and abducted him for
committing

his

murder.

Paramjeet

Singh

dropped

his

programme of going to Agra on the telephonic calls of Anjana
and accompanied Anjana, with whom he was having illicit
relationship.

On the inducement, the deceased accompanied

Crl. Rev. P. No.476 of 2007

Page No.3 of 7

Anjana to Muzaffar Nagar where they were seen in the car. It
was, thus, found that Paramjeet Singh was abducted with the
intent to eliminate him, which object was achieved.
4. The petitioner herein seeks quashing of the order framing
charges against him, inter alia, on the ground that the trial
court had no jurisdiction in the present case and it is the
competent

court

at

Distt.

Muzaffar

Nagar

where

the

investigation report should be presented.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the deceased
Paramjeet Singh left Delhi for Haridwar of his own will. Learned
counsel in this behalf referred to the provisions of Sections 156,
170, 177 to 188 of the Cr.P.C.

The second plea advanced is

that the first complaint lodged by Manjeet Singh has been
ignored which also showed that the deceased Paramjeet Singh
left Delhi of his own sweet will. It was, thus, submitted that the
trial court had erred in law in relying on the statement of the
witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C. while ignoring the first
information report.
6. Learned counsel referred to the judgment of the learned single
Judge of this Court in Malkiat Singh & Ors. Vs. State & Anr.,
2005 (2) JCC 1237 wherein in a case u/s 498A/406/304 IPC it
was held that the allegations in the complaint have to be seen
to ascertain the territorial jurisdiction and when there was no
allegation of any torture of any kind to the wife in Delhi, the
Magistrate should be directed to return the police report to the

Crl. Rev. P. No.476 of 2007

Page No.4 of 7

IO to be presented before the appropriate court in compliance
of the provisions of Section 170 Cr.P.C. To the similar effect is
the pronouncement of the Apex Court in Y. Abraham Ajith and
Ors. Vs. Inspector of Police, Chennai & Anr., 2004(3) JCC 1305.
7. Learned APP for the State, on the other hand, relied upon the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Vishwanath Gupta Vs. State
of Uttaranchal, 2007 III AD (Cr.) (S.C.) 75 which dealt with a
case of kidnapping for ransom and the aspect of territorial
jurisdiction to conduct the trial of the case. The death bodies
had been seized and panchnama was prepared at Unnao, U.P.
and then an application was filed that the Nainital courts had
no jurisdiction to frame the charges as the offence has been
committed in the State of Uttar Pradesh and, therefore, the
State of Uttaranchal had no jurisdiction.

It was held by the

Supreme Court that the important ingredient of Section 364A
IPC is the abduction or kidnapping, as the case may be.
Thereafter, a threat to the kidnapped/abducted that if the
demand for ransom is not made then the victim is likely to be
put to death and in the event death is caused, the offence of
Section 364A is complete. It was, thus, stated that there were
three stages in this Section – kidnapping or abduction, threat of
death coupled with demand of money and lastly when the
demand is made and then causing death and when the three
ingredients are available, that will constitute the offence u/s
364A IPC and when such other acts to be done or were so done

Crl. Rev. P. No.476 of 2007

Page No.5 of 7

at different local areas, it may be inquired into or tried by a
court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
8. On hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the
petition.
9. The case of the prosecution is that a conspiracy was hatched to
abduct the deceased Paramjmeet Singh for committing his
murder and his intimacy with Anjana was utilized for the said
purpose. Thus, Paramjeet Singh was induced to proceed
towards Muzaffar Nagar with the said object of implementing
the conspiracy with ultimate death being caused at Khatauli.
The deceased was abducted with the intent of eliminating him
and ultimately he was so eliminated at Khatauli. Thus, the
conspiracy was hatched in Delhi to abduct and eliminate
Paramjeet Singh and such elimination took place in the same
night at Khatauli in pursuance to the conspiracy hatched at
Delhi.

In view thereof and in view of the authoritative

pronouncements of the Supreme Court in Vishwanath Gupta's
case (supra), it cannot be said that the trial court would have
no territorial jurisdiction to try the case.
10.I am also unable to accept the plea of learned counsel for the
petitioner that the initial complaint alone should be looked into
in the absence of the statement recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C. The
substratum is the non-return of the deceased and his change of
plan from Agra to Muzaffar Nagar at the behest of Anjana for
furtherance of the conspiracy.

Crl. Rev. P. No.476 of 2007

Page No.6 of 7

11.Dismissed.
12.Trial court record be sent back forthwith.
Crl.M.A.8289/2007
The application has become infructuous and is disposed of.
Interim orders dated 27.7.2007 stand vacated.

February 4, 2008
'sp'

Crl. Rev. P. No.476 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.7 of 7

