*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl.Rev.P. 193/2008
Crl.M.A. No.473/2008 & Crl. M.A(Bail) No.474/2008

%

Date of decision: 03.04.2008

RAMESH KUMAR
Through:

...PETITIONER
Mr. Manish Kumar Khanna,
Advocate

Versus
STATE

...RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (Oral)

1.

Notice, which is accepted by the learned counsel for the
State.

2.

On 03-06-1998, a water tanker being driven at a very fast
speed by the accused/petitioner in a rash and negligent
manner knocked down the pedestrian/deceased from
behind who was walking on the left side of the road as a
result of which the deceased received crushed head
injuries. The deceased thereafter was removed to a
hospital by the public gathered at the spot where he was

Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

Page No. 1 of 10

declared brought dead by the doctor. An FIR was
registered vide FIR No. 270/98 and charges were framed
against the petitioner for offences u/s 279/304A IPC.
3.

The prosecution examined eight witnesses but the case of
the prosecution is based on the testimony of PW1, Ct. Raj
Kumar, who was on patrol duty and is a crucial witness to
this case being an eye witness. The petitioner preferred to
claim trial and lead defence evidence by way of examining
DW1 and got his statement recorded. After the conclusion
of the trial, the Ld. MM found against the petitioner and
convicted him for the aforesaid offences vide order dated
27-11-2006 and sentenced him to undergo RI for one year
and to pay fine of Rs. 5,000/- and in default of payment of
fine to undergo SI for one month vide order dated 30-112006. The petitioner assailed the said order in appeal
wherein the Ld. ASJ dismissed the appeal and affirmed the
order of conviction and sentence of the trial court by an
order dated 07-03-2008. The present revision petition is
directed against the aforesaid orders passed by the trial
courts below.

4.

The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
petitioner was not the driver but posted as a baildar as
also the fact that the identity of the petitioner as the
driver of the offending vehicle has not been proved by the
prosecution. The plea raised by the petitioner was that he

Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

Page No. 2 of 10

was not apprehended at the spot but he went himself to
the police station with some chowkidars after about three
hours from the alleged incident to enquire about the
same. It was further pointed out that there are no other
eye witnesses to the present case and the case of the
prosecution solely revolves around the testimony of a
police official being PW 1. It is also stated that the
depositions made by the prosecution witnesses suffer
from

grave

infirmities

on

account

of

there

being

contradictions and improvements in their statements and
thus do not pass the test of reliability.
5.

It is submitted that the foundation of conviction against
the accused/petitioner is that he was driving at a “very
fast speed” but the same is not supported by evidence.
The learned counsel has argued that the site plan
prepared by the IO is doubtful since it does not furnish any
details. The attention of this court was also drawn to the
decision of Raj Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi) 2007 X AD
(Delhi) 94 wherein this court in revision had reversed the
concurrent findings of the trial courts below and observed
that non-examination of the investigating officer and the
other

injured

person

coupled

with

fact

that

the

prosecution had failed to bring on record any material to
establish the “high speed” of offending vehicle had
worked out to the prejudice of the accused and therefore
Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

Page No. 3 of 10

the sole testimony of one witness could not be relied upon
to convict the petitioner. In Lakshmanan v. State of Tamil
Nadu JT 2001 (Suppl. 2) SC 396, it was held that speed of
the offending vehicle is not the criteria but the evidence
on record showed that the speed was high and the
accused had lost control over the vehicle. It was also
observed that contributory negligence is not a permissible
defence but a factor which affects the quantum of
sentence.
6.

I have given my thoughtful consideration to the matter. A
scrutiny of the impugned orders show that the Ld. MM and
the Ld. ASJ while rejecting the submissions made by the
learned counsel for the petitioner have examined and
assessed the evidence and the material placed on record
in depth in reaching to the aforesaid conclusion. The
testimony of PW1 corroborated by the depositions of other
witnesses has brought to light the fact that the petitioner
was driving the offending vehicle in a rash and negligent
manner which resulted in the aforesaid incident costing
the life of the deceased who succumbed to the injuries.
PW1 who was on a patrol duty witnessed the incident and
apprehended the accused. In the meantime, the deceased
was taken to the hospital where he was declared brought
dead when the IO of the case came at the spot and found
the offending tanker at the site.

Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

A site plan was
Page No. 4 of 10

prepared in the presence of PW1. The offending tanker
was seized and the seizure memo is proved on record. The
person who had conducted the mechanical inspection of
the tanker was also examined who has supported the case
of the prosecution. A post mortem was conducted and the
nature of the injuries and the cause of death have been
proved to be anti mortem caused by a heavy vehicle.
7.

The trial courts below have opined that though there are
contradictions in the depositions of prosecution witnesses
but since such inconsistencies are minor in nature thus
cannot be rejected at the threshold. It has also been noted
that the petitioner chose not to cross examine the IO
despite opportunity being granted.

8.

The averment made by the petitioner that he was just a
baildar and not posted as a driver in MCD is not supported
by his evidence led in defence. DW1 in his cross
examination has merely stated that baildars are class IV
employees whose duties can be changed as per MCD’s
requirement and thus the testimony of defence is of no
assistance to the petitioner. There is nothing on record to
proved the alibi of the petitioner where as it has come on
record that PW1 had seen the petitioner driving the
offending vehicle and was apprehended at the spot with
the offending tanker. The driving license of the petitioner
was also seized which shows that he knew how to drive.

Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

Page No. 5 of 10

9.

In my considered view, there is nothing as such on record
to doubt the credibility of the testimony of PW1 being a
police officer especially in the light of the decision of the
Apex

Court

in

Kamaljit

Singh

v.

State

(Delhi

Administration) (2003) 5 SCC 291 wherein it was held that
the testimony of police personnel should be treated in the
same manner as the testimony of any other witness. Their
testimony could be relied upon without being corroborated
by

the

testimony

of

independent

witnesses.

The

presumption that a person acts honestly applies as much
as in favour of a police personnel as of other persons and
it is not a proper judicial approach to distrust them and
suspect them without good grounds. PW1, the most
crucial witness to this case has fully supported the
prosecution version and has withstood the rigours of cross
examination, thus, in my opinion it was not necessary for
the prosecution to multiply the witnesses on the same
point as rightly held by the trial courts below.
10.

There is no material or evidence on record to show that
the prosecution witnesses had any reason to falsely
implicate the petitioner.

11.

The legal position of speed alone being not the criterion is
not

disputed

but

in

the

present

case,

from

the

examination of the witnesses and material produced on
record, it would not be wrong to suggest that the
Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

Page No. 6 of 10

petitioner was driving the offending vehicle in a rash and
negligent manner. In M. Shafi Goroo v. State, ILR (2000) 1
Del 531, the concept of negligence as analysed in
Halsbury’s Laws of England, (4th Edition) Vol. 34 para1
(pg. 3) and R. v. Caldwell (1981) 1 All ER 961 was
discussed which is as follows:
“Negligence is a specific tort and in any given
circumstances is the failure to exercise that care which
the circumstances demand. What amounts to
negligence depends on the facts of each particular
case. It may consist in omitting to do something which
ought to be done or in doing something which ought to
be done either in a different manner or not at all.
Where there is no duty to exercise care, negligence in
the popular sense has no legal consequence. Where
there is a duty to exercise care, reasonable care must
be taken to avoid acts or omissions which can be
reasonably foreseen to be likely to cause physical
injury to persons or property. The degree of care
required in the particular case depends on the
surrounding circumstances, and may vary according to
the amount of the risk to be encountered and to the
magnitude of the prospective injury. The duty of care
is owed only to those persons who are in the area of
foreseeable danger, the fact that the act of the
defendant violated his duty of care to a third person
does not enable the plaintiff who is also injured by the
same act to claim unless he is also within the area of
foreseeable danger. The same act or omission may
accordingly in some circumstances involve liability as
being negligent, although in other circumstances it will
not do so. The material considerations are the absence
of care which is on the part of the defendant owed to
the plaintiff in the circumstances of the case and
damage suffered by the plaintiff, together with a
demonstrable relation of cause and effect between the
two.”
“..........Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act
does presupose that there is something in the
circumstances that would have drawn the attention of
an ordinary prudent individual to the possibility that
his act was capable of causing the kind of serious
harmful consequences that the section which creates
the offence was intended to prevent, and that the risk
of those harmful consequences occurring was not so
slight that an ordinary prudent individual would feel
justified in treating them as negligible. It is only when
this is so that the doer of the act is acting ‘recklessly’
if, before doing the act he either fails to give any
thought to the possibility of there being any such risk
Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

Page No. 7 of 10

or, having recognized that there was such risk, he
nevertheless goes on to do it.”
(emphasis supplied)

12.

The discussion of the aforesaid shows that where
negligence is attributed as an essential ingredient of the
offence,

the

negligence

to

be

established

by

the

prosecution must be culpable or gross and not negligence
merely based upon an error of judgment. In the present
case, it cannot be lost sight of that the deceased was
walking in the direction of the moving traffic and

the

offending vehicle driven by the petitioner hit the deceased
from behind which means that the deceased in such
circumstances was not expected to see the vehicle which
was coming from behind. Thus, it was petitioner who
owed a duty to take care especially being in the capacity
of a driver who could have foreseen the danger resulting
in such eventuality. In my considered view, in the given
facts and circumstances, the petitioner omitted to act in a
diligent manner causing the death of an innocent person.
In Rattan Singh v. State of Punjab (1979) 4 SCC 719, the
Apex Court observed that rashness and negligence are
relative concepts, not absolute abstractions. In our current
conditions, the law under Section 304-A IPC and under the
rubric of negligence, must have due regard to the fatal
frequency of rash driving of heavy duty vehicles and of
speeding menaces.
Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

Page No. 8 of 10

13.

The position as stated in Raj Kumar’s case (supra) cannot
be doubted but the facts in that case can be distinguished
from the present case. The rationale behind the court
taking such view in the aforesaid decision was the nonexamination of the investigating officer and the other
injured person who were material witnesses to the case
coupled with fact that the prosecution had failed to
establish the “high speed” of offending vehicle. This is not
so in the present case. All the witnesses material for the
case have been examined and rashness and negligence
on the part of the petitioner while driving has also been
proved beyond reasonable doubt.

14.

The learned counsel for the petitioner conscious of the
limited scope of power of revision of the High Court and
the powers sanctioned under section 401 CrPC conferring
powers of an appellate court pleads that the present case
is one where re-appreciation of evidence is required since
the evidence is not of the quality that a prudent man
would come to a finding which would lead to conviction of
the petitioner. I am unable to accept the plea raised by
the Ld. Counsel for the petitioner to re-appreciate
evidence and in my considered view, the concurrent
findings reached by the ld. MM and the ld. ASJ are correct
and do not suffer from

any

infirmity,

illegality

impropriety.
Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

Page No. 9 of 10

or

15.

The case of Lakshmanan’s case (supra) is not of much
relevance to the present case since the factum of
contributory negligence has not been proved against the
deceased. Even if the converse was taken to be true, I do
not deem it fit and proper to reduce/modify the sentence
of the petitioner in the light of the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Dalbir Singh v. State of Haryana, (2000)
5 SCC 82 where was held as under:
“While considering the quantum of sentence to
be imposed for the offence of causing death by
rash or negligent driving of automobiles, one of
the prime considerations should be deterrence.
A professional driver should not take a chance
thinking that even if he is convicted he would be
dealt with leniently by the court. He must always
keep in his mind the fear psyche that if he is
convicted of the offence for causing death of a
human being due to his callous driving of the
vehicle he cannot escape from a jail sentence.
This is the role which the courts can play,
particularly at the level of trial courts, for
lessening the high rate of motor accidents due to
callous driving of automobiles.”

16.

The present case is one where death has been caused of
an innocent person

due to

the

negligence of

the

petitioner.
17.

In view of the aforesaid, the petition and the applications
are dismissed.

APRIL 03, 2008
RA

Crl. Rev. P. No.193 of 2008

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No. 10 of 10

