*
DELHI

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW

+

CRL.REV.P.680/07 & CRL.M.A.12869/07

%

Date of decision:

15.01.2008

SHASHI KANT SINGH & ANR.
...PETITIONERS
Through:Mr.S.C.Sagar and
Mr.Pradeep
Sherawat, Advocates.
Versus
THE STATE (NCT OF DELHI)

...RESPONDENTS

Through: Mr.Pawan Sharma, APP for
the State.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1. The petitioners are aggrieved by the impugned order
dated

01.09.2007

in

terms

whereof

the

learned

Metropolitan Magistrate has directed further investigation
into the matter and filing of a supplementary chargesheet on account of the fact that the trial court has found
that no investigation whatsoever against the owner of the
premises was done.
2. The petitioners are employees of a transport firm M/s.
CRL.REV.P.680/07

Page 1/6

Speedage Express Cargo Services and one deceased
Kailash Chand was sitting on the roof of the container for
counting of articles and got electrocuted.

The order

dated 01.08.2007 shows that in view of the electrical
inspection report showing that the current through the
building came charged because of there being no
earthing of the wires, the proper investigation in that
behalf would have been made.
further

investigate

the

The IO sought time to

matter

and

filed

the

supplementary charge-sheet.
3. Learned counsel for the petitioners seeks to rely upon the
judgment of learned Single Judge of this Court in
Kulbhushan Sharma v. State, 2005 (4) Crimes 619 where
it has been held that the Magistrate has no power to order
further investigation after he has taken cognizance of the
offence in view of the provisions of Section 173(8) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, 'Cr.P.C.'),
which reads as under :“173. Report of the police officer on
completion of investigation. ...

...

...

...

...

...

...

(8) Nothing in this section shall be
deemed to preclude further investigation
in respect of an offence after a report
under
sub-section
(2)
has
been
forwarded to the Magistrate and, where
upon such investigation, the officer in
charge of the police station obtains
further evidence, oral or documentary,
he shall forward to the Magistrate a
CRL.REV.P.680/07

Page 2/6

further report or reports regarding such
evidence in the form prescribed; and the
provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6) shall,
as far as may be, apply in relation to
such report or reports as they apply in
relation to a report forwarded under subsection (2).”
4. Learned APP, however, submits that the issue sought to
be raised by the petitioners is covered by a Full Bench
judgment of this Court in Rajneesh Kumar Singhal v. State
(National Capital Territory of Delhi), 2001 (2) Crimes 346
(FB) where it has been held that the Magistrate is
empowered to direct further investigation under Section
173(8) of the Cr.P.C. even in a case where police after
investigation filed the challan and the Magistrate takes
cognizance of the offence. The rationale for the same is
explained in the judgment that restricting the powers of a
Magistrate

would

adversely

affect

administration

of

justice.
5. At this stage, when a judgment is pointed out, learned
counsel for the petitioners submits that he is aware of the
judgment, but that he seeks to challenge the procedure
by which further investigation has to be made.
6. Learned counsel in this behalf relies upon the judgment of
the Apex Court in Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi v. State of
Gujarat & Ors., AIR 2004 SC 2078 where it is observed in
para 13 as under :“13. In Om Prakash Narang and another
v. State (Delhi Admn.) (AIR 1979 SC
CRL.REV.P.680/07

Page 3/6

1791) it was observed by this Court that
further investigation is not altogether
ruled out merely because cognizance
has been taken by the Court. When
defective investigation comes to light
during course of trial, it may be cured by
further investigation if circumstances so
permitted.
It would ordinarily be
desirable and all the more so in this case
that police should inform the Court and
seek formal permission to make further
investigation when fresh facts come to
light instead of being silent over the
matter keeping in view only the need for
an early trial since an effective trial for
real or actual offences found during
course f proper investigation is as much
relevant, desirable and necessary as an
expeditious disposal of the matter by the
Courts. In view of the aforesaid position
in law if there is necessity for further
investigation the same can certainly be
done as prescribed by law. The mere
fact that there may be further delay in
concluding the trial should not stand on
the way of further investigation if that
would help the Court in arriving at the
truth and do real and substantial as well
as effective justice. We make it clear
that we have not expressed any final
opinion on the merits of the case.”
7. On appreciation of the submissions made by learned
counsel for the parties, it is obvious that the judgment of
R.S. Sodhi, J. in Kulbhushan Sharma's case (supra) has
been pronounced without considering the Full Bench
judgment of this Court in Rajneesh Kumar Singhal's case
(supra). The judgment appears to have not been brought
to the notice of the learned Single Judge and it was the
bounden-duty of the counsels to have done so. The result
is that the judgment of the learned Single Judge runs in

CRL.REV.P.680/07

Page 4/6

the teeth of the pronouncement by the Full Bench of this
Court.

In fact, while the petitioner has referred in the

present petition to the judgment of Kulbhushan Sharma's
case (supra), it has made no reference to the judgment of
Rajneesh Kumar Singhal's case (supra) whereas it was his
bounden-duty to have done so. It is the privilege of the
counsel to distinguish a judgment after bringing it to the
notice of the Court, but the privilege does not extend not
to refer to a Full Bench judgment of the Court and instead
refer to a Single Bench judgment of this Court, which is
contrary to the Full Bench judgment.
8. Be that as it may, the plea of learned counsel for the
petitioners is ex facie liable to be rejected in view of the
pronouncement of the Full Bench of this Court in Rajneesh
Kumar Singhal's case (supra).
9. Insofar as the second limb of the argument of the learned
counsel for the petitioner, which arose on the Full Bench
judgment being pointed out in Court, the same is
predicated on the absence of following the procedure as
discussed in Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi's case (supra).
In the said judgment, all that the Court has stated is that
it would ordinarily be desirable that the police should
inform the Court and seek formal permission to make
further investigation when fresh facts come to light. The
present case is not of that category at all and is one
CRL.REV.P.680/07

Page 5/6

where the Court is of the opinion that the police has failed
to carry out the task assigned to it in terms of the proper
investigation. The impugned order records the reason for
the Court to form such an opinion and the IO took time to
carry

out

the

further

investigation

and

filed

the

supplementary charge-sheet.
10.I am of the considered view that the present petition is
not only without any merits but also amounts to an abuse
of the process of the Court and is accordingly dismissed
with costs quantified at Rs.10,000/- to be deposited with
Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee.
CRL.M.A.12869/2007
The application does not survive for consideration and
is disposed of.

January 15, 2008

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

madan

CRL.REV.P.680/07

Page 6/6

