*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P.732/07 & CRL.M.A.14037-38/07

%

Date of decision:

PRAKASH CHANDRA

15.01.2008

...PETITIONER
Through:Mr.K.K.Jha, Advocate
Versus

STATE OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS.

...RESPONDENTS

Through: Mr.Jaideep Malik, APP for the
State/R-1.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
Crl. M.A. No.14038/2007
Allowed subject to just exceptions.
Crl. Rev. P. No.732/2007
1. The present case is an unfortunate one where a young bride
committed suicide.

The father of the deceased/bride alleges

that it is not a case of suicide, either she has been killed or
circumstances

have

been

created

where

she

has

been

2. The deceased had a love marriage with her husband.

Even

compelled to commit suicide.

CRL.REV.P.732/07

Page 1/6

after the marriage the girl continued to stay with her parents
for six months without informing them of the marriage.

The

girl's side of the family refused to accept the marriage while the
boy's side of the family accepted the girl as their daughter-inlaw and she started staying in their house.
3. The statement made by the petitioner herein (father of the
deceased) before the Executive Magistrate is an admission of
the fact that the resistance to the marriage came from the girl's
side and the girl was extremely unhappy with her family for not
accepting the marriage. However all pursuation on her part fell
on deaf ears.
4. There is only one allegation made by the petitioner that about
fifteen (15) days prior to the death of the deceased she had
met with her mother and had asked her whether her father
would be willing to advance about Rs.4.00-5.00 lakh to her
husband, who wanted to start a business but that request was
declined by her father. There is no allegation of any demand
being made by the husband or his family members on the
parents of the girl. In fact, there was practically no interaction
on account of the girl's side not accepting the marriage.
5. It is also to be taken note of that a suicide note was also found
at the place of death and the cause of death is asphyxiation.
6. The learned Additional Sessions Judge in terms of the impugned
order found that there was no material on record to frame the
charges and thus discharged the accused which included

CRL.REV.P.732/07

Page 2/6

practically all members of the family of the husband of the
deceased, who had been arrayed as accused.
7. The learned Additional Sessions Judge has come to the
conclusion that there is not an iota of evidence on record to
show that any cruelty or harassment on account of dowry has
taken place on the deceased. The only allegation is that the
deceased, at one occasion had requested the petitioner to help
her husband by advancing an amount of Rs.4.00-5.00 lakh to
start a business.

This is not only established from the

statement recorded of the petitioner but also from the
statement recorded of the wife of the petitioner.

The trial

court, thus, found that there was no nexus between the said
request made by the deceased and her demise.
8. The trial court also found that even in the statement of the
petitioner there is no whisper of any harsh language used
either by the husband of the deceased or any of his family
member nor any demand for dowry was made by them. In fact,
the stand of the family members of the boy's side was that they
wanted their daughter-in-law to live with them. The deceased
was residing with her in-laws contrary to the wishes of her
parents.

The suicide note was shown to the petitioner, who

initially admitted the hand writing of the deceased but stated
subsequently that he has some doubts on account of demise of
her daughter.
9. Learned counsel for the petitioner, once again, seeks to plead

CRL.REV.P.732/07

Page 3/6

that there was no appreciation of the material on record by the
trial court and the trial court is not required to go into the
detailed scrutiny at the stage of framing of charges.

It is

further submitted that the MLC report shows some anti-mortem
injury and the statement was made by one of the friends of the
father of the deceased which cannot be ignored.
10.It is trite to say that at the stage of framing of charges, the
trial court does not have to go through the detailed scrutiny of
evidence but has to sift evidence on record and other
documents for the limited purpose of ascertaining whether
prima facie case is made out against the accused.

In this

behalf, the judgement of the Apex Court in Niranjan Singh
Karam Singh Punjabi, Advocate Vs. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya &
Ors.

(1990)

4

SCC

76

can

be

usefully

referred

to.

Simultaneously it cannot be lost sight of that the trial court
while framing charges is not to act merely as a post office or a
mouthpiece of prosecution and has to ascertain whether a
prima facie case has been made out. Thus, where two views
equally possible and the evidence gives rise to suspicion but
not grave suspicion, the accused can be discharged (Ref:
Dilawar Balu Kurane Vs. State of Maharashtra (2002) 2 SCC
135).
11.If the aforesaid parameters are applied to the present case, in
my considered view, no fault can be found with the impugned
order of the trial court. The trial court has in depth analysed

CRL.REV.P.732/07

Page 4/6

the material produced by the prosecution and the statements
recorded of the parents of the deceased are material.

The

statements do show that it is a case where the parents of the
girl resisted to the marriage of the daughter against their wish
to an extent that even on the said marriage having been
solemnised in the Arya Samaj Mandir by the parties, they
refused to accept the same. It is the boy's side who accepted
the decision of the couple and wanted the girl to reside with
them in their house.

The statements do show that the

deceased was bothered by the non-acceptance of her marriage
by her father and that is what her mother had stated.
12.The only element of alleged financial demand is stated in both
the statement of the father and mother of the deceased to be
arising from the request of their daughter for some money to
help her husband to start the business which the father
declined. There was never any demand made nor the girl ever
stated that any such demand was made by the husband or her
family members. The statement of the friend of the father of
the deceased has to be appreciated in that context where also
the girl had expressed her unhappiness at her father not
accepting the marriage and wanting the friend of her father to
intervene on her behalf but to no avail. It is only at the alleged
subsequent meeting at a market that a conversation is alleged
to have taken place with the friend of the father stating about
Rs.4.00-5.00 lakh not being paid by the father, which were

CRL.REV.P.732/07

Page 5/6

required by her husband to start a business.
13.The MLC report has also been perused and does not show any
such injuries, which could give rise to suspicion of any foul play
prior to the suicide committed by the deceased.
14.The demise of the deceased and her decision to commit
suicide appears to have direct linkage with the factum of her
family refusing to accept the marriage when it came to light
almost six months after the same had taken place and the
persistence of her father in not accepting the marriage even
thereafter.
15.There is no merit in the petition.
16.Dismissed.
CRL.M.A.14037/2007
The application does not survive for consideration and is
disposed of.

JANUARY 15, 2008
b'nesh

CRL.REV.P.732/07

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page 6/6

