*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

BAIL APPLN.No.241/2008
Reserved on : 12.02.2008

%

Date of decision : 18.02.2008

ARUN KUMAR GUPTA
... PETITIONER
Through :Mr.Pradeep Jain, Advocate
-VERSUSDIRECTORATE OF REVENUE INTELLIGENCE,
NEW DELHI
...RESPONDENT
Through : Mr.P.P.Malhotra, ASG with Mr.Satish
Aggarwal, Advocate with
Mr.Deepankar Aron, Jt.Director, DRI;
Mr.Harish Kumar, Dy.Director, DRI;
Mr.S.K.pandey, Appraiser, DRI; and
Mr.Sushil Kumar, Intelligence Officer,
DRI.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. The petitioner being the working partner of one M/s Shri
Balaji Oversees, a partnership firm registered in Mumbai
dealing in the business of export till 2003 seeks an
anticipatory bail under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (hereinafter referred to as the said 'Code') for

Bail Appln.241/2008

Page No.1 of 10

alleged violations of provisions of Customs Act, 1962 (in
short the said Act).
2. The brief facts relevant for disposal of the present
application are that the petitioner during the period from
June 2002 to Jan 2003 exported certain consignments
covered under 8 shipping bills wherein the shipping bills
covered under serial number 1-4 were made to Dubai from
Bombay in Dollar value which were assessed by the
Customs authorities and thereafter the drawback amount @
12.25% was credited into the account of the petitioner and
the

remaining

4

consignments

were

exported

under

Repayment of State Credit Scheme (popularly known as the
Rupee-Rubal Agreement) for which also the drawback back
amount

had

been credited into

the

account

of

the

petitioner. It is stated that the petitioner accordingly
withdrew a sum of Rs. 32, 75,000/- but before the remaining
amount of Rs. 36, 87, 493/- could be withdrawn by the
petitioner,

the

respondent/Directorate

of

Revenue

Intelligence (in short 'DRI') authorities freezed the said
account of the petitioner in 2003. On two occasions, the
petitioner's statement was recorded in April, 2003 and later
in April, 2004.
3. It is the case of the petitioner that the petitioner at many
instances made several requests to the DRI to de-freeze his
account including the communication made on 15-10-2005,
12-11-2005, 08-12-2005 and 06-02-2006 but to no avail and
instead was issued summons dated 08-06-2006 and 04-082006 from DRI, Delhi requiring the presence of the
petitioner which are stated to be complied with on 19-062006

and

04-09-2006

respectively

by

the

petitioner.

Further, a complaint u/s 173/174 of the Indian Penal Code
(in short 'IPC') was filed by the respondent before the Ld.
ACMM, New Delhi for non-compliance of summons. The

Bail Appln.241/2008

Page No.2 of 10

petitioner sought personal exemption from appearance on
medical grounds but the Ld. ACMM issued NBWs against the
petitioner.

In

the

meantime,

the

petitioner

filed

an

application for anticipatory bail before the Sessions Court,
Mumbai and subsequently filed a revision petition before
the Sessions Court, Delhi against the order of the Ld. ACMM,
Delhi wherein the Ld. Sessions Court, Delhi stayed the NBWs
and directed the petitioner to appear before the Ld. ACMM,
Delhi on 19-12-2007. On 12-12-2007, the Ld. Sessions
Court, Mumbai disposed of the said Anticipatory bail
application of the petitioner as not maintainable on the
ground

that

the

respondent/DRI

did

not

require

the

petitioner to be arrested and that the offence under section
135 of the said Act was bailable. On 19-12-2007, the
petitioner appeared before the Ld. ACMM, Delhi and was
admitted to bail for bailable offence.
4. It is further submitted that the respondent tried to
physically lift the petitioner from outside the court of ACMM,
Delhi which even led to a scuffle on account of summons
being served to the petitioner for appearing before the
respondent soon after the court proceedings. It is the case
of the petitioner that such recourse was taken by the DRI
even before the petitioner could furnish his bail bonds and
in spite of having given an undertaking that the petitioner
was not required to be arrested. It is averred that the
petitioner apprehending arrest in view of the incident of 1912-2007 filed an anticipatory bail application before the
Sessions Court, Delhi on 15-01-2008 which was dismissed
on 23-01-2008. Hence the present petition wherein this
court was pleased to grant interim protection to the
petitioner on his undertaking that he shall join the
investigation and appear before the officer concerned of
DRI. The DRI was directed to produce relevant material in a

Bail Appln.241/2008

Page No.3 of 10

sealed cover which was so produced.
5. The learned counsel for the parties were heard at length.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the
case pertained to 2003 and therefore arrest in 2008 is
unwarranted and also that the respondent/DRI itself had
conceded before the sessions court, Mumbai that the
petitioner is not required to be arrested. It was also the
petitioner's case that the DRI, Delhi had no jurisdiction since
the matter relates to Mumbai and no cause of action has
arisen in Delhi for DRI, Delhi to have jurisdiction. It is
submitted that that the alleged over valuation in respect of
first eight shipments is belated and is not substantiated with
any evidence. In regard to the diversion of remaining four
shipments to Dubai, the petitioner's plea is that the
respondent has not contented that such goods were not
exported therefore once such goods were exported and
crossed the territorial waters of India, the petitioner became
entitled to the incentive by way of duty drawback. Reliance
was placed on the cases of Terai Oversees Ltd. v. UOI 2001
(129) ELT 574 (Cal.); Collector of Custom v. Sun Industries
1988 (35) ELT 241 (SC) and UOI v. Rajindra Dyeing &
Printing Mills Ltd. 2005 (180) ELT 433 wherein it was held
that if the ship has left the Indian port and passed beyond
the territorial waters of India, the title of the goods passes
to the purchasers and the export of such goods are to be
treated as complete as also the fact that the granting of
benefit of drawback duty can be given in the event the
conditions under section 75 of the said Act being fulfilled by
the exporter. Therefore, when the Customs Authority is
satisfied that the goods are brought for export and the
clearance thereof is permitted and particularly when the
consideration for export has been released and/or ensured
then nothing is to be looked into for the purpose of granting

Bail Appln.241/2008

Page No.4 of 10

benefit of drawback duty, no matter whether the goods
have been received by the consignee concerned.
6. Further, it was submitted that the petitioner has not
received any complaint from the foreign buyer or their bank
in Russia and all the payments were duly received through
proper banking channels in accordance with law. The money
had been received through RBI into petitioner's bank
account from buyers bank in Russia under the agreement. It
is also contented that similar allegations have been made
by DRI against other exporters where transactions worth
100 crores have taken place (whose particulars have also
been provided by the petitioner) but none of them have
been arrested by DRI so far for verification and investigation
purposes.
7. The petitioner's averment is that the DRI is a creature of
statute and is governed by the provisions of the said Act
wherein at most they have power to arrest u/s 104 for
alleged contravention u/s 135 upon which the person
accused can be taken into judicial custody and not police
custody and for which the maximum punishment if found
guilty can be up to 3 years or fine or both. There is no power
to investigate under the said Act for such alleged transfer
and such power is vested under the FEMA which indicts the
person only with civil liability and no criminal liability can be
foisted upon such person.
8. The learned counsel for the petitioner also pleads that the
said offence u/s 135 (1) (ii) of the said Act is held bailable in
the cases of Avinash Bhosle v. UOI; Order dated 27-08-2007
in Crl. Appeal No. 1138/2007; Joint Commissioner of
Custom, Punjab v. Kulbhushan Goyal Crl. M.P. 10436/06
decided on 31/10/2006; Sangit Krishna Kumar Aggrwal v.
UOI; Crl. Appl.No. 272/2007 decided on 06-02-2007.
9. The

petitioner

Bail Appln.241/2008

was

stated

to

have

already

joined

Page No.5 of 10

investigation as per the direction of this Court vide order
dated 04-02-2008 and further undertook to join the
investigation and did not wish to realize the remaining
amount of Rs. 36, 87, 493/- lying with DRI pending the
adjudication proceedings.
10.On the other hand, it is the case of DRI that the
investigations conducted so far reveal that the petitioner
has availed of the drawback amounting to Rs. 68,87,513/(export value of approx. Rs. 5.74 crores) and fraudulently
remitted Rs. 3 crores from RBI against ostensible exports to
Russia under the Indo-Russia Rupee Rouble Agreement but
the goods never reached Russia which is in violation of the
said Agreement and provisions of the Exim Policy and the
Customs Act. To substantiate its case, the attention of this
court was brought to the evidence collected (marked as
Annexure 'A' brought in sealed cover) which indicated that
the Russian consignee was neither registered nor existed at
the given address in Moscow as also that the said
consignments reached Dubai instead of Russia and in view
of such fictitious exports to Russia and diversion of goods to
Dubai, it appeared that certain financial transactions were
effected by the petitioner to give an ostensible cover of
credibility to the exports as so declared. It was also
indicated that the statement of the accomplice, showed that
it was the petitioner who had directed him to book the
container only for Dubai and had also paid him to meet the
freight expenses. Further, that during search, the petitioner
did not co-operate in the investigations and there were
details of huge cash transactions on behalf of the petitioner
which required deeper probe. On the whole, it is averred
that the money laundering that appears to have been done
by the petitioner needs investigation since its implications
concern National Security as well.

Bail Appln.241/2008

Page No.6 of 10

11.The second submission made on behalf of DRI was that the
conduct of the petitioner has been malafide on account of
his failure to appear before the DRI and non co-operation
with the investigation in spite of repeated summons.
12.The respondent contends that DRI, Delhi is the head
quarters and assumes jurisdiction all over India and thus,
the petitioner's case falls well within the jurisdiction of the
respondent.
13.In so far as the bailability of the said offence is concerned,
the respondent pleaded that during the period of the
alleged export, the unamended section 135(1) (ii) of the
said Act was applicable where the punishment prescribed is
imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three
years or fine or both. Since the said Act is a Special statute,
Table II of the First Schedule of the said Code would be
applicable, which makes the offence non-bailable. It is
stated that in case the offence committed by the petitioner
is considered under the amended Customs Act, section
135(1)(i) would be applicable since the drawback claimed
exceeds Rs. 30 lakhs in which case the punishment
prescribed is up to seven years and with fine. The
respondent's contention of the offence u/s 135(1) (ii) of the
unamended Act being non-bailable is further supported by
three decisions of this Court in Mohan Lal Thapar v. Y.P.
Dabra, Inspector of Customs, New Customs House, New
Delhi 2002(1) JCC 460, Inderjeet Nagpal v. Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence 2005 (1) JCC 433 and Lalit Goel v.
Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi, B.A.No. 2102/2007
decided on 02-11-2007. it is the case of the respondent that
the judgment of Avinash Bhosle(supra) would not be
applicable since the matter is sub-judice on account of the
fact that the Government has filed a review against the said
order. The respondent has also made an attempt to

Bail Appln.241/2008

Page No.7 of 10

distinguish the case of Terai Overseas (supra) and Sun
Industries case (Supra) with the present one wherein it is
stated that the facts of the present case are different from
the cases mentioned aforesaid and thus, the ratio of both
the cases cannot be applied to the present case.
14.I have given deep thought to the rival contentions
advanced by learned counsel for the parties.

In fact,

Mr.Deepankar Aron, Joint Director, DRI, ably assisted
learned ASG and did explain before the Court the suspicion
of the Department about the nature of transaction and the
requirement of custodial interrogation very succinctly.
15.The first aspect to be taken note of is that the transaction
relates to the period of June, 2002 to January, 2003. The
matter has been under investigation since 2003 itself when
the account of the petitioner of the Duty Drawback receipt
was frozen to preserve the balance amount relating to the
alleged export to Russia. As per the direction of this Court,
the petitioner has joined the investigation and a statement
has been recorded.

The grievance of the Department is

that the petitioner is not forth-coming with the true facts as
to how the shipment was diverted to Dubai and how the
monies were routed from Dubai.

The stand of the

petitioner, of course, is that he has no knowledge about the
same as he had only exported the goods to Russia and the
transactions to Dubai could have been routed by some
fictitious party in Russia and the petitioner had no reason to
suspect the same. Learned counsel for the petitioner has
rightly pointed out that there is no question of any custodial
interrogation since in case of detention, the petitioner has
to be sent to judicial remand. The Custom Authorities unlike
the police authorities cannot take the petitioner into
custody for custodial interrogation and that proposition is
not even disputed by the respondent.

Bail Appln.241/2008

Page No.8 of 10

16.The aforesaid shows that there will be no purpose served by
taking the petitioner into custody.

I am unable to agree

with the proposition propounded by the Department that
there are chances of the petitioner tampering with the
evidence.

This is so since the transaction in question is

already five years old and the alleged illegality was
detected also about five years ago. Thus, even though as
per the Department the transaction in question is part of a
larger scam, in the particular case the transaction is not of
large value and is limited to one set of transaction which
was known to the Department.
17.It is, however, not possible to accept the plea of the learned
counsel for the petitioner that the offence is bailable for the
reason that this Court on previous occasions has taken a
view that the offences under the relevant provisions are not
bailable.

If the offences would have been bailable, there

would have been no occasion to apply for anticipatory bail.
18.No doubt the transaction relates to Mumbai, but there is
force in the contention of the Department that Delhi Office
has All-India jurisdiction and since they are investigating
into a larger scam, the Delhi Office cannot be said to have
no jurisdiction to investigate into the matter in question. In
the present case the monies have been received in India
against the goods which have been exported.

The only

question is of the destination to which the goods went and
as to whether there were any routing of funds from Dubai
and as to how the payments were made under the RupeeRubal exchange.

It also cannot be lost sight of that the

Department is investigating into the offences only under the
said Act.
19.I am, thus, inclined to grant anticipatory bail to the
petitioner on the following terms and conditions:
i)

The petitioner will join the investigation as and when

Bail Appln.241/2008

Page No.9 of 10

required by the respondent/Department;
ii)

In case the petitioner is arrested, he shall be enlarged

on bail on furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs.5.00
lacs with one surety of the like amount.
Iii)

The petitioner will not seek release of the remaining

Duty Drawback amount which is lying frozen till the
investigation is completed;
iv)

The

petitioner

consequently

would

will
not

surrender
travel

his

abroad

passport

and

without

prior

permission of the DRI, Delhi or without permission of this
Court.
20. The petition is accordingly allowed.

FEBRUARY 18, 2008
'ra/sp'

Bail Appln.241/2008

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.10 of 10

