*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

BAIL APPLICATION NO.1557 of 2007
Reserved on: 04.01.2008
Date of decision: 14.01.2008

%
MR. HARISH
Through:

...PETITIONER
Mr. R.S. Juneja, Advocate.

Versus
THE STATE OF DELHI
Through:

...RESPONDENT
Mr. Pawan Sharma,Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. The petitioner was married to deceased, Ms. Jyoti. The petitioner
is charged with offences under Sections 498-A/304-B/34 IPC.
2. Late Ms. Jyoti died in the house of the petitioner and the FIR was
registered in pursuance to the statement of the father of the
deceased. One child born out of the wedlock is staying with the
father of the deceased.

In the statement, the father Shri Amar

Nath

his

had

stated

that

daughter

was

harassed

in

the

matrimonial home by the husband, the in-laws and the sister-inlaw and the family members used to allege that his daughter was
having an illicit relationship with her brother-in-law (husband of
Bail Application No.1557 of 2007

Page No.1 of 5

the sister of the petitioner).

The deceased was also alleged to

have been harassed for dowry. The bail application filed by the
petitioner before the learned Additional Sessions Judge was
dismissed on 2.6.2007.
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the deceased
committed suicide and even a written note was found of the
deceased. The co-accused have all been released on bail while
the petitioner is languishing in jail since 16.6.2005.

The earlier

bail application of the petitioner was dismissed as withdrawn on
11.1.2007 on account of the fact that Section 302 IPC had been
added along with other provisions by the learned Sessions Court
vide order dated 16.12.2006. The investigation is stated to have
been completed and thus there was no chance of the petitioner
absconding. Learned counsel for the petitioner sought to produce
a copy of the writings of the deceased to show that it was a case
of suicide. Learned counsel further referred to the judgement of
the learned single Judge of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in
Kirpal Singh @ Dyal Singh Vs. State of Punjab II (2000) CCR 551
where bail was granted on grounds of parity even in a case where
the accused was charged under Section 302 IPC.
4. Learned counsel for the State, on the other hand, referred to the
judgement of the learned single Judge of this Court in Mukesh
Singh Vs. State 2003 (2) JCC 1102 to contend that the seriousness
of the offence, the character of evidence, circumstances which are
peculiar to the accused and the apprehension of the witnesses
being tampered with are aspects to be considered. Thus, larger

Bail Application No.1557 of 2007

Page No.2 of 5

interest of public and State and similar other considerations had to
weigh for grant of bail. Learned counsel further referred to the
judgement of the Apex Court in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar Etc. Vs.
Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav & Anr. 2005 Crl.L.J. 944 (SC) where
it was held that an accused charged for non-bailable offences
would not be entitled to make successive bail applications on
grounds already rejected by the Courts earlier merely on account
of being deprived of his liberty. It was, thus, held that the Courts
are bound by the doctrine of judicial discipline having regard to
the hierarchical system prevailing in the country and thus the
findings of a higher court or a co-ordinate Bench must receive
serious consideration at the hands of the Court entertaining a bail
application at a later stage.
5. On hearing learned counsels for the parties, it is apparent that the
earlier bail application was withdrawn on account of the fact that
on that date the petitioner was charged under Section 302 IPC.
Thus, the withdrawal of the application cannot be an impediment
to the petitioner preferring the present application and thus the
principles in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar Etc. case (supra) would not
apply.
6. A perusal of the order passed by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge shows that there are certain peculiar facts to the present
case. The postmortem report of the deceased gives the time of
death 10 to 12 hours from the time of examination which took
place on 15.6.2005 at 2:35 p.m., which would show that the death
took place in the night of 14/15.6.2005 at about 2:35 a.m. - 4:35

Bail Application No.1557 of 2007

Page No.3 of 5

a.m.

Thus, the statement of the petitioner that he was not at

home at the time of death and had left early in the morning
should not be acceptable.

The postmortem report showed

fracture of thyroid cartridge and massive bruising in the adjacent
tissue. The mouth of the victim was closed and the photographs
showed that the tongue was not protruded.

Another important

aspect is that there was no scissor or chunni lying in the room
when the complainant reached the site. The SDM also noted that
there were blue marks on the left hand wrist and the eyes were
partly closed.

It is in view thereof that the learned Additional

Sessions Judge found that if it had been a case of suicide, normal
human nature would require that there would have been hue &
cry inviting attention including from the neighbours. Nobody had
witnessed the victim in the hanging position.
7. On consideration of the matter the approach of the learned
Additional Sessions Judge cannot be faulted.

The aforesaid are

material considerations in appreciating the plea of the petitioner
that the case was one of suicide. A material aspect was that if the
time of death is taken into account, the same occurred in the
night when the husband and wife were in the bed room.

The

petitioner left only in the morning at about 7:00 a.m. The
postmortem report shows a ligature mark which is transruse,
continuous and completely encircling the neck.
8. The petitioner cannot claim parity with others who, in normal
course, would not be in the bed room in the middle of the night
when the husband and wife were present. Thus, the role of the

Bail Application No.1557 of 2007

Page No.4 of 5

husband is more aggravated in respect of the incident.
9. The aforesaid being the position, I am not inclined to grant any
bail at this stage.
10.Dismissed.

JANUARY 14, 2008
b'nesh

Bail Application No.1557 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.5 of 5

