*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Rev. P. No. 468 of 2006
Date of Decision : 14.02.2008

%

SUNITA

... ...
...
...
...
PETITIONER
Through:Mr.Rakesh Sherawat,Advocate
-VERSUS-

SATVIR SINGH & ORS. .
...
...
...
...
.RESPONDENTS
Through:Mr.Amit Ahlawat, Advocate for R-1.
Mr.Pawan Sharma, APP for R-2.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1. On a complaint being filed by the petitioner, an FIR 754/1999
u/s 376 IPC at P.S. Nangloi, was lodged whereby the accused,
respondent

no.1,

was

alleged

to

have

subjected

the

petitioner to sexual assault. The petitioner is the wife of a
Police Constable while respondent no.1 is also a Police
Constable. The allegation is that between 7th to 9th July, 1999
the petitioner was subjected to sexual assault against her will
and consent.

Crl. Rev. P. No. 468 of 2006

Page No.1 of 6

2. The accused is alleged to have rung up the complainant and
asked her to come near Shiv Shakti School for some work
under the threat of getting her son abducted. On reaching
the destination, the complainant was asked to accompany
the accused under the same threat and it is alleged that the
complainant was taken to a deserted place where there was
only one room where the victim/petitioner was subjected to
sexual assault despite objection. The complainant, however,
informed

her

husband

about

the

occurrence

only

on

19.7.1999, when the case was registered.
3. The two parties were residing in adjoining houses.

The

accused is stated to have developed a friendship with the
husband of the complainant and used to visit the house on
different pretexts even in his absence.

In the statement

made before the police, the complainant has alleged that
even 5-6 months prior to the incident, the accused had
visited her house at about 12.00 Noon on the pretext of
making a telephone call and subjected her to sexual assault
at revolver point.

This is stated to have occurred even

thereafter and on one day even the daughter of the
complainant noticed the accused leaving the house after she
arrived at the house.
4. Charges were framed on 13.9.2000 for offences u/s 376/506
Part II IPC against the accused and the accused pleaded not
guilty and claimed trial.

Crl. Rev. P. No. 468 of 2006

In terms of the judgment dated

Page No.2 of 6

22.3.2006 the accused was acquitted. The State did not file
any appeal and the revision petition has been filed by the
complainant / prosecutrix.
5. Learned counsel for the parties have been heard at length.
6. Before examining the matter on merits, it has to be kept in
mind that this Court is examining the matter in exercise of
revisional jurisdiction, which jurisdiction u/s 397 IPC r/w
Section 401 Cr.P.C. against an acquittal order is limited. The
law enunciated by the Supreme Court in Thankappan Nadar
& Ors. Vs. Gopala Krishnan & Anr., (2002) 9 SCC 393 does
not empower the Court exercising the revisional jurisdiction
to re-appreciate evidence.

There has to be a procedural

illegality or a manifest error of law for this Court to interfere.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgment
of the Apex Court in Visveswaran Vs. State Rep. by SDM, AIR
2003 SC 2471 to contend that on examination of evidence in
cases of rape being tried u/s 376 IPC, the approach to be
adopted by the Courts has to be different and the Court is
not to get swayed by minor contradiction or discrepancies
and defective investigation. Thus, evidence is required to be
appreciated having regard to the background of the entire
case and not in isolation and the ground realities are to be
kept in view.
8. A perusal of the impugned judgment shows that the evidence
produced on behalf of the prosecution has been examined

Crl. Rev. P. No. 468 of 2006

Page No.3 of 6

minutely by the learned ASJ. One of the aspects which has
weighed with the trial court is the non-disclosure of the
commission of sexual assault for a period of 5-6 months from
the first such incident alleged by the complainant.

The

present case is not one where a Police Constable/accused
could use his unequal bargaining power since the husband of
the complainant is also a Police Constable.

On one of the

dates, when the daughter of the complainant reached home
from school and on opening the door she noticed the accused
leaving the house from the rear door. Even that incident was
never disclosed by the complainant to her husband and, in
fact, told her daughter that the accused had come there to
make a telephone call from their house. In her deposition,
the daughter has stated that while she was entering the
house, she pressed the door bell of the main door, which
would naturally arise if the door bell was functioning.
However, the complainant stated in her cross-examination
that the door bell was out of order, whereas in her
examination-in-chief she herself admitted that she opened
the door when the door bell was pressed by her daughter.
The deposition of the daughter also shows that when she
found the accused leaving the house, the complainant looked
scared and surprised.
9. Insofar as the particular incident is concerned, the accused is
alleged to have rung up the complainant while she was

Crl. Rev. P. No. 468 of 2006

Page No.4 of 6

present in the house. There was no immediate threat to her
or her husband, who was working in the Delhi Police, but she
chose not to call him and decided to join the accused. The
sketch plan prepared of the place of incident by the IO did
not find mention of the existence of any room in the plot
where the sexual assault is alleged to have taken place. The
IO tried to explain the same by stating in his deposition that
there was a room without any door.
10. One

of

the

important

material

aspects

is

that

the

complainant admitted to have written various letters in her
handwriting when confronted in the cross-examination.
These letters are exhibited as Ex.PW1/DA to PW1/D8. These
letters show the affection which the complainant had for the
accused wherein she has alleged mal-treatment by her own
family.

In fact, the case of the accused is that when the

husband of the complainant was informed about the letters, a
quarrel took place with her husband and thereafter the case
was registered. The letters are in endearing terms addressed
to

the

accused

which

express

the

intention

of

the

complainant to periodically join the company of the accused.
The trial court rightly found that the story of the complainant
that these letters were written under threat was not
believable in the context of the evidence available on the
record.
11. The medical evidence has also been considered by the trial

Crl. Rev. P. No. 468 of 2006

Page No.5 of 6

court and the trial court found that the said evidence did not
suggest that the complainant was subjected to sexual
assault.

Testimony of the expert witness also did not help

the case of the complainant and no semen was detected on
the relevant exhibits.
12. The aforesaid evidence has been discussed even though
strictly speaking it is not the function of this Court to reappraise the evidence.

This is so as the nature of offence

persuaded this Court to look deeper into the matter.
13. On a conspectus of the aforesaid, I do not find any
procedural illegality or manifest error of law which requires
this Court to interfere with the impugned order.
14. Dismissed.
15. Trial court record be sent back.

February 14, 2008
‘sp’

Crl. Rev. P. No. 468 of 2006

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.6 of 6

