*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Rev. P. No.564 of 2004
Reserved on: 11.01.2008
Date of decision:18.01.2008

%
MR. SUNIL MOHAN
Through:

...PETITIONER
Mr. M.R. Vij, Advocate for the
Petitioner with Petitioner in
person.

Versus
THE STATE Through its SECRETARY
...RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. A complaint was made on 30.6.1993 by the Section Officer,
Ministry of Labour on account of the forged bank guarantee
No.93/93 dated 5.3.1993 for Rs.1.00 lakh being submitted on
behalf of M/s. First Flight International.

In pursuance to the

complaint FIR No.260/93 was registered on 24.7.1993 under
Sections 420/467/468/471/120-B/511 IPC against one Mohammad
Yunus. The investigation further revealed that one Mr. Surender
Kumar Bagga had connived with the said Mohammad Yunus and
the petitioner and some other unknown persons to hatch a
conspiracy to cheat the Ministry of Labour by submitting forged

Crl. Rev. P. No.564 of 2004

Page No.1 of 4

documents in order to obtain a registration as a recruiting agent
under the Immigration Act, 1983 (hereinafter referred to as the
said Act).

M/s. First Flight International was shown as a sole

proprietorship concern of Mohammad Yunus and the bank
guarantee in question was submitted to the Ministry of Labour.
2. The case against the petitioner is that the public hearings had
been attended by him on behalf of Mohammad Yunus and Form
No.11 was also filed by the petitioner in the capacity of the
Manager of the said firm. Two of the certificates filed along with
the application were also found to be forged.

Certain other

documents were also found to be forged. The CFSL report also
found against the petitioner.
3. The claim of the petitioner is that no revenue loss was caused as
Mohammad Yunus was never issued a registration certificate.
Mohammad Yunus has still not been located and an inquiry is
pending but charges have been framed against the petitioner. The
petitioner is aggrieved by the charges being so framed in terms of
the order dated 5.7.2004.
4. Learned counsels for the parties were heard at length. The plea of
the petitioner is that the petitioner had been assisting in locating
Mohammad Yunus and giving necessary information. An affidavit
was also filed by the petitioner.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner pleaded that the petitioner was
a small fry and the business was being run by Mohammad Yunus,
the details of whom have been given by the petitioner. It is
pleaded that the petitioner has been falsely implicated.

Crl. Rev. P. No.564 of 2004

The

Page No.2 of 4

documents were furnished as handed over by Mohammad Yunus.
6. The learned MM has appreciated the submissions advanced by
learned counsel for the petitioner while passing the impugned
order and has taken note of various judgements of the Apex Court
on the principles to be kept in mind while framing of charges.
Thus, where the material placed before the Court discloses grave
suspicion against accused then charges ought to be framed. The
trial court is not to act as a mere post office or a mouthpiece of
the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of the
case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced
before the court but at the same time not required to make a
roving inquiry into the pros & cons of the matter and weigh the
evidence as if it was conducting a trial.
7. The petitioner has also filed an additional affidavit stating that
Mohammad Yunus had submitted an application for withdrawal of
the application for grant of registration and has left for Saudi
Arabia thereafter.

It is thus pleaded that there is no room for

further action against the petitioner but the Ministry of Labour has
not acted on the letter of withdrawal. A plea is also sought to be
raised that since there is specific provision of offence and
penalties under the said Act, the FIR under the provisions of Indian
Penal Code could not have been registered. The further additional
submissions were filed on the aspect of the concessions recorded
of the counsel for accused No.2, conceding the charges. In this
behalf the additional affidavit affirmed on 17.7.2007 states that
the petitioner was watching the proceedings and the counsel for

Crl. Rev. P. No.564 of 2004

Page No.3 of 4

the respondent has not conceded the charge on behalf of the
petitioner.
8. On appreciation of the submissions advanced by learned counsels
for the parties, I am unable to persuade myself to agree with the
plea advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner. The present
case is not one where the registration took place under the said
Act and thereafter some offence took place under the said Act.
The offences occurred in respect of submission of forged
documents to obtain registration as a recruiting agency and it is
for the said offences that the petitioner has been charged. The
petitioner is the person who appeared on behalf of the sole
proprietor and submitted the documents and would thus deemed
to have knowledge about what he was submitting. The relevant
form was also signed by the petitioner. It was never the case of
the petitioner that any application was moved to correct the trial
court record on account of the fact that any wrong concession has
been recorded therein.
9. The function of the trial court at this stage is to sift evidence and
that task has been carried out by the trial court and there is
sufficient material on record to frame charges against the
petitioner.
10.There is no merit in the petition.
11.Dismissed.

JANUARY 18, 2008
b'nesh

Crl. Rev. P. No.564 of 2004

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.4 of 4

