*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Arb. P. No.91 of 2007

%

Date of decision: 16.04.2007

M/S. BHAGEERATHA ENGINEERING LTD.
...PETITIONER
Through:
Mr. George Thomas with
Mr. G.K. Jose, Advocates.
Versus

M/S. NATIONAL HIGHWAY AUTHORITY
OF INDIA LTD. & ANR.
...RESPONDENTS
Through:
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv.
with Ms. Divya Jain,
Advocate for Respondent No.1
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (Oral)
1. The present petition has been filed under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
& Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) seeking
appointment of a presiding arbitrator in view of the failure of the Indian
Road Congress, respondent No.2, to appoint such a third arbitrator despite
communication of a request in that behalf.
2. The arbitration clause between the parties is as under:
Arb. P. No.91 of 2007

Page No.1 of 7

“3.
ARBITRATION (GCC Clause 25.3)
The procedure for arbitration will be as follows:
(a)
In case of Dispute or difference arising between
the Employer and a domestic contractor relating to any
matter arising out of or connected with this agreement,
such disputes or difference shall be settled in accordance
with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The
arbitral tribunal shall consist of 3 arbitrators one each to
be appointed by the Employer and the Contractor. The
third Arbitrator shall be chosen by the two Arbitrators so
appointed by the Parties and shall act as Presiding
arbitrator. In case of failure of the two arbitrators
appointed by the parties to reach upon a consesus within
a period of 30 days from the appointment of the
arbitrator appointed subsequently, the Presiding
Arbitrator shall be appointed by the Council of Indian
Road Congress.
(b)
If one of the parties fails to appoint its arbitrator
in pursuance of sub-clause (a) and (b) above within 30
days after receipt of the notice of the appointment of its
arbitrator by the other party, then the Council of Indian
Road Congress shall appoint the arbitrator. A certified
copy of the order of the Council of Indian Road
Congress making such appointment shall be furnished to
each of the parties.”
(emphasis supplied)
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

3. The aforesaid arbitration clause, thus, envisaged the appointment of an
arbitrator each by the two parties and a third arbitrator to be chosen by the
two arbitrators appointed by the parties. Such third arbitrator had to be
chosen by the two arbitrators within a period of 30 days from the
appointment of the arbitrator appointed subsequently failing which the
presiding arbitrator was to be appointed by the Council of the Indian
Road Congress.
4. The communications placed on record show that on 16.1.2007 Mr. P.C.
Sharma, the arbitrator appointed by respondent No.1 communicated to
respondent No.1 the failure of any consensus for appointment of the
Arb. P. No.91 of 2007

Page No.2 of 7

presiding arbitrator. As a sequitor to the same respondent No.1 addressed
a letter to respondent No.2, the Indian Road Congress on 7.2.2007 calling
upon it to appoint the third arbitrator.

No such third arbitrator was

appointed resulting in the present petition being filed.
5. Respondent No.1 had entered appearance on the last date of hearing but
no reply has been filed. Learned counsel for respondent No.1, however,
states that a communication has been received from respondent No.2
dated 13.4.2007. The said communication has been placed on record
which points out that the time period of 30 days was stipulated only for
the two arbitrators to agree upon the presiding arbitrator and such time
period did not circumscribe the power of appointment of third presiding
arbitrator by respondent No.2. It is further stated that the request from
respondent No.1 was received by respondent No.2 on 7.2.2007 itself but
the processing charges were deposited on 19.2.2007. Respondent No.2
has appointed the presiding arbitrator. However, this appointment is not
acceptable to the petitioner.
6. In order to appreciate the rival contentions advanced by learned counsels
for the parties, it is necessary to reproduce the provisions of Section 11(6)
of the said Act, which are as under:
“11. Appointment of arbitrators.
(1)....
(2)....
(3)....
(4)....
(5)....
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed
upon by the parties, (a)
Arb. P. No.91 of 2007

a party fails to act as required under that
Page No.3 of 7

procedure; or
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail
to reach an agreement expected of them under that
procedure; or
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to
perform any function entrusted to him or it under that
procedure,
a party may request the Chief Justice or any person or
institution designated by him to take the necessary
measure, unless the agreement on the appointment
procedure provides other means for securing the
appointment.”
7. A perusal of the aforesaid provision shows that unlike the provisions of
Sections 11(4) & 11(5) of the said Act, there is no such prescribed period
of 30 days under Section 11(6) of the said Act. The question which, thus,
arises for consideration in the present case is as to within how much time
should the power be exercised by respondent No.2. It is the submission
of the learned senior counsel for respondent No.1 that since no time
period is prescribed a reasonable time period must be envisaged and 90
days period ought to be considered as a reasonable time period. On the
other hand, learned counsel for the petitioner states that though no time
period is prescribed, the time period ought to be 30 days for appointment
of such a third arbitrator or filing of such a petition under Section 11(6) of
the said Act. It is, thus, contended that since the petition under Section 11
(6) of the said Act was filed and the appointment of the third presiding
arbitrator by respondent No.2 is after the said date, respondent No.2 has
lost the right to appoint the third presiding arbitrator.
8. Learned counsel in this behalf has relied upon the judgement of Apex

Arb. P. No.91 of 2007

Page No.4 of 7

Court in Datar Switchgears Ltd. Vs. Tata Finance Ltd. & Anr. JT 2000
(Suppl.2) SC 226 where this aspect was discussed in paragraph 19 as
under:
“19. So far as cases falling under Section 11(6) are
concerned – such as the one before us – no time limit
has been prescribed under the Act, whereas a period of
30 days has been prescribed under Section 11(4) and
Section 11(5) of the Act. In our view, therefore, so
far as Section 11(6) is concerned, if one party
demands the opposite party to appoint an Arbitrator
and the opposite party does not make an appointmnt
within 30 days of the demand, the right to appointment
does not get automatically forfeited after expiry of 30
days. If the opposite party makes an appointment
even after 30 days of the demand, but before the first
party has moved the Court under Section 11, that
would be sufficient. In other words, in cases arising
under Section 11(6), if the opposite party has not made
an appointment within 30 days of demand, the right to
make appointment is not forfeited but continues, but
an appointment has to be made before the former files
application under Section 11 seeking appointment of
an Arbitrator. Only then the right of the opposite
party ceases. We do not, therefore, agree with the
observation in the above judgements that if the
appointment is not made within 30 days of demand,
the right to appoint an Arbitrator under Section 11(6)
is forfeited.”
9. A reference has also been made to the Full Bench judgement of this Court
in HBHL-VKS (J.V.) Vs. Union of India & Ors. and V.P. Electricals Vs.
Union of India & Ors. 2007(1) Arb. L.R. 252 (Delhi) (FB) where
conclusion was set out in paragraph 40 as under:
“40. Thus, we record our answer to the two questions
referred to the Larger Bench as follows:
(i) Once the party, which has been served
with the demand notice in terms of
arbitration clause, fails or refuses to
act in making appointment in terms of
arbitration clause within 30 days or in
any case prior to institution of a
Arb. P. No.91 of 2007

Page No.5 of 7

petition by the other side under
Section 11(6) of the Act, then its right
to make such appointment ceases or is
forfeited. Such cessation is absolute
in terms of the judgement of the
Supreme
Court
in
Datar
Switchgears' case and cannot be
revived.
(ii)The court has jurisdiction to take
necessary measures in terms of
Section 11(6) of the Act and this
expression would take within its ambit
and scope, the power to make
appointment of independent and
impartial arbitrator with reference to
the accepted arbitration clause, unless
the court in its discretion directs an
institution specified in the arbitration
clause not in default, to make such an
appointment.”
10.A reading of the aforesaid decisions, thus, shows that the matter in issue
is no more res integra and the settled legal position as emerges from the
two judgements is that the power to appoint the third arbitrator has to be
exercised within a period of 30 days failing which the power is not
extinguished till such time a petition is filed. Thereafter the power does
not continue and is vested in the Court.
11.Learned senior counsel for respondent No.1 seeks to contend that those
judgements are in the facts of a designated authority of one party to
appoint a third arbitrator and the position ought to be different in case of
an independent authority as respondent No.2. I am unable to accept this
plea since no such distinction is made in the aforesaid two judgements. In
any case, the principle is that the designated authority, whether it be third
party or any designated person of one of the parties, must exercise

Arb. P. No.91 of 2007

Page No.6 of 7

the power within 30 days or at least before the date a petition is filed
under Section 11(6) of the said Act. This is also clear from a bare reading
of the provisions of Section 11(6) of the said Act which envisages the
failure to perform any function by any institution. The conclusion, thus,
is that respondent No.2 has failed to exercise the power within the time
stipulated and, thus, the third presiding arbitrator is liable to be appointed
by this Court.
12.At this stage, learned counsels for the parties state that Justice R.C.
Chopra (Retd.) may be appointed as the third presiding arbitrator. The
said request is accepted. The fee of the arbitrator would be fixed by the
arbitrator.
13.The petition is allowed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
14.An intimation be forthwith sent to the presiding arbitrator appointed by
this Court.

APRIL 16, 2007
b'nesh

Arb. P. No.91 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.7 of 7

