*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CCP (O) No.149 of 2007 in CS (OS) No.2077 of 2007

%

Date of decision: 12.12.2007

MICROSOFT CORPORATION & ANR.
...PETITIONERS
Through:
Mr. Pravin Anand with 
Mr. Munish Mehra, Advocates.

Versus

MR. MAHENDRA JAIN & ORS.
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Mr. R.S. Endlaw with 
Mr. Vikas Pahwa, Advocates.

CORAM: 
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers 
may be allowed to  see the judgment?

No

2. To  be  referred  to  Reporter  or  not?

No

3. Whether   the   judgment   should   be 
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (Oral)
1. The   petitioners   have   filed   a   suit   for   permanent   injunction   restraining
infringement   of   copyrights,   infringement   and   dilution   of   trademarks,
damages,   delivery   up,   etc.   against   the   defendants   on   account   of   the

CCP (O) No.149 of 2007 in CS (OS) No.2077 of 2007

Page No.1 of 7 

defendants   using   counterfeited/duplicate/pirated   software   of   the
plaintiffs/petitioners' MICROSOFT WINDOWS XP Professional Versions
2002 or any other software programmes of the plaintiffs.  It is the case of
the plaintiffs/petitioners that such pirated goods were being sold by the
contemnor, who is a defendant in the suit.
2. The plaintiffs/petitioners along with the suit filed an application for interim
relief and in terms of order dated 24.10.2007 summons were issued in
the  suit   and   notice   in   the   interim   application.     Interim   relief   was   also
granted to the plaintiffs, restraining sale, distribution and copying of such
counterfeited   unlicensed   versions   of   the   software   of   the   plaintiffs.     A
Local   Commissioner   was   also   appointed   to   visit   the   premises   of   the
defendants to seize the offending goods.
3. The present contempt petition has arisen on account of the conduct of
the   contemnor   along   with   his   father   &   brothers   and   neighbouring
shopkeepers   whereby   the   Local   Commissioner   was   obstructed   in
carrying out his local commission, was assaulted and beaten up.   The
report of the Local Commissioner shows that the Local Commissioner
explained the reason of his visit to the contemnor and handed over a
copy of the order.  At the stage when the contemnor was going through
the  order,  the   Local  Commissioner   requested  Mr.   Amit  Upadhyay,   an
CCP (O) No.149 of 2007 in CS (OS) No.2077 of 2007

Page No.2 of 7 

advocate of the plaintiffs to search the premises of the defendants and
identify   the   counterfeited   software   versions   of   the   plaintiffs   under   the
supervision   of   the   Local   Commissioner   and   the   Local   Commissioner
proceeded   to   make   out   the   proceedings   report.     Mr.   Amit   Upadhyay
found ten (10) pieces of such pirated software, which were handed over
to the Local Commissioner and  it is at that stage that the contemnor
pounced   on   Mr.   Amit   Upadhyay,   snatched   the   bag   containing   the
software and started verbally abusing Mr. Upadhyay.   The contemnor
then proceeded to hold Mr. Upadhyay by his collar and dragged him just
outside his shop and started shouting very loudly and started beating Mr.
Upadhyay mercilessly with punches, slaps, and kicks.   The contemnor
then used  his  mobile  phone  to make a call to his  father  and  his  two
brothers   as   also   his   friends   in   the   nearby   shops.     The   Local
Commissioner   was   shocked   at   the   behaviour   of   the   contemnor,   his
father,   his   brothers   and   the   mob   of   people   and   warned   them   not   to
assault Mr. Upadhyay and himself.   The Local Commissioner also got
hurt in the proceedings and the contemnor and his father & brothers, in
fact,   turned   upon   the   Local   Commissioner   and   started   slapping   and
punching him.  The order passed by this Court was taken possession of
in original and was torn apart.  The On­spot­proceedings were also torn
CCP (O) No.149 of 2007 in CS (OS) No.2077 of 2007

Page No.3 of 7 

apart.   It is stated that the contemnor and his family members claimed
that they were politically well connected and in the mean time a sizable
mob had accumulated possibly consisting of the nearby shopkeepers.  It
is   with   grave   difficulty   that   the   Local   Commissioner   along   with   Mr.
Upadhyay managed to get away to the local police station where they
lodged a report.
4. The report of the Local Commissioner substantiates the conduct of the
contemnors.
5. The original contempt petition was filed only against the defendant as
such,   but   in   view   of   what   was   set   out   in   the   report   of   the   Local
Commissioner, direction was also issued to summon the two brothers
and father of the petitioner as also one shopkeeper of that area, who had
been identified as Mr. Shailesh Bokadia.  The original contemnor and his
brothers   and   fathers   are   present,   who   are   now   arrayed   as   the
contemnors in the present proceedings.
6. Learned counsel for the plaintiffs/petitioners referred to the judgement of
the learned single Judge of this Court in  GE Motors India Pvt. ltd. Vs.
Mukesh Kumar 2006 (32) PTC 768 (Del.).  The factual matrix of the case
is   that   the   Local   Commissioner   appointed   to   take   into   custody   all
infringing goods was physically assaulted and forcefully dragged.   The
CCP (O) No.149 of 2007 in CS (OS) No.2077 of 2007

Page No.4 of 7 

details of such incidents have been set out in the judgement and to an
extent they are identical to the conduct of the contemnors in the present
case.
7. It has been observed in the aforesaid case that the seriousness of the
irresponsible acts of the contemnors and the degree of harm caused to
the   administration   of   justice,   would   decisively   determine   whether   the
matter should be tried as a civil or criminal contempt.  It was found that
there   was   willful   disobedience   of   the   orders   of   the   Court   by   the
respondents coupled with irresponsible acts of rebellion and of defiance
to interfere with the administration of justice which  ex facie  amounts to
acts of criminal contempt.   It was also observed that an apology which
lacks bonafide and is intended to truncate the process of law with ulterior
motive of escaping the likely consequences of such flagrant violation of
the orders of the Court and disrespect to the administration of Justice
cannot   be  permitted.     The  matter   was  referred  to   the   Division  Bench
being   a   criminal   contempt   matter   and   in   terms   of   order   passed   on
26.10.2005   in   CCP   51/2005,   the   contemnors   were   found   guilty   of
criminal contempt and were sentenced.   The Division Bench observed
that a trend has arisen of assaulting Advocate Commissioners appointed
by the Court and if this trend is not curbed, in future no Advocate will
CCP (O) No.149 of 2007 in CS (OS) No.2077 of 2007

Page No.5 of 7 

ever accept becoming an Advocate Commissioner of this Court in future.
8. It is in view of the aforesaid position that I have no doubt that the conduct
of the contemnors was such as would have entailed making a reference
to   the   Division   Bench   for   criminal   contempt   proceedings.     The   only
difference in the present case is that at the stage of inception itself the
contemnors have really not disputed their improper and illegal conduct
and have tendered unconditional apology.  They have undertaken not to
do   so   in   future.     Not   only   that,   the   contemnors   have   agreed   to
compensate   the   advocate   as   well   as   the   Local   Commissioner   with
compensation   of   substantive   amounts   on   account   of   injury   caused   to
them.   The contemnors together have agreed to pay a sum of Rs.1.00
lakh   each   to   the   Local   Commissioner,   Mr.   Kamal   Mehta   and   the
advocate Mr. Amit Upadhyay as compensation. The contemnors have
also agreed to co­operate with the petitioners to find out the sources of
such piracy and assist them in future.
9. It   is   in   view   of   the   aforesaid   position   that   I   refrain   from   making   a
reference   to   the   Division   Bench   as   even   the   petitioners   feel   that   the
expression   of   regret   and   apology   coupled   with   damages   which   the
contemnors are paying and the undertaking to this Court not to indulge in
such conduct in future would be a more meaningful redeeming act of the
CCP (O) No.149 of 2007 in CS (OS) No.2077 of 2007

Page No.6 of 7 

contemnors rather than merely sending them behind bars.
10.I   also   deem   it   appropriate   to   direct   that   the   contemnors   will   be   kept
under a watch for a period of one (1) year and in case of change of their
residential  address,  the  contemnors  would  file  the  same  in  this  Court
with an advance copy to the learned counsel for the petitioners.
11.The contemnors state that they will pay the damages to the advocates
within a period of two (2) days and till then they will not leave the territory
of Delhi.
12.The contempt notice issued is discharged in the aforesaid terms.
13.List for compliance on 14.12.2007.

December 12, 2007
b'nesh

CCP (O) No.149 of 2007 in CS (OS) No.2077 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.7 of 7 

