*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003
Reserved on: 07.01.2008
Date of decision: 14.01.2008

%
MR. P.K. GHOSH
Through:

...PETITIONER
Mr. Devender Hora with
Ms. Vandana Bhatia, Advocates.

Versus
STATE & ANR.
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate
for the State.
Mr. P.K. Dey with
Mr. Kaushik Dey, Advocates
for Respondent No.2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. The present case is a classic one where two well educated people
are alleged to have taken law into their own hands resulting in
physical injuries.
2. The petitioner, the complainant, is alleged that on 30.8.2001 at
about 8:25 a.m. when he along with one Mr. Madan was walking
away from the then residence at Galaxy Apartments, Vikas Puri,
Delhi, the ex-President of Galaxy Apartments, Mr. A.K. Kapoor,
Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003

Page No.1 of 8

respondent No.2/accused stopped them and started hitting the
petitioner on the face and head with some hard object.
Respondent No.2 is thereafter alleged to have picked up a stone
with which he started hitting the petitioner on the head and body
with the threat to kill him.

On the cries of the petitioner some

persons gathered who intervened. The petitioner was taken for
medical examination to DDU Hospital where the doctor found the
injury to be a simple hurt.
3. The petitioner has further alleged that the injury was stated to be
a simple hurt on account of the influence of respondent No.2 as he
was a former Administrative Officer of Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia
Hospital. Incidently the petitioner is a retired Government servant
while respondent No.2 is still in Government service and the
original dispute is about who would control the society of the
Apartment owners. The petitioner, in fact, was so aggrieved that
he addressed several letters to various authorities including
ministries against respondent No.2.
4. The petitioner claims that his medical problems got aggravated
and had to be admitted to LNJP Hospital for 22 days. In view of
the head injuries, the petitioner was kept under observation and
the opinion given was that it was a case of a grievous hurt and not
a simple hurt. On the said medical report, the IO made out a case
against respondent No.2 under Section 308 of the IPC.
5. On the aforesaid opinion being given by LNJP Hospital, respondent
No.2 is alleged to have used his influence and instructed to get a
medical board constituted of two-three doctors and the board so

Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003

Page No.2 of 8

constituted examined the petitioner which held that the petitioner
had suffered a simple hurt.
6. The challan was, however, filed under Section 308 IPC and thus
was committed to the Court of Sessions at the stage of charge.
The learned Additional Sessions Judge, however, passed an order
dated 3.2.2003 holding that there was no material on record for a
case under Section 308 IPC and the present case was one of
simple hurt. It is this order, which is sought to be impunged by
the petitioner.
7. A perusal of the impugned order shows that what weighed with
the trial court was the initial medical report showing a simple
blunt injury and there was nothing on record to show that
respondent No.2 had any intention or knowledge that by such act
he would commit culpable homicide of the petitioner. The matter
was, thus, remanded back to the Magistrate to consider whether
any charge could be framed against the accused in accordance
with law.
8. Learned counsel for the petitioner has emphasised that once it
was found that the offence complained of was in the nature of a
grievous hurt as defined under Section 320 IPC, it is under Section
308 of the IPC that respondent No.2 ought to have been charged.
Learned counsel relied upon the fact that the petitioner had to be
hospitalised for 22 days making him fall under the eighth category
of the kinds of grievous hurt as prescribed under Section 320 of
IPC.
9. Learned counsel for respondent No.2, on the other hand,

Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003

Page No.3 of 8

submitted that the injury initially found on the petitioner was a
blunt injury and the petitioner, with the object of harassing
respondent No.2 got himself re-examined and got admitted to the
hospital and deliberately stayed in the hospital without there
being any cause for the same.

Learned counsel submitted that

the mere fact that the petitioner stayed in the hospital for 22 days
would not imply that respondent No.2 should be charged under
Section 308 IPC.

Learned counsel also emphasised that the

nature of injury and nature of weapon have to be kept in mind and
the allegation in the present case is only that respondent No.2 hit
the petitioner with the stone. In fact, there have been past history
of tussle over control of respondent No.2 of society and there are
cross FIRs of respondent No.2 in respect of the incident in
question.
10.Learned counsel for respondent No.2 further sought to plead that
even if during the course of trial the evidence produced were to
show that an offence under Section 308 IPC was made out, the
Magistrate would have power under Section 309 Cr.P.C. to direct
the proceedings against respondent No.2 under Section 308
Cr.P.C.
11.Learned counsel for the State has supported the case of the
petitioner to contend that respondent No.2 should be charged
under Section 308 IPC and if no material is found for the charge
under Section 308 IPC, he may be convicted for a minor offence
though he may not be charged with it in view of provisions of
Section 222 Cr.P.C. Learned counsel further submitted that at the

Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003

Page No.4 of 8

stage of framing of charges only sifting of the material has to be
done by the trial court.
12.Learned counsel for the State also rebutted the submission of the
counsel for respondent No.2 to the effect that Section 319 Cr.P.C.
would apply. Learned counsel submitted that the said provision
would have no role in the present case since that provides for
power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of
offence.

Learned counsel submitted that, in fact, in such an

eventuality it is Section 216 of the Cr.P.C., which would apply
dealing with the power of the Court to alter or add a charge at any
time before the judgement is pronounced.
13.On hearing learned counsels for the parties, one fact which
imminently emerges is that the incident in question was the result
of the tussle to control the society. It is in view thereof that the
petitioner and respondent No.2 became enemical to each other
resulting in the cross FIRs being lodged.
14.The immediate medical attention received by the petitioner
showed that there was only a simple blunt injury. The petitioner
was not satisfied with it and thus got himself admitted into
another hospital subsequently after a couple of days where he
continued to stay for 22 days.

The question about the medical

condition of the petitioner gave rise to the constitution of the
board of three doctors, who submitted their report.

One of the

conclusions reached by the said committee was that after the
admission of the petitioner on 3.9.2001, the next visit of the
doctor occurred only on 11.9.2001 after full 8 days. The petitioner

Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003

Page No.5 of 8

was thus quite stable during this period of time. On the basis of
the material on record, the committee opined that the clinical
condition of the petitioner did not deteriorate as he suffered from
minor head injury, if any. Insofar as the plea of learned counsel
for the petitioner for stay of the petitioner in the hospital for 22
days is concerned, it must be kept in mind that a mere stay in a
hospital for 20 days, does not constitute a grievous hurt as some
doctors and even lawyers are inclined to believe.

It must be

proved that during that period, the injured man was in severe
bodily pain or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits. An injured
man may be quite capable of following his ordinary pursuits long
before 20 days are over, and yet may prolong his stay in hospital
by interfering with the healing of his wound or for the sake of
permanent recovery or greater ease or comfort may be willing to
remain as a convalescent in hospital, especially if he is fed at the
public expenses.

Thus, in the present case, the gravity of the

injury was simple in nature.
15.Learned counsel for the petitioner sought to rely upon the
judgement of the Apex Court in Sunil Kumar Vs. N.C.T. of Delhi &
Ors. 1999 1 AD (Cr.) SC 217 to plead that an attempt to commit
culpable homicide not amounting to murder may actually result in
hurt or may not. The hurt may be simple or grievous hurt. Merely
because the injury inflicted in the incident was simple in nature, it
did not absolve the accused from the charge under Section 308
IPC.

It is the attempt to commit culpable homicide, which is

punishable under Section 308 IPC whereas the punishment for

Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003

Page No.6 of 8

simple hurts can be meted out under Sections 323 & 324 IPC and
for grievous hurts under Sections 325 & 326 IPC.
16.There can be no doubt about the legal proposition as canvassed
by the learned counsel for the petitioner but in the present case
where if the intent and the instrument used is seen whereby a
stone was picked up from the road in the heat of the moment,
there does not appear that respondent No.2 committed such act
with an intention or knowledge to commit an offence of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder punishable under Section 308
IPC.
17.On perusal of the order, I am of the view that the trial court did
not commit any error in not framing the charges under Section
308 IPC. The legal position is not in dispute that the task of the
trial court at the stage of framing of charge is to sift through the
material to form an opinion that the commission of an offence by
the accused was possible. The probative value of the material on
record cannot be gone into.

However, there must exist some

material, which should form the basis of the framing of the charge.
Such view has been expressed in Soma Chakravarty Vs. State
Through CBI (2007) 5 SCC 403. However, simultaneously it has
also been emphasised in Dilawar Balu Kurane Vs. State of
Maharashtra (2002) 2 SCC 135 that the trial judge cannot merely
act as a post office or mouthpiece of the prosecution. He has to
sift and weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out
whether a prima facie case has been made out and where two
views are equally possible and evidence gives rise to some

Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003

Page No.7 of 8

suspicion but not grave suspicion, he can discharge the accused.
18.In the present case despite the prayer made by respondent No.2,
the learned Judge has not discharged him but has only come to
the conclusion that the injury was of simple nature and there was
no basis to frame a charge for grievous hurt under Section 308 IPC
leaving it for the Magistrate to determine whether charges can be
framed for simple hurt. The learned Additional Sessions Judge has
thus exercised the power by not acting as a post office but
appraising the evidence on record for determining whether there
was material which could give rise even to a possibility of the
offence for which respondent No.2 was sought to be charged to be
proved and came to the conclusion that there was absence of
such material.

The medical examination conducted at DDU

Hospital and the report of the medical board constituted
thereafter concluded that the nature of injury was one of simple
hurt.

The stay at the LNJP Hospital for 22 days also does not

indicate the fact that the petitioner sustained grievous hurt since
the report of the said Board throws light on the visits made by the
doctor which is after 8 days from the time the petitioner got
admitted indicating the stable condition of the petitioner.
19.I find myself in agreement with the said view.

There is no

infirmity in the impugned order.
20.Dismissed.

JANUARY 14, 2008
b'nesh

Crl. Rev. P. No.361 of 2003

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.8 of 8

