*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Reserved on: 08.04.2008
Date of Decision: 11.04.2008

%
MRS. MANI SHANDLY & ANR.
Through:

...PETITIONERS
Mr. Arjun Bhandari &
Mr. B.K. Singh Advocates.

Versus

THE STATE & ANR.
Through:

…RESPONDENTS
Mr. Sanjay Lao, APP for the State.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.

Temperance is the hallmark of judicial authority.

The

exercise of judicial authority is not ‘show of strength’ but a
duty to be performed with humility and yet firmness. This
cardinal principle seems to have been lost while passing
orders in the present case.
2.

The petitioners, both ladies, have been charged under
Sections 347/461 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act
(hereinafter referred to as the said Act) by the MCD on the

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.1 of 16

allegation of misuse of property consisting ground floor of
property bearing No.B-23, Greater Kailash, Part-I, New
Delhi in the capacity of the owner/occupier. The criminal
complaint No.1291/2001 is filed by the MCD, which was
pending in the Court of the learned MM. The offence is a
bailable offence punishable with simple imprisonment,
which may extend to six months or fine which may extend
to Rs.5,000.00 or with both.

It is the case of the

petitioners that they were only employees working in the
said premises at the relevant time and had been falsely
implicated on

the inspection carried out since the

owner/accused No.1 was not present in the premises. The
complaint was filed in the year 2001 and the misuse is
stated to have been stopped by the owner and the
premises are even stated to have been transferred on a
subsequent date.
3.

The petitioners state that they have been appearing in the
complaint case commencing from their first appearance
on 17.9.2002 without any default. On 30.10.2006 notice
was framed under Section 251 of the Cr.P.C. against the
petitioners and the matter was adjourned to 24.3.2008 for
evidence. The petitioners alleged that they had wrongly
noted the date as 25.3.2008 and thus failed to appear on
24.3.2008. An application for exemption on behalf of the
first accused was moved which was allowed on 24.3.2008
but since neither the counsel nor the petitioners as

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.2 of 16

accused Nos.2 & 3 were present, the personal bonds and
surety bonds were forfeited and NBWs were issued against
the petitioners. Simultaneously notices under Section 446
of the Cr.P.C. were issued against the accused persons as
well as the sureties returnable on 28.7.2008.
4.

The petitioners claimed that when they went to appear
before the trial court on 25.3.2008 without their counsel
(who was alleged to be out-of-station since 18.3.2008)
they did not find the matter in the cause list.

On

contacting the counsel on 27.3.2008 they came to know
what had transpired on 24.3.2008. The petitioners, thus,
immediately filed application for cancellation of NBWs and
for restoration of the personal bonds and surety bonds
with an undertaking to appear before the trial court on the
next date of hearing. However, the said application was
dismissed by the impugned order dated 3.4.2008.

The

rationale for the impugned order is that for decision of the
application it was necessary to decide whether the nonappearance of the petitioners was deliberate or due to a
bonafide mistake. The trial court has noted that since the
accused had come to court knowing that their counsel was
out-of-station,

the counsel must

have informed the

petitioners of the date of 24.3.2008 and his nonavailability and thus it must be implied that they were
aware of the next date of hearing.

It has also been

noticed that the counsel for the petitioners had been

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.3 of 16

appearing for all the accused persons including accused
No.1 although there is no vakalatnama on record.

On

24.3.2008 another counsel Shri Pradeep Jaiswal appeared
for accused No.1 and filed his vakalatnama along with
exemption application and the counsel who filed the
exemption application had the same address as of Shri
B.K. Singh, who had appeared for the petitioners though
without a vakalatnama. These counsels were, once again,
present at the time of hearing of the application and thus
it is assumed that Shri B.K.

Singh,

Advocate had

knowledge of the hearing but instructed Shri Pradeep
Jaiswal, Advocate to only appear for accused No.1 and not
for the petitioners herein, who were accused Nos.2 & 3. It
is, thus, concluded that it was a deliberate ploy on the part
of the accused to prolong the matter as witnesses had to
be returned unexamined on that day.

The petitioners

were thus held not entitled to any leniency despite the
judgements cited at the bar. The personal bonds of the
petitioners were forfeited and they were directed to
deposit the personal bond amount in the court on or
before the next date of hearing and in default of the same
to undergo civil imprisonment of seven (7) days.
5.

Learned counsel for the petitioners has pleaded that the
petitioners

had

never

committed

any

default

of

appearance before the trial court on any other occasion
and there was no reason to believe that non-appearance

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.4 of 16

of the petitioners on 24.3.2008 was with any intention to
evade the process of law and that the NBWs were issued
in a routine and mechanical manner without assigning any
reason. It is further pleaded that on 24.3.2008 there was
no complainant witness present and thus in any case
there was no question of any prejudice being caused by
the non-appearance by the petitioners. Learned counsel
has also sought to draw strength from Rule 3 of Chapter 1
of Part C (i) in Part III, Delhi High Court Rules, which reads
as under:
“Rule 3. Warrant should not be issued unless
absolutely necessary – Great care should be taken
not to issue a warrant when a summon should be
sufficient for the ends of justice. Magistrate should
remember that the issue of a warrant involves
interference with the personal liberty of a person
and should take care to see that no greater
hardship is caused than is necessary.
Under
Section 76 of the Code (Now Section 71 of New
Code) a court has the discretion to make the
warrant bailable, and this discretion should be
exercised with due regard to the nature of the
offence, the position of the accused person and the
circumstances of the case.”
6.

It is, thus, pleaded that a bare reference to the Rules
would show the emphasis has been laid on the fact that
issuance of warrants involves interference with personal
liberty of a person and thus due care should be taken to
see that no greater hardship is caused than is necessary.
Since the court has a discretion to make the warrants
bailable under Section 71 of the Cr.P.C., the discretion can
be exercised with due regard to the nature of the offence,
the position of the accused persons and the circumstances

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.5 of 16

of the case.
7.

The attention of this Court is drawn to the provisions of
Sections 87 & 89 of the Cr.P.C. which read as under:
“87. Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition
to, summons. - A court may, in any case in which
it is empowered by this Code to issue a summons
for the appearance of any person, issue, after
recording its reasons in writing, a warrant for his
arrest(a) If either before the issue of summons, or after
the issue of the same but before time fixed for his
appearance, the court sees reason to believe that
he has absconded or will not obey the summons;
or
(b) If, at such time he fails to appear and the
summons is proved to have been duly served in
time to admit of his appearing in accordance
therewith and no reasonable excuse is offered for
such failure.
……..
89. Arrest on breach of bond for appearance.
- When any person who is bound by any bond
taken under this Code to appear before a court,
does not appear, the officer presiding in such court
may issue a warrant directing that such person be
arrested and produced before him.”

8.

It is, thus, submitted that it is the discretion vested with
the trial court for issuance of warrants but the discretion is
fettered with the requirement of recording reasons in
writing for issuance of warrants of arrest.

9.

Learned counsel for the petitioners has emphasized that
the trial court while noting the various judgements has not
discussed the relevant aspect and has merely brushed
aside the judgements of this Court as well as of the Apex
Court. A recent landmark judgement, which should be a
guidance for all the courts is in the case of Inder Mohan

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.6 of 16

Goswami & Anr. Vs. State of Uttaranchal & Ors. 2007 (12)
Scale 15.

The guidelines as to when a non-bailable

warrant ought to be issued has been succinctly set out by
the Supreme Court in the said judgement by emphasizing
that arrest and imprisonment means deprivation of the
rights of an individual and thus the courts have to be
extremely careful before issuing non-bailable warrants.
The courts are, thus, required to maintain proper balance
between individual liberties and interest of public and
State

while

issuing

non-bailable

warrants.

It

was

emphasized that non-bailable warrants should be issued
to bring a person to court when summons and bailable
warrants would be unlikely to have the desired results.
The discussion in this behalf is contained in the following
paragraphs of the said judgement:
“When
issued

non-bailable

warrants

should

be

52. Non-bailable warrant should be issued to
bring a person to court when summons of bailable
warrants would be unlikely to have the desired
result. This could be when:
 it is reasonable to believe that the person will
not voluntarily appear in court; or
 the police authorities are unable to find the
person to serve him with a summon; or
 it is considered that the person could harm
someone
if
not
placed
into
custody
immediately.
53. As far
opinion that
appearance
summon or
Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

as possible, if the court is of
a summon will suffice in getting
of the accused in the court,
the bailable warrants should

the
the
the
be

Page No.7 of 16

preferred. The warrants either bailable or nonbailable should never be issued without proper
scrutiny of facts and complete application of mind,
due to the extremely serious consequences and
ramifications which ensue on issuance of warrants.
The court must very carefully examine whether the
Criminal Complaint or FIR has not been filed with
an oblique motive.
54. In complaint cases, at the first instance, the
court should direct serving of the summons along
with the copy of the complaint. If the accused
seem to be avoiding the summons, the court, in
the second instance should issue bailable-warrant.
In the third instance, when the court is fully
satisfied that the accused is avoiding the courts
proceeding intentionally, the process of issuance of
the non-bailable warrant should be resorted to.
Personal liberty is paramount, therefore, we
caution courts at the first and second instance to
refrain from issuing non-bailable warrants.
55. The power being discretionary must be
exercised judiciously with extreme care and
caution. The court should properly balance both
personal liberty and societal interest before issuing
warrants.
There cannot be any straight-jacket
formula for issuance of warrants but as a general
rule, unless an accused is charged with the
commission of an offence of a heinous crime and it
is feared that he is likely to tamper or destroy the
evidence or is likely to evade the process of law,
issuance of non-bailable warrants should be
avoided.
56. The Court should try to maintain proper
balance between individual liberty and the interest
of the publice and the State while issuing nonbailable warrant.”
(emphasis supplied)
10.

It is not as if the attention of this Court has not been
earlier drawn to this permeating problem relating to
issuance of non-bailable warrants as is apparent from the
judgement of A.K. Sikri, J. in Naresh Kumar Vs. State 131
(2006) DLT 678. It was noticed that if an accused tries to

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.8 of 16

evade

the

process

of

law

or

intentionally

delays

proceedings the Magistrate has the power to issue nonbailable warrants but such powers have to be exercised
only in those circumstances and not lightly and not in
terrorem.

A reference was made to Rule 3 referred to

aforesaid to emphasise that the trial court is not supposed
to take extreme steps of issuing non-bailable warrants on
the very first call and in pre-lunch hours and such orders
are passed indiscriminately and a number of such cases
are coming to this Court. The non-bailable warrants were,
thus, quashed.
11.

Learned counsel has also referred to the judgement of the
learned single Judge of this Court in Shri Radhakrishnan
Vs. State 1995 JCC 568 where the counsel present did not
want to cross-examine the witnesses in the absence of the
petitioner and the learned Magistrate cancelled the bail
bond and ordered NBW against the petitioner and notice
to the surety under Section 446 of the Cr.P.C. It was held
that there was no justification for forfeiture of the personal
bond and the learned Magistrate at most could have
closed the evidence.

12.

Learned counsel for the petitioners not referred to the
judgement of the learned single Judge of this Court in
Puneet Singh Chauhan & Anr. Vs. State & Anr. 107 (2003)
DLT 220 where the scope of Section 89 of the Cr.P.C read
with Section 436 of the Cr.P.C. was discussed. It was held

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.9 of 16

that in case of arrest on breach of bond for appearance in
bailable offence the courts of MM and Sessions Judges
issuing the process of warrants of arrest under Section 89
of the Cr.P.C. for procuring the appearance of the accused
shall either on appearance by the accused on his own or
on his production by the police in execution of warrants or
arrest shall release the accused on his furnishing bond
with or without sureties. A contrary conduct was held to
be unsustainable since on the appearance of such a
person he could not be sent to judicial custody as he was
entitled to immediately be released on executing bond
with or without sureties as it would otherwise amount to
converting bailable offence into non-bailable ones.
13.

Learned counsel for the petitioners has also referred to
the judgement of the learned single Judge of this Court in
Court on its own motion Vs. CBI 2004 (72) DRJ 629 where
directions were issued to the criminal courts and the
relevant ones are reproduced hereinunder:
“….
(ii)
In case the court or Magistrate
exercises the discretion of issuing warrant of arrest
at any stage including the stage while taking
cognizance of the chargesheet, he or it shall have
to record the reasons in writing as contemplated
under Section 87 Cr.P.C. that the accused has
either been absconding or shall not obey the
summons or has refused to appear despite proof of
due service of summons upon him.
(iii) Rejection of an application for exemption
from personal appearance on any date of hearing
or even at first instance does not amount to nonappearance despite service of summons or

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.10 of 16

absconding or failure to obey summons and the
court in such a case shall not issue warrant of
arrest and may either give direction to the accused
to appear or issue process of summons.
(iv) That the Court shall on appearance of an
accused in a bailable offence release him forthwith
on his furnishing a personal bond with or without
sureties as per the mandatory provisions of Section
436 Cr.P.C.
….”
(emphasis supplied)
14.

In G. Sagar Suri v. State & Anr., 106 (2003) DLT 439, it
was observed as under :“13. It is manifest from the provisions of Section 82
Cr.P.C that before publishing the written
proclamation requiring the accused to appear
under the provisions of Section 82 Cr.P.C the court
has to record the reasons either after taking
evidence or without evidence that a person against
whom warrants have been issued has absconded
or is concealing himself so that such warrants
cannot be executed. The procedure for publication
of the proclamation is laid down in sub-section (2)
of Section 82. Sub-section (1) provides that the
Court shall wait for thirty days after publication of
the proclamation for the appearance of the
accused and it is only after processes under
Section 82 Cr.P.C are exhausted that the next step
under Section 83 is to be taken by the Court.
14. Section 83 enjoins upon the court to record the
reasons in writing for ordering the attachment of
any property belonging to the person who has
been proclaimed as an offender under Section 82
Cr.P.C. Even the order of attachment of property
has two pre-requisites. Firstly the court has to
satisfy itself either by affidavit or otherwise that
the person in relation to whom the proclamation is
to be issued is about to dispose of whole or any
part of the property or secondly that he is about to
remove whole or part of the property from the
local jurisdiction of the court. Thus the orders
passed by learned MM in this regard suffer from
gross illegality and inherent infirmity.
15.

Every criminal court is a creature of Criminal

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.11 of 16

Procedure Code. It is neither above it nor can it rise
about it. It has to remain within its precincts and
cannot afford to traverse beyond it. Any order
passed beyond the provisions and in violation of
mandatory provisions empowering the court to
issue warrant of arrest or proclamation under
Section 82 or attachment of property under
Section 83 have to be reasoned one and in accord
with essential requirements. Curtailment of any
person's liberty with the sledge of hammer does
not comport with judicial discretion vested by the
provisions of Criminal Procedure Code in the
criminal court. More absolute power the court
enjoys more circumspective and sparing use of it is
expected. Absolute power does not admit element
of arbitrariness.”
16.

If the aforesaid legal principles are applied to the facts of
the present case the impugned order leaves much to be
desired. It is certainly in breach of the guidance given by
the Supreme Court which is binding on the MM.

It is

further in breach of the directions issued by this Court
from time to time referred aforesaid.
17.

The learned MM seems to have proceeded with the sole
object of somehow dismissing the application of the
petitioners and trying to smell rats when there are none.
The petitioners were appearing in person and were
present on all dates. They have stated in the application
that the date had been wrongly noted. The counsel was
out-of-station.

To draw the conclusion that the counsel

must have informed the petitioners about his going out-ofstation and thus must have told them the correct date and
thus they must have known the correct date is on the
basis of surmises and conjuncture on which the learned
MM seems to have proceeded while considering the
Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.12 of 16

application seeking recall of the NBWs.

Once again, on

the aspect of the counsel representing accused No.1 being
present and seeking exemption of his appearance and the
factum that the counsel having some linkage to the other
counsel who was out-of-station and was appearing for
accused No.1 and had also appeared for accused Nos.2 &
3 on earlier dates though without Power of Attorney is not
of much significance.

There, in fact, have been no

previous occasions noted in the impugned order when the
petitioners have not remained present in court. It has also
been pointed out that even the complainant’s witnesses
were not present on the relevant date and thus there has
been no prejudice to the trial. The impugned order is not
only unsustainable but borders on perversity.
18.

It has been necessary to pen down a more detailed
judgement in this case because of a number of such cases
coming to the notice of this Court of indiscriminate
issuance of NBWs. The accused must remain present for
purposes of early conclusion of trial.

An accused who

seeks to defeat the course of justice by repeatedly
absenting himself must be dealt with firmly. I, however,
consider that non-presence should not result in issuance
of NBWs straightaway when issuance of bailable warrants
could secure the presence of the petitioners.

The

petitioners were appearing on earlier dates and it is not as
if the issuance of bailable warrants could not have

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.13 of 16

ensured their presence on the subsequent dates. The trial
court must take into consideration the important aspects
such as the past conduct of the accused, the nature of
offence or the failure to appear in pursuance to the order
of summoning.

The present case is one of bailable

offences and the petitioners appeared in pursuance to the
summons issued and continued to appear but were absent
on one date.

Not only that they even moved an

application for recall of the non-bailable warrants, which
has been dismissed by the impugned order.

The trial

court at the stage of issuance of NBWs at the initial stage
did not record any reasons for taking this extreme step
and thus the order was in violation of the direction (ii)
contained in the judgement of this Court in Court on its
own motion Vs. CBI (supra). The caution given in the Rule
3 aforesaid has also been thrown to the winds by the trial
court.

It is clearly provided that when issuance of

summons or bailable warrants would suffice, there is no
necessity to issue NBWs as it involves interference with
personal liberties of persons.
19.

The present case was not one where the trial court had
reason to believe that the petitioners would not voluntarily
appear in court or that they could not be located by the
police authorities or would harm somebody if not taken
into custody as per the parameters laid down in Inder
Mohan Goswami & Anr. Vs. State of Uttaranchal & Ors.

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.14 of 16

case (supra).

The power has, thus, not been exercised

judiciously and the impugned order suffers from total lack
of judicious approach to the matter in question.

The

caution extended in Naresh Kumar Vs. State case (supra)
has once again been thrown to the winds. It needs to be
emphasised that the trial court in such cases must
endeavour to secure presence and issue bailable warrants
in case of such one time default before resorting to the
process of issuance of non-bailable warrants. The object
of issuance of NBWs is not to satisfy the ego of a judge but
to secure the presence of an accused. R.C. Chopra, J. in
Geeta Sethi v. State, 91 (2001) DLT 47 has emphasized
that courts administering justice on criminal side must
always remain alive to the ‘presumption of innocence’
which is the hallmark of criminal jurisprudence and, thus,
a natural consequence is that every accused is clothed
with the presumption of innocence and entitled to just, fair
and decent trial and the aim of the criminal trial is not
humiliating or harassing an accused, but to determine the
guilty of the innocence.

It is in this context further

observations were made to the effect that though the
presence of an accused in a criminal trial is certainly
important and must be insisted upon if the offence is
serious and the accused is likely to be punished severely
so that in his absence his defence is not jeopardized. The
accused involved in summons cases, cases under special

Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

Page No.15 of 16

Acts and offences where violations are statutory, the
offenders should not be treated as hardened criminals.
20.

In the end I am only reminded of a Judge’s prayer and a
portion of it is extracted below:
“…..Give me grace to hear patiently, to consider
diligently, to understand rightly and to decide
justly. Grant me due sense of humility, that I may
not be misled by my willfulness, vanity or
egotism……”

21.

The aforesaid prayer should never be lost sight of by a
Judge and humility is a virtue which should not be
overpowered by vanity or egotism.

The presence of a

group of police officers in court while a Judge presides
over

the

criminal

jurisdiction

should

not

give

a

misconceived heady feeling of a sense of power where a
Judge

seeks

obedience

losing

sight

of

fundamental

principles of Constitution rights, criminal jurisprudence
and fair play. I refrain from saying anything further with
the favourent hope that the learned Judge (and in fact
other learned Judges of the Sub-ordinate Courts) would
exercise such jurisdiction with care in future.
22.

The impugned order is quashed, the NBWs are cancelled,
personal bonds and sureties restored with the direction to
the petitioners to appear before the trial court on the next
date of hearing.

23.

Petition accordingly stands allowed.

APRIL 11, 2008
b’nesh
Crl. M.C. No.1157 of 2008

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.16 of 16

