*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Arb.P. No.39 of 2007

%

Date of decision: 11.09.2007

DSC-VICON VENTURES PVT. LTD.
...PETITIONER
Through: Mr. S.K. Maniktala with
Mr. Arvind Kumar, Advocates.
Versus
M/S. CONSULTING ENGINEERING
SERVICES (INDIA) PVT. LTD. & ORS.
...RESPONDENTS
Through: Mr. Anurag Dayal Mathur with
Mr. C.L. Kalia, Advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (Oral)
1. The petitioner claims to be a Special Purpose Vehicle Company
having its constituent as D.S. Construction Limited and M/s. Vimal
Construction Company. The petitioner was awarded the work of BOT
project of four laning of existing two lane road from Rajpur Durg in
Chhatisgarh State. Respondent No.1 was appointed as a consultant
to the project. An agreement in this behalf was executed between the
petitioner and respondent No.1 on 19.9.2003.
2. The dispute resolution mechanism was provided in clause 6.2 of the
contract which reads as under:

Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.1 of 10

“6.2 Dispute Settlement
Any dispute between the Parties as to matters arising
pursuant to this Contract which cannot be settled amicably
within thirty (30) days after receipt by one Party of the other
Party's request for such amicable settlement may be
submitted by either Party for settlement in accordance.
Disputes shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with
the following provisions:
6.2.1 Selection of Arbitrators
Each dispute submitted by a Party to arbitration shall be
heard by a sole arbitrator or an arbitration panel composed
of three arbitrators, in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) Where the Parties agree that the dispute concerns a
technical matter, they may agree to appoint a sole arbitrator
or, failing agreement on the identity of such sole arbitrator
within thirty (30) days after receipt by the other Party of the
proposal of a name for such an appointment by the Party
who initiated the proceedings, either Party may apply to the
President, Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi, for a list of
not fewer than five nominees and, on receipt of such list, the
Parties shall alternately strike names there from, and the last
remaining nominee on the list shall be the sole arbitrator for
the matter in dispute. If the last remaining nominee has not
been determined in this manner within sixty (60) days of the
date of the list, the President, Indian Roads Congress, New
Delhi, shall appoint, upon the request of either Party and
from such list or otherwise, a sole arbitrator for the matter in
dispute.
(b) Where the Parties do not agree that the dispute concerns
a technical matter, the Client and CES shall each appoint
one arbitrator, and these two arbitrators shall jointly appoint a
third arbitrator, who shall chair the arbitration panel. If the
arbitrators named by the Parties do not succeed in
appointing a third arbitrator within thirty (30) days after the
latter of the two arbitrators named by the Parties has been
appointed, the third arbitrator shall, at the request of either
Party, be appointed by Secretary, the Indian Council of
Arbitration, New Delhi.
(c) If one Party fails to appoint its arbitrator within thirty (30)
days after the other Party has appointed its arbitrator, the
Party which has named an arbitrator may apply to the
Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.2 of 10

Secretary, Indian Council of Arbitration, New Delhi to appoint
a sole arbitrator for the matter in disputes, and the arbitrator
appointed pursuant to such application shall be the sole
arbitrator for that dispute.
6.2.2 Rules of Procedure
Arbitration proceedings shall be conducted in accordance
with procedure of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act 1996, of
India unless CES is a foreign national/firm, where arbitration
proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the rules
of procedure for arbitration of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) as in
force on the date of this Contract.
6.2.3 Miscellaneous
In any arbitration proceedings hereunder:
(a) Proceedings shall, unless otherwise agreed by the
Parties, be held in Delhi.
(b) The English language shall be the official language for all
purposes; and
(c) The decision of the sole arbitrator or of a majority of the
arbitrators (or of the third arbitrator if there is no such
majority) shall be final and binding and shall be enforceable
in any court of competent jurisdiction, and the Parties hereby
waive any objections to or claims of immunity in respect of
such enforcement.”
(emphasis supplied)
3. The period of contract is stated to have ended in September 2004.
Respondent No.1 claimed that there was an outstanding amount of
Rs.36.00 lakh due from the petitioner. The amount was disputed by
the petitioner. The respondents raised the total amount of the claim to
Rs.61.00 lakh approx. by the subsequent letter dated 29.1.2005,
which was disputed by the petitioner vide letter dated 4.2.2005. No
settlement emerged.
4. Respondent No.1 invoked the arbitration clause in terms of the letter
Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.3 of 10

dated 9.9.2005 to which the petitioner did not respond. It is the case
of the petitioner that thereafter the petitioner received a letter dated
26.12.2006 from one Shri B.L. Garg, respondent No.3, Additional
District Judge (Retd.) stating that he has been appointed as the
arbitrator by the Arbitration Committee of the Indian Council of
Arbitration on 17.10.2006 communicated to the arbitrator vide letter
dated 22.12.2006.
5. The petitioner has thereafter filed the present petition under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to
as the said Act) seeking the appointment of what is stated to be an
independent and impartial person.
6. The basic ground raised in the petition is that in terms of the
arbitration clause the appointment of the arbitrator had to take place
by the Secretary, Indian Council of Arbitration, New Delhi who was the
persona designata and the Arbitration Committee of the Indian
Council of Arbitration could not have nominated the arbitrator.
7. Respondent No.1 has contested the petition. A preliminary objection
has been raised about the maintainability of the present petition in
view of the judgement of the Apex Court in S.B.P. & Co. Vs. Patel
Engineering Ltd. & Anr. 2005 (3) Arb. L.R. 285 (SC). The conclusions
of the judgement are set out in paragraph 46 and the relevant
paragraph is sub-para (ix), which reads as under:
“(ix) In a case where an arbitral tribunal has been constituted
by the parties without having recourse to Section 11(6) of the
Act, the arbitral tribunal will have the jurisdiction to decide all
matters as contemplated by Section 16 of the Act.”

Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.4 of 10

8. It is this submission of the respondent that the recourse of Section 11
(6) of the said Act can only take place if the appointment is through
the process of Court and where the intervention of Court has not been
involved in the process of appointment of the arbitrator any objection
about the jurisdiction of the arbitrator has to be before the arbitrator
himself.
9. Insofar as the merits of the controversy are concerned, it is pointed
out that the arbitration clause only provides for an application by the
party to the Secretary, Indian Council of Arbitration and does not
make the Secretary as the persona designata. It is in view thereof
that the application was so received on behalf of the Secretary and
placed before the Arbitration Committee.

The decision of the

Arbitration Committee was ratified by the Registrar of the Indian
Council of Arbitration in terms of Rule 23 of the Indian Council of
Arbitration. The said Rule reads as under:
“Rule 23
.....
(a) In case a Sole Arbitrator has to be appointed, the Registrar
shall, by a notice in writing, call upon the parties to the dispute
to forward the name of an agreed arbitrator from among the
Panel of Arbitrators. The said notice shall specify the period
within which the nomination shall be made, which shall not be
more than thirty days from the date of the said notice to the
respective parties. If the parties fail to agree on the person to
be appointed as sole arbitrator within the time granted by the
Registrar, the Registrar in consultation with the Chairman of
the Committee and in his absence in consultation with the
member of the Governing Body designated by the Chairman,
shall appoint the sole arbitrator from among the Panel of
Arbitrators. If one of the parties is a national or resident of a
country other than India, the sole arbitrator shall, as far as
possible, be chosen or appointed by the Registrar from among
the nationals of a country other than that of either of the
parties. The sole arbitrator so nominated shall constitute the
Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.5 of 10

arbitral tribunal to hear the dispute and shall be appointed as
such in writing by the Registrar. The Registrar shall give
notice to the Parties of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal.”
10.It is the further submission of the respondent that the petitioner, in
fact, participated in the arbitration proceedings before the arbitrator
and in this behalf reliance has been placed on the proceedings before
the arbitral tribunal, held on 10.1.2007, which reads as under:
“Whereas, the Arbitration Committee of the Indian
Council of Arbitration, New Delhi at its meeting held on
October 17, 2006 decided to request me to act as the Sole
Arbitrator to decide the disputes that have arisen between the
above named parties and I have received the said request on
22.12.2006.
I entered upon referenced on 26.12.2006 and sent the
notice to the parties to file their Statement of claims/Counter
statement of claims, if any, together with documents in
support thereof for 09.01.2007. However, on 08.01.2007, the
A.R. On behalf of respondent appeared and I also received a
letter from claimant side for adjournment, the matter was
taken up on 08.01.2007 instead of 09.01.07.
Now Therefore Notice Is Hereby Given That:
The hearing in the above case will be held on
31.01.2007, at 4:30 pm at A-9, Ganpati Apartments, 6, Alipur
Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054.
The Claimant shall file his Statement of claims, if any,
together with documents in support thereof on the said date
and time. Parties are further directed to deposit arbitration
fees.
If any of the parties fails to attend the hearing, I
(Arbitrator) shall be at liberty to conduct the proceedings, exparte.”
11.In addition, it is submitted by learned counsel for the respondent that
the party who intends to challenge the arbitrator shall within fifteen
(15) days after becoming aware of the constitution of the arbitral
tribunal or after becoming aware of any circumstances referred to in
Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.6 of 10

sub-section (3) of Section 12, send a written statement of the reasons
for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal. This is so provided in subsection (2) of Section 13 of the said Act. In the present case, the
notice of the arbitration was received by the petitioner on 26.12.2006
and the petition has been filed on 2.2.2007.
12.In order to appreciate the aforesaid controversy, the relevant
provisions are reproduced hereunder:
“12. Grounds for challenge - (1) When a person is
approached in connection with his possible appointment as
an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any circumstances
likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence
or impartiality.
(2) An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and
throughout the arbitral proceedings, shall, without delay,
disclose to the parties in writing any circumstances referred
to in sub-section (1) unless they have already been informed
of them by him.
(3) An arbitrator may be challenged only if—
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as
to his independence or impartiality, or
(b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the
parties.
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or
in whose appointment he has participated, only for reasons of
which he becomes aware after the appointment has been
made.
13. Challenge procedure. - (1) Subject to sub-section (4),
the parties are free to agree on a procedure for challenging
an arbitrator.
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1), a
party who intends to challenge an arbitrator shall, within
fifteen days after becoming aware of the constitution of the
arbitral Tribunal or after becoming aware of any
circumstances referred to in sub-section (3) of section 12,
send a written statement of the reasons for the challenge to
Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.7 of 10

the arbitral Tribunal.
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub-section (2),
withdraws from his office or the other party agrees to the
challenge, the arbitral Tribunal shall decide on the challenge.
(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the
parties or under the procedure under sub-section (2) is not
successful, the arbitral Tribunal shall continue the arbitral
proceedings and make an arbitral award.
(5) Where an arbitral award is made under sub-section (4),
the party challenging the arbitrator may make an application
for setting aside such an arbitral award in accordance with
section 34.
(6) Where an arbitral award is set aside on an application
made under subsection (5), the Court may decide as to
whether the arbitrator who is challenged is entitled to any
fees.”
13.Heard learned counsels for the parties.
14.Insofar as preliminary objections raised by the respondents are
concerned, the scheme of Sections 12 & 13 provide for the ground for
challenge to the appointment of an arbitrator. Section 11, in fact,
referred to the appointment of the arbitrator. Section 12 provides for
an arbitrator to disclose any circumstances which could give rise to
justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality. There is no
such allegation against the arbitrator in the present case. The only
challenge is to the appointment of an arbitrator by a person other than
the persona designata. Section 13 thereafter provides for the mode
and manner of challenge of such appointment. The challenge has to
be laid within fifteen (15) days of a party becoming aware of the
constitution of the arbitral tribunal. Undisputedly the petitioner has not
laid the challenge within fifteen (15) days. Sub-section (3) of Section

Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.8 of 10

13 of the said Act also provides that it is the arbitral tribunal, which
shall decide on the challenge.
15.The provisions have been examined and considered and the
judgement of the Apex Court in S.B.P. & Co. Vs. Patel Engineering
Ltd. & Anr. case (supra), in my considered view, leaves no manner of
doubt that the conclusion reached by the Supreme Court is that a
challenge to the arbitral tribunal has to be decided by the arbitral
tribunal itself except in cases where the appointment is made with the
intervention of the court.

The present case is not one where the

arbitrator is appointed by the court and thus there is no merit in the
contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner. Section 11 of the
said Act would have no application as Section 11(6) of the said Act
reads as under:
“11. Appointment of arbitrators.
......
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by
the parties,—
(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach
an agreement expected of them under that procedure; or
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any
function entrusted to him or it under that procedure,
a party may request the Chief Justice or any person or
institution designated by him to take the necessary measure,
unless the agreement on the appointment procedure
provides other means for securing the appointment.”
16.In view of the aforesaid position, there is also merit in the third
contention of the learned counsel for the respondent that the petitioner
has failed to lay challenge within the time prescribed under subsection (2) of Section 13 of the said Act and thus such a challenge
cannot be laid.
Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

Page No.9 of 10

17.On analysis of the aspect of persona designata, a reading of the
clause shows that what is provided for is that a party can apply to the
Secretary, Indian Council of Arbitration as per sub-clause (c) of clause
6.2.1 but it nowhere provides that it is the Secretary, Indian Council of
Arbitration who will so appoint an arbitrator. The respondent has set
forth the procedure whereby the application received by the Secretary
is placed before the appropriate Arbitration Committee which
appointed the arbitrator and the same was ratified by the Registrar,
Indian Council of Arbitration in terms of Rule 23 of the Indian Council
of Arbitration.
18.Thus, even on this account the challenge by the petitioner cannot be
maintained on merits.
19.It does appear that the petitioner participated in arbitral proceedings
as recorded in the proceedings before the arbitrator and seems to
have had a second thought.

The arbitrator is a retired Additional

District Judge. There is no reason disclosed by the petitioner why the
particular arbitrator would not be impartial. The challenge seems to
be laid for just the sake of such challenge rather than on any
merit/objection.
20.I find no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed with costs
quantified at Rs.5,000.00.
21.Interim order dated 20.3.2007 made absolute on 25.4.2007 stands
vacated.

September 11, 2007
b'nesh
Arb. P. No.39 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.10 of 10

