*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

ARB. PETITION No.66/1999
Date of hearing: 14.03.2007
Date of decision: 20.03.2007

%

HALDIRAM MANUFACTURING CO. LTD.
... PETITIONER
Through: Mr.Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Mahinder Rana, Advocate
VERSUS
M/S SRF INTERNATIONAL
Through:

...RESPONDENT
Mr. Sanjeev Puri and Mr.Rohit Puri,
Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. The petitioner filed an application under Section 8 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as
the said Act) against the present respondent as respondent no.1
and M/s Prime International, a partnership firm, as respondent
no.2.

The petition states that the petitioner is manufacturer/

exporter of high quality of Indian sweets, salty and spicy mixture
and pure Asian vegetarian food snacks commanding good
reputation.

The petitioner is a unit of the Haldiram Group of

Companies enaged in the business of financing and exports. The
original second respondent is stated to be the sole distributor
Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 1 of 17

appointed for distribution of goods manufactured by the petitioner
in Saudi Arabia.
2. The petition states that an agreement dated 19.6.1997 was
entered into between the petitioner, the respondent and the
original respondent no.2 for exclusive marketing and distribution
of 'Haldiram' brand of snacks and food in Saudi Arabia. The said
agreement contains an arbitration clause 20 providing for
arbitration as a mode of settlement of disputes. Clause 20 is as
under:
"ARBITRATION: As applicable for international business."
3. The respondent herein is stated to have placed two purchase
orders, both dated 14.1.1998, for supply of Haldiram brand of
sweets and namkeens on the petitioner and M/s Haldiram
Marketing Limited. The goods were to be despatched latest by
5.2.1998 and the payment had to be made by the respondent to
the manufacturer within four weeks of handing over of the
consignment in Delhi. The goods are stated to be consigned vide
invoice dated 9.2.1998 for Rs.2,89,761.46 and invoice dated
7.2.1998 for Rs.1,88,815/-. The first invoice is in the name of the
petitioner while the second is in the name of M/s Haldiram
Marketing Limited.
4. In terms of the agreement dated 19.6.1997, it was specified that
the products had to be supplied by the manufacturer to the
exporter on local sale basis for onward despatch in Saudi Arabia,
which has to be paid thereafter.
Arb.P.No.66/1999

Use of

'Khas Khas' (poppy
Page 2 of 17

seeds) as an ingredient is stated to be strictly forbidden in any
preparation in Saudi Arabia and is treated as a narcotic drug.
Thus, an specific assurance was taken from the manufacturer that
there

would

be

no

use

of

'Khas

Khas'.

However,

the

manufacturers are stated to have received a letter from the
exporter stating that the Saudi Arabian buyer is not agreeable to
take delivery of the consignment in February, 1998 as per the
purchase order as in three cases of 100 gram pouches of
'Cornflakes mixture' Khas Khas was printed as one of the
ingredients.

This is stated to be so with the consignment of

September, 1997 while there was no such problem in respect of
the consignment sent in February, 1998. Be that as it may, the
manufacturer advised for diversion of the containers to its
nominated distributor M/s Giant Super Market, Sharjah for
removal of any such alleged pouches and send the balance
containers back to Saudi Arabia.
5. The payments received towards the material cost against invoices
dated 9.2.1998 and 7.2.1998 were returned to the exporter vide
letter dated 14.4.1998 to facilitate the transaction.

However,

after certain communications, the distributors expressed their
inability to take delivery of the consignment. Goods were stated
to be lying during this period of time at the sea port in the
shipping container for over three months and this is stated to be
contrary to the agreed terms.
6. In view thereof, disputes are stated to have arisen between the

Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 3 of 17

parties as to whether there is any breach of contract and the
entitlement of damages, if any, for the petitioner.
7. A reply was filed by the respondent herein contesting this
application.

One of the objections taken was that M/s SRF

International does not have any entity in law and it is only a
division of M/s SRF Limited. It may be noticed that the description
of the respondent is "M/s SRF International (a division of M/s SRF
Limited)". The second objection was about the maintainability of
the petition since the provisions of Section 8 of the said Act would
apply only in respect of the matter pending before the Court. It is
further stated that the agreement dated 19.6.1997 contained an
arbitration clause in terms of which arbitration was to be
conducted

as

applicable

for

international

business.

This

procedure agreed to between the parties to conduct the
resolution of disputes was stated not to have been followed. The
disputes were also stated to be beyond the terms of the
agreement dated 19.6.1997. The reply also pointed out that the
purchase orders also contained an arbitration clause. This clause
is in the following terms:
"Arbitration
In case of any dispute between the parties to this
order, the same will be referred for arbitration to a
person, who will be mutually nominated by the
parties hereto and whose decision shall be final and
binding."
8. On merits, the respondent sought to put the blame on the
petitioner for not complying with the terms of the agreement.

Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 4 of 17

The respondent also claims to have sufferred losses on account of
the conduct of the petitioner and sought dismissal of the petition.
A similar reply was also filed by original respondent no.2.
9. The

petitioner

thereafter

moved

an

application

seeking

amendment of the petition whereby the nomenclature of the
petition was sought to be changed from one under Section 8 of
the said Act to one under Sections 8 and 11 of the said Act. This
application was allowed on 26.2.2004. A second application for
amendment was also filed in terms whereof reference was made
to the arbitration clause contained in the purchase order and it
was stated that the arbitration clause in question sought to be
relied upon was as contained in the purchase order dated
14.1.1998 and not the one under the agreement dated 19.6.1997.
Broadly speaking, the petition was sought to be converted into
one under Section 11 of the said Act for reference of disputes in
terms of the aforesaid clause contained in the agreement dated
14.1.1998 from one under the agreement dated 19.6.1997. This
application was also allowed by the order dated 5.9.2006.
10.On 18.1.2007 respondent no.2 pointed out that in view of the
aforesaid amendment, the said respondent ceases to be a
necessary party as it was not a party to the agreement dated
14.1.1998. In view thereof, an order was passed on the said date
for the deletion of original respondent no.2 from the array of
parties.

The present respondent filed a reply to the amended

petition, inter alia, claiming that there must be a dispute in

Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 5 of 17

existence between the parties prior to the Court exercising
jurisdiction for reference of disputes. Thus, the dispute ought to
have been raised and reference sought to arbitration.

It is

contended that without resorting to such a procedure straightway,
the petition has been filed under Section 11 of the said Act. It
may, however, be noted that indisputably a letter dated
16.9.1998 was addressed by the petitioner to the respondent
setting out the history of the dispute and calling upon the
respondent to make the payment of the contracted goods. There
is, however, no reference to any intent of the petitioner for
resolution of disputes by arbitration in such letter.
11.It will be appropriate at this stage to refer to the letter dated
14.1.1998 itself since that now forms the basis of the claim of the
petitioner for reference of disputes to arbitration.

The letter is

addressed by the respondent to the petitioner about the subject
matter of goods and contained the aforesaid arbitration clause. A
similar letter of the even date with the same clause is addressed
to M/s Haldiram Marketing Limited.
12.The basic defence of the respondent is that if the said clause of
arbitration applies, the petition under Section 11 of the said Act
could be filed only after there is invocation of arbitration and
failure of the respondent to agree to the appointment of an
arbitrator in terms of the arbitration clause. In the present case
the arbitration envisaged is of a sole arbitrator. It is only on the
failure of the other party to agree to the appointment of an

Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 6 of 17

arbitrator that a cause arises for the Court to exercise jurisdiction
under Section 11(5) of the said Act.
13.The respondent has also raised a plea of bar of time since the
amendment sought for whereby the reference was claimed under
the contract dated 13.4.1998 was only by amendment and the
amendment application was filed in 2004.

Thus, the period of

three years had lapsed from the date of the contract or the last
cause of action pleaded which was 16.9.1998. The other defences
are more or less similar as raised in the earlier reply.
14.Learned counsel for the parties were heard at length.

It can

really not be doubted that the provisions of Section 8 of the said
Act would really have no application to the present case since the
same pertains to an application being filed in an action brought
before a judicial authority.

Thus, it is only where some

proceedings are pending, the opposite party, not later than
submitting his first statement on the substance of dispute, can
move an application for reference of disputes to arbitration. The
present case being one where the appointment of an arbitrator is
sought through the process of Court without there being any
other judicial proceedings is, thus, to be covered by the provisions
of Section 11 of the said Act. The relevant provisions of the said
Section read as under:"11.Appointment of arbitrators.(1) .............
(2) Subject to sub-section (6), the parties are free
Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 7 of 17

to agree on a procedure for appointing the
arbitrator or arbitrators.
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in subsection (2), in an arbitration with three arbitrators,
each party shall appoint one arbitrator, and the
two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the third
arbitrator who shall act as the presiding
arbitrator.
(4) If the appointment procedure in sub-section
(3) applies and(a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within
thirty days from the receipt of a request to do so
from the other party; or
(b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on
the third arbitrator within thirty days from the
date of their appointment,
the appointment shall be made, upon request of a
party, by the Chief Justice or any person or
institution designated by him.
(5) Failing any agreement referred to in subsection (2), in an arbitration with a sole arbitrator,
if the parties fail to agree on the arbitrator within
thirty days from receipt of a request by one party
from the other party to so agree the appointment
shall be made, upon request of a party, by the
Chief Justice or any person or institution
designated by him.
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure
agreed upon by the parties,(a) a party fails to act as required under that
procedure; or
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators,
fail to reach an agreement expected of them
under that procedure; or
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to
perform any function entrusted to him or it under
that procedure,
a party may request the Chief Justice or any
person or institution designated by him to take
Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 8 of 17

the necessary measure, unless the agreement on
the appointment procedure provides other means
for securing the appointment."
15. In terms of sub-section (6) of Section 11 of the said Act, there
has to be a failure of a party or the parties to act in accordance
with the procedure agreed to between the parties for arbitration
for an application to be made for appointment of an arbitrator.
Sub-section (3) of the said Act comes into force only where there
is failure of an agreement referred to in sub-section (2) of the said
Act. Sub-section (5) provides that in an arbitration with a sole
arbitrator if the parties fail to agree on the arbitrator within 30
days from the receipt of a request of one party or the other party,
an application can be filed.

Thus, on a plain reading of the

provisions, there has to be a failure to agree to an arbitrator in
case of a sole arbitration before a request/application can be
made.
16.The controversy in the present case has arisen on account of the
fact that indisputably the petitioner never called upon the
respondent to appoint an arbitrator and, thus, the question of
failure to so appoint did not arise.
17.Learned senior counsel for the petitioner contended that the
petition filed before this Court itself can be treated as an
application seeking appointment of an arbitrator. In this behalf
learned senior counsel referred to the judgment of the learned
single Judge of this Court in the case of Messers. Greenland Foods
Pvt. Ltd., v. Union of India, AIR 1973 Delhi 157. In respect of the
Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 9 of 17

provisions of Section 20 of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940 it was
held that the application so filed itself can be treated as an
application for appointment of an arbitrator, if there has been no
previous notice. Similarly, in Anand Kumar Jain v. Union of India,
1984 RLR 438 it was held that even if there was no formal
demand made, the filing of the application under Section 20 of the
1940 Act amounts to the demand.
18.A reference has also been made to the judgment of the learned
single Judge of this Court in G. Premjee Trading Pvt. Ltd. v.
Ashoka Alloys Limited, 1998 (47) DRJ 262. The matter pertained
to the said Act and one of the defences was that the petitioner
had failed to identify the disputes arisen between the parties. It
was found that the area of disputes and differences had been
clearly stated in the petition filed by the petitioner and the same
were required to be adjudicated upon through the process of
arbitration.

The arbitration clause did not indicate as to who

would be the arbitrator to adjudicate upon the disputes arriving
between the parties. Since no procedure was described for
appointing an arbitrator, sub-section (5) of Section 11 of the said
Act would come into play and if the party fails to agree upon and
appoint an arbitrator, the Court would have the power to make
such an appointment.
19.Learned senior counsel for the petitioner referred to some
judgments which in the first blush appear to take a view that the
procedure prescribed under Section 11 of the said Act must be

Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 10 of 17

followed prior to approaching the Court. Learned counsel pointed
out that these judgments were based on the given arbitration
clause and would not apply in the present case. Since these are
also the judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the
respondent, it would be appropriate to discuss the same at this
stage.
20. In Alstom v. North Eastern Electric Power Corp., 2006 (87) DRJ
47 the arbitration clause specifically provided that "either party
may require, by written notice to the other party, that the matters
in dispute be referred to arbitration as hereinafter provided." In
Munish Gupta & Ors. V. Ram Dass & Ors., 2002 (Suppl.) Arb. LR
122 (Delhi) the arbitration clause provided for arbitration with a
sole arbitrator "if the parties fail to agree on the arbitrator within
30 days from the receipt of a request by one party from the other
party to so agree". Similarly, a Division Bench of this Court in
Talwar Brothers Pvt. Ltd. and others V. Punjab State Industrial
Development Corporation Ltd., 2001 (3) Arb. LR 587 (Delhi) (DB)
was dealing with a provision for the arbitrator appointed by one
party acting as a sole arbitrator in case of failure of the other
party to appoint their arbitrator. It was, thus, held that once this
procedure was prescribed, the sole arbitrator was well within his
right to proceed with the arbitration and there was no mandatory
requirement of approaching the Chief Justice for appointment of
an arbitrator.
21.In Wipra Finance Ltd. V. SRG Infotech (India) Ltd. and Anr., 2005

Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 11 of 17

(3) Arb. LR 502 (Delhi) the arbitration clause provided for
reference to the arbitration by two arbitrators, one to be
appointed by each party to the dispute in accordance with the
provisions of the 1940 Act.

It was held that it was incumbent

upon the petitioner to serve a notice upon the respondent and
appoint its own arbitrator and call upon the respondent to
nominate its arbitrator.

The cause for approaching the Court

would arise only on failure of the second party to nominate its
arbitrator. Thus, Section 11 of the said Act was held to require one
party to put the other party to notice and call upon the other
party to act as per procedure agreed to between the parties for
appointment of an arbitrator and the Chief Justice would be
approached only if the party noticed failed to act as per
procedure.
22.A reference has also been made to the judgment of the Apex
Court in Datar Switchgears Ltd. V. Tata Finance Ltd. and another,
2000(3) Arb. LR 447 (SC).

The arbitration clause in question

provided for reference of disputes to an arbitrator to be
nominated by the lessor. Since the lessor was never called upon
to appoint an arbitrator, there was, thus, no failure to so appoint,
the procedure under Section 11 of the Act was held not to have
been followed. The forfeiture of the right of one party to appoint
an arbitrtor would, thus, arise only when if called upon to do so
and on failing to do so within the stipulated time.
23.Learned counsel for the respondent also referred to the judgment

Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 12 of 17

in Varun Associates V. Army Welfare Housing Organisation, 122
(2005) DLT 475. Here again was a case where the opposite party
was to appoint an arbitrator who was so appointed within 30 days
from the date of the receipt of the notice. This was held to be a
proper appointment even though an application under Section 11
(6) of the said Act had been filed.
24.The other aspect emphasised by learned counsel for the

respondent was in respect of the petition being barred by
limitation.

It was pleaded that the original application was for

reference of disputes under a different contract while after
amendment reference has been made to a different contract.
Learned counsel referred to a Division Bench judgment in P.B.
Enterprises, Engineers and Contractors, Burdwan V. Eastern
Coalfields Limited, Burdwan and Ors., 2004 (2) Arb. LR 171
(Jharkhand) (DB). The limitation for filing an application under
Section 11(6) of the said Act was held to be counted from the date
on which 30 days expired from the date of the notice and if the
petition is filed more than three and a half years later, the same
was held to be barred by time. In this behalf, learned counsel for
the respondent has also referred to the provisions of Section 21 of
the said Act, which reads as under:
“21.Commencement of arbitral proceedings.Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral
proceedings, in respect of a particular dispute
commence on the date on which a request for that
dispute to be referred to arbitration is received by the
respondent.”
25.Learned counsel submitted that the arbitral proceedings in view
Arb.P.No.66/1999

Page 13 of 17

of the aforesaid provision could commence only when a request
for reference of disputes to arbitration was made and since they
were never so made, the amended application cannot cover the
plea of bar of time. The respondent also referred to the provisions
of Section 43 of the said Act to advance the proposition that it is
the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 which would apply and
such limitation would commence from the date referred to in
Section 21 of the said Act which provides for the commencement
of arbitral proceedings from the date when such request was
made.

Thus, such a request can be treated as to be within

limitation only if the present petition is deemed to be a request
for arbitration.
26.On a conspectus of the aforesaid judgments on the question of
requirement

of a prior notice to invoke the jurisdiction under

Section 11 of the said Act, there is no manner of doubt that the
procedure prescribed under the said Section has to be followed.
Sub-section (5) of Section 11 of the said Act provides for the
procedure as per the arbitration clause.

Thus, wherever the

arbitration clause prescribes the mode and manner of invocation
of arbitration, it is that procedure alone which must be followed
and till such a procedure is followed, there can be no question of
invocation of the jurisdiction of the Chief Justice of the High Court
under Section 11 of the said Act. The moot point is whether there
is any such procedure envisaged under the present arbitration
agreement.

Arb.P.No.66/1999

The various judgments referred to clearly had

Page 14 of 17

arbitration clauses where either one party had to call upon the
other party or had to nominate its own arbitrator or a designated
authority had to appoint an arbitrator. The arbitration clause in
the present case only states that the reference has to be to a sole
arbitrator. The sole arbitrator has to be mutually nominated by
the parties. There was no such mutual nomination. There is no
specific procedure prescribed under the arbitration clause. In the
absence of any procedure, it cannot be said that there is violation
of the pre-requisite before Section 11 of the said Act can be
invoked.
27.There is no doubt that if the petitioner had at least called upon

the respondent to appoint an arbitrtaor, this difficulty would not
have arisen but the line of judgments starting from M/s Greenland
Foods Pvt. Ltd. (supra), Anand Kumar Jain (supra) and finally in G.
Premjee Trading Pvt. Limited (supra) held that once the arbitration
clause does not indicate as to who would be the arbitrator and no
specific procedure is prescribed, the Court should have the power
to appoint an arbitrator. In view thereof, it cannot be said that
this Court is devoid in the facts of the present case to appoint an
arbitrator.
28.Now coming to the question of bar of limitation, it is no doubt
true that earlier the reference was made to the agreement dated
19.6.1997.

However, along with the original documents, the

purchase orders had also been filed. The original agreement was
a wider agreement.

Arb.P.No.66/1999

Once the dispute arose within a specific

Page 15 of 17

purchase order which may flow from the original agreement, a
specific clause of arbitration is contained in the particular
purchase order, then the arbitration clause of that purchase order
would apply. Thus, the appointment of the arbitrator has to be
made in terms of the arbitration clause contained in the purchase
order dated 14.1.1998. The petitioner has amended the original
petition and it is not as if the petition has been filed after the
expiry of three years from the dispute.

The amendment was

sought on the basis that reference to the agreement should be of
14.1.1998 and not the original agreement dated 19.6.1997. It,
thus, cannot be said that merely because the amendment had
been made subsequently by correcting the aforesaid aspect, the
claim for arbitration is beyond the period of three years.
29.Insofar as the defence of the description of the respondent is
concerned, the respondent itself defines itself as M/s SRF
International, a Division of M/s SRF Limited and that is how this
suit is titled and there is no infirmity in the same.
30.Disputes undoubtedly exist between the parties. The respondent
claims that it is not liable to pay the amount as demanded by the
petitioner, but on the other hand is entitled to damages from the
petitioner. Thus, there is existence of disputes which are liable to
be referred to arbitration.
31.I am, thus, of the considered view that the disputes between the
parties are liable to be referred to arbitration of an arbitrator to be
appointed by this Court.

Arb.P.No.66/1999

I deem it appropriate to appoint

Page 16 of 17

Mr.Justice S.K. Aggarwal (Retd.), A-62, Nizamuddin East; Mob.
No.9818000270, as the sole arbitrator to decide the disputes
between the parties. The arbitrator will fix his own sitting fee,
subject to a maximum fee of Rs.1,00,000/- for the total arbitration
to be shared equally between the parties. Parties are left to bear
their own costs.
32.A copy of the judgment be forwarded to the Arbitrator.

March 20, 2007
'sp'

Arb.P.No.66/1999

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page 17 of 17

