*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007 & Crl. M.A. No.5989 of 2007

%
24.01.2008

Date of decision:

SANJIT MALIK & ANR.
Through:

...PETITIONERS
Mr. A.K. Singh with
Mr. Sanjeev Kumar, Advocates.

Versus
THE STATE (NCT of Delhi) & ORS.
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Mr. Jaideep Malik, Advocate
for the State.
Mr. Viraj R. Datar with
Mr. Aditya Jhanji, Advocates
for Respondent No.2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (Oral)
1. The erstwhile Delhi Vidyut

Board

(BSES

Rajdhani

Power

Limited/respondent No.2 being the successor in interest) entered
into an agreement on 17.5.2002 with Mr. Sanjay as the sole
proprietor of M/s. Ishika Electricals under the scheme of single
point supply of electricity, appointing M/s. Ishika Electricals as the
agent. The object of such an agreement was to provide a single
point supply to the agent for distribution of electricity to
Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.1 of 10

unauthorised colonies/JJ bastis and for the agent to be responsible
for the monthly revenue realisation. The agent was to receive the
electricity in bulk from one or more point(s) from the supplier and
to distribute the electricity to the residents of the area and collect
revenue from them and thereafter prepare a monthly statement.
The agent was also responsible for payment of minimum revenue
for 75 per cent of the electricity energy as recorded in the meters
provided by the supplier for measurement of bulk supply.
2. The said Mr. Sanjay is alleged to have entered into a Partnership
Deed on 17.5.2002 itself with one Mr. Rajpal in respect of the said
business with a share of 50 per cent each and the partnership is
stated to have been subsequently registered.
3. On 3.4.2006, the enforcement team of respondent No.2 made an
inspection of the single point delivery connection when the load of
475.253 KW for domestic use and 14.100 KW for non-domestic
use totalling to 489.353 KW was found connected against the
sanctioned load of 360 KW. Further, the three phase CTPT SPD
electronic meter installed at the premises was found deliberately
tampered with, the upper & lower covering strip of the CTPT
terminal cover was found deliberately loosened and the lead seal
wire was found cut so that any foreign material could be inserted
to manipulate CTPT connections. The meter box plastic seal was
removed to download CMRI data for further analysis to ensure that
CTPT connection inside the CTPT box is delivery tampered to
manipulate the recorded consumption of the SPD meter. Hence a
case of dishonest abstraction of Energy was made out.

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.2 of 10

4. First proceedings were held on 25.4.2006 when the proceedings
were attended to by Mr. Sanjit Malik (petitioner No.1 herein) as
the partner of M/s. Ishika Electricals along with his advocate.
Submissions were again made by the consumer wherein it was
stated that the gap in upper and lower covering strip as alleged in
the inspection report may be due to natural wear and tear and so
far as the lead seals found tampered and re-fixed were concerned,
the consumer was open to any investigation regarding the same.
Time was given to file reply to the counsel. The concerned officer
of respondent No.2 thereafter proceeded to hold sittings to assess
the matter and the personal hearing of 5.6.2006 was attended by
Mr. Davender Kumar, petitioner No.2 herein when he sought an
adjournment as his advocate was not present on that date. The
next date fixed was 9.6.2006 when the advocate appeared along
with Mr. Rajpal. Submissions were made by the consumer and the
CMRI data was discussed. The consumption record showed less
consumption but the consumer did not accept the allegation of
seal tampering.

The video recording of the inspection was also

shown to him where CTPT box cover was having a gap from which
the connection to the meter could be manipulated.

The

proceedings were recorded on the said date.
5. It is thereafter on hearing the parties and examining the material
that a speaking order was passed on 31.7.2006 where a case of
dishonest abstraction of energy was found to be established.
6. A criminal complaint was filed on 19.12.2006 under Section 151
read with Section 154 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.3 of 10

referred to as the said Act) for offences under Sections 135 & 138
of the said Act and for determination of civil liabilities under
Section 154 (5) of the said Act. The civil liability was assessed at
Rs.20,08,090.00.

In the complaint, M/s. Ishika Electricals were

impleaded as accused No.1.

Petitioner No.1 is accused No.2,

petitioner No.2 is accused No.3 and Mr. Rajpal is accused No.4. It
appears that in view of non-appearance of the accused and
pursuance to the process before the criminal court, NBW were
issued and proceedings were filed in this Court in Crl. M.C.
No.1203/2007, in which orders were passed staying the operation
of the NBW on the undertakings of the parties to appear before
the trial court.
7. The bail application of the accused was considered and orders
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Special Court
(Electricity) on 21.4.2007. The argument raised before the said
Court by the petitioner was that they have no concern with the
complaint as they were not partners. Petitioner No.1 claimed to
be the brother of the partner of M/s. Ishika Electricals, who had
gone with petitioner No.2 itself, a friend of petitioner No.1, as the
brother was out of station.

On the other hand, the prosecution

claimed that these two parties were recorded as partners and had
signed the proceedings after perusing the same.

Thus, merely

because they appeared as attorneys or otherwise, there was no
occasion for them to sign as partners. The trial court in terms of
order dated 21.4.2007 admitted the three accused to bail on
furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs.25,000.00 each with

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.4 of 10

one surety each of the like amount and directed the three accused
to further deposit a sum of Rs.2.00 lakh each with the complainant
within one month from the date of the order.

It is this order,

which is sought to be challenged in the present Revision Petition.
Interim orders were granted on 23.5.2007 whereby the condition
of deposit of Rs.2.00 lakh each was suspended.
8. Learned counsels for the parties have been heard at length. It is
the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the
petitioners are nowhere concerned with the partnership firm and
thus cannot be impleaded as accused. It is further submitted by
learned counsel for the petitioners that in any case they cannot be
imposed with the onerous condition of deposit of Rs.2.00 lakh
each with which the petitioners are really aggrieved.

Learned

counsel submitted that, in fact, while considering the bail
application there was no jurisdiction with the trial court to have
imposed such a condition.

In this behalf learned counsel has

relied upon the judgement of the learned single Judge of this Court
in Dinesh Ahluwalia & Ors. Vs. State 99 (2002) DLT 387. A reading
of the judgement shows that in the given facts of the case it was
found that there was no occasion for imposing condition directing
the petitioners to deposit Rs.2.50 lakh in the fixed deposit. In fact,
there was no principle or law set down in that behalf.
9. Learned counsel for respondent No.2, on the other hand, points
out that a bare perusal of the proceeding sheets attended to by
the petitioners would show that both the petitioners were signing
as partners in the proceeding sheets and there was no occasion

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.5 of 10

for them to do so, if they had no concern with the partnership
firm.

Not only that it was pointed out that deliberately in the

proceeding sheet of 5.6.2006 filed as true copy before this Court
only the name of Mr. Davender Kumar is mentioned while the
original proceeding sheet recorded his presence as Mr. Davender
Kumar (Partner). It is thus alleged that a deliberate concealment
has been done from this Court to convey an impression that the
petitioners had nothing to do with the matter.

Not only that,

Davender Kumar had signed the proceeding sheet after putting a
line across from the point where recording of proceeding ended till
his signature to ensure that nothing was written in between. The
petitioners knew the English language and were familiar with what
was happening and, in fact, advanced submissions along with the
counsel.

Subsequent proceedings were attended to by the

petitioners with the counsel.
10.Learned counsel also relied upon the judgement of the learned
single Judge of this Court in Crl. Rev. P. No.744/2006 titled H.S.
Pannu Vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Anr. and other connected
matters decided on 22.10.2007.

The question examined was

about the right of the Special Courts to have directed payment of
amount as a condition for granting anticipatory bail in such cases
of theft of electricity. The Court came to the conclusion that the
power to impose condition in cases where the person is accused of
committing offences under the said Act cannot be used invariably.
Such power was held to be exercisable though sparingly.

The

judgement also considered the earlier pronouncement in Rajender

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.6 of 10

Vs. BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. & Anr. 2007 Crl.LJ. 2799 where such
a power to be exercised by a Special Court was held as
exercisable.
11.It may also be noted that in some of the orders produced for
perusal of the Court by learned counsel for respondent No.2
reliance was placed on the judgement of the Supreme Court in
Chakrawarti Prasad Vs. State of Bihar 2002 (10) SCC 390 where
the Apex Court while granting anticipatory bail itself had imposed
a condition for deposit of certain amounts in case of theft of
electricity.

Such

orders

have

been

passed

in

Crl.

M.C.

No.7408/2006 dated 17.11.2006 and Crl. M.C. No.65/2006 dated
6.9.2006 where the imposition of condition of deposit of amount
while granting bail in such cases of dishonest abstraction of
energy have been upheld.
12.The last aspect emphasised by learned counsel for respondent
No.2 is that the responsibility of the petitioners is even more
onerous on account of the fact that they were not the consumer
themselves but were agents of respondent No.2 with the
obligation to collect revenues from the consumer on the supply
being made on bulk basis through single point.

Instead of

assisting in the same, the petitioners started indulging themselves
in dishonest abstraction of energy.
13.On being asked to explain as to why the true copy of the
proceeding sheet dated 5.6.2006 did not reflect the correct
position, the only explanation given by learned counsel for the
petitioners is that the same appeared to be a typographical error.

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.7 of 10

14.On hearing learned counsels for the parties, the first important
aspect which requires consideration is as to whether such a power
does exist with the Special Courts to impose the condition of
deposit of amount while granting bail. In my considered view, the
answer to the same is in the affirmative. The pronouncement of
the Apex Court in

Chakrawarti Prasad Vs. State of Bihar case

(supra) and Rajender Vs. BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. & Anr. case
(supra), in fact, leave no manner of doubt in this behalf. Even the
judgement in H.S. Pannu Vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Anr. case
(supra) only adds a word of caution that such orders should not be
passed in routine.
15.The order passed in the present case by the Special Court is a
reasoned order. It has taken note of the fact that the present case
is one where the agents of respondent No.2 entrusted with the
responsibility

of

delivery

through

single

point

system

and

distribution to consumers as also for recovery of amounts from
such consumers were indulging in dishonest abstraction of energy
itself. It is not a case of a theft by a consumer but the matter is
more aggravated by the petitioners being the agents. There are
thus cogent reasons for imposition of the condition. This is more
so since the total civil liability against the accused has been
assessed at Rs.20,08,090.00 and only an amount of Rs.6.00 lakh
has been directed to be deposited as a condition of the bail.
16.The main thrust of the argument of the learned counsel for the
petitioners was the absence of the role of the petitioners in the
partnership firm, which had entered into an agreement with

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.8 of 10

respondent No.2.

It is the petitioners who appeared before the

concerned authority. The petitioners did not appear as attorney
or otherwise.

The petitioners appeared as partners.

Their

presence was recorded as such and they signed the proceedings
in that capacity even in the presence of their counsel.

The

submissions were made by the petitioners. It is only subsequently
that having realised that there are aspects of criminal liability,
which may also arise that the petitioners are seeking to take a Uturn.

In any case the present stage is not one where there is

conviction of the petitioners but the only concern at the moment
is on the aspect of grant of bail. An aggravating circumstance in
the present case is also the filing of incorrect true copy of a
material document. This has been done to substantiate the plea
of the petitioners that they were not partners, specifically
petitioner No.2. Respondent No.2 produced the correct true copy
to show that the said petitioner No.2 had, in fact, signed as
partner. The endeavour of learned counsel for the petitioners to
label the same as a mere typographical error is fallacious. The
unfortunate part is that even after the aforesaid was pointed out,
learned counsel for the petitioners has persisted with his
submission.
17.For all the aforesaid reasons, I find no error in the order passed
by the trial court nor any ground to exercise the revisionary
jurisdiction.

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

Page No.9 of 10

18.The petition is dismissed with costs of Rs.15,000.00 especially
taking into consideration the mis-representation made before this
Court.
19.Interim order stands vacated.

JANUARY 24, 2008
b'nesh

Crl. Rev. P. No.360 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.10 of 10

