*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006
Reserved on: 16.05.2008
Date of decision: 23.05.2008

%

INSPECTOR/EXE. JASPAL SINGH MANN
…PETITIONER
Through: Ms. Rekha Palli, Advocate.
Versus

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Mr. Ashwani Bhardwaj,
Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the non-grant of either the
rent free accommodation or the House Rent Allowance
(for short ‘HRA’) only by reason of a decision of the
respondents that such facility is extendable only to a
certain percentage of persons on the strength of the
cadre for a particular town.

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 1 of 13

2.

The petitioner was selected as a Sub-Inspector/Exe. In
the CISF in pursuance to a letter dated 1.9.1988.

The

initial pay of the petitioner was fixed at Rs.1,400.00 per
month in the pay-scale of Rs.1400-40-1800 EB-50-2300
“plus usual allowances as admissible and sanctioned by
the Central Government from time to time”. The letter
also provided for the provisions of the Central Industrial
Security Force Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the
said Act) and the Rules as also any other relevant rules
and regulations which may be framed by the Central
Government from time to time to apply to the petitioner.
3.

The petitioner was transferred from the CISF Unit Civil
Airport, Amritsar to CISF Unit IGI Airport, New Delhi vide
order dated 29.3.2005 and the petitioner joined in May
2005.

The

petitioner

was

not

being

provided

a

Government family accommodation at Amritsar and thus
was in receipt of HRA. The petitioner on his transfer to
New Delhi made applications for allotment of family
accommodation

and

requested

that

if

no

family

accommodation is available he be given permission to
stay in an accommodation with his family and be paid the
HRA. The respondents informed the petitioner vide letter
dated 12.7.2005 that no Government accommodation
was available for him and that he would be given outliving permission but without payment of HRA. The out-

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 2 of 13

living permission was subject to various conditions
including residing within eight kilometers of radius from
the place of duty.
4.

The petitioner was aggrieved by the aforesaid decision
denying him the HRA and it resulted in the monthly loss
of Rs.4,000.00 per month towards payment of rent and
thus

made

19.11.2005.

a

representation

dated

5.8.2005

and

The petitioner claims that he was orally

informed that the benefit of family accommodation or
HRA was admissible only for 45 per cent of the enrolled
officers and since he did not fall within the quota of 45per
cent as per his seniority on the date of his joining the
Unit he is not entitled to either.
5.

The petitioner has thereafter filed the present writ
petition seeking a writ of mandamus directing the
respondents to grant him either Government family
accommodation or HRA in lieu thereof and also seeks
quashing of Rule 61 of the Central Industrial Security
Force Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said
Rules) which has been relied upon by the respondents to
deny him the benefit.

6.

In the counter affidavit the respondents have pleaded
that the quota of HRA in the rank of Inspector has
already exhausted and thus the request of the petitioner
for grant of HRA in the new Unit was examined after the

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 3 of 13

petitioner reported in the Unit. The same is stated to be
based on seniority and his name was entered in the
register for the purposes of grant of HRA. It is stated that
there was no quota for grant of HRA to the rank of
Inspector. The respondents have relied upon Rule 61 of
the said Rules referred to aforesaid, which reads as
under:
“61. Free accommodation. – (1) Normally, the
undertaking where the Force has been deputed
shall provide accommodation in the township itself
to all supervisory officers and at the rate of 45 per
cent married and 55 per cent unmarried or as
amended by the Central Government from time to
time, to the enrolled members of the Force.
(2) The accommodation to the enrolled member
of the Force shall be rent-free but where such
facilities are not available they shall get house rent
allowance in lieu thereof as applicable to other
central government employees.
(3) The members of the Force shall also get
compensation in lieu of married accommodation in
terms of orders issued by the Government from
time to time in this respect. The compensation
shall be payable to that percentage of members of
the Force who are entitled to get married
accommodation minus those members of the Force
who are allotted accommodation by
the
Undertaking.
(4) Supervisory officer of the Force who is
provided accommodation by the Public Sector
Undertakings or allotted accommodation by
Directorate of Estate will pay licence fee to the
Public Sector Undertakings at the rates as
applicable to their own employees or the licence
fee as fixed by the Central Government for general
pool accommodation from time to time with
reference to plinth area of accommodation as the
case may be.”

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 4 of 13

7.

A

reading

of

the

aforesaid

Rule

shows

that

the

respondents Force is required to provide accommodation
in the township itself to all the supervisory officers in the
ratio of 45 per cent for married and 55 per cent for
unmarried or as may be amended by the Central
Government from time to time. Sub-rule 2 provides that
the accommodation shall be rent-free but where such
facilities are not available, the members would be
entitled to get House Rent Allowance (HRA) in lieu
thereof as applicable to other Central Government
employees. Sub-rule 3 provides that the members of the
force are also entitled to compensation in lieu of married
accommodation in terms of orders issued by

the

Government from time to time and the compensation
shall be payable to that percentage of members of Force
who are entitled to get married accommodation minus (-)
those members who have got accommodation by the
Undertaking.
8.

The respondents have also relied upon an order dated
27.11.1980
providing

read
for

with

the

compensation

order
in

dated
lieu

of

30.3.2000
rent-free

accommodation for certain personnel. The office orders
purport to state that the non-gazetted personnel of the
CPOs are entitled to compensation in lieu of rent-free
accommodation up to a certain percentage of the total

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 5 of 13

strength of personnel in different categories and such
percentage may vary from organization to organization
and from rank to rank. There have been upward revision
of the percentage of eligible persons in various CPOs for
grant of compensation.

It is, thus, submitted that the

respondents are well within their right to deny both the
rent-free accommodation and the HRA to the petitioner.
9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of her
contention referred to the judgement of the Supreme
Court in Union of India Vs. Dineshan K.K. (2008) 1 SCC
586 which dealt with the apparent disparity and anomaly
on account of the report of the Pay Commission of the
different para-military forces. The High Court held that it
would be unreasonable and discriminatory if pay-scale
given to Radio Mechanics in CRPF and BSF were denied
to the Radio Mechanics in Assam Rifles, when the
qualifications and service requirements in all the three
organizations were identical. The challenge to this order
by the Government was rebutted by Supreme Court on
the ground that such persons were performing identical
functions in the different para-military forces.

10.

Learned counsel also sought to draw strength from the
judgement of the Supreme Court in Director, Central
Plantation Crops Research Institute, Kesaragod & Ors. Vs.

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 6 of 13

M. Purushothaman & Ors. 1995 Supp (4) SCC 633 which
dealt with the concept of HRA in the following terms:
“8. HRA would be covered by the definition of
compensatory allowance. It is compensation in
lieu of accommodation.
This definition itself
further makes it clear that compensatory
allowance is not to be used as a source of profit. It
is given only to compensate for the amenities
which are not available or provided to the
employee. The moment, therefore, the amenities
are provided or offered, the employee should
cease to be in receipt of the compensation which is
given for want of it. We with the Tribunal had
perused the definition of ‘pay’ and “compensatory
allowance” given in the Fundamental Rules before
pronouncing that HRA is a part of the wages or pay
and, therefore, cannot be disturbed.”
11.

Similarly in State of Karnataka & Anr. Vs. Mangalore
University Non-teaching Employees’ Association & Ors.
(2002) 3 SCC 302 the Supreme Court observed in
paragraph 9 as under:
“9. Before dealing with the argument based on
Article 14, we may advert to the comment of the
Division bench that the payment of HRA and CCA is
not in the nature of concession as opined by the
learned Single Judge. True, as pointed out by the
Division Bench, HRA and CCA, which are
components of total salary undoubtedly form part
of conditions of service and it may not be accurate
to describe them as concession. Probably, the
learned Single Judge treated it as a concession for
the reason that the benefit was being given over
and above what was contemplated by the rules
embodied in GO No.67 dated 4-5-1990. Be that as
it may, the fact that HRA and CCA are part of
conditions of service does not lead the
respondents anywhere for the simple reason that
the conditions of service can be unilaterally altered
so long as such action is in conformity with legal
and
constitutional
provisions.
Ultimately,
therefore, the issue turns on the question where
Article 14 is violated for not extending the benefit
of higher scale of allowances admissible to ‘C’

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 7 of 13

Class city employees or by withdrawing a benefit
which was being given under the ad hoc orders
issued from time to time.”
12.

We have examined the rival contentions of the parties.
The first aspect to be considered is the concept of the
HRA itself. HRA is not in the nature of a concession but it
forms a component of the total salary as part of condition
of service.

It is in the nature of a compensatory

allowance in lieu of accommodation. Thus, the object is
to compensate an employee for the amenities which are
not available as provided to other employees.

The

service personnel of the CISF and other CPOs while
posted

in

different

stations

are

thus

granted

accommodation and in case of shortage of the same HRA
is paid.
13.

The operation of Rule 61 of the said Rules and its
interpretation has given rise to a situation where the
grant of such accommodation or HRA in lieu thereof is
sought to be made dependent where a person is posted.

14.

It is trite to say that the transfer or posting is an incident
of service.

The respondents post such persons at

different stations according to their requirement and thus
there cannot be any discrimination on the question of the
grant of accommodation or HRA in lieu thereof on the
basis of such station one is posted to.

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Thus, merely

Page 8 of 13

because the petitioner comes to be posted at Delhi from
Amritsar he cannot be deprived the HRA.
15.

Another aspect to be noted is that in some of the paramilitary forces, 100 per cent of the force is being granted
family accommodation or HRA in lieu thereof giving rise
to discrimination between personnel of para-military
forces and thus principles as laid down in Union of India
Vs. Dineshan K.K. case (supra) would equally apply.

16.

The appointment letter issued to the petitioner itself
stated that allowances as admissible and sanctioned by
the Central Government would apply and HRA is payable
as per CCS (HRA) Rules as admitted by the respondents.

17.

We fail to appreciate either the rationale or the basis for
creating an artificial category of persons who would be
disentitled to an accommodation or HRA. There can be
percentages assigned between different categories of
personnel

for

distribution

of

the

accommodation

available.

This is a natural corollary of shortage of

accommodation. The petitioner cannot make a grievance
in respect of the same.

However, if a personnel is not

granted a family accommodation on account of his
seniority being lower in his category of persons as per
the percentage of distribution of family accommodation,
HRA must follow.

The rule as sought to be interpreted

would imply that not only is there a percentage

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 9 of 13

distribution between different categories but the persons
falling outside the ambit of consideration would be
deprived even of the HRA. The only manner of reading
the Rule which would sustain would be that Rule 61 of
the said Rules would not entitle a person to claim family
accommodation if in the percentage of distribution as per
sub-rule 1 of Rule 61 of the said Rules, he is not of
sufficient seniority but in that eventuality he is entitled to
the HRA in lieu thereof as applicable to the Central
Government employees.

Sub-rule 2 of Rule 61 of the

said Rules is unambiguous inasmuch as, it says that
those

who

cannot

accommodation

be

because

provided
of

with

the

a

paucity

free
of

accommodation which has to be distributed in the ratio
of 45 per cent : 55 per cent in case of married and
unmarried officials, shall be provided HRA in lieu thereof.
If Rule 61 (1) and Rule 61 (3) of the said Rules are read
together, the only conclusion which can be derived is,
that while there may be a situation where there may not
be a house available for allotment to an officer posted at
a particular station, he still would be entitled to HRA.
However, in case where a person is entitled to married
accommodation

but

is

provided

with

unmarried

accommodation, then he may also be entitled to
compensation in lieu of married accommodation in

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 10 of 13

addition

to

the

allotment

of

house

available

for

unmarried category if he wants to occupy the said house.
18.

Reading of Rule 61 of the said Rules in the manner as
stated above would also imply, that the Government
circulars on which much reliance has been placed upon
by learned counsel for the respondents, i.e., the circulars
dated

30.3.2000

and

27.11.1980,

is

misconceived

inasmuch as, those circulars cannot override, the Statute,
that is, Rule 61 (2) of the said Rules.
19.

A

contrary

interpretation

would

make

the

Rule

discriminatory and hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of
India having no rational or nexus with the object sought
to be served.

It can hardly be the intent of the

respondents that the grant of HRA is dependent on a
chance factor as to where a person is posted.

In fact,

this may itself result in unnecessary representations and
pressures by persons for being posted to places where
they would be entitled to such an HRA as posting in other
places may deprive them of this entitlement. Housing in
most parts of the country is expensive and a large
expense for a service personnel. The grant of such HRA,
thus, cannot vary from town to town except to the extent
that the amount of HRA would vary dependent on the
classification of the town/city.

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 11 of 13

20.

We also find it a discriminatory practice where personnel
of other para-military forces who are identically situated
may be getting an accommodation or HRA in lieu thereof
for all the personnel posted in that station while such
benefit is sought to be denied in other para-military
services.

21.

We are, thus, of the considered view that persons in the
service of the respondents when posted to any station
would be entitled to either accommodation or HRA in lieu
thereof as per the Central Government norms, the value
of reimbursement being dependent on the city where
they are posted.

22.

A writ of mandamus is issued directing the respondents
to pay to the petitioner the HRA in lieu of a family
accommodation from the date the petitioner became
entitled to claim such family accommodation and Rule 61
of the said Rules is accordingly read down to imply that
such entitlement would be within the parameters of the
said Rules. A reading down of such rule is permissible so
as to uphold the said Rule as the alternative would be to
quash the rule as violative of the Constitution of India
and an interpretation which would sustain the rule and
yet make it not arbitrary or discriminatory by reading
down the same will be course of action which would be

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

Page 12 of 13

appropriate. The arrears be paid to the petitioner within
a period of three (3) months from today.
23.

The petition stands allowed in the aforesaid terms.

24.

The petitioner shall also be entitled to costs quantified at
Rs.5,000.00.

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

MAY 23, 2008
b'nesh

WP (C) No.1712 of 2006

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

Page 13 of 13

