*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

ARB. P. No. 201 of 2006

%

Date of decision : 29.01.2007

M/S. SATYA PRAKASH & BROS. PVT. LTD.
...PETITIONER
Through: Mr. Aseem Mehrotra, Advocate.
- VERSUS AIRPORT AUTHORITY OF INDIA & ORS.
Through:

...RESPONDENTS

Mr. Sunil Ahuja, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
(1)The respondent inserted an advertisement inviting tenders for the
work of Strengthening of runway 14/32 and taxiway at Trivandrum
Airport,

Thiruvananthapuram.

The

petitioner

submitted

his

application in pursuance thereto and was shortlisted in terms of a
communication dated 10.02.2003 of the respondent. On opening of
the tender received from the petitioner, the petitioner was awarded
the contract vide letter dated 24.04.2003.

Arb. P. 201 of 2006

Page No.1 of 5

(2)The petitioner commenced work which was completed where-after
the final bill was raised on 18.02.2005. The petitioner accepted the
payment

with

the

endorsement

“accepted

in

full

and

final

settlement” on 23.02.2005.
(3)The petitioner, however, raised various claims including on account
of amounts withheld for cable damage at site and on account of
escalation. The respondent, however, refused to accept the claims. It
is an undisputed position that the contract between the parties
contains an arbitration clause No.25 but despite demands of the
petitioner including vide letter dated 29.12.2005, the respondent
refused to appoint an arbitrator on the ground that the petitioner
had accepted the full and final payment for all his claims and thus
there

were

no

disputes

to

be

referred

to

arbitration.

The

respondent's stand was also that in terms of clause 25 of the
contract, the claim is to be made within a period of 90 days of the
final bill.
(4)The petitioner finally filed the present petition under Section 11 (5)
of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as
'the said Act').
(5)It is relevant to also note that during the pendency of the present
petition, the question of settlement of accounts between the parties
apparently continued to be a subject matter of discussion which
resulted in the payment on 12.07.2006 by the respondent to the
petitioner on account of the escalation claim, albeit of a lesser

Arb. P. 201 of 2006

Page No.2 of 5

amount.
(6)Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the plea of a bar of
time beyond 90 days as per clause 25 of the contract would not be
sustainable in view of the judgment of this Court in Explore
Computers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Cals Ltd. & Anr. 131 (2006) DLT 477. This
Court considered the effect of the earlier judgment of this Court in
Union of India Vs. M/s Simplex Concrete Piles Limited 108 (2003) DLT
732 where the same question was raised of filing of a claim within 90
days of the date of final bill.

It was held that such a stipulation

would be against public policy and would be void under Section 28 of
the Contract Act. This was so as such an agreement would seek to
restrict a party from enforcing his rights in a Court after the period
prescribed under the agreement expires even though the period
prescribed by law for enforcement of his rights had not yet expired.
(7)In my considered view, in view of the clear exposition of the legal
position in Explore Computers Pvt. Ltd.'s case (supra) and Union of
India Vs. M/s Simplex Concrete Piles Limited's case (supra), it is not
open to the respondent to plead the bar of time under clause 25 of
the contract.
(8)The second aspect to be examined, as urged by the learned counsel
for the parties, is the plea of full and final settlement. In this behalf,
learned counsel for the respondent has relied upon a judgment of
the Apex Court in Wild Life Institute of India, Dehradun Vs. Vijay
Kumar Garg (1997) 10 SCC 528.

Arb. P. 201 of 2006

In the facts of that case, the

Page No.3 of 5

endorsement made was “No further claim of whatsoever on any
ground will be taken up in any court of law or arbitration. Any claim
arising on account of Labour Act or otherwise
responsibility”.

will be our

It was in the aforesaid given facts of the case, that

it was held that the final payment was accepted by the respondent
in full satisfaction of his claims under the contract and there was no
dispute outstanding.
(9)Learned counsel for the petitioner, on the other hand, contends that
there is no such endorsement in the present case which states that
the petitioner will not agitate its right in any Court of law or through
arbitration. Learned counsel also seeks to rely upon a judgment of
the

Apex

Court

in

Bharat

Coking

Coal

Ltd.

Vs.

Annapurna

Construction (2003) 8 SCC 154, where it was held that only because
a party accepted the final payment would not imply that it was not
entitled to raise any claim. It was observed in para 9 as under:“9.
Only because the respondent has accepted
the final bill, the same would not mean that it was
not entitled to raise any claim. It is not the case
of the appellant that while accepting the final bill,
the respondent had unequivocally stated that he
would not raise any further claim. In absence of
such a declaration, the respondent cannot be held
to be estopped or precluded from raising any
claim. We, therefore, do not find any merit in the
said submission of Mr.Sinha.”
(10)The present case in its given facts is one which falls within the
nature of endorsement made in Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.'s case
(supra) and thus, the petitioner cannot be prohibited from raising
any claim. Another aspect which is important in the present case is

Arb. P. 201 of 2006

Page No.4 of 5

that if there had been such a full and final settlement on 23.02.2005,
there would have been no occasion for the respondent to entertain
any claim of the petitioner thereafter. The petitioner has been paid
a large amount on 12.07.2006 on account of the claim of escalation.
This itself is another factor to show that there was no full and final
settlement prohibiting the rights of the petitioner to urge its claim
before the Court or in arbitration proceedings in accordance with
law.
(11)The respondent has failed to appoint an arbitrator in terms of the
arbitration clause despite notice within the stipulated time.

It is,

thus, this Court which would have to exercise its powers to appoint
an arbitrator.

I hereby appoint Mr. S.K. Mahajan, Retired Judge of

this Court as a sole arbitrator to enter upon the reference and
adjudicate the disputes between the parties. The sitting fee of the
arbitrator will be fixed by the arbitrator himself subject to a total fee
limit of Rs. 3 lacs apart from out of pocket expenses.

The fee of

arbitration shall be borne initially by the petitioner to form part of
the main cause.
(12)The petition is allowed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
(13)A copy of this order be sent expeditiously to the arbitrator.

January 29, 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

ak

Arb. P. 201 of 2006

Page No.5 of 5

