*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI

+

Arbitration Petition No.118/2007

%

Date of decision : 24.07.2007

M/s Jai Prakash Associates Limited

....PETITIONER

Through: Mr.A.K.Singh, Advocate
- VERSUS M/s National Hydroelectric
Power Corporation Limited

...RESPONDENT
Through: Mr.Alagh Kumar, Advocate for
the Respondent with
Mr.G.S.Pandey, Chief of Law
and Mr.L.K.Gupta, Engineer
for NHPC/Respondent

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)

(1)The petition has been filed by the petitioner under Section 11(6) of
Arbitration Petition No.118/2007

Page No.1 of 5

the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 ('the said Act' for short)
for appointment of an arbitrator on behalf of the respondent in
view of the alleged failure of the respondent to appoint their
arbitrator in terms of the arbitration clause. It may be appropriate
at the inception to note that the petitioner is a leader of M/s Indo
Candian Hydro Consortium which was engaged for the Chamera
Hydroelectric Project Stage II by the respondent.

There were

agreements entered into between the consortium and separate
agreements with different parties.

Learned counsel for the

petitioner has clarified that the present petition has been filed by
the petitioner in the capacity of the leader of the consortium.
(2)The dispute which has given rise to this present petition is limited.
The respondent wanted an acceleration in the construction
programme so as to ensure that the Project was completed ahead
of the time as stipulated in the agreement dated 18.07.1999. In
furtherance of the same, the petitioner as the leader of the
consortium, addressed a letter dated 22.10.2001 setting out
certain terms and conditions for the acceleration.

This was

followed up with another letter dated 05.04.2002. It was finally by
the letter dated 09.04.2003 that the respondent agreed to an
incentive for such acceleration of the Project. It is not necessary to
re-produce the terms of the said letter but suffice to say that the
same was addressed to the petitioner as the leader of the
consortium. The schedule for such acceleration was laid down and
Arbitration Petition No.118/2007

Page No.2 of 5

it was stipulated that in case of delay of overall commissioning of
the Project beyond October, 2003 no incentive shall be admissible.
(3)The dispute relates to non payment of this incentive which
according to the petitioner is payable to the consortium while
according to the respondent the said amount is not payable on
account of the failure to meet the requirements of stipulated date
for payment of such incentive.
(4)Notice was issued in the present petition on 20.04.2007 clearly
stating that the reply if any be filed within four weeks of the receipt
of the notice. Notice was served on 01.06.2007. No reply has been
filed till date. Learned counsel for the respondent seeks further
time to file reply. The request is declined in view of the clear terms
of the order dated 20.04.2007.
(5)Learned counsel for the respondent makes a two fold submission.
Firstly learned counsel for the respondent contends that the
petition has been filed by the petitioner alone while the incentive
was payable to the consortium. Learned counsel for the petitioner
has already clarified that it is the petitioner who was acting as the
leader of the consortium and the present petition is one in that
capacity as the leader of the consortium.
(6)The second aspect raised by learned counsel for the respondent is
that payment of such incentive does not form a part of the original
contract and thus arbitration agreement would not apply to the
same.

I am unable to accept the plea for the reason that it is not

Arbitration Petition No.118/2007

Page No.3 of 5

in dispute that there is an arbitration clause in the original contract
which envisaged the appointment of an arbitrator by each of the
parties and a third arbitrator to be appointed by The International
Chamber of Commerce, Paris. The clause is as under:
“SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
38.1.....
38.2
Any dispute or difference which
may arise between the parties out of or in
connection with tis Contract which the
parties are unable to settle amicably,
shall be settled by reference to arbitration
by three arbitrators. Each party shall
appoint one arbitrator and the third shall
be appointed by the Court of Arbitration
of
the
International
Chamber
of
Commerce, Paris (ICC) in accordance with
the provisions of the Rules of Arbitration
of
the
International
Chamber
of
Commerce, Paris (ICC).
The rules
governing the proceedings before the
arbitrators shall be those of the ICC. Save
as above, the Indian Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 shall govern the
arbitration.
The venue of arbitration
proceedings shall be New Delhi, India.”
(7)The payments which are in dispute relate to the incentive payment
offered by the respondent under the same contract. It is in fact the
payment for an early completion of contract.

It cannot be

accepted that this dispute does not arise under the contract.
(8)The petitioner has already appointed its arbitrator in Mr.V.K.Tyagi.
The prayer thus is for appointment of an arbitrator on behalf of the
respondent.

Arbitration Petition No.118/2007

Page No.4 of 5

(9)In view of the failure of the respondent to appoint an arbitrator in
pursuance to the demand made by the petitioner vide letters dated
17.08.2006 and 22.11.2006, I hereby appoint

Justice Devender

Gupta (Retd.), C-89, South Extension Part II, New Delhi 110049
Mobile: 9818065456 as the arbitrator on suggestion of learned
counsel for the respondent on instructions.
(10)The petition stands disposed of.

July 24, 2007
dm

Arbitration Petition No.118/2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.5 of 5

