*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl.M.C. 944/2008

%

Date of decision: 24.03.2008

GULSHAN KUMAR SAHNEY
Through:

...PETITIONER
Ms. Neelam Grover,
Advocate.

Versus
NCT OF DELHI & ORS.
Through:

...RESPONDENTS
Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for
Respondent No. 1 / State.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (Oral)
1.

A

marriage

was

solemnized

between

late

Manisha,

daughter of the petitioner, to Mr.Pradeep Sikri. The sister of
late

Manisha,

Ms.Neha,

was

married

to

Mr.Rajesh,

respondent no.7, younger brother of Mr.Pradeep Sikri. Late
Manisha suffered burn injuries on 26.9.1996 and ultimately
passed away on 1.10.1996.

No complaint was lodged by

any of the relations of late Manisha. The dying declaration
of late Manisha was recorded in the presence of a doctor
and she stated that the fire, which caused her burns, was
Crl.M.C.944/08

Page 1 of 9

accidental and there was no quarrel in the family. The burn
injuries were stated to be caused by an operating generator.
2.

It is alleged that the younger sister of late Manisha,
Ms.Neha, was beaten by her husband and in-laws which
resulted in a complaint being made and registration of FIR
147/1997 on 2.5.1997 u/s 498A IPC at P.S.Anand Vihar. The
petitioner claims that earlier the family members of late
Manisha did not make any complaints because they were
under threat and they were worried about their younger
daughter who was married in the same family but in view of
the conduct of the respondents towards Neha, the petitioner
also decided to complain about the demise of late Manisha.

3.

The concerned authorities are alleged to have taken no
action with the result that a private complaint was filed
before the learned ACMM on 6.8.1997.

The learned MM

sent the complaint to DCP (Vigilance) for inquiry to be
conducted u/s 156(3) Cr.P.C. A report was finally submitted
and the learned MM after considering the same, decided to
examine the witnesses of the complainant. The testimony
of 22 witnesses of the complainant were recorded and
arguments were heard on the summoning orders.
learned

MM,

however,

dismissed

the

complaint

The
on

20.9.2007. The revision petition filed against the same was
also dismissed by the learned ASJ vide orders dated

Crl.M.C.944/08

Page 2 of 9

8.2.2008.

The petitioner aggrieved by both the aforesaid

orders has filed the present petition u/s 482 Cr.P.C.
4.

A perusal of the order passed by the learned MM shows that
there is an in depth analysis of the testimony of the
witnesses of the complainant. The first aspect considered
by the learned MM, as also emphasized by the learned ASJ,
is the fact that after late Manisha was removed to the RML
Hospital, the concerned doctor had declared her fit for
making a statement.

Her statement was recorded in the

presence of a doctor and as per the statement of the
deceased, she was not burnt by anyone.

The deceased

herself stated that the fire was accidental and there was no
quarrel in the family. The marriage took place in the year
1985 and there was never any complaint made till much
after the demise of late Manisha on 1.10.1996 i.e. for a
period of over 11 years.

There was no complaint of

harassment on account of bringing insufficient dowry and, in
fact, the complainant (father), his wife, son and the other
married daughter exonerated the accused persons as they
did not suspect any foul play.

CW18 is an independent

witness, being Dr.Yogesh Jha, who was produced by the
complainant himself and deposed that the deceased had
told her that she got burnt accidentally while operating the
generator.

Crl.M.C.944/08

Page 3 of 9

5.

It is only subsequently that the complainant, his wife and his
daughter have alleged that the deceased told them that she
was burnt by her mother-in-law, father-in-law and sister-inlaw.

This was contrary to the statement made by the

deceased and there was absence of any such complaint at
the relevant stage of time which arose only after the
relationship of Ms.Neha, the younger daughter of the
petitioner married in the same family, became estranged.
In fact, Ms.Neha was married in the year 1989 in the same
family and there was no complaint made till 1997.

The

second aspect taken note of by the learned MM is that the
complainant did not raise any voice till the disputes
between his second daughter and the accused arose.
Neither any foul play was suspected by the deceased
herself nor the complainant or his family members found
any reason to complain against the accused or assign any
role to them.

If actually the deceased would have been

burnt by the accused, the petitioner would not have taken
the matter lightly.

The testimonies of the witnesses

examined had material contradictions and did not really
support the stand of the petitioner.
6.

The learned ASJ had also taken note of the fact that the
complaint had been dismissed not merely on account of the
fact that it was made belatedly, but after recording of
evidence and scrutinizing the evidence.

Crl.M.C.944/08

It was, thus, felt
Page 4 of 9

that at the stage of examination of the complaint u/s
202/204 Cr.P.C. if there is prima facie evidence in support of
the

allegations

in

the

complaint

relating

to

a

case

exclusively triable by the court of Sessions, that will be a
sufficient ground for issuing process to the accused and
committing them for trial to the court of Sessions.

Since

there were patent absurdities in evidence produced, it was
felt that there would be wastage of time in proceeding with
the case further and the accused should not be dragged into
such frivolous litigation.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner sought to contend that
the present petition u/s 482 Cr.P.C. was maintainable
against the order passed by the learned ASJ in revision in
view of the judgment of the Apex Court in Jitender Kumar
Jain Vs. State of Delhi and Ors., 1999 SCC (Crl) 77. In my
considered view, there is no dispute with the proposition but
in order to attract the said provisions, the parameter of
Section 482 Cr.P.C. must be met.

The provision reads as

under:
“482. Saving of inherent power of High Court.—
Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or
affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make
such orders as may be necessary to give effect to
any order under this Code, or to prevent abuse of
the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
ends of justice.”
8.

Thus, the aforesaid provision is enacted to protect the
inherent powers of the Court to make such orders as may

Crl.M.C.944/08

Page 5 of 9

be necessary to give effect to any order under this Code or
to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to
secure the ends of justice. However, it is trite to say that
such power has to be exercised sparingly and should not be
resorted to like a remedy of appeal or revision.

Thus, it

would amount to an abuse of the process of the Court if
without prima facie case having been made out a person is
summoned to face trial in a criminal proceeding as observed
in Laloo Prasad Vs. State of Bihar, (1997) 2 Crimes 498
(Patna).

The Apex Court has, in fact, observed that in

exercising jurisdiction under the said provision, the High
Court would not embark upon an enquiry whether the
allegations in the complaint are likely to be established by
evidence or not (State of Bihar Vs. Murad Ali Khan, AIR 1989
SC 1). The judgment referred to by learned counsel for the
petitioner in Krishnan and Anr. Vs. Krishnaveni and Anr.,
1997 SCC (Cri) 544 also states the same and emphasizes
that such power has to be exercised sparingly.
9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner sought to emphasize that
while examining a complaint, the Magistrate holding the
preliminary enquiry u/s 203/204 Cr.P.C. has to see whether
there is prima facie evidence in support of charges but does
not have to weigh evidence meticulously which would
amount to exceeding his jurisdiction and in view thereof

Crl.M.C.944/08

Page 6 of 9

referred to the judgment of the Apex Court in Kewal Krishan
Vs. Suraj Bhan and Anr., AIR 1980 SC 1780.
10.

On hearing learned counsel for the petitioner on the
aforesaid aspect, I see no violation of the said principle. The
learned MM has examined the evidence, which he is entitled
to do, and found that there was no prima facie evidence in
support of the charges.

If such an enquiry had not been

made, the grievance would have been that there is no
proper application of mind by the learned MM.

Once the

learned MM has applied his mind, a grievance is now sought
to be made that what the learned MM has done is weighing
evidence meticulously which is not so from a reading of the
impugned order.
11. Learned counsel for the petitioner also sought to emphasize
that a Magistrate cannot dismiss a complaint u/s 203 Cr.P.C.
merely on grounds of delay and should not allow himself to
be influenced by considerations of the motive by which the
complainant may have been actuated in moving the matter
or by any other consideration deciding the facts which are
adduced by the complainant in support of the complaint. In
this behalf reference has been made to a judgment of the
single Judge of the Madras High Court in Karumuthu S.
Chockalingam Vs. T. Kannappan and Ors., 1977 CRL. L.J.
1382.

Crl.M.C.944/08

Page 7 of 9

12.

Once again, as discussed aforesaid, the learned MM has
emphasized the delay aspect but that is not the only reason
for dismissal of the complaint. The evidence produced by
the complainant has been examined to form a prima facie
view and, thus, there is an examination on merits of the
case.

It is not the motive which has weighed with the

learned MM but what is emphasized by both the courts
below is the absence of any grievance on the part of the
complainant or his family when the incident took place or
even thereafter till the dispute arose between the second
daughter of the petitioner and her in-laws (both sisters
being married into the same family).

There was also no

prior antecedent or complaint during the long period of 11
years of marriage of the deceased and even during the
eight years of marriage of the younger daughter of the
petitioner till the dispute arose in 1997.
13.

The aforesaid facts are to be considered that the statement
made by the deceased of her own free will in the presence
of the doctor who had certified her to be fit to make a
statement. The deceased categorically stated that she had
no animus against her in-laws and she got burnt in an
accident.

Such a statement cannot be ignored and taken

lightly.
14.

It, thus, appears that the subsequent disputes between the
second daughter of the petitioner with the accused has

Crl.M.C.944/08

Page 8 of 9

possibly resulted in revengeful attitude of the petitioner and
his family members which resulted in filing of the complaint
even though no prima facie material could be produced in
support of the same.
15.

The present case is not one where this Court should
exercise jurisdiction u/s 482 Cr.P.C.

16.

Dismissed.

MARCH 24, 2008
‘sp’

Crl.M.C.944/08

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page 9 of 9

