*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Co.Appeal.44/2005

%

Date of hearing : 08.05.2008
Date of decision : 23.05.2008

M/S KRISHNA TEXPORT INDUSTRIES LTD.
... APPELLANT
Through: Mr.A.S.Chandhiok, Sr.Adv. with
Ms.Suruchi Aggarwal, Ms.Vibha
Dhawan and Mr.Navpreet Singh
Ahluwalia, Advocates.
Versus
DCM LIMITED

... RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. Kirat Singh Nagra, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG

1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

1.

A conflict of judicial view between the Bombay High
Court and the Gujarat High Court in respect of the power
of the company court u/s 391 (6) of the Companies Act,
1956 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) to stay

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 1 of 31

criminal proceedings has given rise to the present
appeal.
2.

The commercial relationship between the appellant and
the respondent started with an Inter Corporate Deposit
(ICD) of Rs.2.50 crores being placed by the appellant with
the respondent under two separate agreements dated
26.9.1997 and 03.10.1997 by way of two separate
cheques of Rs.1.25 lac each which were duly encashed.
The said ICDs were for a period of 120 days and the
respondent company were liable to repay the same
before the expiry of the said period along with interest
@25.5% per annum.

In case of default, the rate of

interest was to be enhanced by an additional interest of
11% per annum. It is the case of the appellant that the
respondent failed to re-pay the ICD with interest and,
thus, gave rise to two sets of separate proceedings. One
proceeding arose out of the cheques issued by the
respondent to clear the liabilities which were dishonoured
on account of paucity of funds resulting in complaints
being filed by the appellant u/s 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter referred to as the NI
Act) and the other arose by reason of the appellant filing
proceedings for winding up under the said Act against
the respondents after serving them with a legal notice. In

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 2 of 31

respect of the complaint u/s 138 of the NI Act, the
respondent filed proceedings for quashing of the same
before this Court but they were ultimately withdrawn. In
the winding up proceedings, it came to light that certain
shares kept by the respondent with the appellant as
security for the ICD had, in fact, been sold for an amount
of about Rs.37.00 lacs and since the sale was without the
leave of the Court, the proceeds were directed to be
deposited in Court and are still lying deposited. A third
proceeding arose out of a suit filed by the respondent,
being Suit No.1815/2003, on the Original Side of this
Court seeking reliefs of declaration, injunction, recovery
etc. as according to the respondent the liability towards
the ICD had been cleared and part of the claim was
settled by payment to a third party at the behest of the
appellant, which was disputed by the appellant.
3.

In the proceedings before the learned Company Judge,
interim orders were granted whereby in view of the
pending scheme for restructuring and arrangement, the
proceedings against the respondent company were
stayed. The order with which the appellant is aggrieved
in the present case was passed on 25.4.2005. The order
notes the contention of the counsel for the respondent
that the scheme had been sanctioned and the same

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 3 of 31

provided for payment to the creditors through the
mechanism of an escrow account subject to the condition
that the creditors withdraw all the cases against the
company and its Executive Directors. It was pleaded that
three persons, whose particulars were given, had not
withdrawn the proceedings because of which payment
could not be made to them although the respondent was
ready and willing to make the payment in terms of the
scheme subject to withdrawal of the criminal complaints.
The learned Company Judge stayed the proceedings of
the cases filed by the three parties. Not only that, it was
noticed that some of the creditors had filed complaints
before different consumer forums which claim also the
respondent was willing to settle in accordance with the
scheme.
4.

The grievance of the appellant is that the criminal
proceedings in the form of complaints filed u/s 138 of the
NI Act by the appellant could not have been stayed by
the learned Company Judge.

5.

It is the submission of the appellant that under the garb
of the escrow mechanism, really nothing is being paid to
the appellant as it is the stand of the respondent that
whatever amount was liable to be paid under the scheme
to the appellant, in fact, already stands paid prior to the

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 4 of 31

scheme. This payment is in the form of part payment to
the respondent and part payment to a third party. The
scheme naturally did not envisage the payment of
interest as per the terms of the ICD and it is in view
thereof that the respondent was, in fact, claiming certain
amounts as due and owing from the appellant under the
transaction making part payment to a third party. In the
alternative, the respondent was pleading that the matter
in issue was in any case being tried in the Civil Court filed
by the respondent. The appellant’s case further was that
there was nothing even in the scheme or in the list of the
liability whereby payment had to be made to the
appellant nor was the aspect of criminal liability forming
part of the scheme.

This was, of course, without

prejudice to the plea that even if it was so included, the
learned Company Judge would have no jurisdiction to
stay the criminal proceedings.
6.

It is not necessary to go into a further detailed scrutiny of
the facts, but the aforesaid averments have been set out
to show that under the scheme there is really nothing to
be paid to the appellant on account of the claim of the
appellant.

The only question, thus, to be considered is

whether the learned Company Judge was entitled to stay
the proceedings in the criminal complaint filed by the

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 5 of 31

appellant against the respondent company and its
Directors.

It has already been noticed above that the

endeavor of the respondent to get the proceedings
quashed in the hierarchy of the criminal courts had not
succeeded and the quashing proceedings had been
withdrawn.
7.

There is an apparent conflict of opinion on this issue
between the two High Courts. The Bombay High Court
has taken a view that it is not within the domain of the
Company Judge to stay the proceedings before the
criminal court while exercising jurisdiction u/s 391 of the
said Act while the view of the Gujarat High Court is to the
contrary.

We also have the benefit of the judgment of

the learned single Judge of this Court, though not directly
on Section 391 of the said Act, holding that criminal
proceedings under the said Act cannot be stayed by the
learned

Company

Judge

unless

there

empowerment in a particular section.

is

specific

In order to

appreciate the aforesaid rival views, it is necessary to
give a conspectus of the judicial pronouncements in this
behalf. Section 391(6) of the said Act reads as under:“391.
Power to compromise or make
arrangements with creditors and members.
(6) The Tribunal may, at any time after an
application has been made to it under this
section
stay
the
commencement
or

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 6 of 31

continuation of any suit or proceeding against
the company on such terms as the Tribunal
thinks fit, until the application is finally
disposed of.”
8.

A learned single Judge of the Bombay High Court in State
of Tamil Nadu Vs. Uma Investments Pvt. Ltd., Vol. 47
Company Cases 242 observed that it was not possible to
take the view that Section 391 of the said Act is meant
for freezing criminal proceedings which may be instituted
either by a creditor or a member of a company or by the
State either against the company or its officers for a
thing which is an offence or an infringement or violation
of

any

law,

imprisonment
proceedings

rule
or
can

or

fine
be

regulation
or

both

and

commenced

punishable
that
or

by

criminal
continued

notwithstanding the fact that the scheme for compromise
or arrangement has been initiated under Section 391 of
the said Act. The relevant observations are as under:
“The language of this sub-section is clear and
unambiguous. The main controversy is focused
on the word "proceedings". According to Mr.
Khambatta, the word "proceedings" cannot cover
criminal proceedings against the company and its
officers. It could not have been the intention of
the legislature to stay the commencement or
continuation of criminal proceedings. The
company and its officers must face the
consequences of their illegal acts. There seems to
be considerable force in these arguments. If the
intention of the legislature had been to stay the
commencement or continuation of criminal

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 7 of 31

proceedings, it would have specifically said so. It
is difficult to accept Mr. Mehta's line of
interpretation indicated above that the word
"proceedings" embraces criminal proceedings.
There is another angle from which the provisions
of section 391 can be looked at in order to find
out whether it is within the scope and object of
the section to cover criminal proceedings. In the
present application under section 391, there are
three classes of creditors, namely, (1) creditors
who were the subscribers of terminated chit
group, (2) creditors who are the subscribers of
existing group, and (3) other creditors of the
company. A reference to these classes shows that
all of them are creditors. The question then arises
as to what meaning is to be given to the word
"creditor". "Creditor" would be a person having a
pecuniary claim against the company, whether
actual or contingent. If the claims of the creditors
are of a pecuniary character or founded on
money considerations, can it then be said that
sub-section (6) of section 391 is extended to
cover proceedings other than proceedings which
involve pecuniary claims or claims based on
money considerations ? It is in respect of these
classes of creditors that proposal is put forward
by the company for a compromise or
arrangement. Nothing has been pointed out to
me that the company's proposal refers to or
covers any criminal proceedings against the
company and its officers. The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of section 391 lay down that
if any proposal is put forth by a company or a
creditor or class of creditors or a member or class
of members, the same is required to be
considered under the directions of the court by
calling, holding and conducting a meeting or
meetings, and if approved by a majority in
number representing three-fourths in value of the
creditors, or class of creditors, or members, or
class of members, and agreed to any compromise
or arrangement, the compromise or arrangement
shall, if sanctioned by the court, be binding on all
concerned. The compromises or arrangements
are about civil liabilities where a creditor will
accept a lesser payment or receive less on
distribution or grant time or waive interest and
work out other kindred things. It is impossible to

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 8 of 31

take the view that section 391 is meant for
freezing criminal proceedings which may be
instituted either by a creditor or a member of a
company or by the State either against the
company or its officers. If, the officers of the
company are involved in offences lime cheating,
criminal breach of trust, misappropriation,
forgery, using a forged document and falsification
of accounts, in connection with the business of
the company, can it be said that prosecutions can
be stayed by the aid of sub-section (6) of section
391 ? Again, if the officers of the company were
to be held responsible for contravention and
infringement of the Income-tax Act of Foreign
Exchange Control Act, can a company by putting
a proposal before the court under section 391
seek the protection of the court under subsection (6) of section 391 and stay the pending
prosecutions or prevent the authorities under the
Income-tax Act or the Enforcement Directorate
from launching prosecutions? Again, section 5 of
the Companies Act, 1956, provides that for the
purpose of any provision of this Act, an "officer
who is in default" shall be liable to any
punishment or penalty, whether by way of
imprisonment, fine or otherwise. Can sub-section
(6) of section 391 be made use of by a company
(who is liable to be wound up) by coming forward
with some sort of proposal? In my opinion,
criminal proceedings cannot be held over or
avoided or criminal process evaded by resorting
to a scheme of compromise or arrangement
under section 391. Section 391 does not provide
an umbrella to a company and its directors and
officers for a thing which is an offence or an
infringement and violation of any law, rule and
regulation punishable by imprisonment or fine or
both. Offenders cannot be given refuge in this
section, nor can it be a shield for delinquent
directors for their misdeeds. This is not the
scheme of section 391 or the policy of law in the
manner urged by Mr. Mehta”.
(emphasis supplied)
9.

In the matter of winding up of Firth (India) Steel Co. Ltd.
(In Liquidation), 1999 (1) Mh. L.J. page 274, once again

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 9 of 31

F.I. Rebello, J. had the occasion to examine the question
whether the expression “suit or other legal proceedings”
in

Section

446

(1)

and

the

expression

“suit

or

proceedings” in Section 442 of the said Act include
criminal complaints filed u/s 138 of the NI Act.

The

company canvassed the plea that the expression “legal
proceedings” or “other legal proceedings” should be
given its widest amplitude and must, therefore, also
include criminal proceedings as a contrary view would
result in the company in the winding up being subjected
to criminal prosecution and would, thus, defeat the object
of Sections 442 and 446 of the said Act. On the other
hand, the petitioners contended that the said expressions
must be read ejusdem generis with the expression “suit”
and, thus, only refer to civil proceedings which have
direct bearing on the proceedings for winding up of the
company and, thus, “other legal proceedings” must
exclude

criminal

proceedings.

The

learned

Judge

thereafter proceeded to discuss the different provisions
in the Act where such expressions have been used.

A

distinction was made in respect of the provisions like
Sections 442 and 446 as compared to Section 454(5) of
the said Act where a default is made in complying with
any

of

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

the

requirements

of

the

section

without

Page 10 of 31

reasonable excuse and a person is liable to be punished
with imprisonment. In such a case the winding up court
can take cognizance of an offence under sub-section (5A)
of Section 454 and, thus, a specific power to entertain a
criminal complaint has been conferred. A similar position
exists in Section 542 of the said Act where there is a
provision for imprisonment.

In Section 633 of the said

Act, an Officer of a company in respect of certain types of
misfeasance or breach of trust may move the High Court
to relieve him. It was, thus, concluded that wherever the
Parliament chose not to confer power on the company
court to try criminal offences, it has so done.

In this

context, it was observed as under:
“… The Legislature therein has used the
expression "suit, "prosecution" or "other legal
proceedings". The rule of interpretation in such
a case is not to make the language redundant
or otiose or hold it to be surplus-age. If the
literal interpretation is accepted then the
expression 'prosecution' has a different
meaning
than
the
expression
'legal
proceedings'. The expression also appears in
the same part and chapter. The main purpose
or object behind sections 446 and 442 is that in
respect of a Company in winding up or where
proceedings in winding up have been filed, the
Company Court is to see that the assets of the
company are not recklessly given away or
frittered. In this context, one has to remember
the main duty of the Company Court is to
oversee the affairs of the Company to meet the
debts of its secured or its unsecured creditors
as also of its shareholders and powers have
been accordingly conferred on it. It may also
be noted that for the purpose of the Act, Court

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 11 of 31

means under section 2(ii) the Court having
jurisdiction under the Act with respect to the
matters relating to the Company under section
10 of the Act and in respect of any offence
under the Act Judicial Magistrate, First Class, or
Presidency Magistrate having jurisdiction. In
this context would the expression "other legal
proceedings" or "legal proceedings" include
'criminal proceedings'”.
(emphasis supplied)
10.

In support of the aforesaid view, learned counsel for the
respondent also referred to the observations of the
Supreme Court in BSI Ltd. And Anr. Vs. GIFT Holdings Pvt.
Ltd. And Anr., (2000) 2 SCC 737.

The question arose

whether Section 2(1) of the Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (in short SICA) declaring
out a sick company could bar the institution of criminal
complaint against the company and its Directors u/s 138
of the NI Act.

It was observed in Paras 20 and 21 as

under:“20. A criminal prosecution is neither for
recovery of money nor for enforcement of any
security etc. Section 138 of the NI Act is a
penal provision the commission of which
offence entails a conviction and sentence on
proof of the guilt in a duly conducted criminal
proceedings. Once the offence under Section
138 is completed the prosecution proceedings
can be initiated not for recovery of the amount
covered by the cheque but for bringing the
offender to the penal liability. What was
considered in Maharashtra Tubes Ltd. (supra)
is whether the remedy provided in Section 29
or 31 of the State Finance Corporation Act,
1951 could be pursued notwithstanding the
ban contained in Section 22 of the SICA. Hence

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 12 of 31

the legal principal adumbrated in the said
decision is of no avail to the appellants.
21. In the above context it is pertinent to
point out that Section 138 of NI Act was
introduced in 1988 when SICA was already in
vogue. Even when the amplitude of the word
"company" mentioned in Section 141 of the NI
Act was widened through the Explanation
added to the section, Parliament did not think
it necessary to exclude companies falling
under Section 22 of SICA from the operation
thereof. If Parliament intended to exempt sick
companies from prosecution proceeding,
necessary provision would have been
included in Section 141 of the NI Act. More
significantly, when Section 22(1) of SICA was
amended in 1994 by inserting the words ["and
no suit for the recovery of money or for
enforcement of any security against industrial
company or of any guarantee in respect of
any loans or advance granted to industrial
company"] Parliament did not specifically
include prosecution proceedings within the
ambit of the said ban”.
(emphasis supplied)

11.

The plea, thus, was that the aforesaid observations apply
on all fours in the context of even the provisions of the
said Act.

12.

In the same context, the Supreme Court in Kusum Ingots
& Alloys Ltd. Vs. Pennar Peterson Securities Ltd., (2000)
2 SCC 745 observed as under:
“15. The next question for consideration is whether
under the provisions of the SICA there was any
legal impediment for payment of the amount for
which the cheques were drawn and for that
reason the appellants cannot be taken to have
committed an offence under Section 138 NI Act.
A bare reading of the Section 22 of the SICA
makes the position clear that during pendency

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 13 of 31

of an inquiry under Section 16 or during the
preparation of a scheme referred to under
Section 17 or during implementation of a
sanctioned scheme or pendency of an appeal
under Section 25, no proceedings for winding up
of the industrial company or for execution,
distress or the like against any of the properties
of the industrial company or for the
appointment of a receiver in respect thereof and
no suit for the recovery of money or for
enforcement of any security against the
industrial company or of any guarantee in
respect of any loans or advance granted to the
industrial company, shall lie or be proceeded
with further, except with the consent of the
Board or, the Appellate Authority, as the case
may be. The section only deals with proceedings
for recovery of money or for enforcement of any
security or a guarantee in respect of any loans
or advance granted to the company and a
proceedings for winding up of the company. The
section does not refer to any criminal
proceeding. In B.S.I. Ltd. and Anr. v. Gift
Holdings Pvt. Ltd., Criminal Appeal No. 847 of
(1999) we held that pendency of proceeding
under Section 22(1) of SICA alone is not
sufficient to get absolved from the liability
under Section 138 of the NI Act”.
13.

In Rajneesh Aggarwal Vs. Amit J. Bhalla, (2001) 1 SCC
631, it was observed that even if the amount in question
was deposited after the complaint had been instituted u/s
138 of the NI Act, by no stretch of imagination the
criminal proceedings can be quashed on account of the
said deposit of money in Court nor could it be held that
the criminal proceedings were unsustainable in law
because of deposit of money.

14.

The aforesaid view has again been followed in Ion
Exchange Finance Ltd. Vs. Bombay Leasing Co. Ltd.

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 14 of 31

(1999) 101 Bom. LR 180 which was affirmed by Vazifdar
S., J. in G.E. Capital Services India Vs. Sharp Industries
Limited, II (2005) BC 373. The said case also dealt with
the prayer for stay of proceedings u/s 138 of the NI Act.
It was observed as under:
“12. In any event, the question whether
proceedings under section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act are covered within the
provisions of section 391(6) is also not res
Integra. In Criminal Appln. No. 2517 of 1998,
(1999(1) Learned Judgement 288), it was
contended that complaints under section 138 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act are filed by
parties with the principal object that the payee
must get his money. In that case took, the
complaint was filed by the respondents against
the applicant for dishonour of the cheque. The
applicants in the judgments had prayed that the
proceedings under section 138 ought to be
stayed till the disposal of the application filed by
the applicants before the Calcutta High Court
under section 391 of the Companies Act. The
learned Judge first held that in proceedings
under section 482 of the Criminal Procedure
Code the question of invocation of inherent
jurisdiction under section 391(6) did not arise at
all. With this part of the judgment we are not
concerned presently. However the learned Judge
in paragraph 4 considered the alternative case
as well and held as under ;
"4.....Secondly, even assuming that under
section 482 this Court could have considered
that proceedings are pending before the
Company Court in Calcutta when Scheme is
under consideration could this Court stay the
proceedings. The expression used is 'suit' or
'other proceedings'. A learned Single Judge of
this Court in the State of Tamil Nadu v. Uma
Industries Ltd., (supra) has held the provisions of
section 391(6) will not apply in so far as the
criminal proceedings are concerned. The said
judgment came up for consideration before me

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 15 of 31

in Company Application No. 446 of 1997 in
Company Application No. 457 of 1997 in (In the
matter of winding up order dated 23-10-1997 of
Firth (India) Steel Co. Ltd. (In Liqn.) Ion Exchange
Finance Ltd.), decided on 4th September, 1998
reported in 1999 (1) Mh L 3 274 and some other
matters. I had occasion to consider expression
'suit' or 'other legal proceedings', In the context
of section 442 and 446 of the Companies Act, I
have considered Chapter V wherein expression
'suit' or 'other legal proceedings' have been
included
including
the
expression
'legal
proceedings' in section 391(6). I have therein
considered a judgment of the learned Single
Judge of the Gujarat High Court which has taken
by different view than the view taken by this
Court in the State of Tamil Nadu v. Uma
Industries Ltd. (supra). After considering the
various Judgments. I have reiterated that the
view taken by this Court in Uma Industries Ltd.
(supra) requires no reconsideration and is in
confirmity with the provision of Chapter V of the
Companies Act. The only limitation is that in a
case where a fine is imposed on the Company, at
the stage of the recovery of the fine, the
Company Court can invoke its jurisdiction. The
said matter had came up before me at the
instance of applicants against whom complaints
had been filed under section 138 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act. I am therefore
clearly of the opinion that the expression 'suit'
and/or 'other legal proceedings' does not include
criminal proceedings".
(emphasis supplied)
15.

A contrary view, however, has been taken in Harish C.
Raskapoor and Ors. Vs. Jaferbhai Mohmedbhai Chhatpar,
1989 Vol. 65 Company Cases 163 by a learned single
Judge of the Gujarat High Court. The view expressed by
the Bombay High Court in State of Tamil Nadu Vs. Uma
Investments Pvt. Ltd. (supra) has been specifically
differed with on the ground that the meaning to be

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 16 of 31

assigned to other proceedings should be of the widest
amplitude and, thus, sub-section (6) of Section 391 of the
said Act should include criminal proceedings. In fact, the
view is predicated on the reasoning that sub-section (3)
of Section 446 of the said Act would also include criminal
proceedings apart from civil proceedings. In fact, each of
the reasoning of Uma’s case (supra) is sought to be
countered in the said judgment.

It has, thus, been

observed that the word “proceedings” does not indicate
that it is confined only to civil proceedings or that it
excludes criminal proceedings. In other words, the word
“proceedings” is used in a comprehensive sense.
16.

The Delhi High Court had the occasion to earlier deal with
this aspect where a Division Bench of this Court in D.K.
Kapur Vs. Reserve Bank of India & Ors., 2001 II AD (Delhi)
259 has followed the line of reasoning of the Bombay
High Court in the context of Sections 433 and 446 of the
said Act and applying the rule of ejusdem generis to the
expression

“legal

proceedings”

or

“other

legal

proceedings” to the expression “suit” held that criminal
prosecution was not included in the aforesaid two
provisions.

Unfortunately, neither side referred to this

judgment.

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 17 of 31

17.

The intent and object of Section 446(2) of the said Act as
enunciated in Sudarsan Chits (I) Ltd. Vs. G. Sukumaran
Pillai, (1984) 4 SCC 657 was taken note of.

Section

442(6) has been included to save the company which is
ordered to be wound up from frivolous and expensive
litigation and to accelerate the disposal of winding up of
proceedings and, thus, the Parliament devised a cheap
remedy by conferring jurisdiction on the Court winding up
the company to entertain petitions in respect of claims
for and against the company.

Thus, the object is to

safeguard the assets of the company in winding up
against wasteful and expensive litigation.

It was

observed as under:
“12. Mere look at the aforesaid provisions
would show that on the one hand, in
Section 457 of the Act, the legislature has
empowered the liquidator to institute or
defend any 'suit' or 'prosecution' or 'other
legal proceedings' civil or criminal in the
name and on behalf of company after
permission from the court; and by Section
454(5A) of the Act the legislature has
empowered the Company Court itself to
take cognizance of the offence under sub
section (5) of section 454 of the Act and to
try such offenders as per the procedure
provided for trial of summons cases under
the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1974; but
on the other hand in sections 442 and 446
of the Act the legislature has used only the
expression
"suit
or
other
legal
proceedings". The words "prosecution" or
"criminal case" are conspicuously missing
in these sections. It appears quite logical

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 18 of 31

as purpose and object of sections 442 and
446 of the Act is to enable the Company
Court to oversee the affairs of the company
and to avoid wasteful expenditure.
Therefore the intention of the legislature
under these sections does not appear to
provide jurisdiction to the Company Court
over criminal proceedings either against
the company or against its directors.
Wherever legislature thought it necessary
to provide such jurisdiction it has used the
appropriate expressions.
13. Further section 621 makes the offences
against the Act to be cognizable only on
the complaint by Registrar, shareholder or
the Government. No permission of the
Company Court is required. However,
under section 446(1) of the Act, suit or
other
legal
proceedings
cannot
be
instituted without permission of the
company court. Therefore, Section 621(1)
itself indicates that the company court has
no jurisdiction over other offences except
the offence under section 545 of the Act?
14. The scope and meaning of expressions
"other legal proceedings" or "proceedings"
under section 446(1) came up for
consideration before the Supreme Court in
the context of Income tax proceedings in
S.V. Kondaskar Vs. V. M. Deshpande AIR
1972 SC 878. It was observed that the
expression "other legal proceedings" in this
section cannot be extended to Income Tax
proceedings as these cannot appropriately
be dealt with by the company court. It was
held:"While
holding
these
assessment
proceedings the Income-tax Officer does
not, in our view, perform the functions of a
Court as contemplated by Section 446(2)
of the Act. Looking at the legislative history
and the scheme of the Indian Companies
Act, particularly the language of Section
446 read as a whole, it appears to us that
the expression "other legal proceeding" in

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 19 of 31

sub-section (1) and the expression "legal
proceeding" in sub-section (2) convey the
same sense and the proceedings in both
the sub-sections must be such as can
appropriately be dealt with by the winding
up court.
15. It was further held: The liquidation
Court, in our opinion, cannot perform the
functions of Income-tax Officers while
assessing the amount of tax payable by the
assesses even if the assessee be the
company which is being wound up by the
Court. The orders made by the Income-tax
Officer in the course of assessment or reassessment proceedings are subject to
appeal to the higher hierarchy under the
Income-tax Act. There are also provisions
for reference to the High Court and for
appeals from the decisions of the High Court
to the Supreme Court and then there are
provisions for revision by the Commissioner
of Income-tax. It would lead to anomalous
consequences if the winding up Court were
to be held empowered to transfer the
assessment proceedings to itself and assess
the company to income-tax.
16. The reasoning adopted by
the
Supreme Court in the above case would be
fully applicable to the facts at hand.
Complaints under the penal provisions of
other statutes against the company or its
directors, (except those provided under the
Companies Act) cannot be appropriately
dealt with by the company court. Orders
passed by the criminal court are subject to
the appeal and revision etc. under the Code
of Criminal Procedure. If the (sic) court is
held to be empowered to transfer these
criminal proceedings to itself it would lead
to anomalous consequences.
17.While considering the prosecution of
directors for violations of the provisions of
Provident Fund Act, the Supreme court in
Rabindra
Chamrior
vs.
Registrar
of
Companies, 1992(Supp) (2) SCC 10
considered the scope of the expression

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 20 of 31

"Any proceedings" in section 633 of the Act
and held that it cannot save directors of the
company from liability or prosecution for
violating these provisions. It was observed
that such a relief can be granted only in
case of proceedings arising under the
Companies Act and not under other acts. It
was held:"Under S.633 of the Companies Act relief
cannot be extended in respect of any
liability under any Act other than the
Companies Act. The expression 'any
proceeding' in S.633 cannot be read out of
context and treated in isolation. It must be
construed in the light of the penal
provisions. Otherwise the penal clauses
under the various other Acts would be
rendered ineffective by application of S.633.
Again, if Parliament intended 633 to have a
coverage wider than the Act, it would have
specifically provided for it as, otherwise, it is
a sound rule of construction to confine the
provisions of a statute to itself. The powers
under sub-s. (2) of S.633 must be restricted
in respect of proceedings arising out of the
violation of the Companies Act. Sub-section
(2) cannot apply to proceeding instituted
against the officer of the company to
enforce the liability arising out of violation of
provisions of other statutes.
18. While dealing with the provisions of
Section 179 of the Companies Act, 1913
(corresponding to section 457 of the
Companies Act, 1956) the Supreme Court in
Jeswantrai Manilal Akhaney Vs. The State of
Bombay, 1956 S.C. 575 observed that in
Section 179(457) of the Act cannot be
construed to restrict powers of the criminal
court to take cognizance of an offence or
powers of the police or even of a private
citizen to move the machinery of the
criminal courts. It was held:"There is nothing in Section 179 of the
Companies Act, 1913 which can be
construed as restricting the powers of the

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 21 of 31

Court to take cognizance of an offence or
the powers of the police to initiate
prosecution or even of a private citizen to
move the machinery of the criminal Courts
to bring an offender like the managing
director of a company to justice. For a
prosecution for breach of trust even by a
director of a company no such condition
precedent as the previous sanction of any
authority is contemplated by law, unless it is
a prosecution in the name and on behalf of
the company by the official liquidator who
has to incur expenses out of the Funds of
the company. Section 179 is an enabling
provision to enable the liquidator to do
certain things with the sanction of the Court.
It does not control the general law of the
land”.
19. When the powers of criminal court to take
cognizance and power of an aggrieved
person to institute any criminal proceedings
against the company under liquidation are
fully protected, can it said that power of a
citizen would be subject to the sanction
under section 446 of the Companies Act? The
answer has to be in the negative”.

18.

The view taken by the learned single Judge of the Gujarat
High Court in Harish C. Raskapoor (supra) has been
specifically disagreed with.

19.

Learned counsel for the appellant sought to rely upon the
judgment of the single Judge of this Court in CRB Capital
Markets Limited Vs. Reserve Bank of India, 127 (2006)
DLT 576 where references have been made to certain
orders passed by the Bombay High Court staying the
proceedings both in the civil and criminal court.

In a

passing reference it has been observed that the company

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 22 of 31

court has ample powers u/s 391(6) of the said Act so as
to stay all civil and criminal proceedings against the
company and its Directors during implementation of
scheme of arrangement. It appears that the judgment in
D.K. Kapur’s case (supra) was not brought to the notice
of

the

learned

single

Judge.

An

appeal,

being

Co.APP.63/2005, was preferred against this judgment
which was decided on 29.2.2008. The Division Bench set
aside the order of the learned single Judge and remanded
the matter back for consideration specifically in view of
the fact that certain aspects germane to the matter in
controversy had not been discussed.

One of the

questions raised was about the authority of the criminal
court to stay the criminal and Income Tax proceedings
under the scheme u/s 391 of the said Act.
20.

In Company Applications 35-36/2006 in the matter of M/s
Escorts Limited Vs. M/s Escorts Finance Ltd. , Sanjiv
Khanna, J. of this Court passed an order on 17.3.2006
and noticed the conflict of view between the two Courts,
as referred to aforesaid, as also the judgment in D.K.
Kapur’s case (supra).

At that stage the order had not

been passed by the Division Bench in the matter of CRB
Capital (supra). The learned Judge declined to stay the
criminal proceedings.

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 23 of 31

21.

We have given deep thought to

the legal views

expressed by the different Courts and we are inclined to
follow the view expressed by the Division Bench of this
Court in D.K. Kapur’s case (supra) and see no reason to
differ from the same. The result is that the view of the
Bombay High Court insofar as the interpretation of
Section 391(6) of the said Act is concerned would prevail.
22.

The legal principles enunciated aforesaid make it clear
that the expression “proceedings” has been used in
different provisions of the said Act. It is not necessary
that the same word used in the Act must necessarily be
given the same meaning in all situations. The word in the
context in which it is used may be different in different
sections.

It is in view thereof that it is observed in

Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes that just as the
presumption that the same meaning is intended for the
same expression in every part of an Act is not of much
weight, so the presumption of a change of intention from
the change of language - which is of no great weight in
the construction of documents – seems entitled to less
weight in the construction of a statute than in any other
case.
23.

The legislature in its wisdom wherever it wanted to
confer powers on the company court under the said Act

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 24 of 31

to deal with matters of criminal offences has specifically
so conferred the power. The discussion in this behalf is
found in D.K. Kapur’s case (supra) as well as the other
cases of the Bombay High Court, which have been
extracted aforesaid. Thus in Section 454(5) of the said
Act or in Section 633 of the said Act the object is clear. A
distinction has to be made in respect of the provisions
like Section 442, 446 or 391 of the said Act. The object
of these provisions is to prevent vexatious litigation and
cost on the company during the period of time when a
scheme is being propounded.

This object is not sub-

served by stay of the criminal proceedings.

In Pennar

Peterson Ltd. Vs. Court of Judicial Magistrate 1st Class,
2002 (2) ALD 78, the Division Bench of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court comprising of S.B. Sinha, C.J. (as he
then was) and V.V.S. Rao, J., while dealing with the
question

of

proceedings”

whether
occurring

the
in

expression
Section

“other

446(1)

legal

of

the

Companies Act does include the criminal proceedings,
held that an interpretation ought to be given which
makes the textual interpretation match the contextual. If
the intention of the legislature was to include criminal
prosecution, the legislature would have specifically said
so and hence, the legal proceedings would not embrace

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 25 of 31

within its fold a criminal prosecution. It was observed in
para 20 as under:
“In Reserve Bank of India Vs. Peerless
Company 1987 (1) SCC 424 it was held:
That interpretation is best which makes the
textual interpretation match the contextual.
A statute is best interpreted when we know
why it was enacted. With this knowledge,
the statute must be read, first as a whole and
then section by section, clause by clause,
phrase by phrase and word by word. If a
statute is looked at, in the context of its
enactment, with the glasses of the statutemaker provided by such context, its scheme,
the sections, clauses, phrases and words
may take colour and appear different than
when the statute is looked at without the
glasses provided by the context. With these
glasses we must look at the Act as a whole
and discover what each section, each clause,
each phrase and each word is meant and
designed to say as to fit into the scheme of
the entire Act.”
24.

It cannot be lost sight of that the aforesaid provisions
take colour from the same intent and in a similar
situation.
failure

of

The proceedings arose on account of the
the

company

to

meet

its

financial

commitments. Thus if winding proceedings are pending,
the civil proceedings can be put in abeyance for the time
being to give some time to the company to come up with
a scheme or otherwise to clear its liability.

In fact, in

view of the D.K. Kapur’s case (supra), the matter is not
even res integra insofar as this Court is concerned that in

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 26 of 31

such a situation criminal proceedings cannot be kept in
abeyance.
25.

Section 391 of the said Act only empowers the company
court

to

compromise

or

creditors or its members.

make

arrangements

with

Thus, a power has to be

exercised in a similar situation and, thus, there is reason
to take a different view than what is taken in the context
of Sections 442 and 446 of the said Act.
26.

We are in agreement with the view that the words used
in all the aforesaid provisions of “proceedings” or “other
proceedings” must be construed ejusdem generis with
the expression ‘suit’ used aforesaid and clearly imply civil
proceedings.

It is only such construction which is in

conformity with the intent of the legislature introducing
these provisions in the said Act.
27.

We are also fortified by the views expressed by the
Supreme Court in BSI Limited’s case (supra) while
dealing with the same provision of Section 138 of the NI
Act and the question whether these proceedings have to
be stayed in view of the orders passed in 22(1) of SICA.

28.

The SICA Act is again one more legislation to revitalize a
company which has gone sick.

It has, thus, been

observed that the criminal prosecution is neither for
recovery of money nor for enforcement of any security

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 27 of 31

and Section 138 of the NI Act is a penal provision. It is in
this context that the observations in Rajneesh Aggarwal’s
case(supra) become relevant that even on deposit of
money, the criminal proceedings cannot be quashed.
29.

The legislature in its wisdom introduced Section 138 of
the NI Act conscious of the existence of the other
provisions under the said Act. Thus, Section 138 of the NI
Act, a later enactment, envisaged criminal prosecution
for

the

offence

of

negotiable

dishonoured, including cheques.

instruments

being

The object was to

reinforce sanctity of commercial transactions. Once the
rigours of the provisions have been complied with, a
person/company cannot, as a matter of right, come to
the Court to deposit the amount and claim that the
prosecution should be brought to an end.

It can, thus,

hardly be expected that the provisions of Sections 442
and 446, or for that matter Section 391 of the said Act,
can be interpreted in a manner so as to bring the
proceedings u/s 138 of the NI Act to a stand-still. Thus,
even if in a scheme which is approved and it was
envisaged that certain amounts have to be paid, the
debtor company or its Directors cannot insist that the
proceedings u/s 138 of the NI Act be quashed.

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 28 of 31

30.

The observations made in para 11 in the case of Jose
Anthony Kakkad v. Official Liquidator, High Court of
Kerela (2000) 100 Comp Cases 811 (Kerela) are of direct
relevance wherein it was held that the provisions of the
special statute namely, the NI Act would have an
overriding effect over the general principles of the
Companies Act and that criminal proceedings as in the
case of section 138 of the NI Act which are not in respect
of the assets of the company would end in the conviction
or acquittal of the accused, cannot be stayed under the
Companies Act.

31.

The matter may also be looked into from another
perspective. The company court cannot call before itself
the proceedings u/s 138 of the NI Act and quash the
proceedings. The power to quash those proceedings rest
only with the hierarchy of the criminal courts. Thus, what
would be the intent to put such proceedings in abeyance
by an order of a company court when the company court
itself has no power at any stage to bring to an end these
proceedings?

32.

The sanctity of the proceedings u/s 138 of the NI Act
must, thus, be preserved and those proceedings must
continue as they arise out of the failure of the company’s
Directors to honour the negotiable instrument duly

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 29 of 31

signed by them like a cheque. The proceedings u/s 138 of
the NI Act are not for recovery of claim of money by a
creditor for which the remedy would be by filing a civil
suit.
33.

It can hardly be said that the object of Section 391 (6) of
the said Act is to prevent action against the officers of
the company who may be involved in cheating, criminal
breach of trust, mis-appropriation, forgery and for that
matter dishonour of cheque. Again the provision cannot
be used to bring to an end a prosecution arising from
Income Tax Act or Foreign Exchange Control Act.

The

proceedings are clearly not of a pecuniary nature
involving recovery of money.

Interestingly, even the

scheme stated to be approved at the behest of the
respondent company does not envisage bar to any
criminal proceedings or payment of any actual amount in
the given facts of the case as discussed at the inception
of this judgment, but only seeks to extinguish the liability
of the appellant on the ground that the respondent is
liable to pay a lesser amount, the interest not running,
and the claim is alleged to have been extinguished by
payment to a third party at the behest of the appellant
for which there is no written document.

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

Page 30 of 31

34.

We are, thus, unequivocal of the view that Section 391(6)
of the said Act does not envisage either quashing or stay
of criminal cases against the company or its Directors
and, thus, the proceedings against the respondents u/s
138 of the NI Act instituted by the appellant could not
have been stayed.

35.

The impugned order is set aside and the appeal is
allowed. The appellant is also entitled to costs, which are
quantified at Rs.10,000/-.

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

May 23, 2008
‘sp’

Co. Appeal No. 44/05

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

Page 31 of 31

