*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Arb. P. No.34 of 2007

%

Date of decision:23.05.2007

MR. SATINDERJIT SINGH & ANR.
...PETITIONERS
Through:
Mr. Bishwajit Bhattacharya, Sr. Adv.
with Mr. Sumant &
Mr. Sudarshan Raja, Advocates
Versus

MR. SANTOSH KAPOOR
Through:

...RESPONDENT
Mr. Subodh Markandeya, Sr. Adv.
with Ms. Rifat Ara, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (Oral)
1. The present petition has been filed by the petitioners under Section 11(4)
(b) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as
the said Act). The dispute arises out of an Agreement to sell dated
1.9.2005 in terms whereof the respondent agreed to sell the leasehold
property consisting of a residential flat on the second floor of plot bearing
No.60, Pocket-II, Jasola, New Delhi with 2/3rd roof rights with
proportionate rights in land measuring 260 sq.yds. for a total
consideration of Rs.84,50,000.00. It is not in dispute that out of the said
Arb. P. No.34 of 2007

Page No.1 of 7

amount the petitioners have paid an amount of Rs.36.50 lakh, which was
duly encashed by the respondent. It may be noted at this stage that
subsequently the disputes arose between the parties and the respondent
sent a refund cheque to the petitioner for Rs.31.50 lakh, which has not
been encashed by the petitioners.
2. The petitioners claimed that there is an arbitration clause in the
Agreement between the parties being clause No.15, which is as under:
“15. That in case of any dispute, differences arising
between the two parties Mr. Rajat Dua S/o Mr. S.L.
Dua and Mr. Sandeep Mohindra will be the arbitrators
from both sides and their decisions will be binding on
both the parties.”
3. It is also the case of the petitioners that a communication dated 1.12.2006
was addressed by the respondent to the aforesaid to named arbitrators in
the following terms:
“Dear Sirs,
You were appointed Arbitrators as per agreement
dated 1.9.05 executed between myself on one side and
Mr. Satinderjit Singh and Mrs. Inderjit Kaur on other
side. A dispute has arisen between the parties and I
am requesting your goodselves to enter into the
reference of the disputes and decide the same after
appointing an Umpire or third arbitrator on which you
both mutually agree.
I shall file my statement of claim against Mr.
Satinderjit Singh and Mrs. Inderjit Kaur as I have
suffered huge losses on account of untimely payment
made by them.”
4. Simultaneously the respondent address a letter of the even date to the
petitioners setting out what were alleged to be the defaults on the part of
the petitioners in complying their obligations under the Agreement to Sell

Arb. P. No.34 of 2007

Page No.2 of 7

dated 1.9.2005. Last line of the said letter states:
“Now that you have violated the agreement and
decision taken on 19.11.06 and since a dispute has
arisen, I have referred the matter to Arbitration as per
the agreement dated 1.9.06.”
5. In view of the respondent having invoked the arbitration clause, the
petitioners also addressed a letter dated 5.2.2006 to the two named
arbitrators requesting for the appointment of the umpire/third arbitrator in
view of the urgency of the matter.

Similarly the respondent also

addressed a letter dated 7.12.2006 to the two arbitrators calling upon
them to appoint the third arbitrator/umpire and suggested three names for
appointment of such third arbitrator.
6. The petitioners were apprehending that the respondent may deal with the
suit property and thus filed OMP No.571/2006 under Section 9 of the said
Act before this Court in which ex parte orders were passed on 8.12.2006
restraining the respondent from creating any third party interest in the suit
property. This petition was disposed of vide order dated 15.12.2006
where the statement of both the counsels for the parties were recorded
that the arbitral tribunal has already been constituted and is in the process
of deciding the name of the umpire/third arbitrator. The parties were
given liberty to approach the arbitral tribunal for any interim relief in
view thereof and the interim orders were directed to be continued till such
appointment of the arbitrator and consideration of the application. The
petition was disposed of.
7. The necessity for filing the present petition has arisen on account of the
fact that no name of the umpire/third arbitrator has been finalised and the
Arb. P. No.34 of 2007

Page No.3 of 7

petitioner is in urgent need to settle the dispute as also on account of the
interim relief claimed for by the petitioner.
8. Reply has been filed to the petition and the sub-stratum of the reply is
that the arbitration clause in the original agreement cannot be said to have
come into existence in view of the fact that there are a lot of cuttings.
This is so since the original clause 15 was different. It was scored out
and substituted by another clause in hand, which has been extracted
aforesaid.

The respondent, thus, denies the arbitration clause in the

Agreement to Sell and it is stated that the said Agreement at best can be
assumed only to be a draft. The receipt of payment of Rs.36.50 lakh has,
however, been admitted.
9. Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn the attention of this Court to
the provisions of Section 11 (4) of the said Act, which reads as under:
“11. Appointment of arbitrators.
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
(4) If the appointment procedure in sub-section (3)
applies and (a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within
thirty days from the receipt of a request to do so from
the other party; or
(b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on
the third arbitrator within 30 days from the date of
their appointment,
the appointment shall be made, upon request of a
party, by the Chief Justice or any person or institution
designated by him.”
10.Learned counsel submits that the present case is one where the two
appointed arbitrators have failed to agree on the third arbitrator within the
stipulated period of thirty (30) days and thus the third arbitrator has to be
appointed by this Court. Learned counsel submits that it is not open for

Arb. P. No.34 of 2007

Page No.4 of 7

the respondent to now contend that there was uncertainty about the
arbitration clause, the respondent herself having invoked the arbitration
clause. Learned counsel has also referred to the provisions of Section 4
of the said Act, which read as under:
“4. Waiver of right to object. - A party who knows
that (a)
any provision of this Part from which the parties
may derogate, or
(b) any requirement under the arbitration
agreement,
has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the
arbitration without stating his objection to such noncompliance without undue delay or, if a time limit is
provided for stating that objection, within that period
of time, shall be deemed to have waived his right to so
object.”
11.Learned counsel, thus, submits that in the alternative even if it be
assumed that there is any defect in the arbitration clause the actions of the
respondent would amount to consent to arbitration within the aforesaid
provision. Learned counsel also seeks assistance from the provisions of
Section 7(4) of the said Act, which reads as under:
“7. Arbitration agreement. ....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is
contained in (a) a document signed by the parties;
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other
means of telecommunication which provide a record
of the agreement; or
(c ) an exchange of statements of claim and defence
in which the existence of the agreement is alleged by
one party and not denied by the other.”
12.Learned counsel submits that apart from a document signed by the
parties containing an arbitration clause arbitration can be resorted to even
by exchange of letters and communications. This is also happened in the
Arb. P. No.34 of 2007

Page No.5 of 7

present case apart from the arbitration clause contained in the Agreement
to Sell dated 1.9.2005.
13.Learned counsel for the respondent has reiterated the pleas as contained
in the reply and has further drawn the attention of this Court to the
definition under Section 2(b) of the said Act, which reads as under:
“2. Definition. ....
....
....
....
....
....
....
(b) “arbitration agreement” means an agreement
referred to in section 7;”
14.Learned counsel for the respondent thus contends that an arbitration
agreement can be said to have come into force only if it is in accordance
with the provisions of Section 7 of the said Act.
15.On hearing learned counsels for the parties, in my considered view, the
present petition is liable to be allowed. There is no doubt that there are
cuttings in the original agreement dated 1.9.2005 containing the
arbitration clause.

The new clause is hand written.

However, the

existence of the said clause can really not be doubted in view of the
communications of the respondent which are undisputed.

It is the

respondent who invoked the said arbitration clause addressing the
communication to the two named arbitrators in terms of letter dated
1.12.2006 and also informing the respondent by another letter of the even
date. The petitioner also issued letters to the arbitrators. Both the parties
wrote letters to the arbitrators for appointment of the third arbitrator but
the third arbitrator was not appointed. It can hardly be said that there are
any uncertainly about the existence of the arbitration agreement. The
present petition is one where the arbitration clause is hand written and
Arb. P. No.34 of 2007

Page No.6 of 7

communications were exchanged between the parties leaving no manner
of doubt about the intent of the parties to agree to the arbitration and thus
on both accounts sub-section (4) of Section 7 read with Section 2(b) of
the said Act are satisfied.
16.I also find force in the contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioners that the respondent has waived any right to object to this
arbitration in view of communications and the provision of Section 4 as
contained aforesaid.
17.I am thus of the considered view that the third arbitrator is liable to
appointed by this Court in view of the Agreement to sell, the
communication between the parties and in view of the failure of the
arbitrators to appoint the third arbitrator.
18.Learned counsels for the parties suggested the name of Justice R.C.
Chopra (Retd.) to be appointed as the third arbitrator.

Ordered

accordingly.
19.The fee of the third arbitrator will be fixed by the third arbitrator himself
to be shared equally between the parties.
20.The petition is allowed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
21.A copy of the order be sent to the arbitrator.

MAY 23, 2007
b'nesh

Arb. P. No.34 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.7 of 7

