*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL. APPEAL NO.443/2001
Reserved on : 15-02-2008
Date of decision: 27-02-2008

%
ISLAM & ANR.

.... .... ... APPELLANTS
Through: Mr. Dharmender Rana, Adv. with
the appellants in person.
-VERSUS-

STATE

... RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. Jaideep Mallik, APP for the
State

CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1.Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2.To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3.Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. The present appeal has been preferred by the two
appellants to challenge the judgment of their conviction
and sentence dated 21-05-2001 passed by the ASJ to
undergo R.I. for a period two years each for the offences
under sections 324/34 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC for
short).
2. The case of the prosecution in brief is that the appellants,
being the relatives of one Mrs. Bano (PW1) and her
husband Kallu (PW2), along with four other persons having
their faces covered entered the house of PW1 and PW2 at
night at about 2 am on the night of 12/13-09-1998 and

Crl. A. No.443/2001

Pg. No. 1/8

inflicted injuries with knife on both, PW1 and PW2.
Thereafter, the injured persons were taken to GTB hospital
in PCR van and on receiving such information, DD No. 29
(Ex. PW7/A) was recorded. One HC Hari Om along with Ct.
Mahveer reached the spot from where they reached GTB
hospital and registered the case vide FIR No. 677/1998
(Ex. PW3/A) dated 13-09-1998 on recording the statement
Ex. PW1/A of PW1 after having been declared fit for
making statement by the doctor. Both the injured persons
were medically examined by the doctors in the hospital
vide their MLCs Ex. PW6/A and Ex. PW8/A.
3. Subsequently, both the appellants was arrested and on
interrogation, made

disclosure statements. The injured

PW2 also produced a knife like khukari (Ex. P1) before the
IO and an opinion of the doctor was sought of the said
knife. The case was committed to trial and charges were
framed against the appellants vide order dated 30-012001. The appellants pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
The prosecution had examined ten witnesses in support of
its case against the two accused persons. When examined
under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (the
said Code for short) both the accused denied the
prosecution

case

in

its

entirety

implication on account of

and

pleaded

false

previous animosity.

After

hearing the learned Counsel for both the parties and
considering the material placed on record, the learned
trial Court convicted both the accused persons for the
Crl. A. No.443/2001

Pg. No. 2/8

offences u/s 324/34 IPC and sentenced them to undergo
R.I. for a period two years. Feeling aggrieved, the said
convicted accused persons have come up in appeal where
the sentence of the appellants was suspended pending
the appeal vide order dated 18-07-2001 till bailable
warrants were issued against them for production before
the court.
4. I have heard both the parties and have also gone through
the evidence adduced on record. The case revolves
around the two material depositions of the injured
persons, PW1 and PW2. PW1 in her testimony has stated
that on

the intervening night of the date of incident, the

two accused persons along with four other persons, whose
faces were covered, entered the room of the house where
both Bano (PW1) and her husband (PW2) were sleeping.
The appellant no. 2 held her while appellant no. 1 pressed
her mouth and gave knife blows on her chest and arm.
She further averred that her husband was then taken hold
of by others and stabbed by appellant no. 1, when he was
awakened. It is then that she became unconscious and
regained her consciousness only in the hospital where the
police came and recorded her statement. PW2 in his
statement before the trial court largely affirmed to the
facts stated by PW1 and further stated that on such
incidence, he called the police who took both the injured
persons to the hospital.
5. Learned counsel for the appellants has contended that the
Crl. A. No.443/2001

Pg. No. 3/8

prosecution has miserably failed to establish its case on
the ground that the material testimonies of both PW1 and
PW2 suffer from serious infirmities since they have given
contradictory versions of the incidence in question. It is
stated that PW2 in his examination in chief has stated that
he was sleeping inside the room and his wife (PW2) was
sleeping in the courtyard. Both the accused

along with

four other persons entered the house and caught hold of
his wife and stabbed her with knife. It is then that the wife
came inside the room to awaken him. PW2 stated that the
room was lit with a candle which was extinguished by the
appellants when they entered the room. Learned counsel
pleads that it was not possible for PW2 to have seen the
incident of stabbing since it is his own case that the
candle light was put out by the accused and that he was
sleeping at that time and was awakened only later by his
wife as also that according to PW1, Bano, her husband got
awakened on hearing the commotion. It is also stated that
there was no mention of the four persons other than the
accused/appellants in the FIR. It is argued that the story
concocted by both the injured persons that the persons
who were not known to them had come with their faces
covered

and

the

ones

who

were

their

own

relatives/appellants had not covered their faces, is difficult
to believe. It is further stated that PW1 in her statement
before the police had stated that when her husband tried
to save her from being stabbed, appellant no. 1 gave a
Crl. A. No.443/2001

Pg. No. 4/8

knife blow to him also while her deposition before the Ld.
Trial Court was that when she went inside the room after
being stabbed, she saw appellant no. 1 stabbing her
husband.
6. Learned counsel for the appellants sought to draw the
attention to certain contradictions. It was pointed out that
PW1 had stated that she regained consciousness in
Hospital and her statement was recorded in Hospital
whereas PW2 averred that his wife's and his statement
was recorded in the PCR van. Further, PW1 and PW5, ASI
Somnath stated that no public person had gone to the
hospital with them while PW2 stated that his brother had
also gone with them to the hospital in the van. Other than
this, PW2 in his testimony stated that the police officials
did not conduct any proceedings in his house whereas PW
9, S.I. Ravinder Kumar Sharma stated that the statement
of PW2, Kallu was recorded at the place of occurrence and
the alleged weapon (knife) was recovered by PW2 from his
possession. It has also not been brought on record
whether there were any blood stains or not, no cloth was
taken into possession of blood stains or mark of knife on
clothes and were not sent for C.F.S.L. And there was no
blood seizure memo prepared by the I.O. The Doctor
opined that the injuries received could not be possible
from the said knife. Learned counsel for the appellants
pleaded that all the contradictions and inconsistencies
pointed out aforesaid were also brought before the trial
Crl. A. No.443/2001

Pg. No. 5/8

court but had been brushed aside in a casual manner by
the learned trial judge.
7. Apart from the above, it was submitted that in the light of
the facts that the appellants being the only bread earners
of their big families, have been facing trial for a long
period

now

and

have

no

past

or

prior

criminal

antecedents, the appellants may be given the benefit of
the provisions under the Probation of Offenders Act ( the
said Act for short).
8. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the State fully
supported the judgment of the trial court and contended
that there is no infirmity in the findings of the trial court in
holding the appellants guilty and that this appeal should
be dismissed and their convictions and the sentences
awarded to them should be affirmed.
9. It was submitted that the case is duly supported by PW2
and PW1 and PW1 has identified the two accused and
assigned specific roles to the appellants while deposing
before the trial court. It is averred that the plea raised by
the accused that they have been falsely implicated has
not been proved and is not supported by any evidence on
record. It is further stated that the testimony of PW1 is
supported with the recovery of knife as Ex. P1 and the fact
that PW2 also received injuries on his shoulder in the
same incident and denied the suggestion that appellant
no. 1 had not given a knife blow, makes the case of the
prosecution even more reliable.
Crl. A. No.443/2001

Pg. No. 6/8

10.

In the given facts and circumstances of the case, I

am of the view that it cannot be disputed that there are
some inconsistencies in the testimonies of PW1 and PW2
but at the same time, these infirmities are not of a nature
which would lay a doubt in the mind about the credibility
of the said depositions and thus, cannot be rejected at the
threshold as rightly pointed out by the learned ASJ. It
cannot be lost sight of that the appellants have been
identified by PW1 and have been alleged to have
effectuated their particular tasks in order to accomplish
their objective to cause hurt to PW1 and PW2. The MLCs
proved on record as Ex. PW 6/A and PW 8/A provide that
the nature of injuries are simple which has not been
disputed and have been caused by a sharp weapon. The
testimony of PW1 is supported by the MLC which also
provides that PW1 received injuries on the chest and arm.
In the disclosure statement of appellant no. 1, he has
admitted to have gone to the house of PW1 and PW2, with
his brother, appellant no. 2 and stabbing PW1 with a knife
which was later seized by the police officials from the
possession of PW2 and proved by the prosecution.
11.

Thus, though the evidence produced on record is not

sufficient to convict the appellants u/s 307 IPC since the
element of mens rea is lacking, nonetheless, it is
established beyond reasonable doubt that the appellants
on the date of the incident, went to the house of PW1 and
PW2, in furtherance of their common intention to inflict
Crl. A. No.443/2001

Pg. No. 7/8

injuries upon both the injured persons. In the absence of
any defence evidence in support of the plea raised by the
appellants, the conviction of the appellants u/s 324/34 IPC
is sustainable in the eyes of law. The Ld. Trial court, in my
opinion, has examined the matter at length and has not
erred in coming to the conclusion that a case is made out
against the appellants u/s 324/34 IPC and thus, sentenced
them to undergo RI for a period of 2 years.
12.

However, in view of the fact that the appellants have

no past or prior antecedents of a convict, I am inclined to
modify the sentence of the appellants and deem it
appropriate to direct that the sentence of the appellants
be confined to a period of six months RI and hence the
order of sentence of the trial court is modified to the
aforesaid extent.
13.

Appeal stands allowed in the aforesaid terms.

FEBRUARY 27, 2008
'RA'

Crl. A. No.443/2001

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Pg. No. 8/8

