*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL. REV. PETITION NO.709/2005 & CRL.M.A.9575/2005
Reserved on : 18.01.2008

%
24.01.2008

Date of decision :

SHRI MADAN GOPAL @ MADAN BHAIYA
... PETITIONER
Through :Mr.R.N.Mittal, Sr.Advocate with
Ms.Manisha Bhandari, Advocates

-VERSUSSTATE GOVT.OF NCT OF DELHI... ...
...
...
...RESPONDENT
Through : Mr. R.N.Vats, APP for the State
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by the framing of charges
against him by the order dated 13.7.2005 in FIR 270/1999 in
respect of offences alleged against him under Section 307
of the Indian Penal Code, 1908 (in short 'IPC').

2.

The case of the prosecution is that they received secret
information on 23.7.1999 that some dreaded criminals of

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.1 of 10

Uttar Pradesh would gather at Ashoka Hotel at Chanakya
Puri to kidnap a trader for some ransom. The police team,
thus, visited the venue at the hotel on 23.7.1999 at 11.30
A.M.

Two vehicles - one Maruti Zen and one Opel Astra,

arrived at about 11.45 A.M. and the petitioner got out at
12.00 noon from the vehicle. At about 12.15 P.M. the Opel
Astra followed by the Maruti Zen started to move again
when they were asked to stop. The petitioner was sitting on
the right side on the back seat of the Opel Astra car and he
pointed out a mouser from inside the car at the police party
when the window glass of the vehicle was down. The other
person accompanied in the car also did the same and one
Ram Pratap sitting in the car incited the driver to drive the
car over the policemen.

Simultaneously, firing took place

from the Maruti Zen car and there was return fire.
petitioner and others were over-powered.

The

In the firing,

Saria Pahalwan was shot dead.
3.

Trial court record has been summoned and perused.

4.

An FIR was filed under Sections 186/353/307/34 IPC and
under Section 25/27 read with Section 59 of the Arms Act.
The learned Additional Sessions Judge framed charges
against the petitioner under Sections 307/186/353/34 IPC
only as the petitioner was stated to have a license for the
mouser.

5.

The petitioner aggrieved by the framing of the charges, filed

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.2 of 10

Criminal Revision Petition No.444/2001 and the prosecution
pleaded that the medical evidence was yet to be recorded
to see whether there is any injury. The revision petition was
disposed of by the order dated 4.11.2003 with the direction
that the evidence of the doctor has to be recorded and
thereafter the petitioner would be at liberty to file another
petition.

It is stated that thereafter the evidence of the

doctor was recorded.
6.

A categorical assertion has been made in para-3 of the
petition

that

other

than

Criminal

Revision

Petition

No.444/2004 (which should actually read as 444/2001), no
other petition was filed before this Court or any other Court.
On the recording of doctor's evidence, the petitioner filed
another Criminal Revision Petition No.901/2003 for revision
of charges under Section 307 IPC, which was disposed of by
an order dated 7.5.2004 with the direction that it was open
to the petitioner to move the trial court for amendment of
charges.

The petitioner thereafter filed an application for

amendment of the charges, which request has been
declined by the impugned order dated 13.7.2005.
7.

A perusal of the impugned order shows that the learned ASJ
has considered the application of the petitioner under
Section 216 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(hereinafter referred to as the said 'Code') on merit. The
learned trial court took note of the plea of the petitioner

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.3 of 10

that there was no allegation against the petitioner of any
overt act as the accused had not fired the pistol and no
injury has been received by any member of the raiding
party.

There was no MLC of any member of the raiding

party.

The petitioner had a licensed revolver and that is

why the charges were not framed under the Arms Act. It is
further

alleged

that

there

was

contradiction

in

the

statement of the prosecution witnesses recorded under
Section 161 of the Cr.P.C.
8.

The aforesaid pleas were sought to be opposed by the
learned APP for the State before the trial court and it was
submitted that the accused had pointed a pistol at the
members of the raiding party and, thus, even if the accused
has not fired and no injuries received by any member of the
raiding party, charges under Section 307 IPC had been
properly framed. The intention to point the pistol was to kill
even though no injuries have actually been caused.

9.

The trial court has relied upon the observations in Sagayam
Vs. State of Karnataka, 2000(3) C.C.Cases (SC)23 where it
was held that it is not essential that bodily injury capable of
causing death should have actually been inflicted to justify
conviction under Section 307 IPC since an attempt in order
to be criminal need not be the penultimate act foreboding
death.

It is sufficient in law if there is present an intent

coupled with some overt act in execution thereof, such act

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.4 of 10

being proximate to the crime intended and if the attempt
has gone so far that it would have been complete but for
the

extraneous

intervention

which

frustrated

its

consummation. The trial court noted that the said judgment
as well as another judgment relied upon by the petitioner,
being Durgo Bai & Anr. Vs. State of Punjab, 2004 III AD (Cr.)
SC 385 which dealt with the cases where after recording of
evidence there was acquittal and not at the stage of framing
of charge. Not only that, the observation in Sagayam Vs.
State of Karnataka (supra) substantiates the plea that if
there is an intent coupled with some overt act in execution,
the same would suffice.
10.

The trial court also examined the general principles for
framing of charges that only sifting of evidence is necessary
and as long as there is strong suspicion which leaves the
court to think that there is ground for presuming that the
accused has committed an offence, it is not open to the
court to see that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused.

11.

The factum of the accused pointing the pistol towards the
members of the raiding party was an intention to kill and
such intention could develop at the spur of the moment. It
was held that there was sufficient material to frame
charges.

12.

Learned senior counsel for the petitioner strongly contended

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.5 of 10

that the statement of Shri Palbinder Singh of the AntiRobbery Cell under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. showed that
when the mouser was recovered, there was one bullet stuck
but the mouser was locked.

It was, thus, pleaded that in

view of the provisions of Section 227 of the Cr.P.C. dealing
with the discharge of an accused, the present case was one
where there was no sufficient ground for presuming any
intent on the part of the petitioner so as to give rise to
framing of charges under Section 307 IPC. Learned senior
counsel emphasized that there were 9 police personnel who
visited the site and two of them were in uniform. None of
the persons including the persons in civilian dress went
inside the hotel to find out what transpired in the meeting or
in what manner. The common intent or the facts necessary
for conspiracy have be gathered. It was only a case where
a legal weapon was shown and the petitioner ran.

The

reason for this was stated to be that the police party had
already shot dead a person in the encounter and there was
an apprehension that the petitioner would meet the same
fate.
13.

Learned APP for the State, on the other hand, drew the
attention of this Court to the charge-sheet to contend that a
secret information was received about some hardcore
criminals assembling together and it was known that these
persons could indulge in firing and, thus, the police party

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.6 of 10

had to move carefully. The apprehension of the police party
was correct as the mouser was pointed at the police by the
petitioner to obstruct in the functioning of the police party
with an intent to kill the personnel in order for the petitioner
to escape.
14.

Learned counsel for the parties referred to the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi,
Advocate & Ors. Vs. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya and others,
(1990) 4 SCC 76 to advance their case. The case, however,
dealt with the special statute being the Terrorists and
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987. The aspect of
framing of charges was also dealt with. It was held that the
Court had to sift and weigh the evidence on record and
other

documents

only

for

the

limited

purpose

of

ascertaining whether prima facie case is made out against
the accused.

Thus, if such material is available, charges

should be framed under Section 228 of the Cr.P.C. and, if
there is absence of such material, then the accused should
be discharged under Section 227 of the Cr.P.C.
15.

Learned senior counsel for the petitioner emphasized by
reference to the judgment in Dilawar Babu Kurane Vs. State
of Maharashtra, 2002 CRL.L.J.980 that the Court while
exercising powers under Section 227 of the Cr.P.C. does not
act as a mere post-office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution
but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.7 of 10

total effect of the evidence and the documents produced
before the Court, and should not make a roving inquiry into
the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as
if he was conducting a trial. On no prima facie case being
made out, the High Court was held to have acted correctly
in discharging the accused.
16.

It is towards the culmination of the hearing that the learned
APP pointed out that the averments made by the petitioner
in respect of no other petition being filed are incorrect as
the petitioner had, in fact, filed Criminal Misc.(Main)
No.91/2001, which was dismissed by a speaking order on
16.3.2001. The said judgment is reported as Madan Gopal
& Madan Bhaiya Vs. State, 2001 (1) JCC (Delhi) 316.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner did seek to
canvass that the petitioner at that stage had approached for
quashing of the FIR while the present stage was for
quashing of charge-sheet though he did concede that this
fact ought to have been mentioned in the petition. Learned
senior counsel pleaded that neither the instructing counsel
nor he was aware of this fact as he was not the counsel
earlier for the petitioner.

17.

On hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the
considered view that there is no ground made out for
amending the charge-sheet. The case against the petitioner
is that he had used a mouser (albeit a licensed one) by

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.8 of 10

pointing it at the police party. He was sitting in a car where
other person accompanying him had even asked the driver
to run over the police party.

The fact that the petitioner

may not have actually fired or caused injury itself would not
be sufficient to absolve the petitioner at this stage.

It is

always open to the petitioner during the course of evidence
to establish the lack of mens rea in a case under Section
307 of the IPC.
18.

It is not in dispute that the gun was loaded though it was
stated by one of the police personnel that the same was
locked when it was recovered.

There was a time gap

between the pointing of the mouser, the petitioner being
over-powered and the mouser being recovered.

Whether

the mouser was locked prior to it or during the intervening
period or whether the bullet was not fired, being in the
chamber and in what circumstances, is a matter of
evidence.
19.

In Madan Gopal & Madan Bhaiya Vs. State (supra), some of
the observations made are material though the case related
to the quashing of the FIR. It has been observed that on
seeing a mouser aimed, the police officer must have got
terribly shaken obstructing him in the discharge of his
official duties. The mouser was loaded. In my considered
view, it cannot be said at this stage that the only object of
the petitioner was to somehow run away from the scene by

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

Page No.9 of 10

pointing the mouser.
20.

The trial court has discharged the function of sifting through
the material on record to come to the conclusion that there
was sufficient material to frame the charges.

21.

In view of the aforesaid, the correctness, legality and
propriety of the order framing the charges or refusing the
plea of the petitioner to modify the charges cannot be
doubted.

22.

Dismissed.

23.

Trial court record be sent back.

CRL.M.A.9575/2005
Application does not survive for consideration and is
disposed of.
JANUARY 24, 2008
'sp'

CRL.REV.P.709 of 2005

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.10 of 10

