*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No. 142 of 2001

%

Date of Decision: 29.05.2008

MAJOR SURESH RANA …

…

…

…

…

… PETITIONER

Through : Mr. Viraj R. Datar, Advocate.
-VERSUS-

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

...

…

…

...

RESPONDENTS

Through : Mr. Sanjay Katyal, Advocate
with Major S.S. Pandey.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)

1. The petitioner was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in
the Army Ordnance Corps on 22.12.1979 and was sent on
deputation to DGAR, Shillong on 01.01.1992. The petitioner
during the said deputation period was posted as Joint
Assistant Director (Provisions) with HQ, DGAR and was

WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 1 of 12

entrusted with the duty of provisioning of general stores and
clothing for the troops of Assam Rifles. In performance of
his duties, requirements used to be received from the
Maintenance Groups of the Assam Rifles for about 70 major
items, which were dealt with by the petitioner.
2. It is the case of the petitioner that he was the junior-most
officer in the Directorate and was serving directly under the
officers of the rank of Colonel, Brigadier and Major General.
The Directorate is headed by a Director General of the rank
of Lieutenant General and all financial powers are vested
with the Director General or his nominee being the Deputy
Director General. Thus, all purchases were required to be
sanctioned by the Director General or his nominee and at
the relevant stage of time, it was the Deputy Director
General, who was entrusted with the said task.
3. The controversy has arisen on account of one such
transaction pertaining to purchase of Hessian cloth, which is
used as packing material by the troops for movement and
packing purpose.

On receipt of the requirement for this

item by the Directorate from the Maintenance Group, indent
was placed for purchase of the same from the DGS&D as it
was not available in the Army. The indent did not receive
any response resulting in a decision being taken for local
purchase from the open market and tenders were invited
after following standard procedure, which was placed before

WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 2 of 12

the Board of Officers. The petitioner was not a member of
the Board of Officers nor did he take part in the
deliberations.

The recommendations of the Board of

Officers were placed before the Deputy Director ‘Q’ and the
Deputy Director General, who approved the same and the
item was procured. It appears that a Court of Inquiry was
instituted in respect of the procurement of the said Hessian
cloth, which was not a critical item. It was further alleged
that the petitioner had obtained the sanction of higher
authorities without projecting the stock position as well as
not projecting the minimum escapable requirement.
4. The proceedings against the petitioner were initially under
Chapter V of the Army Rules, 1954 ( hereinafter to be
referred to as, ‘the said Rules’ ). The scheme of Section 1 of
the said Chapter deals with investigation of charges and
remand for trial. Rule 22 of the said Rules provides for the
hearing on charge by the Commanding Officer in the
presence of the accused with full liberty to the accused to
cross-examine any witness against him.

In case the

Commanding Officer finds that the evidence does not show
any offence under the Army Act, 1950 had been committed,
the charge is dismissed or he can proceed for taking down
the summary of evidence under Rule 23 of the said Rules.
The relevant provisions of Rule 22 of the said Rules are as
under :-

WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 3 of 12

“22. Hearing of Charge. – (1) Every Charge
against a person subject to the Act shall be
heard by the Commanding Officer in the
presence of the accused. The accused shall
have full liberty to cross-examine any witness
against him, and to call such witness and make
such statement as may be necessary for his
defence:
Provided that where the charge against the
accused arises as a result of investigation by a
Court of inquiry, wherein the provisions of rule
180 have been complied with in respect of that
accused, the commanding officer may dispense
with the procedure in sub-rule (1).
(2) The commanding officer shall dismiss a
charge brought before him if, in his opinion the
evidence does not show that an offence under
the Act has been committed and may do so if,
he is satisfied that the charge ought not to be
proceeded with.
Provided that the commanding officer shall not
dismiss a charge which he is debarred to try
under sub-section (2) of Sec. 120 without
reference to superior authority as specified
therein.”
5. The present case was one where the Commanding Officer
did not dismiss the charge, but proceeded to take down the
summary of evidence under Rule 23, the relevant portion of
which is as under :“23. Procedure for taking down the
summary of evidence. – (1) where the case
is adjourned for the purpose of having the
evidence reduced to waiting, at the adjourned
hearing evidence of the witnesses who were
present and gave evidence before the
commanding officer, whether against or for
the accused, and of any other person whose
evidence appears to be relevant, shall be
taken down in writing in the presence and
hearing
of
the
accused
before
the
commanding officer or such officer as he
directs.”
WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 4 of 12

6. The Commanding Officer under the scheme of the said
Rules has to thereafter exercise the options in terms of Rule
24 of the said Rules, which reads as under :“24. Remand of accused. – (1) The evidence
and statement (if any) taken down in writing in
pursuance of rule 23 (hereinafter referred to as
the “summary of evidence”), shall be
considered by the commanding officer, who
thereupon shall either –
(a)
(b)
(c)

remand the accused for trial by a courtmartial; or
refer the case to the proper superior
military authority; or
if he thinks it desirable, re-hear the case
and either dismiss the charge or dispose
of it summarily.

(2) If the accused is remanded for trial by a
court-martial, the commanding officer shall
without unnecessary delay either assemble a
summary court-martial (after referring to the
officer empowered to convene a district courtmartial when such reference is necessary) or
apply to the proper military authority to
convene a court-martial, as the case may
require.”
7. A reading of the aforesaid rules shows that three options
were available to the Commanding Officer.

It is no-one’s

case that clause (a) aforesaid was made applicable, but the
dispute arises on account of the fact that as per the
petitioner, the Commanding Officer dismissed the charge
while, according to the respondents, there was a reference
of the case to a proper superior military authority.

The

respondents proceeded to hold a General Court Martial ( for
short, ‘GCM’ ) where the petitioner was held guilty and was

WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 5 of 12

imposed the sentence as under :“(i) To take rank and precedence as if his
appointment as substantive Major bore date
22.12.1995 (forfeiture of future seniority of rank
for 5 years).
(ii)
To forfeit 3 years past service for the
purpose of pension.
(iii) To be severally reprimanded.”
8. The gravamen of the case of the petitioner is that the action
of the respondents in holding the GCM is contrary to Rule 24
of the said Rules since a final finding was arrived at by the
Commanding Officer that the petitioner was not guilty. It is,
thus, the submission of the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the Commanding Officer being the persona
designate to take a decision in this behalf and the decision
being so taken, there is no option available to a superior
authority to proceed in the matter by directing a GCM until
and unless the Commanding Officer refers that case to a
proper superior military authority.
9. In order to appreciate this submission, it is necessary to
reproduce what the Commanding Officer had recorded in
the

summary

Commanding

of

the

Officer

prescribed form.

case
dated

and

the

27.09.1995

opinion

of

the

made

in

the

After considering the material and the

testimonies, it was recorded in paras 8 and 9 as under :“8. I have carefully considered the Summary
of Evidence. Evidence given by prosecution
witnesses and documentary proof as recorded
therein do not indicate any offence having been
committed by the accused.
To protect the

WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 6 of 12

interests of justice, it is a fit case where all the
six charges are required to be dismissed.
9.
Since the accused has been attached to
my unit by Army HQ, I therefore forward the
case to higher authorities.”
10.

A

reading

of

the

aforesaid

shows

that

the

Commanding Officer after consideration of the summary of
evidence held that the same did not indicate any offence
having been committed by the accused.

Thereafter, the

conclusion is stated to be that to protect the interest of
justice, it was a fit case where all the six charges are
required to be dismissed.
11.

It is the submission of the learned counsel for the

respondents that the Commanding Officer did not actually
dismiss the charges but had only formed an opinion to
dismiss the charges. It is also submitted that there was no
basis for making the noting of para 9 aforesaid as there was
no requirement for the case to be placed before higher
authorities on the ground that the petitioner was attached
to the unit of the Commanding Officer until and unless the
Commanding Officer was of the view that he would not like
to take a decision in the matter and would like to forward
the

case

for

further

consideration

to

the

superior

authorities.
12.

The most relevant aspect in the present case is that

the petitioner had received intimation from the superior
authorities for forwarding the case. In pursuance thereto,
WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 7 of 12

the following noting was made :“(In the opinion of Commanding Officer, the
case is fit to be dismissed. The application for
pre-trial advice is submitted as directed by
convening authority vide DG Assam Rifles (D &
V Br) Signal Nos. A 3710 dt. 19 Oct 95 and A
3748 dt. 27 Oct 95 for obtaining legal advice).”
13.

The aforesaid shows that the Commanding Officer was

of the opinion that the case was fit to be dismissed, but the
same was being forwarded for pre-trial advice as per the
directions

of

Commanding

the

convening

Officer

having

authority.
formed

his

Thus,
own

the

opinion

proceeded to send the papers over to the convening
authority as per the directions of the convening authority.
14.

Learned counsel for the respondents submits that

there was, in fact, no such signal sent which can be
construed as a direction by the convening authority and the
papers were forwarded in view of the dilemma in the mind
of the Commanding Officer. It is, thus, submitted that what
the Commanding Officer did was within the parameters of
clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 24 of the said Rules.
15.

We are unable to accept the aforesaid plea on the

bare reading of what has been noted.

The noting clearly

shows that the Commanding Officer had come to a
conclusion which is clearly recorded that there was no case
made out against the petitioner.

Once having done that,

the matter should have been put to rest. It is obvious that
having arrived at the finding, there was no question of
WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 8 of 12

further forwarding of papers to the convening authority and
the same was obviously under a direction.
conclusion

formed

by

us

is

fortified

The aforesaid
by

what

the

Commanding Officer himself has stated when he was called
as

a

witness

during

the

GCM

proceedings.

The

Commanding Officer has categorically stated that he had no
doubt in his mind and that after hearing the charges under
Rule 22 of the said Rules, he complied with the provisions of
Rule 24(1)(c) of the said Rules and thereafter recorded his
findings.

The Commanding Officer did not produce any

document in respect of the said compliance but reiterated
his view that what he had done was in terms of Rule
24(1)(c) of the said Rules.
16.

The stand of the Commanding Officer being so

categorically and what is recorded by the Commanding
Officer being so apparent and clear, there can be no doubt
that the said Commanding Officer proceeded to record the
findings under Rule 24(1)(c) of the said Rules to the effect
that there was no charge made out against the petitioner.
17.

It may be noted at this stage that on the principles of

law, there is no dispute in the submissions of the learned
counsel for the parties that if the Commanding Officer has
actually proceeded under Rule 24(1)(c), then that is the end
of the matter and the question of holding any GCM or taking
any further step would have arisen only in case any

WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 9 of 12

reference had been made in terms of Rule 24(1)(b), which
had to be of the own volition of the Commanding Officer and
not under any dictat. This agreement is in conformity with
the settled legal position as enunciated in C.W.P. No. 2726
of 1990 titled ‘Lt. Col. Satish Kumar Sharma v. Union of
India & Ors.’ decided on 14.02.1991 of this Court, Lance
Dafedar Laxman v. Union of India & Ors., DRJ 1992 (24) 125
and LPA No. 244 of 1985 titled ‘Union of India & Ors. V. Maj.
Virendrarai J. Kharod’ decided on 15.07.1987 by the Gujarat
High Court.
18.

Learned counsel for the respondents did seek to

persuade us to look into the proceedings of the GCM as also
the additional summary of evidence recorded before the
GCM to contend that this Court ought not to come to the aid
of the petitioner.
19.

We are unable to accept the plea for the reason that

what has happened is not mere technical defect in GCM
proceedings, but affects the very entitlement to initiate the
GCM. If the Commanding Officer comes to an opinion that
there is no case, there can be no question of holding a GCM.
Interestingly, the additional summary of evidence before
the GCM was done by changing the Commanding Officer
and appointing a new Commanding Officer. The motive is
obvious that in view of the opinion and decision recorded by
the earlier Commanding Officer, it was not even considered

WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 10 of 12

feasible to send the case to him as the convening authority
apparently did not want to accept the finding of the
Commanding Officer though they were fully conscious of the
fact that once such a decision is made by the Commanding
Officer, they have no such option to convene the GCM.
20.

The judgments referred to by learned counsel for the

respondents of Lt. Col. P.P.S. Bedi v. UOI & Ors., 1982 (3)
SCC 140, Maj. G.S. Sodhi v. UOI, 1991 (2) SCC 382 and UOI
& Ors. v. Maj. A. Hussain, AIR 1998 SC 577 are only to
substantiate the plea that mere technical defects should not
result in annulment of GCM proceedings, but we have
already observed that what has happened is not mere
technical defects, but the initiation of the GCM could not
have taken place in view of the conclusion of the
Commanding Officer. The convening authority has, in fact,
used his command and influence to get the records from the
Commanding Officer to proceed against the petitioner,
which was not permissible as the designated authority was
the Commanding Officer to take the decision with whom the
petitioner was attached with and who had come to the
finding of no guilt on the part of the petitioner.
21.

A

writ

of

mandamus

is

issued

quashing

the

constitution and the findings arrived at by the GCM on
17.09.1998. A further direction is issued for consideration
of the petitioner for promotion in accordance with law in

WP (C) 142 of 2001

Page 11 of 12

view of the first relief being granted to the petitioner.
Needless to say, if in law it is permissible for the
respondents to take out any other proceedings against the
petitioner, the present order would not come in the way.
22.

The parties are left to bear their own costs.

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

MAY 29, 2008
madan

WP (C) 142 of 2001

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

Page 12 of 12

