*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL.M.A.6991/2006 & CRL.REV.PET. No.478/2006

%

Date of decision :
22.01.2008

SMT.MOBINA BEGUM
... PETITIONER
Through :Mr.G.S.Sharma, Advocate
-VERSUSNAWAB ALI & ORS.
...RESPONDENTS
Through : Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for the State/
Respondent no.10.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
CRL.M.A.6991/2006
1.
The petitioner/complainant is aggrieved by the impugned
order dated 7.2.2006 of the learned Additional Sessions
Judge in terms whereof the accused have been acquitted for
the charges under Sections 308/34 of the Indian Penal Code
(hereinafter referred to as the IPC). The State has not filed
any appeal against the impugned order.
2.

There is a delay of 68 days in filing the revision petition. It

Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

Page No.1 of 9

is stated in the application for condonation of delay that
after the petitioner had deposed in the matter, she did not
participate any further and it is only when a legal notice
dated 11.5.2006 was served on the petitioner on 29.5.2006
alleging malicious prosecution, did the petitioner come to
know about the acquittal of the accused by the impugned
order. The petitioner thereafter contacted her counsel and
applied for certified copy of the judgment and other
relevant

documents

on

29.6.2006

which

were

made

available on 6.7.2006. It is during this period of time that
the petitioner also requested the Chief Prosecutor through a
counsel for the State to challenge the acquittal order or for
permission for filing of criminal revision by the petitioner,
but no reply was received.

The petitioner claims to hail

from an economically dis-advantaged section of society.
3.

In view of the aforesaid reasons, sufficient grounds have
been

made

out

for

condonation

of

delay

and

for

consideration of the revision petition on merits. Application
stands allowed.
CRL. REV. P.478/2006
4.
An alleged agreement for repairing of Gali No.8, B-Block,
S.R. Colony, for which contributions were stated to have
been made by the inhabitants of the Gali, gave rise to a
quarrel and the police took preventive action against two
groups under Sections 107/151 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Cr.P.C.) on
Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

Page No.2 of 9

11.3.2000.

All the persons involved in the quarrel were

medically examined as they had received injuries and the
MLC opined that it was a case of simple injury caused by
blunt objects. However, a subsequent MLC of Smt.Mobina
Begum (the petitioner) after receipt of C.T. Scan report gave
rise to medical opinion that the injury on her person was
dangerous and, thus, her statement was recorded by the
police. As per her case, on 11.3.2000 while she was present
at the shop located in her house in the Gali, the accused
persons came and started beating her and a blow was also
given with an iron rod over her head.

Beating was also

given to her husband and her sons and the money box was
taken away. An FIR was registered under Sections 308/34
of the IPC and on completion of investigation, the chargesheet was filed under Sections 308/323/324/352/34 of the
IPC against the accused (respondents no.1 to 9 herein). The
charges were framed on 27.11.2001 under Section 308/34
of the IPC against all the accused who claimed trial after
denying the charges. On completion of trial, in terms of the
impugned order dated 7.2.2006 of the learned ASJ all the
accused have been acquitted.
5.

Before proceeding to analyse the reasoning of the trial
court, it is necessary to keep in mind the scope and ambit of
scrutiny by this Court while exercising jurisdiction under
Section 401 of the Cr.P.C.

Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

Section 397 of the Cr.P.C.

Page No.3 of 9

empowers the High Court or any Sessions Judge to call for
and examine the records of any proceedings before the
inferior criminal court situate within its local jurisdiction for
purposes of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or
propriety of any finding, sentence or order. Sub-section (3)
of Section 401 of the Cr.P.C. provides that nothing
contained in the said Section 401 of the Cr.P.C. shall be
deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a finding of
acquittal into one of conviction. Thus, in such matters there
is a difference in the approach while exercising the power to
entertain a revision against an order of acquittal as against
an appeal.
6.

The judgment referred to in this behalf by the learned APP is
in the case of Jagannaath Choudhary & Ors. Vs. Ramayan
Singh and Anr., 2002 (2) Crimes 409 where the Supreme
Court frowned upon an order of the High Court while
exercising

revisionary

jurisdiction

filed

by

a

private

complainant directing trial court for writing of a fresh
judgment by giving proper judicial mind to the evidence on
record.

Such a direction was held to be unjustified.

reference

was

made

to

the

earlier

judgments

A
in

K.Chinnaswamy Reddy Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.,
AIR 1962 SC 1788; and D.Stephens Vs. Nosibolla, 1951 SC
196. In these two judgments it has been observed that the
exercise

of

revisionary

Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

jurisdiction

on

a

private

Page No.4 of 9

complainant's revision petition against an order of acquittal
was to be exercised only in exceptional cases where the
interest of public justice required interference for the
correction of a manifest illegality or the prevention of a
gross mis-carriage of justice. Jurisdiction was held not to be
ordinarily invoked merely because the lower court had
taken a lenient view of the law or mis-appreciated the
evidence on record. The High Court is not to re-appraise
the evidence and reverse the findings of fact on which the
acquittal was based in the absence of any error on a point
of law.

The observations in Logendranath Jha Vs. Shri

Polailal Biswas, 1951 SC 316 was cited to stress that it was
not open to the High Court to convert a finding of acquittal
into one of conviction. Thus, where the State may not have
thought fit to appeal, but the jurisdiction to be exercised in
such revision petitions was in exceptional cases where there
is glaring defect in the procedure or manifest error on a
point of law and consequently a flagrant miscarriage of
justice.
7.

In Jagannath Choudnary's case (supra) some illustrations
have been given where the High Court ought to interfere.
Such restrictions include the cases where the trial court had
no jurisdiction to try the case but still acquitted the accused
or where the trial court had wrongly shut out evidence
which the prosecution wished to produce or where the

Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

Page No.5 of 9

appeal court had wrongly held evidence which was admitted
by the trial court to be inadmissible. Simultaneously, where
material evidence had been over-looked by the trial court or
by the appeal court was another such example. This was so
as the object of revisionary jurisdiction under Section 401 of
the Cr.P.C. was to confer upon superior criminal courts a
kind of paternal or supervisory jurisdiction in order to
correct miscarriage of justice arising from misconception of
law, irregularity of procedure, neglect of proper precautions
of apparent harshness of treatment which has resulted on
one hand in some injury to the due maintenance of law and
order or on the other hand in some undeserved hardship to
the individuals.
considered

in

The main question which remains to be
an

application

in

substantial justice had been done.

revision

is

whether

Thus, if the impugned

order is apparently presentable, without any such infirmity
which may render it completely perverse or unacceptable
and when there is no failure of justice, there can be no
interference in exercise of revisional jurisdiction.

The

exercise of power under Section 401 of the Cr.P.C. was held
to be discretionary though such an exercise of discretion
had to be judicious.
8.

The aforesaid aspects have been emphasized as the
revision petition itself was worded and the submissions of
the learned counsel for the petitioner seem to suggest as if

Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

Page No.6 of 9

this Court has to go again into detailed scrutiny of evidence
to derive a different conclusion which is not permissible.
9.

The first aspect which has weighed with the trial court is the
inordinate delay in registration of the FIR without any
explanation and the case was, thus, seemed with suspicion
and a benefit was given to the accused. Learned counsel
for the petitioner, however, sought to contend that this was
on account of police inaction or collusion with the accused.
This plea is not sustainable.

There was preventive action

taken under Sections 107/155 of the Cr.P.C. while preparing
the Kalandra.
record.

However, the DD entry was not proved on

The Kalander, however, mentions that the SI had

reached the spot and found that both the parties were bent
upon quarreling with each other.

The Dispute was about

payment of the amount for repair of the Gali which had not
been paid in full.

The altercation was corroborated by

material witnesses and it is in pursuance thereto that the
matter went out of hand when the parties started pelting
stones at each other.
10.

The learned trial court found that PW8 and PW9 were
declared hostile by the prosecution but nothing prevented in
law in relying upon the hostile witness if his statement was
otherwise corroborated by other evidence on record.

The

learned trial court found that the deposition of these two
witnesses was sufficiently corroborated by PW12 and the

Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

Page No.7 of 9

Kalandra as also some documents.

The conclusion, thus,

arrived at was that the investigation and the consequent
charge-sheet was filed on the basis of twisted facts as
deposed by PW1 to PW5. The testimony of even these five
witnesses was found to be full of material contradiction.
The said witnesses had deposed that first the incident
started at the shop where PW3 was sitting and thereafter
the accused entered inside the house but the site plan
prepared by the Investigating Officer at the spot showed the
spot in the Gali in-front of the house. The testimony of the
five witnesses were not even ad idem on the alleged
weapon used. Some stated it was danda, other stated that
it was iron rods alone. Another version was of lathies and
iron rods together and of knife.
11.

The material aspect referred to in the impugned judgment,
as pointed out by the learned APP, is that even the accused
had received injuries and their MLC were on record, but no
explanation was given as to how the accused had received
injuries

which

was

mandatory

in

the

circumstances

particularly in view of the preventive action taken by the
police authorities. The prosecution was, thus, held to have
failed to discharge its onus of proving the injuries on the
respective persons of the accused.

PW5 in the Kalandra

case Ex.PW12/H in his statement admitted the version of
the defence of the payment of the money on account of the

Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

Page No.8 of 9

agreement and this admission went contrary not only to his
deposition but the story to be put-forth by the other
prosecution witnesses.
12.

The aforesaid have been discussed in detail only to show
that the trial court had discussed the evidence and the
ramification of the testimonies of the parties to come to the
conclusion that the case had not been established against
the

accused

testimonies

beyond
of

the

unreasonable
prosecution

doubt

and

witnesses

the
were

contradictory. This is coupled with the fact that the incident
was one of an altercation arising from the non-payment of
money for an agreement about the repair of the Gali.
13.

In view of the aforesaid, I see no reason why this Court
should exercise the revisionary jurisdiction to reverse the
order of acquittal of the trial court.

14.

Dismissed.

JANUARY 22, 2008
'sp'

Crl.M.A.6991/06 & Crl.Rev.P.478/06

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.9 of 9

