*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P.613/2004

%

Date of decision:31.01.2008

SMT.VANDANA GOSWAMI

...PETITIONER

Through:Mr.Anuj Soni, Advocate with
petitioner in person.
Versus
THE STATE & ORS

...RESPONDENTS
Through:Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for the
State/R-1.
Mr.Dhan Mohan, Advocate for
respondents 2-7.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

No

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1. The petitioner/complainant is aggrieved by the impugned
judgment dated 7.8.2004 acquitting the accused of offences u/s
498A/406/34 IPC.
2. The petitioner was married to accused no.1, Shri Adesh
Goswami, on 1.12.1992 and a complaint was filed resulting in
registration of FIR 534/1995 against the husband of the
petitioner, Jeth, mother-in-law, wife of the Jeth, Nandoi and the

Crl. Rev. P. No.613 of 2004

Page No.1 of 6

Nanad.

The marriage between the two parties had been

performed according to Arya Samaj rites and it was a love
marriage.

The allegation in the complaint was that the

petitioner was made to sleep on the floor and taunted for dowry
by the accused persons and the petitioner also received
beatings at the hands of her husband and his mother.
3. The prosecution produced the complainant as a star witness
who narrated the incident in her examination-in-chief.

She

admitted in the cross-examination that the two parties had
relationship for two years prior to the date of marriage and the
accused husband along with his family was residing in-front of
the house of the complainant.

The parties were living as

husband and wife for a period of one year after the marriage.
She also admitted that after about one month of marriage, she
was provided jewellery by the accused persons without any
occasion comprising of a gold set and was also given clothes.
The complainant was also provided with a colour T.V., 2-in-1,
crockery, bed sheets and other articles on the occasion of Lohri
by her parents, though she did not know from where the
articles were purchased. The main cause of quarrel between
the husband and wife was that whenever she made a demand
for money from her husband, he showed his inability to pay and
she used to take money from her parents, including for her
further education. It was also admitted that the accused Anil
Goswami (Jeth) was leading an independent life along with his

Crl. Rev. P. No.613 of 2004

Page No.2 of 6

family and had nothing to do with the family of the
complainant. The factum of any assault was never disclosed by
her to any neighbour or to the police prior to the complaint in
question on which FIR was registered.

The complainant

admitted that she had told the doctors at the hospital that the
injury received by her was due to broken glass. During the
cross-examination also, the complainant admitted that the
jewellery given to her was old used jewellery which was not
purchased from anywhere.
4. Another material aspect which came out during her crossexamination was that the complainant had no knowledge qua
the drafting of the complaint at CAW Cell on which the FIR was
registered.

The complaint was stated to be drafted by her

father and the complainant professed lack of knowledge qua
the facts written in the complaint as she was not present at the
time of drafting of the complaint and had only signed the same.
Not only that, she admitted that her husband never made any
demand. Her Nandoi never made any demand directly to her
and that the house of the Nandoi and the Nanad is about 15-20
Kms from her house and both the said persons are gainfully
employed. The gold set given to her by her mother-in-law was
alleged to have been taken back after the reception and the set
which was given to her was stated to be possibly belonging to
her mother-in-law.
5. Another important aspect is that the complainant has admitted

Crl. Rev. P. No.613 of 2004

Page No.3 of 6

that the accused persons returned all her stridhan articles lying
at her matrimonial home on her demand and she has never
demanded any article back after leaving the matrimonial home.
In view of the aforesaid evidence, the trial court found that the
initiation

of

the

complaint

itself

which

resulted

in

the

registration of the FIR was not at the instance of the
complainant. She, in fact, had no knowledge of the contents of
the complaint. The father of the complainant, of course, took a
different stand attributing knowledge to the complainant,
though it was admitted that the complaint had been prepared
by the Advocate which had been filed. The father even denied
knowledge of the factum of giving of jewellery to the
complainant by her mother-in-law..
6. The trial court, thus, found contradictory statements being
made by the complainant and her father.
7. Another subsequent development which took place is that the
parties filed a petition for dissolution of marriage by mutual
consent in May, 2001 and the marriage stands dissolved
between the parties and both the parties are now married
again. In this behalf, learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that though such an application was filed and the
divorce granted, there were specific averments made therein
that the petitioner would be entitled to pursue her claim for
maintenance u/s 125 of the Cr.P.C. and there would be no
waiver of the rights in respect of the case pending against her

Crl. Rev. P. No.613 of 2004

Page No.4 of 6

husband and his family members.
8. On hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the
impugned judgment, it is obvious that the case against the
accused was not established beyond reasonable doubt. In fact,
there were contradictory statements made.
professed ignorance about the complaint.

The complainant
On one hand

allegations of dowry have been made and on the other hand, it
is admitted that jewllery and a gold set was given by the
parents of her husband. The complainant was unaware even
about the alleged purchases of different items by her parents.
She never made a demand for return of the articles when she
left the matrimonial home, but when such demand was made,
the dowry items were returned.
9. The marriage between the parties was performed according to
Arya Samaj rites and the parties lived opposite each other prior
to marriage. It was a love marriage that apparently went sour
after a short time.

The parties are now separately married

after divorce has been granted by mutual consent.
10.It cannot be lost sight of that this Court is exercising revisional
jurisdiction and the parameters for exercising such jurisdiction
u/s 397 r/w Section 401 Cr.P.C. against an acquittal order is
limited.

The law enunciated by the Supreme Court in

Thankappan Nadar and Ors. Vs. Gopala Krishnan and Anr.,
(2002) 9 SCC 393 does not empower the Court exercising
revisional jurisdiction to re-appreciate evidence. There has to

Crl. Rev. P. No.613 of 2004

Page No.5 of 6

be a procedural illegality or manifest error of law for this Court
to interfere.

In fact, in the said judgment the Apex Court

intervened when the High Court acted contrary to the said
principle since it was not permissible while exercising the
revisional jurisdiction at the instance of the de facto complaint
against the order of acquittal to do so.
11.In view of the legal principles being applied to the present
case, as enunciated aforesaid, there is no such procedural
illegality or manifest error of law which require this Court to
interfere in the impugned order. It is not possible to accept the
submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that the
evidence should be re-appreciated in terms of the findings of
the trial court based on the conclusion that the complainant
was really not even involved in the drafting of the complaint.
12.Dismissed.
JANUARY 31, 2008
'sp'

Crl. Rev. P. No.613 of 2004

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.6 of 6

