*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP (C) No.5892 of 2007
Reserved on: 26.05.2008
Date of decision: 30.05.2008

%

SHIV CHARAN

…PETITIONER
Through:

Mr.R.M.Bagai, Advocate.
Versus

HIGH COURT OF DELHI & ANR
Through:
+

...RESPONDENTS

Mr.Viraj R.Datar, Advocate for R-1.
Ms.Jyoti Singh, Advocate for R-2.

WP (C) No.2577 of 2007
Reserved on: 26.05.2008
Date of decision: 30.05.2008

%

D.S.SIDHU

…PETITIONER
Through:

Mr.R.M.Bagai, Advocate.

Versus

HIGH COURT OF DELHI & ANR
Through:

...RESPONDENTS

Mr.Viraj R.Datar, Advocate for R-1.
Ms.Jyoti Singh, Advocate for R-2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 1 of 12

may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.

The petitioners herein were appointed as the members
of the Delhi Judicial Service in 1972-73 and were
promoted to the Delhi Higher Judicial Service on an adhoc
basis.

The petitioners along with Sh.M.S.Rohilla were

reverted

to

Delhi

Judicial

Service

on

15.02.1995.

Sh.Rohilla challenged the order of reversion by filing a
WP(C)4589/1995 but the petitioners herein accepted the
reversion.

Sh. M.S.Rohilla succeeded in the writ petition

which was decided by the Full Bench of this Court in
M.S.Rohilla v. High Court of Delhi at New Delhi; 129
(2006) DLT 737. It was held that though the High Court
had the control over the subordinate judiciary including
disciplinary jurisdiction, it had no authority to pass an
order against a judicial officer which had the effect of
removal from service or reduction in rank as such power
is

vested

with

the

Lieutenant

Governor.

The

recommendation of the High Court for reverting the
petitioner had not been sent to the Administrator of Delhi
for formal approval as required under Article 233 r/w
Article 235 of the Constitution of India and thus the
impugned order was not sustainable apart from the fact
WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 2 of 12

that no opportunity of hearing had been given to the
petitioner before reduction in rank.
2.

The petitioners herein filed the writ petitions seeking
parity with Sh.M.S.Rohilla as they had also been reverted
by the same order and thus claimed all financial benefits
treating the petitioners as members of the Delhi Higher
Judicial Service till the date of their retirement.

3.

It may be noticed that the petitioners have, in the
meantime, attained the age of superannuation.

4.

Learned counsel for the petitioners pleaded that the
representations made by the petitioners after the said
Full Bench Judgment should have elicited a favourable
response as the same principles would apply in the case
of the petitioners and thus the grounds for setting aside
the order would equally be applicable to the case of the
petitioners. It was submitted that, in fact, the respondent
no.1 should itself have passed the necessary orders
without even any representations having to be made by
the petitioners or at least without the petitioners being
compelled to approach the Court.

5.

Learned counsel for the petitioners claimed that the
alleged delay and latches would not come in the way of
the grant of relief to the petitioners and referred to the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Ramchandra Shankar
Deodhar and Ors v. The State of Maharashtra and Ors;

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 3 of 12

AIR 1974 SC 259.

It was observed in the said judgment

that the principle on which the Court proceeds in refusing
relief to the petitioner on the ground of delay or latches
is that the rights, which have accrued to others, by
reason of delay in filing the petition should not be
allowed to be disturbed unless there was reasonable
explanation for the delay. This is so since each person
ought to be entitled to sit back and consider that his
appointment and promotion, effected a long time ago,
would not be set aside after the lapse of a number of
years.

However, where no rights had accrued in favour

of others by reason of the delay in filing the petition, and
the promotions being provisional, no rights could have
been conferred on those promoted, the same were liable
to be set at naught in terms of the correct legal position
as may be finally determined. It was thus submitted that
in the present case there were no rights accrued to the
petitioners which would be disturbed.
6.

On the same issue learned counsel also referred to the
judgment in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd v.
Dolly Das; (1999) 4 SCC 450 where it was observed in
para 8 as under:
“ So far as the contention regarding
latches of the respondent in filing the writ
petition is concerned, delay, by itself,
may not defeat the claim for relief unless
the position of the appellant had been so
altered which cannot be retracted on

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 4 of 12

account of lapse of time or inaction of the
other party. This aspect being dependent
upon the examination of the facts of the
case and sucha contention not having
been raised before the High Court, it
would not be appropriate to allow the
appellants to raise such a contention for
the first time before us. Besides, we may
notice that the period for which the
option of renewal has been exercised has
not come to an end.
During the
subsistence of such a period certainly
the respondent could make a complaint
that such exercise of option was not
available to the appellants and, therefore,
the jurisdiction of the High Court could be
invoked even at a later stage. Further,
the appellants are not put to undue
hardship in any manner by reason of this
delay in approaching the High Court for a
relief.”
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioners invited the attention
of this Court to the Constitution Bench Judgment of the
Supreme Court in K.C.Sharma & Ors.v.Union of India &
Ors; JT 1997 (7) SC 58. In the facts of the said case, a
notification

seeking

to

effect

pension

having

retrospective effect was held to be invalid by a Full
Bench Judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal,
which decision was upheld by the Apex Court. In such a
case, it was held that the Tribunal was not justified in
refusing to condone the delay in filing of the application
for giving relief on the same terms as given by the Full
Bench.
8.

Learned counsel for the petitioners lastly referred to an
order passed by the Supreme Court in a Civil Appeal

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 5 of 12

arising out of SLP(C)14005/1992 titled Girdhari Lal v.
Union of India & Ors; decided on 03.01.1996. The matter
pertained to the retiremental benefits and it was held
that the Union of India should treat all persons alike to
grant the same benefit instead of driving each one of
them to litigation when the matter in issue stands
settled.
9.

Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand
referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of Ex.Captain Harish Uppal v. Union of India & Ors;
1994 (Supp (2) SCC 195. The High Court while exercising
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
had dismissed a writ petition impugning rejection of postconfirmation petition against sentence of court martial
filed on the grounds of delay and latches as the same
was filed after about 11 years.

The said decision was

upheld by the Supreme Court and it was observed that
the mere fact that the delay had not effected the rights
of any third parties could not cure the defect.

This was

held equally applicable even if any subsequent order
passed by the Government in compliance of the Supreme
Court’s orders that the representation, if not already
decided, should be disposed of at an early date, would
not have the effect of curing the said defect.

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 6 of 12

10.

A reference was also made to the judgment of the Apex
Court in Bhoop Singh v. Union of India and Ors; AIR 1992
SC 1414. The matter pertained to the challenge to the
termination of services of the petitioner therein along
with many others which was not challenged by the
petitioner

for

a

long

period

explanation offered for delay.

of

time

without

any

It was held that the

challenge could not be allowed merely because others,
whose services were similarly terminated, had been reinstated and the refusal of relief was held not to be
discriminatory.
11.

We have noticed that in a recent judgment New Delhi
Municipal Council v. Pan Singh & Ors; (2007) 9 SCC 278,
the Supreme Court considered

the consequences of

delay and latches while seeking remedy under Article
226 of the Constitution of India.

It was held that delay

and latches are relevant factors for exercising of the said
equitable jurisdiction and the relief claimed for by the
private parties of parity in pay scale with other workmen,
who had been granted relief by the Court, was held as
not maintainable after a period of 17 years even though
they may be similarly situated.
12.

The doctrine of latches especially in respect of the
service jurisprudence was once again examined in the
matter of U.P.Jal Nigam and Anr. V. Jaswant Singh & Anr;

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 7 of 12

(2006) 11 SCC 464. In the same vein as in the case of
NDMC v. Pan Singh & Ors’ case (supra), it was observed
that the employees who had not woken up to challenge
their retirement and accepting the same had collected
their post retirement benefits could not be granted relief
in view of a subsequent decision delivered by the
Supreme Court. A reference was made to the Halsbury’s
Laws of England and it was observed in para 12 & 13 as
under:
“ 12.
The statement of law has also been
summarized in Halsbury’s Laws of England,
para 911, p.395 as follows:
“In determining whether there has been such
delay as to amount to latches, the chief points
to be considered are:
i) Acquiescence on the claimant’s part; and
ii)Any change of position that has occurred
on the defendant’s part.
Acquiescence in this sense does not mean
standing by while the violation of a right is in
progress, but assent after the violation has
been completed and the claimant has become
aware of it. It is unjust to give the claimant a
remedy where, by his conduct, he has done
that which might fairly be regarded as
equivalent to a waiver of it; or where by his
conduct and neglect, though not waiving the
remedy, he has put the other party in a
position in which it would not be reasonable
to place him if the remedy were afterwards to
be asserted. In such cases lapse of time and
delay are most material.
Upon these
considerations rests the doctrine of latches”
13. In view of the statement of law as
summarized above, the respondents are
guilty since the respondents have acquiesced
in accepting the retirement and did not
WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 8 of 12

challenge the same in time. If they would
have been vigilant enough, they could have
filed writ petitions as others did in the
matter. Therefore, whenever it appears that
the claimants lost time or wiled it away and
did not rise to the occasion in time for filing
the writ petitions, then in such cases, the
court should be very slow in grating the relief
to the incumbent. Secondly, it has also to be
taken into consideration the question of
acquiescence or a waiver on the part of the
incumbent whether other parties are going to
be prejudiced if the relief is granted. In the
present case, if the respondents would have
challenged their retirement being violative of
the provisions of the Act, perhaps the Nigam
could have taken appropriate steps to raise
funds so as to meet the liability but by not
asserting their rights the respondents have
allowed time to pass and after a lapse of
couple of years, they have filed writ petitions
claiming the benefit for two years. That will
definitely require the Nigam to raise funds
which is going to have serious financial
repercussions on the financial management of
the Nigam.
Why should the court come to
the rescue of such persons when they
themselves are guilty of waiver and
acquiescence?”
13.

On examination of the principles of law laid down
aforesaid, we are of the considered view that the
petitioners are not entitled to any relief on grounds of
delay and latches.

No doubt the petitioners are

identically positioned as Mr. M.S.Rohilla but for the last
twelve years took no steps to challenge their reversion.
They accepted the reversion and the pay package as a
consequence thereof and retired from service accepting
the retiremental and pensionary benefits which accrued
to them as a consequence of the reversion. The benefits

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 9 of 12

are personal to the petitioner and there is no explanation
as to why the petitioners did not join in and file writ
petitions challenging their reversion.

They, in fact,

acquiesced and accepted their reversion without being
vigilant of their rights.

The services which were

rendered by the petitioners were also of the subordinate
judicial service for which they have been paid.
14.

Any change of position which may have occurred on the
respondent’s part or may affect other officers is not the
only reason to deny relief to a party which approaches
the Court belatedly.
considerations.

It is only one of the two material

The acquiescence on the part of the

petitioner is another material consideration as observed
in the judgment of U.P.Jal Nigam and Anr. V. Jaswant
Singh & Anr’s case (supra).

Such acquiescence is not

just standing while the violation of a right is in progress,
but assent after the violation has been completed and
the petitioner has become aware of it.

The petitioners in

the present case were not only aware of the reversion
but joined after reversion and worked in the subordinate
judicial service from where they retired and took there
pensionary benefits.
15.

The observations made in Bhoop Singh v. Union of India
and Ors’s case (supra) also squarely apply to the facts of
the present case where it has been held that the

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 10 of 12

challenge cannot be allowed merely because other
similarly situated persons have got relief in respect of
their service grievance.

In the case of Ex.Captain

Harish Uppal v. Union of India & Ors’s case (supra), the
Supreme Court went as far as to observe that even if the
Government in compliance of Supreme Court’s orders to
decide a representation had taken a decision on the
representation, it would not cure the defect of delay and
latches.
16.

In our considered view, the aspect of pension and
retiremental benefits stand on a different footing as
pension is a continuing cause of action and thus the
judgments in K.C.Sharma & Ors.v.Union of India & Ors’s
case(supra) and Girdhari Lal v. Union of India & Ors’s
case (supra) would not come to the aid of the petitioners.
The other judgments in Ramchandra Shankar Deodhar
and Ors v.

The State of Maharashtra and Or’s case

(supra) and

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd v.

Dolly Das would equally not apply to the petitioners
which only lay down general principles

on delay and

latches. The subsequent elucidation of the legal position
both in U.P.Jal Nigam and Anr. V. Jaswant Singh & Anr’s
case (supra) and NDMC v. Pan Singh & Ors’ case (supra)
leave no doubt that unexplained delay of almost 12 years
on the part of the petitioners in approaching the Court

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

Page 11 of 12

disentitles them to grant of any relief on grounds of delay
and latches and the mere fact of Mr. M.S.Rohilla
succeeding in his writ petition would not ipso facto make
available the benefits of the said judgments to the
petitioners.
17.

The writ petitions being devoid of any merit are
dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

MAY 30, 2008
dm

WP (C) 5892 of 2007 and WP(C) 2577/2007

MOOL CHAND GARG, J.

Page 12 of 12

