*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. No.495/2007 & CRL.M.A.8637/2007

%

Date of decision : 31.01.2008

NIRAJAN KUMAR

... PETITIONER
Through :Mr.V.K.Shali, Advocate
-VERSUS-

STATE

...RESPONDENT
Through : Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for the State

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J. (ORAL)
1. A marriage was solemnized between Smt.Sushma and Shri
Ashok Kumar on 4.5.2001.

Smt.Sushma died on 25.6.2004,

otherwise than in normal circumstances.

An FIR 238/2004

dated 25.6.2004 was registered u/s 498A/304B/34 IPC against
Shri Ashok Kumar at P.S. Bhajan Pura.

The FIR records the

allegation of the father of the deceased girl alleging dowry
demands and harassment of the deceased.
Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

There was also
Page No.1 of 10

reference to the husband of the deceased having some extra
marital

relationship.

After investigation

was

completed,

charge-sheet was filed against Shri Ashok Kumar, husband; his
father Shri Braham Singh; his mother Smt.Sumitra and one Shri
Niranjan Kumar, petitioner herein, u/s 498A/304B/34 IPC. A
diary of the deceased was also recovered. Further statements
were recorded, including of the mother of the deceased, who
gave details about the dowry demands and torture and
harassment by the family members of the husband in order to
get more dowry in the second marriage. Statement was made
by Smt.Sheela Arya, the mother, before the SDM.

Pursuant

thereto, necessary action was directed to the IO.
2. In the statement, the mother has deposed that the deceased
daughter had complained to her that the petitioner herein, who
is the son of the Jeth of the Bua of Shri Ashok Kumar (husband),
used to keep on inciting her in-laws and husband of the
deceased to get rid of the deceased girl and that he would
arrange a marriage in a high profile family which would provide
them with a car. It is also alleged that the petitioner used to
advise the boy's family members to inform the deceased
parents that she had consumed something wrong and on their
finding that nothing had gone wrong, they would undergo the
harassment. The petitioner is also alleged to have advised how
to extract money from the parents of the deceased.

The

statement further recorded that the deceased daughter used to

Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

Page No.2 of 10

say that the petitioner would murder her. The statement of the
complainant Dr.Dharampal Arya (father of the deceased) also
refers to the role played by the petitioner.
3. The trial court framed charges on 7.7.2006 against all the four
accused for offences under Section 498A/304B/34 IPC.

The

order of framing charges shows that insofar as the petitioner is
concerned, it was stated that he was a relative, being the
brother-in-law of the deceased, and there was common
intention of the parties.
4. The aforesaid order of framing charges was impugned by the
petitioner herein by filing a Crl.Rev.P.473/2006, which was
allowed by an order dated 22.12.2006.

The principal plea

advanced before the learned single Judge of this Court was as
to whether the petitioner could be regarded as the relative of
the husband in view of the specific provisions of Sections 498A
and 304B of the IPC. This was so since there was an indirect
relationship of the petitioner with the husband of the deceased.
This plea found favour with the learned single Judge of this
Court and it was held that the expression 'relative of the
husband' should be regarded as the mirror image of the
expression 'relative of the victim' and the petitioner was held
not to fall within any of the named categories of persons, being
the father, mother, brother, sister, father's or mother's brother
or sister or any other person related to him by blood or
marriage or adoption.

Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

Page No.3 of 10

5. The matter, however, did not rest at this as the Court found
that there was another provision in the IPC which was of
relevance, being Section 109 IPC, dealing with punishment for
abetment.

In this behalf the statement made by the mother

was found relevant.

It was deemed proper that the aspect

regarding the conduct of the petitioner falling within the fourcorners of the offence under Section 109 IPC needed to be
examined and a direction was issued to the learned ASJ to
examine the said aspect.
6. The matter was thereafter taken up by the learned ASJ and
after giving detailed reasons in terms of the order dated
17.4.2007, a prima facie case under Section 109 IPC r/w Section
498A IPC was found to have been made out against the
petitioner.
7. The trial court in terms of the impugned order has noted that
before the provision for a charge to be framed under Section
109 IPC, it should be shown that the accused instigated the coaccused to do a criminal act and in consequence of the
instigation, the co-accused committed that offence.

Section

498A IPC required the accused to have subjected a married
woman to cruelty and the accused should be either the
husband or the relative of the husband of the married woman.
Thus, the Section required a positive instigation on the part of
the co-accused person and could be done by them on the
instigation of the accused.

Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

This was different from Section

Page No.4 of 10

304B IPC for which no positive act was required to be done by
the accused person and the offence was made out by a
combination of circumstances created for the married woman
by her husband or relatives of her husband and an assumption
of law which could be raised when the death of the woman
occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances.

There

could, thus, be no instigation of the co-accused by the accused
for committing an offence u/s 304B IPC.
8. Learned counsel for the petitioner firstly contended that the
order passed by the High Court in Crl.Rev.P.473/2006 on
22.12.2006 in effect amounted to a direction to the trial court
to frame charges u/s 109 IPC and such a course could not have
been adopted.
9. The aforesaid plea does not have substance for two reasons.
Firstly, the petitioner chose not to challenge the order further
and, thus, accepted the said order, therefore, no grievance can
be made in that behalf.

Secondly, the direction contained in

the order was to examine the aspects which came out of the
statement of the mother of the deceased and to determine
whether there was sufficient material for framing of charges u/s
109 IPC.
10.The second plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
that charge has been framed on hearsay evidence in view of
the fact that what the mother of the deceased had stated is
attributed

to the

deceased while

Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

she had no personal

Page No.5 of 10

knowledge about it. Learned counsel, thus, submitted that the
present case did not fall within the parameter of Section 32 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Relevant portion of the said
Section reads as under:
“32. Cases in which statement of relevant
fact by person who is dead or cannot be
found, etc., is relevant.-- Statements, written
or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who
is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has
become incapable of giving evidence, or whose
attendance cannot be procured without an
amount of delay or expense which, under the
circumstances of the case, appears to the Court
unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in
the following cases:_
(1) When it relates to cause of death.__ When
the statement is made by a person as to the
cause of his death, or as to any of the
circumstances of the transaction which resulted
in his death, in cases in which the cause of that
person's death comes into question.
Such statements are relevant whether the person
who made them was or was not, at the time
when they were made, under expectation of
death, and whatever may be the nature of the
proceeding in which the cause of his death comes
into question.”
11.Learned counsel for the petitioner referred to the aforesaid
provision to submit that out of various categories of cases
enumerated in Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, only the
aforesaid provision can be said to have any relevance in the
facts of the present case.

However, the statement did not

relate to the cause of the death or any of the circumstances of
the transaction which resulted in the death.
12.I am unable to accept the plea for the reason that the
statements attributed to the deceased show the role played by
Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

Page No.6 of 10

the petitioner.

In this behalf reference can be made to the

provisions of Sections 107, 108 and 109 of the IPC, which are as
under:
“Section 107. Abetment of a thing
A person abets the doing of a thing, whoFirst: -Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly: -Engages with one or more other
person or persons in any conspiracy for the
doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission
takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and
in order to the doing of that thing; or
Thirdly: -Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal
omission, the doing of that thing.
Explanation1:- A person who, by wilful
misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a
material fact which he is bound to disclose,
voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to
cause or procure, a thing to be done, is said to
instigate the doing of that thing.
Section 108. Abettor
A person abets an offence, who abets either the
commission of an offence, or the commission of
an act which would be an offence, if committed
by a person capable of law of committing an
offence with the same intention or knowledge as
that of the abettor.
Explanation 1: - The abetment of the illegal
omission of an act may amount to an offence
although the abettor may not himself be bound
to be that act.
Explanation 2: - To constitute the offence of
abetment it is not necessary that the act
abetted should be committed, or that effect
requisite to constitute the offence should be
caused.
Section 109. Punishment of abetment if
the
act
abetted
is
committed
in
Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

Page No.7 of 10

consequence, and where no express
provision is made for its punishment
Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act
abetted is committed in consequence of the
abetment, and no express provision is made by
this Code for the punishment of such abetment,
be punished with the punishment provided for
the offence.
Explanation: - An act or offence is said to be
committed in consequence of abetment, when it
is committed in consequence of the instigation
or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the
aid, which constitutes the abetment.”
13.A reading of the provisions of Section 107 IPC shows that the
instigation should be for the other person to do a thing to
constitute the offence of abetment while Section 109 IPC
provides for punishment of such abetment.

The allegation is

that the petitioner instigated the other accused to harass the
deceased person on account of inability to bring adequate
dowry, suggested methods to get rid of her and assured to get
the husband of the petitioner re-married

in a family where

there would be adequate dowry, including a car.

It, thus,

cannot be said that the offence of abetment cannot be made
out.
14.It also cannot be lost sight of that there are specific allegations
made only against the petitioner and not against any other
near or distant relative other than the immediate family
members. The allegations are specific.

The present stage is

only of framing of charges.
15.On perusal of the order, I am of the view that the trial court did
not commit any error in framing the charges under Sections
Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

Page No.8 of 10

109 r/w Section 498A IPC. The legal position is not in dispute
that the task of the trial court at the stage of framing of charge
is to sift through the material to form an opinion that the
commission of an offence by the accused was possible.

The

probative value of the material on record cannot be gone into.
However, there must exist some material, which should form
the basis of the framing of the charge. Such view has been
expressed in Soma Chakravarty Vs. State Through CBI (2007) 5
SCC

403.

However,

simultaneously

it

has

also

been

emphasised in Dilawar Balu Kurane Vs. State of Maharashtra
(2002) 2 SCC 135 that the trial judge cannot merely act as a
post office or mouthpiece of the prosecution. He has to sift and
weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out
whether a prima facie case has been made out and where two
views are equally possible and evidence gives rise to some
suspicion but not grave suspicion, he can discharge the
accused.
16.The aforesaid parameters are clearly met in the present case.
17.The last aspect urged by learned counsel for the petitioner is
that Section 498A IPC was introduced by amendment to the
Code and is a special provision to deal with the aspects of
cruelty by the husband or relatives of the husband. It is, thus,
submitted that there cannot be any offence of abetment u/s
109 IPC except in respect of relations mentioned u/s 498A IPC.
The submission, thus, is that Section 109 IPC has no application

Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

Page No.9 of 10

in respect of a relative who does not fall within the category of
a relative of a husband within the meaning of Section 498 IPC.
18.I am afraid such a plea cannot be accepted for the reasons
that the legislature in its wisdom did not exclude the operation
of the provisions of Sections 107 to 109 of the IPC. No doubt
the provisions of Section 498A IPC have been introduced
subsequently with a particular objective in mind but it cannot
be said that a person other than the husband or the relative of
the husband cannot ever be said to commit the offence of
abetment as envisaged u/s 109 IPC in respect of an act by
cruelty within the meaning of Section 498A IPC.
19.In view of the aforesaid, the petition is dismissed.
CRL.M.A.8637/2007
Application does not survive for consideration and is
disposed of.
JANUARY 31, 2008
'sp'

Crl.Rev.P.495/07 & CRL.M.A.8637/07

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.10 of 10

