*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Bail Application No. 1874 of 2007
Reserved on : 24.01.2008
Date of decision : 31.01.2008

%
GOPAL SEN

...

...
...
Through:

...
...
...
...PETITIONER
Mr. Yogesh Kumar Saxena,
Advocate.

Versus
THE STATE (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) ...
...
...
...RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. Pawan Sharma,
Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. A secret information from an informer was received by the
Narcotics Branch of the Government of NCT of Delhi on 1.10.2005
that one Sunil @ Naniya, his sister and mother are indulging in the
business of supply of smack. According to the information, Sunil
@ Naniya got such smack from Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh for
supply in Delhi and on that day he had to get the smack from
some trader at Railway Station, Delhi.

Sunil @ Naniya was

expected to travel on a scooter No.DL7S-U-3191 via Avantika
Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.1 of 11

Chowk, Rohini around 6:30 – 7:30 a.m. towards his house at C-1,
Sector-I, Rohini, Delhi. Such information was recorded in DD entry
No.4 at 5:55 a.m. on 1.10.2005 and after some inquiry, the
Narcotic Department took necessary action for carrying out a raid.
The scooter with two riders on it was apprehended. The scooter
was being driven by Sunil @ Naniya while the petitioner was the
pillion rider.

The informer identified the two people and the

petitioner was identified as the trader. One black rexcin bag was
recovered from Sunil @ Naniya and a recovery of 8 kgs. of heroine
was made, which is alleged to be commercial quantity.

The

petitioner and Sunil @ Naniya were thereafter arrested and since
then have been in judicial custody.
2. The bail application was filed before the Special Judge (NDPS Act),
which was rejected on 25.4.2007 and thus the present bail
application has been filed.
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the charge sheet
has been filed and three witnesses have been examined, who are
informers.

It is alleged that the petitioner is a victim of

circumstances

and

has

been

falsely

implicated

and

the

confessional statement of the petitioner recorded in the presence
of police officials is not admissible in evidence under Sections 25
& 26 of the Evidence Act, 1872. It is also submitted that there
was no recovery made from the petitioner and the only thing
alleged in the FIR is the identification by the informer, which is of
no evidential value.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgement of

Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.2 of 11

the Supreme Court in Ranjitsing Brahmajeetsing Sharma Vs. State
of Maharashtra & Anr. 2005 (2) JCC 689, which dealt with a case
under the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999. It is
submitted that Section 21 of that Act is para materia to Section 37
of the Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to as the said Act).

It was held that the

restrictions on the power of the court to grant bail is not to be
pushed too far but if the court is satisfied with the material placed
on record that in all probability the accused may not be ultimately
convicted, an order of grant of bail ought to be passed. Similarly
the satisfaction of the court as regards the likelihood of not
committing an offence while on bail must be construed to mean
an offence under the Act and not any offence whatsoever, be it a
minor or major offence. It was further observed that the wording
of the Section did not lead to the conclusion that the court must
arrive at a positive finding that the applicant for bail has not
committed an offence under the Act since in that event it would
be impossible for the prosecution to obtain a judgement or
conviction of the applicant.

This could not be the intent of the

legislature and thus the provision regarding bail must be
construed reasonably so that the court is able to maintain a
delicate balance between a judgement of acquittal and a
conviction

and

an

order

granting

bail

much

before

the

commencement of trial.
5. Reliance was also placed on a judgement of the learned single
Judge

of

this

Court

Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

in

Kamaljeet

Singh

Vs.

H.K.

Pandey

Page No.3 of 11

(Intelligence Office, NCB) 2005 (3) JCC (Narcotics) 220.

The

matter dealt with the question of grant of bail under the said Act.
A confessional statement had been recorded under Section 67 of
the said Act and recovery made. It was found that the confession
of the petitioner was exculpatory and not inculpatory. One of the
contentions raised by the learned counsel for the State was that
once possession of narcotic drug is established, the presumption
under Sections 35 & 54 of the said Act would come into play and
the courts ought not to overlook the confessional statement of the
petitioner and not undermine the object of Section 37 of the said
Act as indicated in the case of Babua @ Tazmul Hossain Vs. State
of Orissa 2001 (1) JCC 159. In this case, the bail was opposed.
The argument was that once a charge was framed in view of
Section 37 of the said Act, bail should not be granted. This plea
was rejected by the High Court. This judgement has been relied
upon by learned counsel for the petitioner to rebut the plea of the
respondent that since charges have been framed no bail should be
granted at this stage.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied upon the
judgement of the learned single Judge of this Court in Karan Singh
Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) 130 (2006) DLT 114 to advance the
proposition that merely because two persons are apprehended
from the same spot and recoveries are made from them does not
mean that Section 29 of the said Act would ipso facto be
attracted. A similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court in
Amarsingh Ramjibhai Barot Vs. State of Gujarat 2005 III AD (Cr.)

Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.4 of 11

SC 625 where two persons were arrested but individually carrying
the recovered substances. It was held that there was no evidence
to suggest that there was any criminal conspiracy within the
meaning of Section 29 of the said Act.
7. Learned APP, on the other hand, strongly pleaded for rejection of
the bail application and relied upon the provisions of Sections 29
& 37 of the said Act, which are reproduced hereinafter:
“29. Punishment for abetment and criminal
conspiracy – (1) Whoever abets or is a party to a
criminal conspiracy to commit, an offence
punishable under this Chapter, shall, whether such
offence be or be not committed in consequence of
such abetment or in pursuance of such criminal
conspiracy, and notwithstanding anything contained
in Sec. 116 of the Indian Penal Code, be punishable
with the punishment provided for the offence.
(2) A person abets, or is a party to a criminal
conspiracy to commit, an offence, within the
meaning of this section, who, in India, abets or is a
party to the criminal conspiracy to the commission
of any act in a place without and beyond India
which (a) would constitute an
committed within India; or

....

offence

if

(b) under the laws of such place, is an
offence relating to narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances having all the
legal conditions required to constitute it
such an offence the same as or
analogous to the legal conditions required
to constitute it an offence punishable
under this Chapter, if committed within
India.”
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
....

“37. Offences to be cognizable and nonbailable. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (a) every offence punishable under this
Act shall be cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence
Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.5 of 11

punishable for a term of imprisonment of
five years or more under this Act shall be
released on bail or on his own bond
unless (i) the Public Prosecutor has been
given an opportunity to oppose the
application for such release, and
(ii) where the Publice Prosecutor
opposes the application, the Court is
satisfied that there are reasonable
grounds for believing that he is not
guilty of such offence and that he is
not likely to commit offence while
on bail.
(2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in Cl
(b) of sub-section (1) are in addition to the
limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, or any other law for the time being in force on
grant of bail.”
8. Learned APP relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Union of India v. Ram Samujh & Anr. 1999 (4) SCC 134 (SC) for the
aforesaid

proposition

that

the

jurisdiction

of

the

Court

is

circumscribed by the provisions of Section 37 of the said Act and
an accused should not be released on bail during trial unless the
mandatory conditions provided under Section 37, i.e., reasonable
ground for believing that the accused is not guilty and that he is
not likely to commit any offence on bail, are satisfied.

The

Supreme Court held that a cryptic order of bail is not permissible.
It was observed in paras 6 and 7 as under :“6. It is to be borne in mind that the aforesaid
legislative mandate is required to be adhered and
followed. It should be borne in mind that in murder
case, accused commits murder of one or two
persons, while those persons who are dealing in
narcotic drugs are instruments in causing death or
in inflicting death blow to number of innocent
young victims, who are vulnerable; it causes
deleterious effects and deadly impact on the
society; they are hazard to the society; even if they
Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.6 of 11

are released temporarily, in all probability, they
would continue their nefarious activities of
trafficking
and/or
dealing
in
intoxicants
clandestinely. Reason may be large stake and
illegal profit involved. This Court dealing with the
contention with regard to punishment under NDPS
Act, has succinctly observed about the adverse
effect of such activities in Durand Didier v. Chief
Secretary, Union Territory of Goa, (1990) 1 SCC 95
as under :“With deep concern, we may point out
that the organised activities of the
underworld
and
the
clandestine
smuggling of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances into this
country and illegal trafficking in such
drugs and substances have led to drug
addiction among a sizeable section of
the public, particularly the adolescents
and students of both sexes and the
menace has assumed serious and
alarming proportion in the recent
years. Therefore, in order to effectively
control and eradicate this proliferating
and booming devastating menace,
causing deleterious effects and deadly
impact on the society as a whole, the
Parliament in the wisdom has made
effective provisions by introducing this
Act 81 of 1985 specifying mandatory
minimum imprisonment and fine.”
7. To check the menace of dangerous drugs
flooding the market, the Parliament has provided
that the person accused of offences under the
NDPS Act should not be released on bail during trial
unless mandatory conditions provided in Section
37, namely,
(i) there are reasonable grounds for believing that
accused is not guilty of such offence; and
(ii) that he is not likely to commit while on bail
are satisfied. The High Court has not given any
justifiable reason for not abiding by the aforesaid
mandate while ordering the release of the
respondent accused on bail. Instead of attempting
to take a holistic view of the harmful socioeconomic consequences and health hazards which
would accompany trafficking illegally in the
Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.7 of 11

dangerous drugs, the Court should implement the
law in the spirit with which the Parliament, after
due deliberation, has amended.”
9. Similarly in Babua @ Tazmul Hossain's case (supra), it has been
held that the Court is to see whether statements made on behalf
of the prosecution witnesses, if believable, would result in
conviction of petitioner or not since liberty of a citizen has got to
be balanced with the interest of society. In cases where Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances are involved, an accused
would indulge in activities, which are lethal to society and, thus, it
is in the interest of the society to keep such persons behind bars
during the pendency of proceedings before the Court.
10.The last judgment relied upon is in Crl. M. (M) No. 4053/2002
titled 'Raju v. State' decided on 29.04.2003 wherein it was held
that a harmonious reading of Section 36A(3) of the said Act and
Section 37(2) of the said Act leaves no room for doubt that in spite
of the saving power of the High Court regarding bail under Section
439 of the Cr.P.C., by incorporating Section 36A(3) of the said Act,
the Legislature has put a limitation on the said powers to grant
bail by introducing sub-clause (2) of Section 37 of the said Act.
The provisions for grant of bail to drug traffickers had been
deliberately made more stringent as their activities undermine the
basic fibre of the society and is not only ruining and destroying
young lives, but is also introducing huge amount of black money,
which is used to carry out anti-national and subversive activities in
the country. Thus, at the initial stage of trial, without giving full
opportunity to the prosecution to establish its case and explain
the infirmities, if any, the accused should not get bail unless the
Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.8 of 11

Court finds that he is not guilty of such offence and is not likely to
commit any offence while on bail. Not only that, learned Single
Judge while rejecting the said application of the petitioner on
account of commercial quantity of drugs seized observed that it
should be clearly understood that for the offences to which
Section 37(1)(b) of the said Act applies, getting bail may be
difficult and getting an acquittal may be easier because at the end
of the trial, the Court gets a complete picture of the case against
an accused and may acquit him if it entertains a reasonable doubt
about the truth of prosecution case.

It cannot be said that the

Court can grant bail to an accused if there is doubt about
prosecution case. The Courts are under an obligation to return the
findings as envisaged by Section 37 of the said Act if the accused
is to be released on bail.
11.I have given deep thought to the submissions advanced by
learned counsel for the parties.
12.The factual matrix is not in doubt. The secret information was
that Sunil @ Naniya would get smack from Rajasthan and Madhya
Pradesh for supply in Delhi from a trader at the Railway Station,
Delhi. On the basis of the said secret information, Sunil @ Naniya
was apprehended on a scooter.

The petitioner herein was the

pillion rider. The petitioner was identified by the secret informer
as the trader.

The recovery was made from a rexcin bag of

commercial quantity of heroine of 8 kgs. from Sunil @ Naniya.
These facts show that the information of the secret informer was
correct to the extent of apprehending the narcotic drug being

Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.9 of 11

carried by Sunil @ Naniya.

The initial information was that the

same would be received from a trader and the petitioner was
identified as the trader sitting as a pillion on the scooter.
13.There is no doubt that the recovery has not been made from the
petitioner, but it is also true that at this stage even the
prosecution evidence is not complete.

In fact, it was put to

learned counsel for the petitioner whether he would seek leave to
withdraw the bail application to renew the request after at least
the prosecution evidence is complete, but learned counsel for the
petitioner insisted that the bail application should be decided at
this stage.
14.It has been held in a catena of judgments noted aforesaid and
relied upon by the prosecution that specific provisions have been
made, which are more stringent in nature for grant of bail under
Section 37 of the said Act and, thus, unless and until the
conditions therein are satisfied, bail ought not to be granted. The
larger interest of society of preventing paddling of drugs, thus, out
ways the individual liberty of a citizen, who is alleged to be
indulging in the carrying of drugs. Though the recovery has not
been made from the petitioner, but the fact remains that Section
29 of the said Act provides for punishment for abatement and
criminal conspiracy. It is not only a case where the narcotics have
been recovered from the scooter driver, but the pillion rider being
the petitioner has been identified as the trader. It is difficult to
accept the plea of learned counsel for the petitioner at least at
this stage that the petitioner, namely, Gopal Sen only got a lift

Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

Page No.10 of 11

from Sunila @ Naniya, the driver of the scooter. The chance of a
drug paddler carrying drugs just giving a lift to another person
would be difficult to accept.
15.If the parameters of Section 37 are applied to the facts of the
present case, it cannot be said that there is satisfaction at this
stage of existence of reasonable grounds for believing that the
petitioner is not guilty of such offences.
16.The present case is, thus, not a fit one for grant of bail.
17.Dismissed.

JANUARY 31, 2008
b'nesh

Bail Appl. No. 1874 of 2007

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.

Page No.11 of 11

