LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

LPA NO. 13 of 2007

%

Date of Decision :

9th February, 2007.

RAJESH KUMAR GOUHARI
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. C.N. Sreekumar & Ms. Nidhi
Ravindran, Advocates.
VERSUS
UOI & ANR
.... Respondents.
Through Mr. Kirtiman Singh, Advocate for
respondent No. 2..
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes.

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

The present Appeal has been filed by Mr. Rajesh Kumar

Gouhari (hereinafter referred to as the appellant, for short)
challenging the judgment dated 15th December, 2006 dismissing the
civil writ petition filed by him. The appellant, in the writ petition, had
challenged and questioned order dated 18th February, 2005

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 2

transferring him to Bangalore for closure of the branch office and
recovery of dues.
2.

The appellant is an employee of Educational Consultants India

Limited, a Government of India Enterprise, the respondent in the
present appeal. The appellant was employed as Assistant Manager
(Internal Audit) with the respondent on 30th December, 1996. In May,
1999, the said post was designated as Assistant Manager (Finance).
Thereafter,

he

was

transferred

to

personnel

and

then

to

administrative department for performing administrative duties.
3.

Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the order of

transfer was liable to be struck down on the ground that it was
vitiated by mala fides and was passed with the intention to harass the
appellant.

It was submitted that Mr. A.K. Motwani, Director

(Technical)/Chief Vigilance Officer was behind the said transfer. Mr.
A.K. Motwani it was stated had a personal grudge against the
appellant, as he had submitted a report regarding misuse of official
vehicle and refund of excess airfare paid beyond entitlement.
Reference was also made to information furnished under the Right
to Information Act by the respondent and Karnataka Residential
Educational Institutions Society to argue that there was no work in
Bangalore.

LPA NO. 13/2007

4.

Page 3

Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand,

controverted the submissions made and relied upon the impugned
order.
5.

It is admitted by the appellant that as per terms of employment,

he could be transferred to anyplace in India and abroad. As per the
appointment letter, the appellant is liable to serve in any part of India
and abroad at the discretion of the management. Transfer, it is well
settled is an incidence of service and courts do not interfere and
quash transfer orders unless (i) it is mala fide, (ii) prohibited under
service rule, or (iii) passed by an incompetent person. In the present
case, the appellant has taken plea of mala fides and the said plea
has to be examined.
6. In Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan versus Damodar Prasad Pandey
reported in (2004) 12 SCC 299, it was observed;
“4. Transfer which is an incidence of service is
not to be interfered with by courts unless it is
shown to be clearly arbitrary or visited by mala
fide or infraction of any prescribed norms of
principles governing the transfer (see Abani
Kanta Ray v. State of Orissa 1995 Supp 4 SCC
169. Unless the order of transfer is visited by
mala fide or is made in violation of operative
guidelines, the court cannot interfere with it (see
Union of India v. S.L. Abbas (1993) 4 SCC 357).
Who should be transferred and posted where is
a matter for the administrative authority to
decide. Unless the order of transfer is vitiated by
mala fides or is made in violation of any

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 4

operative guidelines or rules the courts should
not ordinarily interfere with it. In Union of India v.
Janardhan Debanath (2004) 4 SCC 245 it was
observed as follows: (SCC p. 250, para 9)
No government servant or employee of a public
undertaking has any legal right to be posted
forever at any one particular place or place of
his choice since transfer of a particular
employee appointed to the class or category of
transferable posts from one place to another is
not only an incident, but a condition of service,
necessary too in public interest and efficiency in
the public administration. Unless an order of
transfer is shown to be an outcome of mala fide
exercise or stated to be in violation of statutory
provisions prohibiting any such transfer, the
courts or the tribunals normally cannot interfere
with such orders as a matter of routine, as
though they were the appellate authorities
substituting their own decision for that of the
employer/management, as against such orders
passed in the interest of administrative
exigencies of the service concerned. This
position was highlighted by this Court in National
Hydroelectric Power Corpn. Ltd. v. Shri
Bhagwan (2001) 8 SCC 574.
In the present case, the Tribunal categorically
came to hold that mala fides were not involved
and the High Court did not disturb that finding.”
7.

Similarly in,

State of U.P. Versus Siya Ram reported in

(2004) 7 SCC 405, it was observed;
5. The High Court while exercising jurisdiction
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution
of India had gone into the question as to
whether the transfer was in the interest of
public service. That would essentially require
factual adjudication and invariably depend
upon peculiar facts and circumstances of the

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 5

case concerned. No government servant or
employee of a public undertaking has any
legal right to be posted forever at any one
particular place or place of his choice since
transfer of a particular employee appointed to
the class or category of transferable posts
from one place to other is not only an incident,
but a condition of service, necessary too in
public interest and efficiency in the public
administration. Unless an order of transfer is
shown to be an outcome of mala fide exercise
or stated to be in violation of statutory
provisions prohibiting any such transfer, the
courts or the tribunals normally cannot
interfere with such orders as a matter of
routine, as though they were appellate
authorities substituting their own decision for
that of the employer/management, as against
such orders passed in the interest of
administrative exigencies of the service
concerned. This position was highlighted by
this Court in National Hydroelectric Power
Corpn. Ltd. v. Shri Bhagwan (2001) 8 SCC
574.
6. The above position was recently highlighted
in Union of India v. Janardhan Debanath
(2001) 4 SCC 245. It has to be noted that the
High Court proceeded on the basis as if the
transfer was connected with the departmental
proceedings. There was not an iota of
material to arrive at the conclusion. No mala
fides could be attributed as the order was
purely on administrative grounds and in public
interest.”

8.

In the writ petition, main plea taken by the appellant was that he

had come across certain irregularities in awarding contract to M/s
Satyam Renaissance Consulting, misuse of transport etc. and,

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 6

therefore, he had been victimised. Learned counsel for the appellant
relied upon ground 'M' of the writ petition, which reads as under:“Because the action of the respondents in
transferring the petitioner out of his cadre is
wholly motivated by mala fides and a result of
the disclosure of the irregularities of the higher
officials by the petitioner which has resulted in
curtailment of official transport, non-payment
of alleged travel reimbursement, dismissal of
two General Managers and a Dy. Manager
and initiation of a CBI enquiry.”
9.

A reading of the said ground shows that the allegations made

are entirely vague, cryptic and without any details. The allegations
made also show that two General Managers and a Deputy Manager
had been dismissed and the matter has been referred to the Central
Bureau of Investigation.
10.

On the other hand, the stand of the respondents all along has

been that there is no material to suggest that the appellant had
exposed any financial irregularities and it was the competent
authority that had initiated appropriate action against the erring
officials who have since been dismissed from service. In the counter
affidavit, it was pointed out that while reviewing IT implementation
plan, some irregularities had come to notice and an enquiry was
ordered. Disciplinary proceedings were initiated and three officers
were dismissed. The said enquiry related to award of contract to M/s

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 7

Satyam Renaissance Consulting. Later on the matter was referred
to Central Bureau of Investigation for further investigation.

It

appears subsequently that the orders of dismissal against the
officers were converted into suspension. The name of these three
officers are Mr. I.P. Kwatra, General Manager (Finance), Mr. U.K.
Habbu, General Manager (Portal) and Ms. Monalisa Sen, Deputy
Manager (Projects).
11.

The irregularities were noticed in 2001 long before the order of

transfer under challenge dated 18th February, 2005 was made.
There is nothing to substantiate or even indicate that any of the three
persons had any role to play in the order of transfer and/or the
appellant herein was responsible for the dismissal/suspension of the
said officers. In the counter affidavit, all the allegations have been
categorically denied. It appears rather strange that a person who
was already dismissed/suspended and also facing possibility of
prosecution and investigation by the Central Bureau of Investigation,
would yield influence to have the appellant transferred to Bangalore.
Transfer would not have served any purpose and helped the three
officers.
12.

During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the

appellant submitted that he had filed applications under Order VI

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 8

Rule 17 and Order I Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(hereinafter referred to as the Code, for short) before the learned
single Judge. No reply/counter affidavit to the applications was filed.
We may in this regard notice that the learned single Judge

has

specifically recorded that she is dealing with the appellant's case as
it stands including the pleas raised in the application under Order VI
Rule 17 of the Code. The learned single Judge has discussed all the
allegations against Mr. A.K. Motwani, Mr. Amit Dutta and others and
dismissed them finding them to be without substance.

While

discussing the allegations against Mr. A.K. Motwani, it was pointed
out that his name was not specifically mentioned in the original
petition. Learned single Judge has recorded that during the course
of arguments on 27 November, 2006, it was stated at bar on behalf
of the appellant that on 23rd July, 2003, the appellant had made a
complaint against Mr. A.K. Motwani for using the official vehicle and
at the same time he was availing conveyance allowance. Similarly, it
was alleged at the bar that the appellant had made a report on 24th
November, 2003 to the CMD in respect of intended travel of Mr. A.K.
Motwani in December, 2003.

Learned single Judge has also

recorded that these allegations had not been mentioned in the
paragraphs sought to be incorporated in the writ petition by the

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 9

amendment application. In these circumstances, learned single
Judge has held that these allegations cannot be believed. Learned
single Judge had also pointed out that the proposal to transfer the
appellant was finally approved by Mr. S.K. Lokhande, Manager (ID).
No allegations against him had been made by the appellant and it
was also not alleged that Mr. S.K. Lokhande was influenced by any
of the persons who allegedly had grievance against him. Even in the
application under Order VI Rule 17 and Order I Rule 10 of the Code,
no prayer and/or allegation had been made against Mr. S.K.
Lokhande.
13.

Additional affidavit filed by the respondent before the learned

single judge shows that vide note dated 8.9.2001 Mr. U.K. Habbu
was directed to be immediately disassociated with the IT project and
was placed under suspension pending enquiry. A fact finding report
was prepared by Mr. A.K. Motwani, Director (Tech.) and Mr. I.P.
Kwatra, General Manager (Fin.).On 9.1.2002 the appellant was
appointed as the presenting officer in the enquiry to be held against
Mr. U.K. Habbu. Thereafter Board of Directors of the respondent
directed suitable action against all officials who had projected a
misleading picture and were responsible for misappropriation of
public funds. Matter was also referred to CBI. As per directions of the

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 10

Board of Directors, the appellant submitted a preliminary report
dated 11.4.2002. It cannot be said that

the appellant was

responsible for the CBI case or uncovering the case. It is also
apparent that no endeavor has been made to protect and save any
officer. The appellant was appointed as a presenting officer by the
respondent. Mr. A.K. Motwani's name is not mentioned in the
preliminary report of the appellant. Mr. Amit Dutta, DM(P&A) was
one of the members of the committee that had examined the
proposals but as per report of the appellant, Mr. Amit Dutta was not
involved in the award of and finalisation of the contract, which was
done by committee of five other officers.
14. In our opinion, there is nothing to show and substantiate the
allegations of mala fide made by the appellant. It is easy to make
allegations of mala fide, malice, etc. but difficult to substantiate and
justify the same. However, this does not mean that once allegations
of mala fides are made, these should be believed. Courts have to
scrutinise the allegations and draw reasonable inference on the basis
of antecedent facts and circumstances as mentioned in the
pleadings and on the basis of documents. There is no presumption
that allegations of mala fides once made should be accepted.
Necessarily, the onus to prove allegations of mala fide is on the

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 11

person who makes them. Presumption is in favour of bonafides of
the impugned order. Foundation of facts to establish malafides
should be pleaded. Inference of malafides cannot be made by merely
making vague allegations and insinuations. Acceptable material
should be produced by the person making the allegation. It is not
understood and the appellant has not been able to explain the
reason and cause, why in the writ petition as originally filed by him,
allegations of mala fide, name of the officers and facts and
circumstances were not highlighted and stated in detail. In these
circumstances it was not necessary to have individual affidavit of Mr.
A.K. Motwani and Mr. Amit Dutta. We may also point out that Mr.
Amit Dutta had filed affidavits on behalf of the respondent. Order of
transfer by the respondent cannot be connected to any act of the
appellant. The appellant was appointed as a presenting officer in the
departmental proceedings by the respondent.
15.

It may be relevant to state here that when the Writ Petition

(Civil) No. 8516/2005 had come up for hearing before the learned
single Judge for the first time, vide order dated 18 th May, 2005, the
transfer orders were directed to be kept in abeyance. It is the case
of the appellant that this order continued to be in operation. It is well
known that parties after obtaining stay orders prolong litigation.

LPA NO. 13/2007

Some

parties

Page 12

deliberately

file

applications

for

amendment,

impleadment of parties to avoid hearing and expeditious disposal of
the matter. We may also state here that against the stay order dated
18th May, 2005 and subsequent orders extending the stay, the
respondent employer had filed an appeal before a Division Bench.
The operation of the stay orders was stayed by the Division Bench,
while issuing notice in the said appeal being LPA No. 1175/2005.
After this order, the appellant herein wrote number of letters to the
respondent praying for leave and it's extension as he had to look
after his ailing father and children. He even approached ministers
and politicians for help.
16.

Learned Single judge in the impugned judgment has pointed

out that on 9th November, 2006 it was put to the respondent whether
he would go to Bangalore tentatively for a period of three months
during which he could complete the assigned work. The counsel for
the appellant took pass over before the learned Single Judge but
thereafter rejected the suggestion on the ground that his father had
some health problem and he was busy looking after his father.
17.

The second ground to establish and prove mala fide is that

there is no work in Bangalore office.

Reliance in this regard is

placed upon the information furnished by Karnataka Residential

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 13

Educational Institutions Society under the Right to Information Act. It
is pointed out that the entire staff at Bangalore has been transferred
out and, therefore, there was no cause or reason for the appellant to
be transferred to Bangalore. It may be mentioned here that initially
the plea taken by the appellant was that there was no work for him to
do at Bangalore and he being a finance man was not required to do
work relating to civil engineering.

The stand of the respondent,

however, has been that the Bangalore office is being closed but
dues of the respondent have to be recovered.

There are also

disputes

and

pending

between the

respondent

Karnataka

Residential Educational Institutions Society which have been
referred to arbitration. It is pointed out by the respondent that in the
absence of the appellant, the work for recovery is being temporarily
followed up from Noida. The explanation given by the respondent
cannot be rejected.

In fact, it is admitted by the appellant that

arbitration between the respondent and Karnataka Residential
Educational Institutions Society is going on and recoveries of the
dues have to be made.

For handling the arbitration proceedings

some one at Bangalore is required. The appellant had earlier
handled similar work at Allahabad. Moreover as held in Siya Ram's
case (supra) the issue whether transfer of the appellant was in

LPA NO. 13/2007

Page 14

interest of public service essentially requires factual adjudication and
normally courts should not go into this aspect.
18.

Keeping all these aspects in mind, we do not find any merit in

the present Appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no
order as to costs.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
FEBRUARY 9, 2007
VKR/P

