LPA No. 257/2007

*
+

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
LPA No. 257 OF 2007

%

Date of Decision :

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

7

th

September, 2007.

.... Appellants.
Through Mr. Rakesh Tikku with
Mr. P. Gautam, Advocates
VERSUS

SMT.SHYAMA MALHOTRA & ANR.
.... Respondents.
Through Mr. P.V Kapoor, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. S.K. Bhaduri, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

YES.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

YES.

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1. Union of India-the appellant has filed the present Appeal against

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 2
th

the judgment dated 20 February, 2007 allowing the writ petition
filed by Smt.Shyama Malhotra-the respondent No.1 and her son, Mr.
Jaswant Malhotra-the respondent No.2. By the impugned judgment,
learned Single Judge has directed the appellant to reimburse
medical expenditure incurred on treatment of respondent No.1 .
2. It is an admitted case of the parties that the respondent No.1 who is
about 80 years old, was admitted for treatment in Batra Hospital
(Nephrology Department), an Institute approved under the Central
Government Health Scheme (hereinafter referred to as CGHS, for
short), in a critical condition and emergent circumstances in May,
2005. A large portion of her intestine had turned gangreous and was
operated upon. She remained in hospital for nearly three months
and expenditure of more than Rs.14 lakhs was incurred. Out of the
above amount, Rs.10,06,666/- was refunded by CGHS to the
respondent No.2 as the name of the respondent No.1 was shown as
a dependent of the respondent No.2 in the CGHS card. It may be
stated here that a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 2113/2006 was filed as a

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 3

Public Interest Litigation alleging, inter alia, that the respondent No.2
was not entitled to reimbursement of the medical expenditure as
total monthly income of respondent No.1 was more than Rs.1500/-.
The respondent No.2 in these circumstances refunded the amount
of Rs.10,06,666/- to the appellant in March, 2006.
th

3. On 20 March, 2006, the respondent No.1 being a retired Central
Government employee was issued a CGHS card in her own name.
Thereafter, she applied for reimbursement of medical expenses
incurred. The said request was rejected on the ground that the
medical expenditure was incurred when she was incorrectly shown
as a dependent family member of the respondent No.2 and CGHS
th

card was issued in her favour only on 20 March, 2006.
4. Both the respondents filed a Writ Petition (Civil) No. 11843/2006,
which stands allowed by the impugned judgment dated 20

th

February, 2007. Learned Single Judge has held that CGHS card
once issued will also cover the expenditure incurred on treatment
before the acquisition of the card. While giving the aforesaid finding

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 4

the learned Single Judge has referred to the three earlier decisions
of this Court in the case of S.K. Sharma versus Union of India
reported in 2002 (64) DRJ 620, V.K. Jagdhari versus Union of
India and others reported in 2005 (85) DRJ 160 and B.R. Mehta
versus Union of India reported in 1999 (50) DRJ 270 : 1999 (79)
DLT 388 . In these decisions it has been held that benefits under the
CGHS Scheme cannot be restricted from the date on which the card
is issued and once membership is accepted it relates back to the
point of time when the beneficiary was hospitalised.
5. Learned counsel for the appellant-Union of India sought to
distinguish the said decisions on the ground that the parties in the
said cases were residing in non-CGHS areas and therefore after
undergoing medical treatment had applied for the CGHS cards.

It

was also pointed out that against the decision in B.R. Mehta's
(supra) case, an appeal was filed but was dismissed but with the
observation that the said decision would not operate as a binding
precedent.

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 5

6. B.R. Mehta (supra) was decided in 1999, but thereafter there have
been number of decisions of this Court till 2007, wherein it has been
repeatedly held that refusal to reimburse medical expenses incurred
by a retired Government servant on the ground that he was not a
card holder at the relevant time, is not justified. It was noted in S.K.
Sharma (supra) that a card holder under the CGHS is only required
to pay a nominal amount and it is the duty of the Government to
provide proper health services and an officer or a pensioner should
not suffer. The distinction sought to be drawn by the learned counsel
for the appellant in this case and other cases that the pensioners
were residing in non-CGHS areas cannot be accepted as this, was
not the sole ground on which the writ petitions were allowed. The
Scheme itself stipulates that a pensioner residing in a non-CGHS
area can also obtain CGHS card from the nearest CGHS covered
city. A government servant while in service prior to his retirement
pays CGHS subscription. Cases of pensioners is distinct and
separate from government servants who do not opt for the

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 6

CGHS while in service.
7. We may also refer to another decision of this Court in the case of
V.K. Jagdhari (supra) wherein the entire case law on the subject
was examined and the following propositions were summarised:“13. The position emerging from
various decisions of this Court may be
summarised as follows:
(1) Even if an employee contributes after
availing medical facilities, and becomes
member of the scheme after treatment, he is
entitled to reimbursement — Govt. of NCT
v. S.S. Sharma, 2005(118) DLT 144 (DB).
(2) Even if membership under scheme not
processed the retiree is entitled to benefits
of Scheme — Mohinder Pal v. UOI, 117
(2005) DLT 204.
(3) Full amounts incurred have to be paid by
the employer; reimbursement of entire
amount has to be made. It is for the
Government and the hospital concerned to
settle what is the correct amount — Milap
Singh v. UOI, 113 (2004) DLT 91; Ran
Deep Kumar Rana v. UOI, 111 (2004) DLT
473 (DB).
(4) The pensioner is entitled to full
reimbursement so long the hospital remains

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 7

in approved list P.N. Chopra v. UOI, 111
(2004) DLT 190.
(5) The status is of retired employee and this
leads to entitlement; the status is not as card
holder — S.K. Sharma v. UOI, 2002(64)
DRJ 620.
(6) If medical treatment is availed, whether
the employee is a card holder or not is
irrelevant and full reimbursement has to be
given, B.R. Mehta v. UOI, 79 (1999) DLT
388.”
8. A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Union of India
versus T.S. Oberoi and Raj Chawla (LPA No. 898/2002) dealt
with the matter where after hospitalisation, retired Judges had been
enrolled as members of CGHS. It was held that once membership
fee was accepted it would relate back to the date of hospitalisation.
Though in the case of T.S. Oberoi (supra), claimants were Judges
but it was held that once membership is granted, past medical
expenses can be reimbursed.

9. Similarly, in the case of Government of NCT of Delhi versus
Som Dutt Sharma reported in 118 (2005) DLT 144 (DB) the

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 8

retired Government servant had become member of the CGHS
after having undergone a heart surgery prior to his enrollment as
member. The claim for medical reimbursement was rejected. In
this case, it was noticed that the relevant provisions which required
employees to opt for the medical Scheme and requirement for
payment should have been brought to the notice of the retired
Government servant.

10.Whether

a

retired

Army

officer

is

entitled

to

medical

treatment/benefits and whether the same can be regarded as part of
Article 21 of the Constitution of India- Right to Life, has been
recently considered by the Supreme Court in the case of
Confederation of Ex-Servicemen Association Versus Union of
India reported in (2006) 8 SCC 399. In the said case the Supreme
Court upheld the contributory scheme requiring one time payment
as reasonable. It was opined by the Supreme Court that the said
scheme does not violate fundamental rights enshrined in Part III of

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 9

the Constitution. The Supreme Court further noticed that the State
does not have the unlimited resources and financial constraints are
a relevant factor that have to be taken into consideration. However,
at the same time it cannot be denied that Right to Life under Article
21 embraces not only physical existence but also quality of life.
11.Smt. Shyama Malhotra-respondent No.1 is a retired Government
servant and was earlier working in the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting. She is entitled to medical facilities under CGHS,
which is applicable to all Central Government servants as well as
pensioners.

Mr.

Jaswant Malhotra-respondent

No.2,

son

of

respondent No.1 is also a Central Government servant and is
entitled to medical benefits under the CGHS.
12.Benefits under the CGHS, as per the Scheme placed on record, are
available to members and also their spouse and dependent family
members. For this purpose, we may refer to Clause 26(1) of the
Scheme, which reads as under :-

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 10

“26. CGHS Cards:
1. Definition of Family : In accordance
with the initial instructions, the term of “Family”
for the purposes of the Scheme shall consist of
the Government servant's wife or husband, as
the case may be children and stepchildren and
parents who are mainly dependent on and
residing
with
the
Government
servant
concerned. Subsequently, in pursuance of the
recommendations of the Fourth Central Pay
Commission, it has been decided that for
availing the medical facilities under the Scheme,
parents, sisters, widowed sisters, widowed
daughters, minor brothers and children will be
deemed dependent on the Government
employees if they are residing with him and their
income from all sources including pension and
pension equivalent of DCRG benefit is less than
Rs.1500/- per month.”
13.A reading of the above clause shows that parents who are “mainly
dependent” and residing with the Government servant concerned
are treated

as 'family' for the purpose of the CGHS. The term

“mainly dependent” however is not defined and elaborated upon.
The second part of Clause 26(1) incorporates a deeming clause and
parents, sisters, widowed sisters, widowed daughters, minor brother
and children are deemed to be dependent on the Government

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 11

servant, if they are residing with the Government servant and their
income from all sources including pension is less than Rs.1500/- per
month. A deeming provision however will not curtail the scope and
ambit of the term “mainly dependent” in the first part of Clause
26(1). Scope and object of a deeming provision, is to expand and
bring within the ambit of the main provision, that which may not form
part of the main provision. “When a statute gives a definition and
then adds that certain things shall be 'deemed' to be covered by the
definition, it matters not whether without that addition the definition
would have covered them or not” (as per Lord President Cooper in
Ferguson V. McMillan, 1954 S.L.T.109).

It is difficult to hold that

the deeming part of clause 26 has the effect of restricting or
curtailing the natural and general meaning of the term “mainly
dependent” as we commonly understand in a reasonable manner.
14.The word “ mainly” has been defined in Shorter Oxford Dictionary as
“ for most part, chiefly, principally” . The said common and general
meaning of the word “mainly” has been accepted by the Supreme

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 12

Court in Swarnlata Vs. Union of India, reported in (1979) 3 SCC
165.

A Division of this court in Govind Dass and others Vs.

Kuldip Singh, reported in AIR 1971 Delhi 151, has held that the
word “dependent” is not restricted to mere financially dependency
but comprehensive enough to include persons who are dependent
on the landlord for residential accommodation for the purpose of
section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act,1958. It was observed
as under:“ ..... The term must be construed as meaning
somebody not wholly independent or selfsupporting and in a position to set up separate
residence. Dependence may not in all
circumstances be entirely a matter of finance and
................
To our mind this interpretation, if
accepted, would tend to restrict the meaning of
the word “dependant” to a person being
financially dependant. In the socio-religious
structure of Hindu society it is common for all the
members of a family of brothers to live together
while some men folk in the family may go out of
town to earn a livelihood and even remit their
earnings to the family. One cannot shut one's
eyes to this structure of our society and so to give
a restricted meaning to the word “dependant”
would be to provide a definition of this word which
the legislature has advisedly chosen not to do
so....”

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 13

15. Words “wholly dependent” as used in MP Civil Services (Medical
Attendance) Rules, 1958 were interpreted by the Supreme Court in
State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. M.P. Ojha, reported in (1998) 2 SCC
554. In the said Rules word 'wholly' had been used, whereas in the
present Scheme the word used is 'mainly'. The word 'wholly' as is
normally understood means entirely or completely and therefore M.P.
Civil Services (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1958 require stricter
compliance. While interpreting the term 'wholly dependent',
Supreme Court has elucidated :
“13. The expression 'wholly dependent' is not
a term of art. It has to be given its due
meaning with reference to the Rules in which
it appears. We need not make any attempt to
define the expression 'wholly dependent' to
be applicable to all cases in all
circumstances. We also need not look into
other provisions of law where such
expression is defined. That would be likely to
lead to results which the relevant rules would
not have contemplated. The expression
'wholly dependent' has to be understood in
the context in which it is used keeping in
view the object of the particular rules where it
is contained. We cannot curtail the meaning

the

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 14

of 'wholly dependent' by reading into this the
definition as given in SR 8 [ sic SR 2(8)]
which has been reproduced above. Further,
the expression 'wholly dependent' as
appearing in the definition of family as given
in Medical Rules cannot be confined to mere
financial
dependence.
Ordinarily
dependence means financial dependence
but for a member of a family it would mean
other support, maybe physical, as well. To
be 'wholly dependent' would therefore
include
both
financial
and
physical
dependence. If support required is physical
and a member of the family is otherwise
financially sound he may not necessarily be
wholly dependent. Here the father was 70
years of age and was sick and it could not be
said that he was not wholly dependent on his
son. The son has to look after him in his old
age. Even otherwise by getting a pension of
Rs 414 per month which by any standard is
a paltry amount it could not be said that the
father was not 'wholly dependent' on his son.
That the father had a separate capacity of
being a retired government servant is
immaterial if his case falls within the Medical
Rules being a member of the family of his
son and wholly dependent on him. A flexible
approach has to be adopted in interpreting
and applying the Rules in a case like the
present one. There is no dispute that the son
took his father to Bombay for treatment for
his serious ailment after getting due

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 15

permission from the competent authority. It
was submitted before us that the father being
a retired government servant could himself
get sanction for treatment outside the State
as a special case from the competent
authority. It is not necessary for us to look
into this aspect of the matter as we are
satisfied that under the relevant Medical
Rules, the father was a member of the family
of his son and was wholly dependent on him
and the 2nd respondent was thus fully
entitled to reimbursement for the expenses
incurred on the treatment of his father and
other travelling expenses.”

16.A deeming provision is incorporated for giving artificial construction
to a word or a definition than that which would otherwise prevail.
Sometimes, it is used to clear any ambiguities and place a particular
construction beyond doubt, when there is uncertainty. It is used to
include what is obvious, what is uncertain or what is in ordinary
sense impossible. (See, St. Aubyn (L.M.) Vs. AG (No.2) reported in
(1951) 2 ALL ER 473 (HL). However, mostly a deeming clause is
used to extend denotation of the defined term to things that it would
in ordinary parlance denote. It creates an artificial friction which

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 16

otherwise would not prevail. Each provision has to be examined
keeping in view the object for which the legislation has been made.
(See, Ali Mk and Ors. Versus State of Kerala reported in (2003)
11 SCC 632).
17. CGHS is a beneficial and benevolent scheme, a welfare measure
to provide for medical treatment of government servants and family
members who are “mainly dependent” on the Government servant.
The scheme recognises and accepts that a Government servant
must take care of his old and aged parents residing with him. A
narrow construction may well be self defeating and contrary to the
object behind the provision. Dependency for the purpose of the
clause will mean dependency for purpose of medical treatment and
aid. It is ironical that when medical treatment (even in government
hospitals) can land you with bills in lacs, as in the present case, for
the deeming clause monthly income of Rs.1500/- has been
prescribed. This apparent contradiction, refutes and negates the
primary objective. We need not go into these aspects in great detail

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 17

in view of the interpretation given by us.
18. One important and relevant factor is that the respondent No.1 is
entitled to benefit under CGHS in her own right being a retired
government servant and also in case she is “mainly dependent” on
her son, the respondent No.2. In fact the name of respondent No.1
was included in the CGHS card issued in favour of the respondent
No.2 and therefore, she had not initially applied for an individual
card in her personal capacity, as a retired Government servant but
consequent to some doubts being raised, she applied for and was
issued a CGHS card.
19.In view of the peculiar facts of the present case and since the
respondent No.1 is entitled to benefit under the CGHS in her own
right and she was “mainly dependent” on the respondent No.2, who
is a Government servant, we feel that the appellant should pay and
reimburse the medical expenses as per rules. In view of the above,
we dismiss the present Appeal but without costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
SEPTEMBER 7, 2007
P/RN

LPA No. 257/2007

Page 18

