LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA NO. 1080 OF 2006

%

Date of Decision :

st

1

October, 2007.

MR. GATAKALA VENKATESWARLU
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. Upmanyu Hazarika, Advocate.
VERSUS
UOI & ANR.

.... Respondents.
Through Mr. Mukesh Anand, Mr.S. Tiwari and
Ms. Zeba Tarannum Khan, Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1.

The appellant, Mr. Gatakala Venkateswarlu is an Indian citizen. He

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 2

was working and living in Kuwait in August, 1990 when gulf war broke out
with Iraq occupying Kuwait. Leaving behind his personal belongings and
worldly goods to save his life and the lives of his family members, the
appellant left Kuwait via Baghdad and Jordan to reach India.
2.

The

appellant

saw

a

ray

of

hope

when

United

Nations

Compensation Commission (hereinafter referred to as UNCC, for short)
floated a Scheme for payment of compensation to persons who had lost and
suffered during the Gulf War. Claims were invited under four heads : Claim
'A' : ex gratia payment of US$ 2,500 for individuals who had fled Kuwait;
Claim 'B' : claim for injury or death; Claim 'C' : for losses caused to person
and property upto US$ 100,000; Claim 'D' : for losses to property above US$
100,000. Claimants were required to submit applications to their National
Governments who would forward the same to UNCC. Claimants could not
directly approach UNCC with their claims and per force were required to
make applications with the National Governments in terms of the scheme.
3.

th

On 28 October, 1992, the appellant made applications for claims in

forms 'A' and 'C' with the Embassy of India in Kuwait, the designated authority

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 3

of the Union of India. His claim was registered at AT-302 and a receipt was
issued by the authorised officer, Embassy of India in Kuwait. The said receipt
is on record and clearly shows that compensation claim forms 'A' and 'C' had
been received from the appellant.
4.

As noted above, under claim 'A' standard compensation of

US$2,500 was payable to the claimants and under claim 'C' damages and
losses of personal effects, property and income upto US $ 100,000 was
payable.
5.

There is no dispute between the appellant and the Union of India in

respect of claim 'A' as the said claim stands paid. It is an admitted case of the
parties that claim 'C' was not forwarded to UNCC and has not been paid to
the appellant. This had forced the appellant to approach this Court by filing
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4645/2001 which stands dismissed by the impugned
th

judgment dated 10 February, 2006 leading to filing of the present Appeal.
6.

The claim of the appellant is that as there was lapse and negligence

on the part of Union of India in not forwaring claim no.'C' to UNCC and
therefore the appellant was not paid claim No.C. Thus, the Union of india

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 4

must recompensate him and pay him claim No.C.
7.

The defense of the respondents-Union of India is multifarious. We

will deal with them in seritum.
8.

Firstly, it was contended on behalf of Union of India that the relevant

records are not traceable and therefore they cannot admit or deny that the
appellant had submitted claim form 'C' seeking compensation of KD 23,495.
At the same time, it is not denied that the acknowledgment receipt issued by
the Embassy of India in Kuwait specially states that claim in form no. 'C' was
received. It is stated that the receipt issued by Embassy of India does not
bear any date. The above contention of the respondents is liable to be
rejected. The receipt issued by the Embassy of India in Kuwait bears the date
th

28 October, 1992 clearly and also bears Srl. No. AT-302 (Annexure P-3 of
the paper book).

The receipt is signed and it is specifically stated that

compensation claim forms 'A' and 'C' have been received. Form 'A' and 'C'
have been ticked and marked in positive and the other columns have been
scored of. There is no specific denial of the avements made in the writ
petition that claim form No.C for compensation of KD 23,495 was filed and

LPA No. 1080/2006

receipt was issued in token thereof. The averments to

Page 5

this extent

in the

writ petition are deemed to be admitted by the respondent-Union of India. If
the Embassy of India in Kuwait had failed to forward claim form No. C or it
was misplaced, the same is an internal matter between the relevant Ministry
in the Government of India and the Embassy of India in Kuwait. The appellant
cannot be blamed nor can he be made to suffer for the said lapse. It is not the
case of the respondents that the Embassy of India in Kuwait was not
authorised to receive the forms and issue acknowledgment receipts.
9.

The next contention raised by the respondents-Union of India is that

the appellant does not have any claim against the respondents as no
compensation was payable by the Union of India. Compensation as per the
Scheme to the victims of the Gulf war was payable by UNCC and not by the
Union of India. Union of India is not therefore liable. We do not find any merit
in the said contention. The appellant was not claiming compensation from the
Union of India, when he filed form 'C'. As per the procedure prescribed by
UNCC and accepted by the Union of India, all claims had to be made to the
prescribed authority appointed by the Union of India for being forwarded to

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 6

UNCC. Embassy of India at Kuwait was the prescribed authority appointed
by the Union of India. The appellant has been forced to file a writ petition
because the Union of India did not forward his claim to UNCC and not
because he is seeking compensation under any scheme floated by the Union
of India to compensate victims of the Gulf war. It is not the case of the
respondent that claim of the appellant was rejected on meirts by UNCC. In
fact it is an admitted case that the claim form 'C' filed by the appellant was not
forwarded to UNCC by the Union of India. The cause of action for filing of the
writ petition is the failure of the Union of India to forward the claim to UNCC.
Rejection of the claim by UNCC is not subject matter of the writ petition or this
Appeal. In fact the claim form 'C' was never forwarded to UNCC and therefore
the appellant submits that cause of action has arisen in his favour and against
the respondent.
10.

The next question which arises for our consideration is whether the

respondents-Union of India is guilty of negligence because of failure to
forward the claim form 'C' to UNCC? In the counter affidavit it was submitted
that over 1.45 lakhs compensation applications were received and in the

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 7

wake of handling of such vast volume of paper, loss of claim form 'C' by the
appellant cannot be treated as negligence. It was further stated that the
appellant again applied in claim form 'C' in October, 1995, well after the
prescribed date fixed by UNCC and therefore no relief could be granted to the
appellant. Another contention raised was that the writ petition was not
maintainable.
11.

For the sake of convenience these contentions are being dealt with

together. The contentions of the respondents-Union of India are reiteration of
the maxim : “the State can do no wrong” and “State is not answerable for the
torts committed by its servants”. The two maxims have been gradually diluted
over a period of time and the immunity granted to the State has ebbed and
eroded. In Public Law field, courts have repeatedly intervened to enforce
public duties by authorities. A citizen has right to invoke jurisdiction of High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for enforcement of his
Fundamental Rights and for any other purposes, which would also include
enforcement of public duties by the Government. Any action of the
Government or public bodies which is arbitrary, violates Article 14 and 21 of

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 8

the Constitution of India or contrary to statutory and legal rights can be
challenged. In Common Cause, a Registered Society versus Union of
India reported in (1999) 6 SCC 667, the Supreme Court noticed the everexpanding operation/dimension of Public Law field, which in some cases
includes contractual matters. Public Law remedies have been extended by
the Supreme Court in the realm of Tort. Compensation has been awarded to
persons who have suffered at the hands of the officers of the Government for
injuries on account of tortious acts. Courts have intervened where there is
violation of Fundamental Rights, there is lack of enforcement or failure to
enforce public duties.
12.

A Writ Petition is maintainable if an authority fails to perform public

or governmental functions. Failure to perform public duty is amenable to writ
jurisdiction. Public duty need not be imposed by a statute. Public character of
the duty is sufficient. Rights, Duties and privilges of public authorities and
their relationship with individual citizens of the state pertains to public law, in
contradiction to private law fields – which are those branches of law which
deal with the rights and liabilities of private individuals in relation to one

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 9

another (Refer LIC of India versus Escorts (1986) 1 SCC 264).
13.

The Supreme Court in the case of State of U.P. versus Joharimal

reported in (2004) 4 SCC 714 has held that legal right of an individual may be
founded on a contract, a statute or an instrument having the force of law.
Actions of any authority be it legislature, executive, instrumentality or
person/authority imbued with public law element, can be made subject matter
of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution. To decide whether the
question raised relates to public law remedy or public law field, each case has
to be determined having regard to the nature of and extent of an authority
vested in the State. Power to entertain a petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution, within the scope of judicial review, is decided by answering the
question : whether a particular decision under challenge is justiciable.
However, even when a petition is maintainable, power of judicial review by
the courts is restricted ordinarily to illegality, irrationality or impropriety. It is
not intended to review the governance as an appellate forum and act as
suprema lex.
14.

In ABL International Ltd and another versus Export Credit

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 10

Guarantee Corporation of India and others reported in (2004) 3 SCC 553,
the appellant therein had taken insurance cover in respect of the export
contracts from Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India. The Court
examined several decisions including VST Industries versus Workers
Union reported in (2001) 1 SCC 298 wherein it has been observed as
under:“ In Anadi Mukta , case this Court examined
the various aspects and the distinction between an
authority and a person and after analysis of the
decisions referred in that regard came to the
conclusion that it is only in the circumstances when the
authority or the person performs a public function or
discharges a public duty that Article 226 of the
Constitution can be invoked. In the present case, the
appellant is engaged in the manufacture and sale of
cigarettes. Manufacture and sale of cigarettes will not
involve any public function.”
15.

It was noted that the question whether an authority is discharging

public function or public duty can be answered with reference to the ratio in
the case of Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi versus State of U.P. reported in
(1991) 1 SCC 212 by answering whether the State action is really in the
nature of its personality as a State, which is significant. It does not matter

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 11

what is the nature of function. The Court while examining public duties or the
function test discerns the State action on the touchstone of Article 14 i.e.
public duty to act fairly, justly and reasonably. While examining the question
whether a writ court can issue mandamus for refund of money, the Supreme
Court held that the power exists but the said power is to be exercised
sparingly depending on the facts and circumstances of each case. It was
accordingly observed that a writ petition involving consequential relief of
monetary claim is maintainable. The Supreme Court reiterated that the State
while exercising its powers and discharging its functions must act indisputably
for public good and in public interest. It cannot act unfairly and unreasonably
in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.

16.

We may also refer here to an earlier judgment of the Supreme Court

in the case of Jaylakshmi Salt Works (Pvt.) Ltd. Versus State of Gujarat
reported in (1994) 4 SCC 1. In the said case after heavy downpour a
reclamation bundh collapsed leading to flooding of the claimants factory who
then made a claim for compensation. The Trial Court dismissed the suit on

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 12

the ground that negligence was not proved and the damage was caused due
to Act of God. The High Court also dismissed the appeal after split verdict, on
the ground that Rule of Strict Liability as enunciated in Rylands versus
Fletcher reported in (1868) 3 HL 330 is not applicable and stands modified
by the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab versus
Modern Cultivators reported in AIR 1965 SC 17. The Supreme Court
allowed the appeal holding, inter alia, that between cases of strict liability and
fault liability, there can be numerous cases which may entitle a citizen to sue
Government for damages, if losses are occasioned by failure to perform
duty, general or specific, by the Government which may arise due to
negligence or even inevitable mistake. We take benefit of quoting some
paragraphs from the said judgment, which read as follows:“8..............Truly speaking entire law of torts is founded
and structured on morality that no one has a right to
injure or harm others intentionally or even innocently.
Therefore, it would be primitive to class strictly or close
finality ( sic finally) the ever-expanding and growing
horizon of tortious liability. Even for social development,
orderly growth of the society and cultural refineness, the
liberal approach to tortious liability by courts is more
conducive.
9.................In a welfare society construction of dam or

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 13

bundh for the sake of community is essential function and
use of land or accumulation of water for the benefit of
society cannot be non-natural user. But that cannot
absolve the State from its duty of being responsible to its
citizens for such violations as are actionable and result in
damage, loss or injury................................ Once the
occasion for loss or damage is failure of duty, general or
specific, the cause of action under tort arises. It may be
due to negligence, nuisance, trespass, inevitable mistake
etc. It may be even otherwise. In a developed or
developing society the concept of duty keeps on
changing and may extend to even such matters as was
highlighted in Donoghue v. Stevenson (1932 All ER Rep
1) where a manufacturer was held responsible for injury
to a consumer. They may individually or even collectively
give rise to tortious liability. Since the appellant suffered
loss on facts found due to action of respondents officers
both at the stage of construction and failure to take steps
even at the last moment it was liable to be compensated.
10. But to be actionable and get redress from court it must
assume legal shape by falling in one or the other
statutorily, judicially or even otherwise recognised
category of wrong. That is why the appellant based his
claim on negligence.............. Winfield has defined
'negligence'
as
under:
“ 'Negligence' as a tort is the breach of a legal duty
to take care which results the State or an individual. For
this submission advanced with plausibility it appears
necessary to determine how wide or narrow is the ambit
of negligence in realm of torts. Can it be strictly
compartmentalised? When the State was found reluctant
in discharge of its duties or public responsibility then was
it negligence alone or it was something more or less?

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 14

11. 'Negligence' ordinarily means failure to do statutory
duty or otherwise giving rise to in damage, undesired by
the defendant, to the plaintiff. Thus its ingredients are ( a ) a legal duty on the part of A towards B to exercise
care in such conduct of A as falls within the scope of the
duty;
( b ) breach of that duty;
( c ) consequential damage to B.”
According to Dias,
“[L]iability in negligence is technically described as
arising out of damage caused by the breach of a duty to
take care.”
These textbooks thus make it amply clear that the axis
around which the law of negligence revolves is duty, duty
to take care, duty to take reasonable care. But concept of
duty, its reasonableness, the standard of care required
cannot be put in strait-jacket. It cannot be rigidly fixed.
The right of yesterday is duty of today. The more
advanced the society becomes the more sensitive it
grows to violation of duties by private or even public
functionaries. Law of torts and particularly the branch of
negligence is consistently influenced and transformed by
social,
economic
and
political
development.................................................... Yet the law
was expanded to achieve the objective of protecting the
common man not by narrowing the horizon of legal injury
but by widening it. In Donoghue v. Stevenson (supra) the
House of Lords held a duty to take care as a specific tort
in itself. Even improper exercise of power by the
authorities giving rise to damage has been judicially
developed and distinction has been drawn between power
coupled with duty. Where there is duty the exercise may
not be proper if what is done was not authorised or not

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 15

done in the bona fide interest of the public. In David
Geddis v. Proprietors of the Bann Reservoir ((1878) 3 as
430) the failure to keep the reservoir clean as a result of
blameworthy negligence leading to overflow was held to
be liable for negligence. It was reiterated in Tate and Lyle
Industries Ltd. v. Greater London Council ((1983) 1 All ER
1159). It was held that where public right was interfered
with which resulted in public nuisance the claim for
damages was maintainable.”

17.

The contention that large number of compensation applications were

received and therefore loss and failure to sent the claim application of the
appellant to UNCC does not constitute negligence cannot be accepted.
Negligence is failure to take reasonable care as required in the facts and
circumstances. It is omission to do something which was required and should
have been done by a reasonable person. The respondent, owed a duty to
take care that the applications for compensation that were received were
forwarded to UNCC. The respondents were also aware of the consequences
and the effect and failure to properly maintain records and to deal with the
applications for compensation and also to forward them. Causal connection is
therefore established. In case applications were not forwarded to UNCC, the
claimants would not have received compensation. In such circumstances it

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 16

was the responsibility and public duty of the Union of India to ensure that the
applications received were properly attended to and forwarded to UNCC. In
case substantial number of applications had been received, a greater care
and caution was required to be exercised. Failure and consequence of not
exercising care and caution was well known to the respondents. The
respondents were aware and conscious of natural and inevitable result in
case any application was misplaced and not forwarded to the UNCC. A
person with modest measure of prevision would have realised that loss or
misplacement of the forms was a real possibility and likehood of injury was
apparent and obvious. If consequences can be forseen, duty to take care
arises. Thus, the contention of the respondents that it was not negligent
cannot be accepted. We have already quoted above definition of the term
negligence as interpreted by the Supreme Court in Jaylakshmi Salt Works
Pvt. Ltd. (supra).
18.

We may refer here to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the

case of M.S. Grewal and another versus Deep Chand Sood and another
reported in (2001) 8 SCC 151. The said case relates to death of five school

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 17

students who had gone for a picnic and got drowned. The Supreme Court
relied upon an earlier judgment in Lata Wadhwa versus State of Bihar
reported in (2001) 8 SCC 197 and held that failure to exercise due care
expected of a reasonable prudent person would constitute negligence.
Shameful disregard of safety and interest of others, constitutes breach of duty
and can be made subject matter of a claim under the Law of Torts. Lack of
proper care, want of attention which a prudent and reasonable man would
have taken in the circumstances shall constitute negligence. The Supreme
Court quoted with approval the following statements made in Clerk and
Lindsell on Torts, which are extracted below:”14....................Clerk and Lindsell on Torts (18th Edn.)
sets out four several requirements of the tort of
negligence and the same read as below:

( 1 ) The existence in law of a duty of care situation i.e.
one in which the law attaches liability to carelessness.
There has to be recognition by law that the careless
infliction of the kind of damage in suit on the class of
person to which the claimant belongs by the class of
person to which the defendant belongs is actionable.
( 2 ) Breach of the duty of care by the defendant i.e. that
it failed to measure up to the standard set by law.

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 18

( 3 ) A causal connection between the defendants
careless conduct and the damage.
( 4 ) That the particular kind of damage to the particular
claimant is not so unforeseeable as to be too remote.”

19.

In the said case, the Supreme Court also pointed out that the current

trend of justice oriented approach should not be thwarted on technicalities
and the object and purpose should be to give and do justice.
20.

The appellant had legitimate expectation that the respondent shall

forward his application to UNCC. Citizens have right to be treated fairly and
can legitimately expect that the Government will perform its duties and
responsibilities. This promise by the authorities in its public dealings is implied
and accepted under our Constitutional framework and is the essence of the
“government for the people”. The expectation of a citizen in this regard is a
legitimate and a valuable right.
21.

Lastly, it was contended before us by the respondents that the

appellant is guilty of contributory negligence. It was stated that the appellant
had received acknowledgment card in respect of the claim form 'A' but not in

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 19

respect of claim form 'C'. The contents of the acknowledgement card relied
upon read as under:“Dear Sir\Madam,
Your compensation claim, details of which are
given overleaf, has been registered and forwarded to the
United Nations Compensation Commission, Geneva for
further action. If you have applied under any other
category also, seprate acknowledgment wil be sent in due
course.
Discrepancy, if any, in the details of the claim
should be brought to our notice immediately. Please
quote the registration number given overleaf for all further
correspondence.
SPECIAL KUWAIT CELL”
22.

To examine the above contention, facts may be noticed. On 28

th

October, 1992 the appellant filed two claim forms with the Embassy of India in
Kuwait. The same had to be forwarded by the Union of India to UNCC for
payment of compensation. UNCC had fixed a cut-off date by which claim
forms had to be received. The cut-off dates were extended from time to time
st

and the last cut off date so fixed was 1 January, 1995. The appellant had
th

made application with the Embassy of India in Kuwait on 28 October, 1992,
i.e. before the cut-off date. UNCC could receive applications after the cut-off
date only if the following condition were satisfied : “bureaucratic delay, postal

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 20

delay or breakdown of civil order and beyond the control of the claimant”.
23.

Claim form 'A' of the appellant was forwarded by the respondents to

UNCC and after the said claim was registered an acknowledgement card
mentioned above was issued. Case of Union of India is that the appellant did
not take appropriate action, even after acknowledgement card in respect of
th

claim 'C' was not received . We may here refer to the letter dated 10 May,
1996 written by the respondents which reads as under:“An Acknowledgement Card will be issued in
respect of the late claim only if we receive an
indication from the UNCC that they have taken up
the claim for examination.
It is clarified that it is the exclusive
responsibility of the UNCC to evaluate and scrutinise
the claims, evolve a payment procedure and deliver
the awarded compensation to eligible claimants for
payment through national governments. It is not
possible to estimate the time or the value of the
payment which may eventually be made by the
UNCC.”
24.

Thus acknowlgement card was issued by the respondent-Union of

India after the claim was registered by UNCC. The appellant has stated that
the acknowledgement card in respect of the claim 'A' was received by him in
st

March, 1995 i.e. after the cut-off date for submission of claims i.e. 1 January,

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 21

1995. The respondents have not filed any document or material to show that
the acknowledgement card in respect of claim 'A' was sent to the appellant
st

before 1 January, 1995.

Moreover, the acknowledgment card clearly

stated that if a claim was registered under any other category a separate
acknowledgment card will be sent in due course. Therefore, the appellant
could not have presumed that claim No. 'C' had not been sent to UNCC or
had

been

misplaced

by

the

respondents.

when

he

received

the

acknowledgement card in March, 1995. In any case, by the said date time for
st

submitting and forwarding the claim forms upto 1 January, 1995 had expired.
The contention of Union of India therefore loses all its force. Case of
contributory negligence is not made out by the Union of India.
25.

The facts stated in the writ petition and in the counter affidavit show

that when the appellant did not receive acknowledgement card for claim form
'C', he made representations to the High Commission of India in London as
well as Ministry of External Affairs, Delhi. It is the case of the appellant that as
claim form 'C' was not traceable, he submitted a fresh claim form 'C; as he
th

was advised, on 5 October, 1995. Even at this stage, the respondents did
not properly take up the matter with UNCC accepting default and lapse on
the part of the Union of India in forwarding claim form 'C' within the stipulated

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 22
st

time limit, i.e. by 1 January, 1995. Had this been done, probably UNCC
would have agreed to belatedly accept claim form 'C' on the ground of
bureaucratic delay and not punish the appellant. The belated claim form 'C'
th

filed on 5 October, 1995, was ultimately rejected by UNCC as being beyond
time. The above facts show that the appellant was not guilty of contributory
negligence and was not responsible for the failure of the respondents-Union
st

of India to send the claim form 'C' by 1 January, 1995. It may also be
relevant to state here that from 1996 till 2001, the respondent-Union of India
th

th

has written letters dated 10 May, 1996 and 5 May, 1999 in which it was
stated that the claim of the appellant under claim 'C' was pending
th

consideration before the UNCC. The respondent by letter dated 10 January,
2000 informed the appellant that his claim form 'C' had not been approved by
th

UNCC, but in a subsequent correspondence dated 18 January, 2000, the
aforesaid statement was negated and it was affirmed that UNCC was still
examining the claim of the appellant. Thus, UNCC had rejected and not taken
st

on record claim form 'C' as it was submitted belatedly after 1 January, 1995.
26.

In view of the above facts, we feel that the Secretary, Ministry of

External Affairs, should examine the claim form 'C' submitted by the appellant
for KD 23,495 and pass a speaking order, examining and deciding the claim.
For examining the said claim, the appellant will produce relevant material
documents to substantiate and show the loss of properties, personal items,

LPA No. 1080/2006

Page 23

income, etc. caused to him. On being satisfied, the respondents shall
determine the quantum payable and make payment of the claim along with
st

interest @ 9% per annum w.e.f. 1 January, 2001 till payment. In case the
appellant is not satisifed with the quantum awarded and the decision, he shall
be at liberty to file a civil suit to substantitate and prove his claim. Appellant
will send by post all relevant papers including duplicate copy of claim form 'C'
within one month from today to the Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs.
The Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs or an officer appointed by him will
decide and pass an order after hearing the appellant or his representative
within three months thereafter.
27.

With the above observations and directions, the present Appeal is

allowed. In the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as
to costs.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
OCTOBER 1, 2007.
P

