REPORTABLE
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ LPA NO. 286 OF 1996

Date of Decision : 4th March, 2008.

SHARDA NATH .... Appellant.
Through, Mr. Madan Bhatia, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Manu Bansal and Mr. Ankit
Jain, Advocates.
VERSUS
DELHI ADMINISTRATION & ORS. .... Respondents.
Through Mr. Parag Tripathi, Sr. Advocate with Mr.Suresh Singh and
Ms.Sunita Bansal, Advocates for respondent no.4.
Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Advocate for the DDA.
CORAM:
%04.03.2008
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? YES.
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? YES.

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1. The appellant, Ms. Sharda Nath, has filed the present Letters Patent
Appeal impugning the judgment dated 12th December, 1996 dismissing her
Writ Petition No. 1026/1981. The appellant in the said writ petition had
challenged order dated 30th March, 1981 issued by the Delhi Development
Authority (hereinafter referred to as DDA, for short) restoring sub-lease deed
dated 17th July, 1965 executed in favour of Mr. Dharam Chand and cancelling
the lease deed dated 5th July, 1973 executed in her favour. Both the aforesaid
lease deeds pertain to a plot no. C-70 (new No. G-20) located in Maharani
Bagh, New Delhi, measuring 800 square yards. The above two sub-lease
deeds were tripartite documents executed by the President of India, Maharani
Bagh Co-operative House Building Society Limited (hereinafter referred to as
the Society, for short) and Mr. Dharam Chand in respect of sub-lease dated
17th July, 1965 and Ms. Sharda Nath in respect of sub-lease dated 5th July,
1973.
2. The President of India has executed a perpetual lease deed dated 2nd
November, 1964 in favour of the Society for the purpose of allocating plots to
it's members. Mr. Dharam Chand was a member of the Society and
accordingly sub-lease deed dated 17th July, 1965 was executed in his favour.
As per the said sub-lease deed, Mr. Dharam Chand was required to construct

a residential building on the plot within a period of two years after obtaining
sanction for the building plans. The relevant clause of the sub-lease deed is
as under:“Clause II (5). The Sub-Lessee shall within a period of
two years from 1st day of January, 1965 (and the time
so specified shall be of the essence of the contract)
after obtaining sanction to the building plan, with
necessary design, plans and specifications from the
proper municipal or other authority at his own
expense, erect upon the residential plot and complete
in a substantial and workmanlike manner a residential
building for private dwelling with the requisite and
proper walls, sewers and drains and other
conveniences in accordance with the sanctioned
building plan and to the satisfaction of such municipal
or other authority. ”

3. Mr. Dharam Chand constructed two garages, bathroom and WC on the
ground floor and two rooms with bathroom and a veranda on the first floor
above the garage block. The respondent-DDA felt that there was noncompliance of the aforesaid clause and by letter dated 21st May, 1973, the
sub-lease deed dated 17th July, 1965 was determined.
4. The cancellation letter dated 21st May, 1973 was made subject matter of
challenge in Writ Petition No. 744/1974, which was filed by Sh. Dharam
Chand in the Delhi High Court. By Order dated 10th January, 1975
dispossession of Mr. Dharam Chand was stayed. It may be relevant to state

here that DDA had initiated proceedings under the Public Premises (Eviction
of Unauthorized Occupant's) Act, 1971 for recovery of possession against Mr.
Dharam Chand.
5. On termination of the sub-lease deed executed in favour of Mr. Dharam
Chand by letter dated 21st May, 1973, the co-operative society was informed
by a letter of the same date about the said termination. On 21st May, 1973
itself, Ms. Sharda Nath's name was recommended by the Society to the DDA
for allotment of the said plot as her name was on the waiting list. Allotment in
favour of the appellant was approved and a perpetual sub-lease deed dated
5th July, 1973 was executed in her favour. However, she could not be put in
possession as possession was with Mr. Dharam Chand and later on he was
protected from dispossession by an interim order passed by this Court in Writ
Petition No. 744/1974.
6. Mr. Dharam Chand kept on making representations for restoration of the
plot/sub-lease deed. DDA agreed to restore the said lease deed in favour of
Mr. Dharam Chand subject to payment of restoration charges of Rs.48,674/-.
The said restoration charges were paid and by communication dated 30th
March, 1981 sub-lease deed in favour of Mr. Dharam Chand was restored.
This necessitated cancellation of the Sub-lease deed dated 5th July, 1973
executed in favour of Ms. Sharda Nath.

7. However, the factum of restoration of lease deed dated 17th July, 1965 in
favour of Mr. Dharam Chand was not communicated and was not brought on
record in Writ Petition No. 744/1974. In fact, the said writ petition had become
infructuous in view of the restoration of the sub-lease deed vide
communication dated 30th March, 1981. No one appeared for Mr. Dharam
Chand before the learned Single Judge, when Writ Petition No. 744/1974
came up for hearing and the said writ petition came to be dismissed by an ex
parte speaking judgement dated 30th March, 1989. As the learned Single
Judge was not informed about restoration of the sub-lease deed, in the
judgement dated 30th March, 1989, the said fact was not mentioned and
examined. Mr. Dharam Chand, however, filed an appeal being LPA No.
15/1990 highlighting that by letter dated 30th March, 1981 the sub-lease deed
in his favour had been restored. This factum was noticed by the Division
Bench and the Appeal was disposed of as infructuous as the plot in question
had been restored to the original allottee. The said Order was passed on 7th
November, 1991.The judgement dated 30th March,1989 got merged into this
order dated 7th November, 1991.
8. In the meanwhile, Ms. Sharda Nath had filed writ petition being Writ Petition
No. 1026/1981 challenging the communication dated 30th March, 1981
restoring the sub-lease deed in favour of Mr.Dharam Chand and cancelling

the lease deed in her favour. It is this Writ Petition No. 1026/1981, which was
dismissed by the learned Single Judge in his judgment dated 12th December,
1996 and the same has been made subject matter of the present appeal.
9. Contentions raised by the learned counsel for the appellant may be
enumerated as follows. Firstly, it was submitted that after Sub-lease Deed
dated 5th July, 1973 was executed in favour of Ms. Sharda Nath, the same
could have been cancelled only for violation of the terms of the lease and in
accordance with clauses III and IV. Secondly, it was stated that after the Sublease Deed dated 5th July, 1973 was executed, the Lessor i.e.; the President
of India or his nominee was only vested with revisionary interest and therefore
was not competent to restore the lease in favour of Mr. Dharam Chand and
cancel the lease deed in favour of Ms. Sharda Nath. Thirdly, it was stated that
there is violation of the principles of natural justice as before cancelling the
Sub-lease Deed dated 5th July, 1973, no show cause notice was issued and
personal hearing was not granted. Fourthly, it was stated that the lease deed
was restored in great haste and hurry, legal opinion was incorrect and the
entire exercise was malafide. Lastly, it has been contended that the legal
representatives of Mr. Dharam Chand have created third party interest in the
property. Some other contentions raised by the appellant have also been dealt
with.

10. Mr. Dharam Chand, has expired and is now represented by his legal
representatives Learned counsel for the Legal representatives of Mr. Dharam
Chand addressed arguments meeting and making submissions to the
contrary. It was highlighted that Ms. Sharda Nath was daughter of the
Secretary of the Society and that the cancellation of the sub-lease deed was
done with ulterior motives and for malafide reasons. He had drawn our
attention to the correspondence exchanged and the lightening speed with
which the authorities had executed the sub-lease deed dated 5th July, 1973 in
favour of Ms. Sharda Nath even though the proceedings under Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupant's) Act, 1971 had been initiated
against Mr. Dharam Chand but no final order had been passed. It was also
highlighted that Ms. Sharda Nath has been allotted another plot measuring
232.71 square yards being plot No. I-1 subject to final outcome of the litigation
between Ms. Sharda Nath and the legal representatives of Mr. Dharam
Chand.
11. The first and the foremost question that arises for consideration is whether
the respondent authorities had the right to restore the lease and revoke order
of cancellation of lease deed dated 17th July, 1965 made on 21st May, 1973
by order dated 30th March, 1981. The relevant clauses of the sub-lease deed
in this regard read as under:-

“III. If the sum or sums payable towards the premium

or the yearly rent hereby reserved or any part thereof
shall at any time be in arrear and unpaid for one
calendar month next after any of the days whereon
the same shall have become due, whether the same
shall have been demanded or not, or if it is
discovered that this Sub-Lease has been obtained by
suppression of any fact or by any mis-statement,
mis-representation or fraud or if there shall have
been, in the opinion of the Lessee or the Lessor, and
the decision of the Lessor shall be final, any breach
by the Sub-Lessee or by any person claiming
through or under him of any of the covenants or
conditions contained herein and in the Lease and on
his part to be observed or performed, then and in any
such case it shall be lawful for the Lessor or the
Lessee with the prior consent in writing of the Lessor,
notwithstanding the waiver of any previous cause or
right of re-entry upon the residential plot hereby subleased and the buildings thereon, to re-enter upon
and take possession of the residential plot and the
buildings and fixtures thereon, and thereupon this
Sub-Lease and everything herein contained shall
cease and determine in respect of the residential plot
so re-entered upon, and the Sub-Lessee shall not be
entitled to any compensation whatsoever nor to the
return of any premium paid by him.
(emphasis supplied)
PROVIDED that, notwithstanding any thing contained
herein to the contrary the Lessor, in his absolute
discretion, or the Lessee with the Prior consent in
writing of the Lessor, may, without prejudice to the
right of re-entry as aforesaid, waive of (sic) condone,
breaches, temporarily or otherwise, on receipt of
such amount by the Lessor or by the Lessee on
behalf of the Lessor and on such terms and
conditions as may be determined by the Lessor and
the Lessor or the Lessee whoever may be entitled
may also accept the payment of the said sum or

sums or the rent which shall be in arrear as aforesaid
together with interest at the rate of six per cent per
annum. The amounts for waiver or condonation
received by the Lessee from the Sub-Lessee shall be
paid forthwith by the Lessee to the Lessor subject to
such deductions as the Lessor may, in his absolute
discretion, allow to be retained by the Lessee.
IV. No forfeiture or re-entry shall be effected until the
Lessor or the Lessee has served on the Sub-Lessee
a notice in writing.
(a) specifying the particular breach complained of,
and
(b) if the breach is capable of remedy, requiring the
Sub-Lessee to remedy the breach,
and the Sub-Lessee fails within such reasonable time
as may be mentioned in the notice to remedy the
breach if it is capable of remedy, and in the event of
forfeiture or re-entry the Lessor in his discretion or
the Lessee, with the prior consent in writing of the
Lessor, may relieve against forfeiture on such terms
and conditions as the Lessor thinks proper.
Nothing in this clause shall apply to forfeiture or reentry.
(a) for breach of covenants and conditions relating to
sub-division or amalgamation, erection and
completion of building within the time provided and
transfer of the residential plot as mentioned in Clause
II, or
(b) in case this Sub-Lease has been obtained by
suppression of any fact, mis- statement, misrepresentation or fraud. ”

12. A careful perusal of the aforesaid Clauses reveals that the lessor has
been given power and authority to forfeit, make re-entry and take possession,
when the sub-lessee commits a breach of the terms and conditions of the
Sub-lease. Right of re-entry can be waived and breaches condoned on receipt
of such amount and on such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the
lessor.
13. Clause IV of the Sub-lease deed requires issue of show cause notice
before re-entry. However, no show cause notice is required to be issued in
cases of breach relating to sub-division of plot, amalgamation, transfer of plot
or failure to complete the building within time. In the present case, therefore,
Clause IV of the sub-lease deed will not apply as the breach complained of
was failure to erect and complete building within the prescribed time in terms
of lease deed dated 17th July, 1965. Clause IV deals with the procedural
aspect, which is to be followed when there is a breach and terms of the Sublease have been violated. In certain circumstances, the sub-lessee must be
given notice in writing and asked to rectify and remedy the breaches
complained of. In specified cases, right to forfeit or re-entry can be exercised
even without issue of show cause notice by the lessor.
14. Clause III entitles the lessor to re-enter upon and take possession of the
residential plot and building and structures thereon and thereupon this sub-

lease and everything therein contained shall cease and determine. This is
clear from the words used in the last portion of paragraph 1 of Clause III
quoted above. Thus, the sub-lease deed ceases to exist and is determined
not merely by issue of notice by re-entry but only when possession is taken
and thereon and thereupon the sub-lease deed ceases to exist and is fully
determined. Till possession is taken after order of re-entry, the sub-lease
continues to exist and is not fully determined. In Clause III, the draft man has
been careful to use the expression "re-enter” and not “cancellation” or
“termination". “Re-entry” in its normal connotation includes right to take
possession and enter upon the property.
15. The proviso to Clause III gives absolute discretion to the lessor to waive or
condone the breaches temporarily or otherwise on receipt of consideration or
on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the lessor. In fact, the
proviso begins with non-obstante clause which over rides all other clauses in
the sub-lease deed (this will include clause IV). It specifically stipulates that
the lessor has absolute discretion to waive or condone breaches
notwithstanding the conditions contained to the contrary in the sub-lease. This
absolute discretion of the lessor to waive or condone breaches is an
overriding power and authority given to the lessor in proviso to Clause III and
is not subject to Clause IV of the sub-lease deed. This absolute discretion can

also be exercised by the lessor where the sub-lessee has not taken prior
consent in writing from the lessor. Prior consent of the lessor is not a precondition for exercise of discretion to waive or condone breaches of the terms
of the sub-lease. The lessor can also call upon the sub-lessee to make
payment of the sum so determined together with the interest @ 6% per
annum. Payment of interest can only arise for past defaults and breaches and
not in cases of prior consent. Therefore, the proviso to Clause III postulates
two situations. Firstly, cases of prior consent in writing by the lessor to waive
conditions imposed for future. Secondly, the proviso equally applies to cases
where breaches have occurred but the lessor in its absolute discretion is
inclined to condone the same on payment of charges so determined, and
these may be payable with interest. We feel that the proviso will equally apply
to cases where right to re-entry has been exercised but possession of the plot
and actual re-entry in fact has not taken place.
16. The above interpretation given by us is in consonance with certain well
established principles of construction of deeds and documents. The first
general rule of interpretation of a deed or document is to read the document
itself as a whole and not in piece-meal and gather the intention of the parties
from the words used. (See in this regard, Odgers Construction of Deeds
and Statutes, 5th Edition, 1967 and the observations of the Supreme Court

in Delhi Development Authority versus Durga Chand Kaushik, reported in
(1973) 2 SCC 825).
17. The second principle is where two clauses disclose some conflict or
contradiction but the Clauses can be reconciled, one should give effect to all
the clauses rather than render one or more of them as nugatory. We should
try and resolve the conflict at the first instance, in view of principle expressed
in the maxim Ut Res Magis valeat Quam Pereat.
18. Thirdly, where it is not possible to resolve conflict between two clauses
and the same are irreconcievable, courts have evolved the principle or the
theory that what once has been granted cannot be taken away. A clear
disposition in an earlier clause cannot be withdrawn and cut down by a later
clause. (Refer Sahebzada Mohd. Kamgarh Shah versus Jagdish Chandra
Deb, reported in (1960) 3 SCR 604, Ram Kishore Lal versus Kamal Narain,
reported in AIR 1963 SC 890 and Forbes versus GIT, reported in (1922) 1
AC 256).
19. Fourthly, where there is a grant and an exception is carved out, the
exception is to the benefit of the granter and the Clause can be construed in
favour of the grantee if two reasonable interpretations are possible. In such
cases, interpretation in favour of the grantee and as against the granter

should be accepted. This principle does not apply when the exception so
carved out is not bad for uncertainty.
20. Lastly, rule of contra preferentem applies against the party/person who
has prepared the document in case of any ambiguity. As per this rule, a
document can be construed against a party who had prepared the same.
(See, United India Insurance versus Pushpalaya Printers reported in
(2004) 3 SCC 694).
21. In reaching the above conclusion, we have also kept in mind the policy
guidelines issued in 1988 that prescribe for payment of composition fee for
delay and default in construction of upto 25 years. The said guidelines also
state that even as per the policy in vogue before 21.7.1988, defaults beyond
three years were being condoned upto seven years or even after lapse of ten
years in terms of an earlier order of the Lieutenant Governor dated 17.2.1984.
One of the Clauses in the said guidelines/procedures for calculation of
composition fee published in the year 1988 reads as under:“2. (ii) Principle of General amnesty ending with 1975

shall apply to all cases where lease/sub leases have
been executed either directly or through Co-operative
Societies.”

22. It is clear from the guidelines that the lessor does not regard delay in
construction as an absolute and non-condoneable breach, that would result in
automatic and mandatory determination of the lease but a remedial breach,
subject to payment of composition charges. We have also kept in mind the
conduct of the lessor during this period whereby as a matter of routine the
breaches and defaults of failure to construct were condoned.
23. Sub-lease in favour of Mr. Dharam Chand was cancelled in the year 1973.
Acute shortage of building material, during the period 1971-1975 is a fact that
has been alluded to in two letters dated 10th May, 1971 and 19/20th August,
1974 written by Government of India, Ministry of Work and Housing. These
letters are available on the files of DDA. The first letter reads as under :“ I am directed to say that it has been decided by the

Government of India to conserve the use of building
materials for urgent and essential public works, as a
result of this decision, the availability of these
materials for the private sector is likely to be cut down
and its building activity slowed down to a great
extent. It may not be possible for the beneficiaries
under different social housing schemes etc to
complete construction of their houses within the
stipulated period due to non-availability or shortage of
the building materials. In the circumstances, it is
recommended that the State Government etc. may
give extensions of time liberally for completion of
houses by individuals.”

24. The second letter is virtually on similar lines stating, inter alia, that there
was acute shortage of cement in the country and there was a pressing need
to conserve cement for export and therefore Delhi Administration and DDA
should not resume plots on the ground of non-construction and extension of
time beyond stipulated period may be granted consistent with the availability
of building material. It is not disputed that due to shortage of steel, cement
and construction material, general amnesty was granted from 1st January,
1971 to 31st December, 1975 by the DDA and the Government of India (See
in this regard observations of the Court in Satish Kumar Kapoor versus
DDA and another reported in 107 (2003) DLT 41). In these circumstances, it
was rather unusual for DDA to cancel the allotment and re-enter the plot
bearing no. C-70 allotted to Mr.Dharam Chand on 21st May, 1973.The said
action cannot be justified. In fact there are representations of Mr.Dharam
Chand on record that due to non-availability and acute shortage of cement
and other material and also as his father had fallen sick he was unable to
construct the house, though he constructed the garage block and that
construction itself was sufficient compliance with the terms of the lease. The
file notings also reveal that Mr.Dharam Chand had repeatedly made
representations for restoration of the plot also pointing out other cases
wherein construction had not been made but no order for re-entry had been
passed and the defaults were condoned.

25. In cases of non-construction or construction beyond the period specified in
the sub-lease, policy decisions have been taken by the DDA to condone the
said breaches on payment of late construction charges. If the interpretation
put forward by the appellant is to be accepted, then defaults of the nature of
the sub-division, amalgamation, third party transfer or failure to erect and
complete the building within the prescribed time, are non-condonable defaults
on which the lessor has no discretion and has to forfeit and re-enter and take
possession. This interpretation cannot be accepted and if it is accepted, then
the policy decisions taken by the DDA/lessor to condone the aforesaid
breaches are liable to be set aside. We therefore do not accept the contention
of the appellant that defaults of sub-division, amalgamation, transfer and
failure to construct a building within time cannot under any circumstance be
condoned. These breaches can be condoned, but, depending upon merits of
each case and the policy in force at the instant time.
26. We are conscious of the fact that courts are normally reluctant to interpret
a contract on the basis of subsequent conduct of the parties. However, in the
case of Godhra Electricity Company Limited versus State of Gujarat,
reported in (1975) 1 SCC 199, the Supreme Court accepted the fact that the
conduct of the parties in rendering or receiving performances under contract
can be of assistance in interpreting statement made by the parties themselves

in the contract. The conduct of the parties is a further expression by the
parties to the meaning they had given and intended to give to the terms of the
contracts previously made. Subsequent practice and conduct can in certain
circumstances be taken into consideration, where there is scope for ambiguity
as it throws light on the meaning of a term or a clause. Though subsequent
statements cannot change the meaning of a word, phrase or clause which is
crystal clear from a plain reading of the same, in case of ambiguity, extrinsic
evidence in the shape of subsequent statements of both the parties and their
conduct is admissible.
27. To examine in the contention raised by the appellant that the restoration of
the lease and letter dated 30th March, 1981 was issued in haste and hurry, we
have examined the original files. The said original files reveal that a detailed
note dated 3rd December, 1980 was prepared and thereafter the same was
processed. Another note dated 4th December, 1980 followed this previous
note. In these notes, reference was made to the policy framed for restoration
and to the fact that Mr. Dharam Chand had met Vice Chairman, DDA to
pursue his case for the restoration of the sub-lease executed in his favour.
The notes recorded that the possession of the plot was with Mr.Dharam
Chand and the proceedings under the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 were halted in view of the stay granted by

the High Court of Delhi to the order of re-entry dated 10th May, 1973. As per
the restoration policy in cases of late construction, composition charges were
payable by the allottee. It was also noticed that in the present case
complications had arisen as the plot had been re-allotted to Ms. Sharda Nath,
a member of the Cooperative Society. In view of the re-allotment of the plot to
Ms.Sharda Nath difficulty had arisen. By note dated 23rd December, 1980 it
was directed that legal opinion should be obtained. On 28th January, 1981
legal opinion was given noticing that possession of the plot had not been
handed over to Ms.Sharda Nath. It was also observed in the legal opinion that
no lease deed should have been executed in favour of Ms. Sharda Nath
without obtaining actual physical possession and there was possibility of
connivance of some officers of the DDA and office bearers of the Society at
the relevant time which resulted in execution of the Sub-lease Deed dated 5th
July, 1973 in favour of Ms. Sharda Nath. It was suggested that Ms.Sharda
Nath should be allotted some other plot, and if no amicable settlement was
arrived at, the parties could approach Courts for settlement of their disputes.
However, legal advisor clearly opined that cancellation of the sub-lease deed
in favour of Mr. Dharam Chand was ill-advised and the execution and
registration of the Sub-lease Deed dated 5th July, 1973 in favour of Ms.
Sharda Nath was done in undue haste. Thereafter, the file was examined by
Commissioner (Land) on 7th February, 1981 who agreed with the view and

opinion given by the legal department. The Vice-Chairman, DDA vide Order
dated 19th February, 1981 observed that Mr. Dharam Chand was entitled to
restoration of sub-lease on payment of compounding fee in terms of the
policy. It was also observed that the Sub-lease executed in favour of
Ms.Sharda Nath was wrong and therefore should be treated as void ab initio.
The said order was approved by the Lt. Governor of Delhi. Thereafter,
composition fee in terms of the policy decision taken was calculated and paid.
28. We have also examined the file notings and hasty manner in which the
sub-lease deed in favour of the Mr. Dharam Chand was cancelled. The file
notings dated 2nd May, 1973 reveals that two Plots were available for
allotment on account of surrender and it was decided that these plots should
be allotted to Mr. Jagjivan Ram and Mr. V.C. Shukla. It was further observed
that plot bearing C-70 and F-1 might be offered by the Society to Ms. Sharda
Nath and Mr. Gurbachan Singh. The above notings were approved by the
Vice Chairman, DDA on 4th May, 1973, i.e.; even before the actual order for
re-entry of the plots in question had been passed. Lt. Governor on 10th May,
1973, (i.e. after allotment of plots to 4 persons on the waiting list was virtually
approved on 4th May,1973) directed that action for re-entry of plot no. C-70
and other plots should be taken and the Society should be asked to allot
these plots to other persons on the waiting list. On 21st May, 1973, Additional

Secretary (Legal Administration) in his note observed that it had been decided
to cancel the plots allotted to Mr.Dharam Chand and five others in terms of
the orders passed by the Lt. Governor. Another note dated 22nd May, 1973
was also prepared stating, inter alia, that in view of letters of cancellation
dated 21st May, 1973, five plots are available for allotment and accordingly it
was approved that first two plots measuring 1120 sq. yds. and 1013 sq. yds.
be allotted to Mr. Jagjivan Ram and Mr. V.C. Shukla and plot no. B-41 should
be allotted to Ms. Sharda Nath and plot no.C-70 may be allotted to Mr.Satnam
Shah instead of Gurbachan Singh. By letter dated 2nd May, 1969, Mr. Satnam
Shah had been directed to be kept at serial no.1 of the waiting list for
allotment of plot. This note was approved by the Vice Chairman, DDA as well
as Lt. Governor on 22nd May, 1973 itself.
29. The pace at which the files had moved is apparent. Ms. Sharda Nath is
the daughter of Mr. H.K Sanghi, the then Secretary of the Society. The said
office bearer it appears was trying to oblige the two influential political figures
and in turn he was being obliged by way of allotment of a flat to his daughter.
It is indeed inexplicable that the DDA did not even wait to get possession of
the plot from Mr. Dharam Chand and went ahead to allot the said plot to Ms.
Sharda Nath.

30. There were protests from Mr. Satnam Shah that he was in serial no. 1. He
was not considered for the 1st two plots on account of the difference in their
size. Mr. Satnam Shah protested that he should be put in serial No. 3 and
allotted plot No. B-41, as plot No. C-70 was allotted to him as he was earlier
treated at serial No. 4. Merit was found in the representation made by Mr.
Satnam Shah and he was placed at serial no.3 and Ms. Sharda Nath was
placed at serial no.4. The reason why Mr. Satnam Shah was anxious not to
be treated at serial no.4 was that plot no.C-70 was embroiled in dispute with
claim of Mr. Dharam Chand. There was virtually no difference in the size of
the plot nos. B-41 and C-70 which measured 802 sq.yds and 800 sq. yds.
respectively. Though this fact is not mentioned in the notes but the
representations made by Mr.Satnam Shah, make it apparent why he was
insisting that he should be allotted plot no. B-41 and not C-70. A natural
inference is that Mr. Satnam Shah did not want that he should be allotted a
disputed plot on which Mr. Dharam Chand had a claim which was pending
consideration. Thus allotment and registration of sub-lease deed dated 5th
July, 1973 and cancellation of sub-lease deed dated 17th July, 1965 is subject
to same criticism, as was exhibited when sub-lease deed of Mr. Dharam
Chand was restored in 1981, i.e.; undue haste and hurry. Both instances fall
foul on the same ground and are susceptible to challenge for the same
reasoning but with one difference. If cancellation of the sub-lease dated 17th

July, 1965 by letter dated 21st May, 1973 is struck down, the sub-lease dated
17th July, 1965 gets restored and order of restoration passed on 30th March,
1981 becomes immaterial. It is held accordingly.
31. The facts mentioned above are clear pointers that allotment and
registration of the Sub-lease Deed dated 5th July, 1973 in favour of Ms.
Sharda Nath was done with undue haste and it appears that there was some
interest in ensuring allotment of one plot to Ms. Sharda Nath when allotment
was made to other members on the waiting list who were well known political
figures and one Mr. Satnam Shah who was entitled to allotment in his own
right after the death of his father. There was no occasion or cause to execute
the Sub-lease Deed dated 5th July, 1973 in favour of Ms. Sharda Nath when
even possession of the plot had not been taken and Mr. Dharam Chand had
raised objections with regard to cancellation of plot. We may note here that
the Society had issued letters and telegrams claiming that possession of the
plot had been taken from Mr. Dharam Chand but this was found to be
incorrect when objection were raised. Ms. Sharda Nath was always aware
and conscious of the fact that Mr. Dharam Chand was the original allottee and
there was a dispute in respect of cancellation of his sub-lease. It is not a case
of an unwary purchaser who inspite of verification and due diligence was not
aware of an antecedent claim or right of a third person. Ms. Sharda Nath was

fully conscious of the claim of Mr. Dharam Chand. She was also aware that
dispute had been raised about cancellation of the plot, an injunction order had
been passed by the Court and till the claim of Mr. Dharam Chand was fully
adjudicated and decided she would not get possession of the plot. In this
regard we can also refer to letters written by and to DDA that Sharda Nath
cannot be given possession of the plot as the matter was sub-judice and
Mr.Dharam Chand had a claim in respect of the plot. Mr H.K Sanghi had filed
an counter affidavit in response to WP(C) 744/1974. Ms. Shrada Nath was
aware that her right, title and interest in the plot depends upon the right and
claim of Mr. Dharam Chand. If the later succeeds and the sub-lease deed in
his favour is restored, she cannot claim right on the plot. With open eyes and
fully conscious of the claim of Mr. Dharam Chand, Ms. Sharda Nath went
ahead and took her chance when she executed sub-lease deed dated 5th
July, 1973. The appellant therefore cannot now contend that cancellation of
the sub-lease dated 5th July, 1973 is contrary to the terms mentioned therein,
beyond clauses III and IV and the President of India or the Lt. Governor could
not have cancelled her sub-lease. The plea of the appellant that as per terms
of the sub-lease dated 5th July, 1973, it could not have been declared as null
and void, cannot be a ground to allow the writ petition or this appeal. For the
same reasons the plea of revisionary rights is also liable to be rejected. Fault
and error can be found with the DDA and the appellant in executing the Sub-

lease deed dated 5th July,1973, even without taking possession of the plot in
question.
32. The Appellant herein Ms. Sharda Nath was aware of the fact that the
possession of the plot was still with Mr. Dharam Chand and also the fact that
he was trying to get the order of re-entry recalled and get the sub-lease
restored. In view of the above facts, it is apparent that the Appellant willfully
took a risk by seeking execution of the sub-lease in her favour for the same
plot which had been allotted to Mr. Dharam Chand. It was well within the
knowledge of the appellant that in case Mr. Dharam Chand succeeds in
getting the sub-lease restored, the sub-lease executed in favour of Ms.
Sharda Nath would be cancelled. This fact is borne out of the letters written by
the appellant Ms. Sharda Nath to the DDA requesting for allotment of an
alternate plot in lieu of the Plot in question, subject to the result of the
litigation. We may also note that the Appellant has in fact been allotted an
alternate plot bearing number I-1 Maharani Bagh, measuring 232.71 Sq Yds.
33. The files also reveal that in 1971 actual physical inspection of plot no.C-70
was undertaken. It was found that garage and servant quarter upto first floor
had been constructed and the rest of the plot was lying vacant. There were
similar other plots. In fact, a report in respect of 25 plots in all had been
submitted. In most of the cases only garage blocks had been constructed and

rest of the plot was lying vacant. The file notings also reveal that a separate
note in respect of eight plots was prepared. In respect of plot no. C-70 it was
recorded as under:“5. Sh. Dharam Chand.
Plot No. 70-C measuring 800 sq.yds. was allotted to
Shri Dharam Chand and the sub-lease of the same
was executed on 17.7.65. The normal period of
construction expired on 27.5.66 but the building has
not been constructed so far. Show-cause notice for
non-completion was issued to him on 9.8.71.”

It was incorrectly recorded in this note that no building had been constructed
on the plot, whereas in fact garage block and first floor thereon had been
constructed. This note was approved by the Vice Chairman,DDA as well as Lt.
Governor.
34. The appellant has tried to project that restoration of the sub-lease and
withdrawal of the re-entry notice did not have sanction and approval of the
Lieutenant Governor. This is incorrect. The notes and observations made by
the Vice-Chairman for restoration of the lease in favour of Mr. Dharam Chand
subject to payment of penalty/composition fee was duly approved by the
Lieutenant Governor. Lieutenant Governor is not required to pass a detailed
speaking order. It cannot be doubted that the Lieutenant Governor had

accepted recommendation of the Vice-Chairman for restoration of the sublease deed in favour of Mr. Dharam Chand.
35. Another contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant was
with regard to the right of the Lt. Governor to restore the lease in favour of the
respondent no.4. It was submitted that such right only vests with the President
of India in terms of the sub-lease deed. We do not find any merit in the said
contention. We may note here that this objection was not raised in the writ
petition as noticed in the impugned Judgement . Under Clause X of the lease,
all powers exercisable by the lessor in the lease deed can be exercised by the
Chief Commissioner. The lessor in the present case being the President of
India. Under Article 229 of the Constitution of India all contracts made and in
exercise of executive power of the Union has to be expressed to be made by
the President. All such contracts have to be executed on behalf of the
President of India by such persons and in such manner as he made direct or
authorise. Clause X of the Sub-lease Deed dated 5th July, 1973 reads as
under :“X. (a) All powers exercisable by the Lesser under this
Sub-Lease may be exercised by the Chief
Commissioner. The Lessor may also authorise any
other officer or officers to exercise all or any of the
powers exercisable by him under this Sub-Lease.
(b) The Chief Commissioner may authorise any officer
or officers to exercise all or any of the powers which he

is empowered to exercise under this Sub-Lease except
the powers of the Lessor exercisable by him by virtue of
sub-clause (a) above.”

36. On going through the original files produced before us by DDA, we find
that as per Notification dated 1st February, 1966, the President had directed
that contracts and assurances of property made in exercise of the executive
power of the Union shall be exercised by the respective officers as specified
therein. In terms thereof action has been taken by the Vice Chairman, DDA
and Lt. Governor of Delhi. Thus, order for restoration of the sub-lease in
favour of Mr. Dharam Chand is in accordance with clause X. We may also
notice that there is a basic flaw or contradiction in the contentions raised by
the appellant. The order of re-entry against Mr. Dharam Chand was passed
and approved by the Vice Chairman, DDA and Lt. Governor of Delhi. The said
officers have also waived and condoned defaults in cases of nonconstruction.
37. It has been contended by the appellant that a lease is a right to enjoy and
possess an immoveable property. It is a valuable constitutional right under
Article 300A of the Constitution. There cannot be any doubt about the said
proposition. However, the said argument is equally applicable and also
supports the case of Mr. Dharam Chand. After all, by cancellation and
forfeiture of sub-lease, the said respondent was being deprived of the same

very right to enjoy and possess an immovable property. DDA could not have
discriminated against Mr. Dharam Chand by not extending time, whereas in
other cases time for construction was extended. As per the policy also time
could be extended.
38. The Appellant has vociferously contended that there has been violation of
principles of natural justice in so far as, no notice and hearing was given to the
appellant before their sub-lease was cancelled or declared void. As stated
above, the said declaration and cancellation was a natural consequence of
restoration of the sub-lease in favour of Mr. Dharam Chand. It is the stand of
the respondents that for restoration of the sub-lease of Mr. Dharam Chand,
the appellant was not required to be heard and no show cause notice was
required to be issued. There may be some merit in the said contention but as
subsequent sub-lease had been issued for the same very plot/property in
favour of the appellant, it would have been better and more appropriate if the
appellant had been informed and given a chance to make a representation.
However, we are not inclined to allow the present appeal solely on this basis.
Principles of natural justice have to be complied with to ensure that the
decision taken is just, fair and appropriate. It also prevents unnecessary
litigation by an aggrieved party whose contentions and objections are not
heard. Supreme Court in S.L. Kapoor verus Jagmohan, reported in (1980) 4

SCC 379, had observed that non-observance of principles of natural justice in
itself causes prejudice,but in subsequent cases, the Supreme Court has
accepted the doctrine of useless formality theory, at least in cases where
there are admitted or indisputable facts (See Aligarh Muslium University
Versus Mansoor Ali Khan Reported in (2000) 7 SCC 529). Remote chance
of success or real likelihood of success has been applied in some cases
(State of Manipur versus Y.Token Singh Reported in (2007) 5 SCC 65).
However, there is unanimity that exercise of writ Jurisdiction is discretionary in
cases where there is no violation of the constitutional or mandatory statutory
requirements but principles of natural justice have been violated. In such
cases, writ courts always have discretion whether or not to grant relief to the
petitioner, who approaches the Court on the ground that there is violation of
right of hearing. (Refer M.C. Mehta versus UOI and Others, reported in
(1999) 6 SCC 237).
39. In the present case, we have examined the entire case of both the
appellant and the respondent No. 4 on merits. Therefore, no purpose would
be served at this belated stage to remand the matter back to the Lt. Governor
specially when we are satisfied that the order of restoration of lease of
respondent No. 4 is just, fair and appropriate. We, therefore, refuse to
exercise the discretion to allow the appeal solely on the ground of violation of

Principles of Natural Justice. We may also notice here that respondent No. 4,
Mr. Dharam Chand had raised objection to the right and entitlement of the
appellant to be allotted any plot. It was submitted that Ms. Sharda Nath was
16 years old in 1966, when she was enrolled as a member of the co-operative
society and wrongly kept on the waiting list. This it was submitted was
contrary to the Bombay Co-operative Societies Act, 1925, and the rules which
were applicable at the relevant time. It was also stated that the appellant was
a dependent daughter and as her father Mr. H.K. Sanghi had been allotted a
plot, no allotment could have been made in her favour in view of Clause 5 of
the perpetual lease deed between the President of India and the society. We
have referred to the said allegations but refrain from giving any final verdict as
it would not be fair to go into these aspects after almost four decades specially
when her allotment has been approved by the DDA. In any case the appellant
has been allotted plot No. I-1 in the same colony, albeit of a smaller size.
40. The appellant had also raised allegations that the legal representatives of
Mr. Dharam chand have entered into agreements with third parties to sell and
transfer the property in violation of the terms of the lease. The legal
representatives of respondent No. 4 have denied the said allegations and it
has been stated that the agreements entered into do not violate terms of the
sub-lease deed. We are not examining and going into this aspect and leave it
open to the DDA to examine whether there has been violation of the terms of
the sub-lease deed, take action as per the terms of the sub-lease deed and

their policies. We may note that even if legal representatives of Mr. Dharam
Chand have violated terms of the sub-lease deed, the plot/property is liable to
be re-entered and vest in the lessor. This by itself would not revive the sublease deed in favour of the appellant. On forfeiture, the property/plot once reentered would have to be dealt with and transferred to a third party in
accordance with law. We do not think the appellant has any preemptive right
to allotment of the plot/property, if after restoration of the sub-lease Mr.
Dharam Chand or his legal representatives have violated the conditions of the
said sub-lease. Right of the appellant to the said property/plot is based and
dependent upon restoration of the sub-lease in favour of respondent No. 4. It
is this restoration, which was the subject matter of the writ petition and this
appeal. The appellant's success or failure in this appeal depends upon
whether the restoration of the sub-lease in favour of respondent No. 4 is
justified and in accordance with law. Subsequent breach, if any, of the sublease by respondent No. 4 or his legal representations will not entitle the
appellant to allotment or restore the sub-lease deed in her favour.
41. In view of the aforesaid observations, we find no merit in the present
appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed. In view of the facts and
circumstances there would be no order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)

CHIEF JUSTICE
MARCH 4, 2008.
VKR/P

