WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

*
+

1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) Nos.1590/2008,
8142/2007,
8167/2007,
8616/2007,
9093/2007,
1046/2008,
1074/2008,
1142/2008,
1188/2008,
69/2008 & 1405/2008

%

1593/2008,
8181/2007,
1040/2008,
1085/2008,
1189/2008,

7967/2007,
8506/2007,
1045/2008,
1086/2008,
1294/2008,

Date of Decision : 08th April, 2008.

CHHANGA LAL
RAJ KUMAR

..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1590/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1593/2008.
Through Mr.Pankaj Kumar, Advocate.

RISHABH KUMAR JAIN
SWATI GARG
VIBHA AGGARWAL
V.P.GUPTA

..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 7967/2007.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 8167/2007.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 8181/2007.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 8616/2007.
Through Mr. Sugriv Dubey, Advocate

RAJESH MAKKAR & ORS. ..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1405/2008.
Through Mr.S.K.Sinha, Ms.Parvinder Kaur
Malhotra and Ms.Ritika Gupta, Advocates.
MANIT GUPTA

..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 9093/2007.
Through Mr. D K Sharma, Advocate.

VERSUS

M.C.D.

..... Respondent
Through Ms.Madhu Tewatia with Ms.Sidhi
Arora,
Advocates
for
MCD
in
WP(C)Nos.7967/07,
8616/2007,
&
8167/2007.
Ms.Mansi Gupta, Advocate for MCD in
WP(C)Nos.1593/2008.
Ms.Sumita Kapil, Standing Counsel for
MCD with G.P.Dwivedi, Advocate in WP(C)

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

2

Nos.1590/2008.
Ms.Smita
Shankar,
for
MCD
with
G.P.Dwivedi,
Advocate
in
WP(C)
No.1189/2008.
Mr.Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate for MCD
in WP(C)Nos. 9093/2007 & 1405/2008.
Mr. Anoop Bagai, Advocate for respondent
no.1 in WP(C) No.8181/07.

AND
JAI PARKASH
RAMESH KUMAR

ASHOK KUMAR JAIN
SHYAM SUNDER
RAMESH CHAND
SANJAY MAUSHIK
RAJESH KUMAR
BABITA MANGAL
VISHNU PRASAD
RAJESH KUMAR
RISHI PRAKASH

..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 8142/2007.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 8506/2007.
Through Mr. Prabhat Ranjan, Advocate.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1046/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1074/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1085/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1086/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1142/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1188/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1189/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1045/2008.
..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1040/2008.
Through Mr.S.K.Sinha, Ms.Parvinder Kaur
Malhotra and Ms.Ritika Gupta, Advocates.

RAJNI GUPTA

..... Petitioner in W.P.(C) 1294/2008.
Through Mr. Ajit Prasad, Advocate.
VERSUS

M.C.D. & Anr.

..... Respondents.
Through Ms.Mansi Gupta, Advocate for
MCD Mr.S.S.Sahu for Ms.Sonia Sharma,
Advocate
for
G.N.C.T.
in
WP(C)No.1294/2008.
Ms. Madhu Tewatia with Ms. Sidhi Arora,
Advocates for MCD in 8142/2007.
Ms. Mansi Gupta, Advocate for MCD in
WP(C) No.1074/2008.
Mr.Mukesh Gupta, Advocate for MCD in

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

3

WP(C)No.1085/2008.
Mr.Sanjay Goel, Advocate for MCD in
WP(C)No.1045/2008.
Mr.Rajeev
Sharma,
Advocate
for
respondent no.2 in WP(C)No.8506/2007.
Mr.S.P.Sharma with Ms.Shishir Singh,
Advocates for respondent no.2 in WP(C)
No.8142/2007.
Mr.P.L.Gautam, Advocate for MCD in
WP(C)No.1142/2008.
Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate for MCD
in WP(C) No.1189/2008 and 1040/2008.
Mr.Ajay Arora, Advocate for MCD in WP(C)
No. 1040/2008.
Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate for
respondent no.2 in WP(C) Nos. 1046/08,
1142/08, 1086/08, 1085/2008, 1074/08,
1188/08 and 1198/08.
Ms.
Smita
Shankar,
Advocate for
respondent no.1 in WP(C) No. 1188/08 and
1198/08

AND
DHARAMVIR SINGH
Through

:

… Petitioner.
Mr. Shiv Kumar

Sharma,

Advocate.
Versus
UOI & ORS.

…Respondents.
Through : Mr. V. Babu Joseph, Advocate.
for UOI.
Ms. Suparna Srivastava, Advocate for
MCD.

CORAM :
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

4

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

Menace of stray cattle in Delhi has resulted in a series of

directions being issued by this Court in WP(C) No.3791/2000 titled
as ―Common Cause Versus Union of India‖. Municipal Corporation
of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as MCD for short) prepared a resettlement scheme for shifting of unauthorized dairies to Ghogha
on the outskirts of Delhi. Approximately 180 acres of land has been
earmarked and allotted to MCD to develop a colony on selffinancing basis. Allotment of dairy plots was to be made on first
come first serve basis as per circular no.539/Dir./VS./2006 dated
1/8/2006 issued by MCD. Public notices were thereafter issued
inviting applications for allotment of dairy plots. The relevant public
notice taken on by MCD reads as under :
― Hon‘ble Delhi High court has issued directions in
writ petition no.3791/2000 Common Cause Vs.
Union of India and others that all the unauthorized
dairies run in the Urban area of Delhi be got closed.
In compliance the Government has taken the
decision to relocate in developed area in Ghogha
the unauthorized dairies. There is permission to
carry on dairy activities in this area in the master
plan as also this area can be approached
conveniently through road.
All the dairy owners are therefore informed by
this notice that the Delhi Municipal Corporation is
going to start development in Ghogha a dairy colony
and is also inviting applications from the dairy

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

5

owners operating within the city area for booking of
plot which is as follows :1. 60 sq.mtr. plot for fairy with five cattles.
2. 96 sq.mts. plot for dairy with eight cattles.
The rate/price of the developed plot would be
Rs.2500/- per sq.mts. The rate/price of the plot is
inclusive of development charges i.e. of civil work,
road, sewerage, electricity, water, gardening and
cleaning. It does not include the expenses required
for putting of the shed for the cattle. The said
expense will have to be borne by the owner of the
plot.
The owner of the cattles according to the
requirements can book plot in the office of the
Veterinary Office of the concerned zone. The price
of the plot will have to be deposited only after
acceptance of the booking by the department.
Thereafter date for deposit of the amount will be
notified.
Those persons who will not book the plot, they
will have to close down their dairies immediately
otherwise will have to suffer consequences. Plot
can be booked by 20th September, 2004.
/- Rakesh Mehta
Commissioner
Delhi Municipal Corporation.‖

2.

The form prescribed by MCD in column 4 required the

applicant to state the place where the dairy was being presently
run and column 5 required the applicant to give details of number
of cattles and the size of the plot for which application was being
made i.e. 60 sq.mts. or 96 sq.mts. The applicant was also required
to verify the application form by declaring that the information
furnished by him was true and correct to his knowledge and

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

6

nothing was concealed and in case any information given in the
form was found to be incorrect, the applicant would be responsible
for the same and would face legal consequences.
3.

5857 applications were received for booking of as many as

8344 dairy plots out of which 2569 applications were for plots
measuring 60 sq.mts., while the remaining 5775 applications were
for plots measuring 96 sq.mts. Thereafter by public notices
published in news papers on 13.10.2004, the applicants were
required to deposit 50% of the developed cost of the plot i.e.
Rs.1250/- per sq. mts. The balance amount was payable after
layout plan, roads and drains were constructed. The last date of
payment of Rs.1250/- per sq. Mts. was extended upto 31.1.2005.
4. Said applications were examined and thereafter in the month of
May and August, 2005 allotment letters were issued by MCD. The
allotment letter stated as under :
― This is to certify that the aforesaid plot(s) is/are
allotted in the Ghogha Dairy Colony for the
purposes of running the dairy activities only. The
possession of the plot(s) shall, however, be handedover only on payment of the remaining 50% of the
plot(s) cost, within one month subject to terms and
condition of allotment.‖
5. Thus, the respondents had sufficient time to verify and examine
the applications and thereafter allotment letters were issued. In all
cases petitioners have paid 50% or 100% towards the price of plot
as demanded in the allotment letter. However, possession of the

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

7

plots has not been handed over to them.
6.

Allegations about fraudulent allotment of plots led the court

to pass an order in the Common Cause case (Supra) on 30th
August, 2006 directing that running of dairy business would be the
sole criteria for allotment and if anyone was found ineligible on that
criteria, possession of the plot shall not be delivered to him. In a
connected writ petition titled ―Vikash Jain Vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi
bearing W.P.(C) No.14715/2005, the court directed that even
provisional allotment should be made after verification and not
otherwise. Allegations were also made against the members of the
Monitoring Committee which was formed. In these circumstances
the court in the Common Cause case (Supra) vide order dated 18th
March, 2007 re-constituted the Monitoring Committee. On 5th May,
2007 the court recorded that MCD had admitted in their additional
affidavit that 67% allotments made in Ghogha dairy complex by the
Veterinary Officer were found to be wrong and bogus after
verification as the applicants concerned did not meet the eligibility
criteria of having a dairy. The Veterinary Officer was suspended
but it appears that he approached a civil court and obtained a stay
order. The case of the Veterinary Officer was that allotments were
subject to verification of the eligibility of the allottee to be carried
out by the Micro Chipic Agency. [see in this regard detailed order
passed by this Court in case of Common Cause (Supra) dated

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

8

31st May, 2007) reported in 141 (2007) DLT 164].
7.

The Monitoring Committee constituted by this court held

several meetings to examine and verify the applications and
ensure that plots are allotted to eligible persons and bogus
allottees are weeded out. Zonal Committees were formed to visit
premises of each and every applicant and verify, whether he was
having an illegal or unauthorized dairy. The team consisted of the
Zonal Officer, Veterinary Doctor from the Govt. of NCT of Delhi and
SHO in each of the 12 zones. In this manner about 1373
applications have been verified out of which 535 applications are
found to be valid and meeting the eligibility criteria and 838
applications are found to be made applicants who do not meet the
eligibility criteria.
8.

There is no dispute that applicants or persons not meeting

the eligibility criteria cannot be and should not be allotted plots. In
the present case I am satisfied that the petitioners do not meet the
eligibility criteria. I have also examined the writ petitions and find
that in most of the cases there is no evidence or material to show
that the petitioners were in fact running or are running an illegal
dairy. Cases where there is some reliable material or document,
which creates a doubt have been segregated and MCD has been
asked to file reply on merits. To be fair to the counsel for the
petitioners in most of the cases they did not press and gave up

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

9

their claim for allotment of plots after initial hesitation.
9. Thus, there has been misrepresentation on part of the
petitioners herein. MCD has submitted the original files maintained
by them with respect to each of the individual applicant-petitioner
for the plots at Ghogha Dairy Colony. I will make reference to the
application filed by Mr. Rishabh Kumar Jain, the petitioner in WP
(Civil) No. 7967 of 2007, the lead case in the present bunch of
petitions. The petitioner in unequivocal terms had stated that he
had been running a dairy business from the premises bearing no.
484/5A-3B Shalimar Park, Shahadara, New Delhi. He has further
mentioned that he had 15 cattle and for the said purpose he has
sought allotment of three plots measuring 60 sq Mtrs.; each at
Ghogha. MCD had issued him an allotment letter on the basis of
this representation by the petitioner. However, on inspection it was
found that the petitioner was running a sweet shop and was not
having any illegal dairy. While the petitioner does sell dairy
products from the said shop but that by itself does not satisfy the
eligibility criteria- ―running an illegal/unauthorised Dairy within
Delhi‖. The said being the sole criterion for allotment of plots, nonfulfilment of the said condition disqualifies the petitioner. The
petitioner knew that he is not entitled to allotment of plot and had
made a misrepresentation. Therefore MCD is well within it‘s rights
to rescind the consent so granted, as the same is vitiated on

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

10

account of the misrepresentation played by the petitioner. In view
of the above, the claim for allotment of plots is liable to be rejected.
10.

The main issue in question is whether the petitioners are

entitled to refund of 50% or 100% of amount deposited by them
towards purchase of plot. The petitioners have made a prayer that
the entire amount deposited by them should be refunded. MCD on
the other hand has taken the stand that the entire amount is liable
to be forfeited. In the counter affidavit filed by the MCD in the lead
case

of

Rishab

Kumar

Jain

Vs.

MCD

bearing

W.P.(C)

No.7967/2007 it is stated that the decision to forfeit the money
deposited by the petitioner was taken by the Stray Cattle
Committee for the following reasons :
― 4. Refund of money in respect of ineligible
applicants
The Committee recommends that the earnest
money deposited by the ineligible applicant dairy
owners be not refunded and the same would stand
forfeited in pursuance of directions dated
30.04.2006 of the Hon‘ble High Court of Delhi and
separate action should also be contemplated
against such ineligible applicant diary owners in
consultation with the Law Department for booking of
the dairy plots fraudulently. The applicants in their
applications for allotment had categorically declared
that –
“It is certified that the above information is
true and correct to the best of my knowledge
and belief and nothing has been concealed
therefrom. In case, the same (in part &/or in
whole) is found incorrect at any stage, I shall
solely be responsible and shall be liable for
action, as per law.”

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

11.

11

Thereafter, letters were written by the MCD stating inter alia

as under :
―2. The Hon‘ble High Court of Delhi, vide its orders
dated 30.08.2006, inter-alia, directed as under : ‗…………..The running of dairy business
will be the sole criteria to allot the plots with
possession and if anyone found to be
ineligible on the aforesaid criteria the
possession shall not be given to such
applicants. Similarly, if a person after taking
possession of the plot is found misusing the
same for the purpose other than running of
dairy, the allotment will stand cancelled and
money deposited will be forfeited by the
MCD………….‘
3. As per the verification reports furnished by the
Zonal Committee, constituted in pursuance of the
decision of the Stray Cattle Committee (appointed
by the Hon‘ble High Court of Delhi vide its orders
dated 08.03.2007), you have not been found
running dairy at the address as mentioned in the
application form while seeking booking of the dairy
plot(s).
4. In compliance of direction of the Hon‘ble High
Court of Delhi dated 31.05.2007 in CWP
No.3791/2000 (Common Cause Society Vs. UOI &
Ors.), you are hereby informed that your
booking/allotment of dairy plot(s) under Ghogha
Dairy Colony Project stands cancelled and the
amount deposited towards cost of the dairy plot(s) is
forfeited by the MCD pursuant to the directions
dated 30.08.2006 of the Hon‘ble High Court of
Delhi.
5. This is without prejudice to the rights of MCD to
take legal action against you in accordance with law
for booking the dairy plot(s), in question, on false
declaration.‖
12.

It is apparent that MCD has misread the order dated 30th

August, 2006 of this court passed in Common Cause case (Supra).

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

12

This is clear from the portion of the said order quoted in the letter of
cancellation itself. I have also read the order passed on 30th
August, 2006. The relevant portion of which reads as under :
―With regard to the development of Dairy Colony at
Ghogha (Narela) although vide order dated
10.11.2005 we had directed the MCD to hand over
the possession of the plots to the dairy owners but it
seems that the statement was made by the MCD
without realizing that adequate electricity and water
lines are not available and infrastructure has not
been developed. It has been stated in the report
that by the end of October, 2006 the NDPL and
Delhi Jal Board will be in a position to complete the
electrification and water pipelines and thereafter the
possession of dairy plots to the eligible applicants
after due verification of cattles through Micro chips
shall be started. It is stated in the report that the
process of verification will start in the first week of
December, 2006 and only those persons who are
carrying on the dairy business in Delhi and will carry
on the same in future will be provided the
possession of dairy plots as per the undertaking
given by them at the time of provisional booking of
their dairy plots. The running of dairy business will
be the sole criteria to allot the plots with possession
and if anyone found to be ineligible on the aforesaid
criteria the possession shall not be given to such
applicants. Similarly, if a person after taking
possession of the plot is found misusing the same
for the purpose other than running of dairy, the
allotment will stand cancelled and money deposited
will be forfeited by the MCD. The MCD has assured
that no plot would be allotted with possession to any
applicant without proper verification and permission
from the Chairman of the Committee. It has also
been noted in the report that MCD has provided a
reprieve to illegal dairy owners in Delhi to continue
their dairy work in their houses so long the plots
applied by them at Ghogha dairy colonies are not
provided to them in order to achieve mischievous
object of continuing illegal dairies in Delhi.‖

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

13.

13

Two directions have been given by the Court in the said

order. Firstly that allotment of plots should be made after proper
verification by MCD and the sole criterion for allotment should be
that the applicant should be carrying on dairy business. Any person
who was not eligible would not be given possession of a plot. The
second direction given by the court in the said order was that if a
person after taking possession of the plot is found misusing the
same i.e. using the plot for any purpose other than using the same
for the purpose of running of a dairy, he will incur penalty of
cancellation of the plot and forfeiture of the money deposited by
him. The distinction between the two directions given by the Court
has been completely overlooked by the Committee and the MCD.
The order has been misread and misunderstood. No direction was
given by the Court for forfeiture of the money deposited by an
applicant in case the applicant was not eligible. Onus was put on
MCD to verify the applications for allotment.

MCD was to ensure

that only persons carrying on or running an illegal dairy business
are given possession of plots.
14.

The Committee has also committed a mistake by incorrectly

recording that the petitioners/applicants had paid or deposited any
earnest money. The petitioners/applicants had not deposited any
earnest money with MCD. I have quoted the public notice inviting
offers. Public notice did not mention or state that any earnest

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

14

money was to be deposited by the applicant. Public notices issued
thereafter asking the applicants to deposit 50% of the purchase
price as advance payment did not state that what was being paid
was earnest money or an amount that could be forfeited. Rs.1250/was required to be deposited purchase cost/price. The allotment
letter also did not state that the amount deposited or to be
deposited was earnest money. The petitioners/applicants therefore
have deposited part or whole consideration for purchase of the plot.
No earnest money was required to be deposited under the scheme,
nor was the same deposited by the petitioners. The reasons
recorded by the Committee, therefore, proceed on entirely wrong
assumption. The factual foundation itself is incorrect and based on
wrong premise. Error has been committed by the respondent/MCD
in their decision making process.
15.

Learned counsel for the respondent/MCD submitted that the

petitioners had made false and incorrect representation and
therefore, the amount deposited by the petitioners being 50% of the
price of the plot or 100% of the price of the plot is liable to be
forfeited. This court thereafter asked the parties to examine the
provision of the Contract Act, 1872 and it was pointed out that even
in case of factual or fraudulent misrepresentation, doctrine of
Restitution applies subject to right of MCD to deduct or set off
damages suffered. Doctrine of Pari Delicto was referred to.

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

15

Learned counsel for the respondent/MCD thereafter prayed for
some time to get instructions but on 10th March, 2008 it was stated
that MCD is not ready to reconsider their decision to forfeit the
entire amount deposited by the petitioners.
16.

At the outset I may note that in the public notices and in the

application form there is no clause for forfeiture. Even in the
allotment letter it is not stated that the amounts deposited by the
petitioners can be forfeited. The original scheme and the resolution
passed by the MCD on 25/10/2004 do not contain any provision for
forfeiture of money deposited by an applicant. The scheme as
prepared states that the applications for allotment of plots may be
invited for shifting of dairies, scrutinized and verified by MCD. If
found eligible, applicants were to be allotted plots for establishing a
dairy on, no profit, no loss basis.
17. Law of Contract is codified law. Though the Contract Act is not
a complete Code but where the Act is applicable and covers a
case, it is not necessary to look beyond the statute and apply
principles of equity, justice and good conscious. (Refer, Lala
Kapoor Chand Godha versus Mir Nawab Himayatali Khan
reported in (1963) 2 SCR 168).
18.

Sections 2 (g) – 2(i) of the Contract Act define the terms

―contract‖, ―void contract‖ and ―voidable contract‖. An agreement
enforceable by law is contract. The contract is an agreement or set

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

16

of promises giving rise to obligations which can be enforced or are
recognized by law. Public notices issued by MCD invited offers. It
was an invitation but restricted to unauthorized dairy owners. The
petitioners, therefore, have made a misrepresentation of fact in
their applications seeking allotment, which as per law of contract
was

an

offer.

The

respondent/MCD

on

the

basis

of

misrepresentation initially/provisionally had made allotment to the
petitioners but subsequently rescinded/cancelled the allotment but
before possession is given.
19.

The terms ―void‖ and ―voidable‖ contract are separate and

distinct. A void contract is invalid since inception. It is no contract
and is still born. Void contracts have to be distinguished from
voidable contracts or contracts which become void subsequently
after they have been validly executed and entered into. Voidable
contracts are not still born and are contracts in the eyes of law.
Voidable contracts are enforceable in law at the instance or option
of the innocent party or can be rescinded by the said party. They
remain a contract till the right to rescind is exercised.
20.

Voidable contracts can be divided into two groups. Contracts

which are voidable at the inception itself and contracts which are
not voidable at the inception but become voidable due to
subsequent defaults. (See, Sections 39, 53, 55 of the Contract
Act). Sections 19 and 19A deal with voidable contracts at their
inception. The said Sections read as under :-

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

17

―Sections 19. Voidability of agreement
without free consent:- When consent to an
agreement is caused by coercion, fraud or
misrepresentation, the agreement is a
contract voidable at the option of the party
whose consent was so caused.
A party to contract, whose consent was
caused by fraud or misrepresentation, may,
if he thinks fit, insist that the contract shall be
performed, and that he shall be put in the
position in which he would have been if the
representations made had been true.
Exception. – If such consent was caused by
misrepresentation or by silence, fraudulent
within the meaning of s 17, the contract,
nevertheless, is not voidable, if the party
whose consent was so caused had the
means of discovering the truth with ordinary
diligence.
Explanation – A fraud or misrepresentation
which did not cause the consent to a
contract of the party on whom such fraud
was practised, or to whom such
misrepresentation was made, does not
render a contract voidable.

19A. Power to set aside contract induced
by undue influence – When consent to an
agreement is caused by undue influence,
the agreement is a contract voidable at the
option of the party whose consent was so
caused.
Any such contract may be set aside either
absolutely or, if the party who was entitled to
avoid it has received any benefit thereunder,
upon such terms and conditions as to the
Court may seem just.‖

21.

In a case of fraudulent misrepresentation, the innocent party

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

18

can rescind the contract or claim damages or both. MCD is,
therefore, justified in rescinding the contract and also has a right to
claim damages. In cases of misrepresentation of fact at precontractual stage the innocent party (MCD in the present case) is
entitled to recover damages for misrepresentation only and not for
―expectation or interest‖ in the contract as if the same has been
executed and performed. Damages are awarded in such cases on
the assumption that the contract had not been made and not on the
basis as if the contract had been made. The claimant i.e. MCD is
entitled to be put back in the same position as if the contract had
never

come

into

existence.

[See;

Doyle

versus

Olby

(Ironmongers) reported in (1969) 2QB 158]. Thus, MCD is entitled
to be put back in the same financial position as they would have
been, if no false mis-representation had been made.
22.

Once an innocent party exercises the option and rescinds the

contract, the contract becomes void and thereafter right to
restitution in terms of Section 64 of the Contract Act gets attracted.
In Satgur Prasad versus Har Narain Das, reported in AIR 1932
PC 89, it was observed that once a voidable contract has been
avoided, any person who has received any advantage under such
contract is bound to restore it to the person from whom he had
received it, or make compensation therefor. Quoting from Kerr on
Fraud and Mistake it was held that a party exorcising his option to

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

19

rescind is entitled to be restored as far as possible to his former
position.
23.

Section 64 of the Contract Act applies in such cases and

reads as under :―Section 64. Consequences of rescission
of voidable contract – When a person at
whose option a contract is voidable rescinds
it, the other party thereto need not perform
any promise therein contained in which he is
promisor. The party rescinding a voidable
contract shall if, he has received any benefit
thereunder from another party to such
contract, restore such benefit, so far as, may
be, to the person from whom it was
received.‖
24.

Thus in cases of voidable contracts a party rescinding the

contract must restore the benefit received under the contract to the
other side in terms of Section 64. This is, however, subject to the
principle of restituto integrum. The intention is that status quo
ante should be restored. This necessarily implies that expenditure
wasted and spent by the innocent party by relying on the wrong
statement should be paid to the said party. Damages are paid to
the aggrieved or the innocent party as a consequence of the
representation being untrue. (Refer, Smith New Court Securities
Ltd. Versus Scrimgeour Vickers (Asset Management) Ltd.,
reported in 1996 (4) All.Eng. Reporter 769).
25.

It is in this context that the legislature has been careful to use

the words ―restore as far as may be‖ in Section 64 of the Contract Act. A

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

20

person rescinding the contract is bound to return the benefit he has
received under the contract and is entitled to set off damages
suffered at the hands of the defaulting party. In Murlidhar
Chatterjee versus International Film Co. Ltd. reported in AIR
1943 PC 34, it was held that a party that has rightfully rescinded a
contract can recover damages from the party at default and is
afforded facility of set off. His just claims have to be met but further
exaction is not justified by the default in view of section 64 of the
Contract Act. Where a payment has been made under a contract
which –for what so ever reason – becomes void, duty of restitution
would seem to emerge.
26.

Doctrine of Pari Delicto applies to immoral or illegal contracts

and is based upon the principle that no Court will lend its aid and
entertain action founded upon an immoral or illegal act that forms
basis of a cause of action. Courts do not assist a plaintiff who is
guilty of having entered into an immoral or illegal agreement with a
third party. In such cases sometimes, right to restitution is not
granted on the ground that the Court will not help particeps
criminis and could reject the claim on the line of principle ―let
estate lie where it lies”.

The Black‘s Law Dictionary defines

the term Pari Delicto as follows“In equal fault, in a similar offence or crime,
equal in guilt or in fault.”

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

21

Doctrine of Pari Delicto is not applicable to the facts of the
present case. Parties were not entering into an illegal or immoral
contract forbidden by law. It cannot be said that MCD was entering
into an illegal or immoral transaction with the petitioners. As far as
MCD is concerned, MCD was entering into a legal transaction or a
contract. The present case is one of fraudulent representation by
one party. As far as Contract Act in India is concerned the
respondent/MCD is entitled to rescind the contract and also claim
damages. (Reference can also be made to Sita Ram versus
Radha Bai reported in AIR 1968 SC 534). The allegation that
there was illegality perpetuated between an officer of MCD and the
petitioners and other applicants and therefore Doctrine of Pari
Delecto applies cannot be accepted. Firstly, the allegation that the
petitioner –applicants had joined hands is not pleaded but
mentioned only in written submissions. No such plea has been
taken in the counter affidavit filed in the case of Rishabh kr. Jain
(WP (Civil) No. 7967/2007) the lead case in which counter has
been filed and the counter is being read as reply to other writs also.
There is no conclusive evidence to support the allegation, though
FIR against the officer is pending investigation. Secondly the
contract is not between the petitioners and the officer but between
the petitioners and MCD. In Kedar Nath Motani versus Prahlad
Rai, reported in (1960) 1 SCR 861 it was observed:

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

22

―Where both parties do not show that there
was any conspiracy to defraud a third person or
to commit any other illegal act, the maxim, in
pari delicto etc., can hardly be made applicable.
The appellants and the answering respondents
were not in pari delicto. The respondents
claimed to be innocent parties, who had
acquired the lands themselves, and the
appellants, on the other hand, stated that the
respondents knew nothing about the matter and
were not even consulted. In our opinion, the
application of the maxim was erroneous.‖
27.

In the same case the Supreme Court also examined doctrine

of ex dolo malo non oritur actio and it was observed in paras 12
and 15 as under:“12. The law was stated as far back as
1775 by Lord Mansfield in Holman v. Johnson
in the following words:
―The principle of public policy is this; ex
dolo malo non oritur actio. No Court will lend
its aid to a man who founds his cause of
action upon an immoral or an illegal act. If,
from the plaintiff‘s own stating or otherwise,
the cause of action appears to arise ex turpi
causa, or the transgression of a positive law of
this country, there the Court says he has no
right to be assisted. It is upon that ground the
Court goes; not for the sake of the defendant,
but because they will not lend their aid to such
a plaintiff. So if the plaintiff and defendant
were to change sides, and the defendant was
to bring his action against the plaintiff, the
latter would then have the advantage of it; for
where both are equally in fault, potior est
conditio defendentis.
There are, however, some exceptions or
―supposed exceptions‖ to the rule of turpi
causa. In Salmond and William on Contracts,
four such exceptions have been mentioned,

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

23

and the fourth of these exceptions is based on
the right of restitutio in integrum, where the
relationship of trustee and beneficiary is
involved. …………….
15. The correct position in law, in our opinion,
is that what one has to see is whether the
illegality goes so much to the root of the
matter that the plaintiff cannot bring his action
without relying upon the illegal transaction into
which he had entered. If the illegality be trivial
or venial, as stated by Williston and the
plaintiff is not required to rest his case upon
that illegality, then public policy demands that
the defendant should not be allowed to take
advantage of the position. A strict view, of
course, must be taken of the plaintiff‘s
conduct, and he should not be allowed to
circumvent the illegality by resorting to some
subterfuge or by mis-stating the facts. If,
however, the matter is clear and the illegality
is not required to be pleaded or proved as part
of the cause of action and the plaintiff
recanted before the illegal purpose was
achieved, then, unless it be of such a gross
nature as to outrage the conscience of the
Court, the plea of the defendant should not
prevail.‖
28.

Again in Sita Ram versus Radha Bai reported in (1968) 1

SCR 805 is was observed :
“11. The principle that the Courts will refuse to
enforce an illegal agreement at the instance of a
person who is himself a party to an illegality or
fraud is expressed in the maxim in pari deucto
portior est conditio defendentis. But as stated in
Anson‘s Principles of the English Law of
Contracts, 22nd Edn., p. 343: there are

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

24

exceptional cases in which a man will be relieved
of the consequences of an illegal contract into
which he has entered — cases to which the
maxim does not apply. They fall into three
classes: (a) where the illegal purpose has not yet
been substantially carried into effect before it is
sought to recover money paid or goods delivered
in furtherance of it; (b) where the plaintiff is not in
pari delicto with the defendant; (c) where the
plaintiff does not have to rely on the illegality to
make out his claim‖.
29.

In Euro-diam Ltd. versus Bathurst reported in (1988) 2

WLR 517 the following three propositions have been laid down
1.
The ex turpi causa defence rests on a
principle of public policy. It applies where the
plaintiff has been guilty of illegal or immoral
conduct, if in all the circumstances it would be
an affront to the public conscience to grant the
plaintiff relief, because the court would
thereby appear to assist or encourage others
in similar acts.
2.
The main situations where the
defence will prima facie succeed are :i)
Where the plaintiff seeks, or is
forced, to found his claim on an illegal contract
or to plead illegality in order to support his
claim, either in the statement of claim or in a
reply.
ii)
Where the grant of relief to the
plaintiff would enable him to benefit from his
criminal conduct.
iii)
Where the situation is residually
covered by the general principle in (i) above.
3.
However, the ex turpi cause
defence must be approached pragmatically
and with caution depending on the
circumstances.‖

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

30.

25

The terms mentioned in the advertisements required

verification of the contents of the application by the respondentMCD. Reference in this regard can be made to explanation (1) to
Sections 19 of the Contract Act which stipulates that contract would
not be voidable on the ground of misrepresentation or silence
which is fraudulent, if the parties whose consent was so caused
had the means to discover the truth by ordinary diligence. This is
not to say that the said explanation is applicable to the present
case, but reference is to highlight pre-condition mentioned in the
invitation to offer issued by MCD that all applications shall be
scrutinised and verified for their contents and only legible persons
would be allotted plots. Normal presumption is that MCD has
competent and efficient staff and allotment would be made to
eligible persons only and others would be weeded out. The
petitioners belong to lower strata of society and the most of them
are not well educated. There is no forfeiture clause in any of the
advertisements or even in the allotment letter. No warning was
given. The petitioners have not been given possession and the
contract has not culminated into a lease deed or a sale deed.
31.

The contention of the MCD that the petitioners should be

denied discretionary relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India on the ground that they have made false and incorrect
averments in the Writ Petition and have approached the Court with

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

26

unclean hands is also liable to be rejected. The petitioners have
given up their claim to allotment of land and did not press the same
before the Court. I do not think that the Petition is abuse of the
process of Court/law. In this regard, reference may be made to a
recent decision of the Supreme Court in Arunima Baruah versus
Union of India and others reported in (2007) 6 SCC 120, wherein
it has been observed:
―11. The court‘s jurisdiction to determine the lis
between the parties, therefore, may be viewed
from the human rights concept of access to
justice. The same, however, would not mean that
the court will have no jurisdiction to deny
equitable relief when the complainant does not
approach the court with a pair of clean hands;
but to what extent such relief should be denied is
the question.
12. It is trite law that so as to enable the court to
refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction
suppression must be of material fact. What would
be a material fact, suppression whereof would
disentitle the appellant to obtain a discretionary
relief, would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. Material fact would
mean material for the purpose of determination
of the lis, the logical corollary whereof would be
that whether the same was material for grant or
denial of the relief. If the fact suppressed is not
material for determination of the lis between the
parties, the court may not refuse to exercise its
discretionary jurisdiction. It is also trite that a
person invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of
the court cannot be allowed to approach it with a
pair of dirty hands. But even if the said dirt is
removed and the hands become clean, whether
the relief would still be denied is the question.‖

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

32.

27

Reference can also be made to an earlier judgment of the

Supreme Court in the case of S.J.S. Business Enterprises (P)
Ltd. Versus State of Bihar and others reported in (2004) 7 SCC
166.
33.

MCD is not entitled to retain the entire sale consideration

received and paid by the petitioners. Section 64 of the Contract Act
is applicable. The respondent is entitled to deduct the financial
expenditure incurred by them on examining the applications,
sending Committee members for verification as well as some
punitive damages. MCD is entitled to set off the said amount.
Keeping in view facts of the present case, I feel that interest of
justice would be met if MCD is allowed to set off Rs. 20,000/- for
each plot measuring 60 sq. mtrs. and Rs. 30,000/- for each plot
measuring 96 sq. mtrs. towards damages, but the balance amount
should be refunded to the petitioners. The amount being forfeited is
also punitive in nature and in accordance with the provisions of the
Contract Act. Respondent/MCD will refund the balance amount to
the petitioner within a period of 6 weeks from today by crossed
cheques. The respondent MCD will write letters by registered post
to the petitioners calling upon them to furnish details of their bank
account and personally come and collect the cheques.

Payment

will be made after properly identifying the person who had made
the deposit. In case the MCD does not make payment within 6

WP(C) NO.1590/2008 & others

28

weeks from today, it shall be liable to pay interest from the date of
the order till payment @ 10% per annum.
34.

In the facts and circumstances of the present case, there will

be no order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
APRIL
P

08, 2008.

