FAO(OS) No.248/2004

*

Page No.1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) NO. 248 OF 2004
rd

Date of Decision: 3 August, 2007
CHANDRA SHEKHAR

..... Appellant
Through Mr.V.P.Chaudhry, Sr.Advocate with
Ms.Sushma, Advocates.

VERSUS
UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents.
Through Mr. Rajeeve Mehra with Mr.Arvind
Sharma, Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgement?
To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Whether the judgement should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes.
Yes.

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. The respondent herein-Union of India has filed a Civil Suit for
recovery of Rs.12,47,67,414/- against the appellant, Mr.Chander
Shekhar and Samajwadi Janta Party (Rashtriya).
2. The civil suit was filed in the year 2000. Written statement to the
th

civil suit was filed by the appellant on 5 March, 2003. Replication

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.2

to the written statement was filed by the respondent/Union of India
on 24.2.2004.

It may be relevant to state here that the Joint

Registrar before whom the civil suit was listed, had vide order dated
05.2.2003 granted three weeks time to the appellant to file the
written statement and two weeks time thereafter to the respondentplaintiff to file replication. The defendant no.2 had filed its written
statement only after 07.4.2003 as the said written statement is
verified on the said date as per copy placed on record.
3. When the suit came up before the learned Single Judge on
03.8.2004, an objection was raised by the appellant that the
replication cannot be taken on record as it was filed much beyond
the period of two weeks granted by the Joint Registrar for filing the
same vide order dated 05.2.2003 and the provision of Order VIII
Rule 9 read with Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(hereinafter referred to as Code, for short) would apply.

The

learned Single Judge by the impugned order allowed the replication
already filed, to be taken on record subject to costs of Rs.3,000/-. It
was held that the replication, though filed belatedly, interest of
justice demands that it should be taken on record so as to give a
fair chance to both the parties to plead and contest their claim/case
on merits. Learned Single Judge has held that the provisions of
Order VIII Rule 9 of the Code are not attracted.
4. Aggrieved, the appellant has filed the present appeal. A number of
objections and contentions have been raised in the present appeal.

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.3

Reference was made to the Delhi High Court (Original Side) Rules,
1967 (hereinafter referred to as Rules, for short). Chapter VI, Rule
3 states that ordinarily not more than one extension of time shall be
granted to the defendant for filing written statement, provided that
a second or further extension may be granted on an application
made in writing setting forth sufficient grounds for such extension
and supported, if so required by an affidavit. It was submitted that
replication is also a written statement or additional written
statement in terms of Order VIII Rule 9 of the Code.

Reference

was made to Order VI Rule 1 of the Code, which only refers to
pleadings as plaint and written statement. Reliance was placed
upon

in

Sunil

and

Vasanth

Architects

and

Consulting

Engineers and Anr. vs. Tata Ceramics Ltd. [AIR 1999 Kerala 88],
Salig Ram & Anr. vs. Shiv Shankar & Ors. [AIR 1971 Punjab
437], Jag Dutta vs. Savitri Devi [AIR 1977 Punjab 68], Mateshwar
Dayal vs. Amar Singh [AIR 1983 Punjab 197] and Moti Ram vs.
Baldev Kishan [Volume 81 (1979) RLR 69 (Delhi)].
5.

We are not required to go into the question whether replication
to the written statement filed by the appellant should have been

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.4

permitted and allowed to be filed. It is clear from the impugned
order that no such contention and objection was
appellant before the learned Single Judge.

raised by the

In some of the

decisions relied upon by the appellant [Sunil & Vasanth
Architects & Consulting Engineers vs. Tata Ceremics Ltd.,
Salig Ram vs. Shiv Shankar, Jag Dutta vs. Savitri Devi,
Mateshwar Dayal vs. Amar Singh, Moti Ram vs. Baldev Krishan
(supra)] it has been held that replication is part of the pleadings
even though Order VI Rule 1 of the Code stipulates that pleadings
consists of plaint and written statement. These aspects to our mind
are entirely irrelevant and immaterial for deciding the present
appeal, which is against the discretion exercised by the learned
Single Judge in granting time and taking on record the replication
filed by the respondent subject to payment of costs. The facts of
the present case do not warrant detailed examination of the rules,
statutory

provisions and the question whether replication is a

written statement.

This will be apparent from the reasons

discussed below, as to why we feel that the present appeal should
be dismissed.
6. As per the copy of the order sheet placed before us by the
appellant vide order dated 05.2.2003, direction was given to the
appellant to file written statement within three weeks after the
respondent had furnished documents. The matter was renotified

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.5

for 27.8.2003 with a direction that the respondent can file
replication within two weeks from the date on which copy of the
written statement was received.
7. On 27

th

August, 2003, the Presiding Officer was on half day leave
th

and the matter was renotified for 8 January, 2004. Thus no order
was passed on the said date. On 8

th

January, 2004, time was

sought on behalf of the respondent to file replication and
documents, which was opposed.
order dated 8

th

In these circumstances, vide

January, 2004 the matter was listed before the

Court on 26.2.2004. Before the said date on 24.2.2004, replication
was filed.

In fact the matter was not taken up for hearing on

26.2.2004 and a few dates thereafter. Next substantive order was
passed on 03.8.2004 when by the impugned order the replication
filed was taken on record.
8.

Even if we accept the contention of the appellant that replication
is nothing but written statement or additional written statement and
accordingly the provisions of Order VIII Rule 1 of the Code and
Rule 3 of Chapter VI of the Rules,

are applicable, we do not think

that the impugned order requires any modification or interference.

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.6

In Kailash vs. Nanhku AIR 2005 SC 2441, it has been held that
the provisions stipulating time for filing of written statement are
procedural in nature and not part of the substantive law.

The

reason behind prescribing time limit for filing of written statement is
to prevent unscrupulous defendants from adopting dilatory tactics
and delaying disposal of cases against them causing severe
inconvenience to the plaintiffs who had made claims. This also
chokes

up

Courts

which

are

repeatedly

asked

to

grant

adjournments. The object behind prescribing time schedule in the
procedure is to advance cause of justice in adversarial system but
no party should ordinarily be denied an opportunity of participation
in the process of justice dispensation and getting a fair chance of
putting forward its case.
9.

It has been held in the case of Sk. Salim Haji Abdul
Khayumsab vs. Kumar [(2006) 1 SCC 46] that “14. Processual law is not to be a tyrant but a
servant, not an obstruction but an aid to justice.
Procedural prescriptions are the handmaid and not
the mistress, a lubricant, not a resistant in the
administration of justice.
15. It is also to be noted that though the power of

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.7

the court under the proviso appended to Rule 1 of
Order 8 is circumscribed by the words “shall not be
later than ninety days” but the consequences
flowing from non-extension of time are not
specifically provided for though they may be read by
necessary implication. Merely, because a provision
of law is couched in a negative language implying
mandatory character, the same is not without
exceptions. The courts, when called upon to
interpret the nature of th e provision, may, keeping
in view the entire context in which the provision
came to be enacted, hold the same to be directory
though worded in the negative form.”

10.

Further, in the case of Rani Kusum v. Kanchan Devi

[(2005) 6 SCC 705] it was observed:
“20 . The use of the word “shall” in Order 8 Rule 1
by itself is not conclusive to determine whether the
provision is mandatory or directory. We have to
ascertain the object which is required to be served
by this provision and its design and context in which
it is enacted. The use of the word “shall” is ordinarily
indicative of mandatory nature of the provision but
having regard to the context in which it is used or
having regard to the intention of the legislation, the
same can be construed as directory. The rule in
question has to advance the cause of justice and
not to defeat it. The rules of procedure are made to
advance the cause of justice and not to defeat it.
Construction of the rule or procedure which
promotes justice and prevents miscarriage has to be
preferred. The rules of procedure are the handmaid
of justice and not its mistress. In the present

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.8

context, the strict interpretation would defeat
justice.”

11.It was noticed that though time limit had been prescribed under
Order VIII Rule 1 of the Code, consequence for failure is not
specifically provided for. The same is the position with regard to
Rule 3 in Chapter VI of the Rules. It is accordingly held that the
Court has ample powers to extend time where facts and
circumstances justify such extension.

Accordingly, the said

provision was to be construed as directory and not mandatory
but the Court should not permit dilatory tactics to be adopted by
any party, if they stand to gain by delay and so as to nullify the
object and purpose behind the said Rule. Extension of time
should only be granted, if there are reasons for delay and the
same is adequately explained. Deliberate delays in filing
pleadings and documents so as to take advantage of interim
stay, putting pressure on other side, has to be dealt with sternly.
Nothing of this sort has been alleged by the appellant. The
respondent has filed a suit for recovery and has nothing to gain
by delay. Similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court in

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.9

Salem Advocate Bar Association, Tamil Nadu vs. Union of
India [AIR 2005 SC 3353], inter alia, observing that there is no
restriction on the Court to grant further time even after expiry of
90 days. However, Supreme Court cautioned that frequent and
liberal adjournments should not be given to nullify the period
fixed under Order VIII Rule 1 of the Code.
12. Again, in Iridium India Telecom Ltd. vs. Motorola Inc. (2005)
2 SCC 145, the Supreme Court has held that the High Court
(Original side) Rules, 1967 will prevail over the amended
provision of Order VIII Rule 1 of the Code. Relying upon the
said decision and after referring to Rule 3 of Chapter VI of the
Rules, a Division Bench of this Court in DDA vs. K.R.Builders
Pvt. Ltd. [119 (2005) DLT 196 (DB)] has held that Rule 3
permits extension of time. First extension of time for filing of
written statement is ordinarily granted to the defendant but the
second or further extension of time requires closer scrutiny and
consideration. The object and purpose of the said provision is
to curb delay in disposal of the suit. The expression 'further
extension' as used in Rule 3 it has been held will also cover
extension of time even after the second extension and it was
observed :“If read and interpreted in this perspective the
expression 'further extension' should be

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.10

construed as the extension to be granted after
the second extension but only in exceptional
and rare circumstances which are beyond the
control of the parties. In other words, any
extension after second extension would not be
liable to be granted on a mere sufficient cause
unless such cause makes out an exceptional
and rare circumstance which occur beyond
the control of the defendant seeking extension
for filing the written statement. This
interpretation is based on the purposeful
construction of the rule aimed at striking the
mischief that results in by the defendant's
strategy to prolong the adjudication of the suit
by not filing a written statement within a
reasonable time.”
13.It may be noted that the aforesaid Rule 3 stands amended with
effect from 06.1.2007.

However, the amended Rule is not

applicable to the present case.
14.It is clear from the order sheet dated 05.2.2003 that on the said
date the respondent was asked to file the replication within two
weeks after written statement was filed. On the next date of
hearing, the Presiding Officer was on leave and no order for
extension of time was passed. Thereafter, on the very next date
th

of hearing i.e. 8 January, 2004, the Joint Registrar noted the
request of the respondents for grant of time to file replication.
Joint Registrar did not pass any order rejecting or accepting the
request but listed the matter before the Court. It is, therefore,

FAO(OS) No.248/2004

Page No.11

clear that this was the first date on which the respondent had
made a request for extension of time but no order was passed
on the said date and the matter was listed before the Court to
consider and examine the said request. Replication was filed
on 24.2.2004 and the Court has allowed extension of time
subject to payment of costs of Rs.3,000/-. Therefore, it cannot
be said that the appellant had made two or more request for
extension of time for filing replication.

The first request for

extension of time for filing of replication was made on 8.1.2004
and considered and allowed on 3.8.2004 after 24.2.2004 when
the replication was filed.
15.We may also note that the appellant did not raise any objection
and rely upon Rule 3 of Chapter VI of the Rules before the
learned Single Judge. The appellant did not urge before the
learned Single Judge that the respondents had not filed a
written application as required under Rule 3 and, therefore, the
request for extension of time to file replication should be
rejected. If any such objection had been raised at the
appropriate time, the respondent could have filed a formal
application to deal with the technical plea and thereupon
appropriate order could have been passed. The appellant did

FAO(OS) No.248/2004
not

Page No.12

object to the oral application before the learned Single

Judge. In appellate proceedings, objection in this regard should
not be permitted and allowed to be raised as the respondentUnion of India is prejudiced and prevented from taking remedial
steps.
16.

Keeping in view of the above facts and circumstances, we

do not find any merit in the present appeal and the same is
accordingly dismissed. Parties shall appear before the learned
th

Single Judge on 20 August, 2007.
17. The respondent will also be entitled to costs of the present
appeal, which is quantified at Rs.5000/-.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
AUGUST 3 , 2007.
RN/P

