*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 6719/2005
AJEET VARMA

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. C M Gopal, Adv.

versus
MCD & ANR

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Vibhu Shankar, Adv. for MCD
Mr. Harshit Agarwal, Adv. for Mr. Rajiv Bansal, Adv.
for DDA

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%

ORDER
01.04.2008
1. The petitioner has approached this court for issue of writ of mandamus
to the respondent no.2, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, to seal and
demolish illegal and unauthorized construction carried out in the motor
garage of the premises bearing no.A-10/14, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi. It
appears that the said premises is in occupation of one Mr. Bhupinder
Singh who is respondent no.3 in the present writ petition. The said
respondent has been served by publication but has not entered
appearance.
2. Respondent Nos.1 and 2 have filed their short reply/status report stating
inter alia that there are already 3 suits pending between the petitioner

and Mr. Bhupinder Singh/Mr. R P Gupta. It is further stated by MCD that
three

inspections

have

been

done

to

ascertain

unauthorized

construction but on each occasion garage was found to be locked. The
photographs have also been filed by respondent/MCD. A similar reply
has been filed by DDA stating inter alia that the property i.e. the garage
was inspected on 9.6.2006, when it was found to be locked.
3. The petitioner and Mr. Bhupinder Singh are involved in civil litigations.
Personal rights of the petitioner and Mr. Bhupinder Singh will be
decided in the said suits.
4. As far as unauthorized construction in the garage is concerned the
respondents MCD and DDA have already taken action by visiting the
properties and inspecting the same. On each occasion the property was
found to be locked. It is also pointed out by counsel for the MCD that
earlier, pursuant to directions issued on 20th March, 2002 in WP(C)
No.1610/2002, demolition action was carried out and unauthorized
construction made in the garage was removed.
5. In view of the facts and circumstances stated above I do not think any
direction or order is required to be passed in the present writ petition.
However, it will be open to the petitioner to approach the respondents
MCD and DDA, in case he finds that there is any unauthorized
construction in the property in question. If any such letter with evidence

is received, the respondents will take action as per law.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA,J
APRIL
Vld/RN

01, 2008

