* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) 18429/2006

Date of decision : 8th February,2008

PREM PRASAD SAKLANI

..... Petitioner

Through Ms.Gitanjali Chauhan for Ms.Richa Kapoor, Adv.

versus

D.D.A.

..... Respondent
Through Mr.C.Mohan Rao, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

ORDER
%
1. The petitioner was registered under the Janta Housing Registration Scheme,
1996. In March, 2003, he was allotted a Janta Flat bearing No.356, First Floor,
Pocket 7, Category B, Nasirpur, Dwarka. As per allotment letter, the last date of
making payment was 04.11.2003 by which date the petitioner was required to
deposit Rs.2,40,031/-. The demand cum allotment letter sent to the petitioner
was however, returned back to DDA with the remark “left”. Another letter sent to
the occupational address of the petitioner was also returned back with the report
that no such person was available at the said address.
2. On 4th June, 2004, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner why her
registration could not be cancelled. The petitioner made a representation on
03.8.2004 stating that during the course of public dealing, she had come to know
about the aforesaid allotment. She further represented that her allotment may be
restored and she was ready to make payment of all the necessary charges.
Another representation dated 10.1.2005 was made stating that the petitioner at
the time of her registration under 1996 Scheme was residing at Kashmere Gate,
New Delhi but thereafter had shifted to the address given in the said letter. A
number of similar representations were made by the petitioner.

3. By letter dated 25.5.2005, the respondent/DDA informed the petitioner as
under :“Sub.:- Allotment of Janta flat No.356, Cat B Pocket 7

Nasirpur Phase-1
With reference to your letter dated 9.3.05 on the
subject mentioned above. In this connection, it is
intimated that your request has been considered by
the competent authority subject to payment of
demanded payment, restoration charge of Rs.5,000/and interest on demanded amount within 30 days from
the date of issue of this letter, otherwise/filing which
your registration cum allotment will cancelled.”

Sd/Asstt. Director
Janta Housing
Encl: DAL with documents.”

4. After receiving the above letter, the petitioner applied to Canara Bank and
obtained loan for payment of consideration to purchase of the said flat. The said
loan was duly sanctioned on 23.6.2005. Accordingly, Canara Bank issued a bank
draft of Rs.2,40,031/- towards purchase value of the flat.
5. One can appreciate and understand the efforts, time and energy that the
petitioner would have made to get the said loan sanctioned within the time limit of
one month. It is also apparent that the petitioner complied with all the terms and

conditions of the letter dated 25.5.2005 and had deposited the entire amount as
demanded by the DDA within one month. A concluded and binding contract
came into existence between the petitioner and the respondent/DDA. Even if the
petitioner had committed any default, in payment of the amount, the said default
was condoned and waived, when the DDA issued letter dated 25.5.2005 asking
the petitioner to deposit the restoration charges of Rs.5,000/- and demanded the
entire amount within 30 days. The respondent/DDA could not have thereafter reexamined the matter unilaterally or cancelled the contract on the ground that the
petitioner had failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the allotment
letter issued in March, 2003.
6. DDA however, did not hand over possession of the said flat to the petitioner
and on 3rd March, 2006, wrote to the petitioner stating that restoration of the flat
has not been allowed by the competent authority. This letter is contrary to the
earlier

letter

dated

25.5.2005,

which

has

been

quoted

above.

The

respondent/DDA cannot be permitted and allowed to turn around and claim that
letter dated 25.5.2005 was issued without obtaining permission from the ViceChairman as was required as per their internal guidelines. Internal guidelines
were within the knowledge of the respondent/DDA and not in the knowledge of
the petitioner. As far as the petitioner is concerned, he had received letter dated
25.5.2005 and had duly complied with the same, resulting in a binding and a
concluded contract between the parties. If there was any default or violation of

internal guidelines by an Officer of DDA, suitable action should have been taken
against the said Officer. The petitioner cannot be penalized and a concluded
contract between the petitioner and the respondent/DDA reopen on the basis of
internal guidelines of the DDA. It is admitted that delay in payments can be
condoned. By letter dated 25.5.2005 delay has been condoned. The stand taken
by the DDA is that for delay beyond one year, Vice-Chairman is competent
authority to condone the delay and not the Commissioner (Housing). This is
entirely an internal matter of the DDA over which the petitioner had no control.
Moreover in the present case, the petitioner had written letter dated 3.8.2004
seeking extension of time in making payment. This letter was written within one
year of last date of payment i.e. 4.11.2003. The petitioner wrote a number of
letters and then the respondent/DDA agreed to restore his allotment subject to
conditions. On the other hand, the petitioner was made to change his position
and obtain loan from Canara Bank. He deposited the entire amount in terms of
the letter dated 25.5.2005. Payment was accepted. In case DDA is allowed to
wriggle out of their letter dated 25.5.2005, prejudice shall be caused to the
petitioner in form of penalty and interest which shall have to be paid to the said
Bank from where the petitioner has obtained loan.
7. In these circumstances, I allow the present writ petition and also award
Rs.10,000/- to the petitioner, which will be paid within four weeks from today.
DDA will complete all formalities within four weeks and hand over possession of
the flat in question to the petitioner. In case the respondent/DDA is not able to

complete all formalities within four weeks, any interest levied by the Bank for
default and delay in submission of the original documents of title after four weeks
will be borne and paid by the respondent/DDA.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
FEBRUARY 08, 2008
RN/VKR

