*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 379/2008

DR.ANKIT JAIN & ORS.
..... Petitioners
Through : Mr. R P Bansal, Sr. Adv. With Mr. Rakesh
Mahajan, Mr. Prabhat Ranjan, Mr. Prashant Jain
and Mr. Sheetesh Khanna, Advocates
versus
UOI &ORS.

..... Respondents
Through : Mr. P P Malhotra, ASG with Mr. Rajeev
Mehra and Mr. Gaurav Sharma, Advocates for UOI
Mr. A Mariarputham, Advocate for University of
Delhi
Mr. G D Goel with Mr. Sanjiv Goel, Advocates for
respondent no.3
Mr. Maninder Singh with Mr. T. Singh, Advocates
for respondent no.4/MCI

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%
1.

ORDER
03.03.2008
In spite of two Orders dated 18th January, 2008 and 22nd February,

2008, Government of India, University of Delhi and Guru Gobind Singh
Indraprastha University (hereinafter referred to as I.P. University, for short)
have not been able to resolve the controversy for distribution/allotment of
seats in Post Graduate M.D/M.S. Courses.
2.

Earlier, University of Delhi was the only University awarding degrees

in Medicine and accordingly only the students from the said University were
entitled to compete for 50% seats in Post Graduate Degree and Diploma in
M.D./M.S. 50% seats in Post Graduate M.D./M.S. Courses were reserved
for the students of the said University. Graduates in Medicine from other
universities could not compete for admission to the said 50% reserved
seats in Post Graduate Degree and Diploma Courses.
3.

In 2003, I.P. University, which is also located in Delhi,

started

Graduate Courses in Medicine. First batch of students in I.P. University will
be getting degrees in Medicine this year.
4.

The question which arises for consideration is whether the students

from I.P. University should be eligible and allowed to compete with students
from University of Delhi for 50% of the said reserved seats in Post
Graduate Degree and Diploma Courses.

Conflicting stands have been

taken with University of Delhi on the one side and I.P. University and
Government of India on the other side. As per the stand taken by University
of Delhi, MBBS Graduates from I.P. University are not eligible and cannot
compete with MBBS Graduates from University of Delhi for admission to
the said 50% reserved seats in Post Graduate Degree and Diploma
courses in Delhi University affiliated colleges. It is submitted that University
of Delhi is a separate Institution and in terms of the judgments of the

Supreme Court, 50% of the seats can be filled up only by students who
have successfully completed MBBS Course from University of Delhi.
Government of India, however, feels that MBBS Graduates from I.P.
University are entitled to admission to Post Graduate Degree and Diploma
in M.D./M.S.

under this 50% reserved quota/seats. I.P. University also

contends that students from the said University are entitled to same
benefits and advantages as students of University of Delhi.
5.

Government of India by letter dated 26th November, 2007 informed

University of Delhi that Dr.R.M.L. Hospital and Safdurjung Hospital were
affiliated to University of Delhi but it had been decided to change affiliation
of existing M.D./M.S. seats in these two Institutes from University of Delhi
to I.P. University. It was stated in the said letter that Under-Graduate
College at Safdurjung Hospital, i.e. Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College
was affiliated to I.P. University and a new P.G.I.M.P.R. is being established
in Dr. R.M.L. Hospital which will also be affiliated to I.P. University.
University of Delhi has, however, ignored the said letter and it is stated that
affiliation of Post Graduate Courses in both Hospitals with University of
Delhi cannot be altered and changed without following proper procedure.
MBBS students of University of Delhi have also filed a separate petition
pointing out inequities in case 86 students of I.P. University are allowed

right to admission to Post Graduate Courses in Vardhaman Mahavir
Medical College and Dr. R.M.L. Hospital to the exclusion of the students
from University of Delhi. It is stated that about 400 students every year get
degree in Medicine from University of Delhi and about 900 students apply
for admission to limited/reserved 50% seats in Post Gradutate courses in
Medicine in University of Delhi.
6.

The issues and contentions raised in the Writ Petition will have to be

examined and considered in detail and depth. At this stage, this Court is
concerned with the interim order that should be passed in view of the
conflicting stands taken by University of Delhi, I.P. University and
Government of India. I am informed that about 260 seats are available in
different Post Graduate Degree and Diploma courses. About 130 reserved
seats, therefore, have to be filled up by MBBS Graduates from University of
Delhi.
7.

I am of the opinion that the 86 students from I.P. University, just as

students from University of Delhi, should also be given a fair and equitable
chance for admission in

M.D./M.S. courses in Delhi. About 400 students

receive MBBS Degree every year from the University of Delhi. In addition,
another 500 students who have cleared and obtained MBBS Degree from
University of Delhi also compete and apply for admission to Post Graduate

Degree and Diploma Courses in Delhi.
8.

Keeping all these aspects in mind, as interim measure it is directed

as under:-

(i) 86 students from I.P. University will be entitled to compete for 50%
reserved seats in M.D./M.S. Courses in Vardhaman Mahavir
Medical College at Safdurjung Hospital to the exclusion of
students from University of Delhi. I am informed that 86 students
will be competing for about 25-26 seats in M.D./M.S. Course
available in the said College. This means tht about 28-30%
students from I.P. University will get admission to M.D./M.S.
courses in the said Hospital/Institute.
(ii) MBBS students of University of Delhi, about 400 in number, will be
entitled to compete and apply for admission for the balance 104
reserved seats in M.D./M.S. Courses including the seats available
in Dr. R.M.L. Hospital. I am informed that there are some more
seats available to University of Delhi. Thus, about 25% of the
students passing out from University of Delhi this year will be
entitled to admission in Post Graduate Degree and Diploma
Courses in Delhi.
9.

I am informed and may also note that University of Delhi is

currently conducting Post Graduate courses in Dr.R.M.L. Hospital. In
their letter dated 26th November, 2007 it has been

stated by

Government of India that a new PGIMPR is being established in Dr.
R.M.L. Hospital and the same will be affiliated to I.P. University.

10.

The above arrangement is applicable only for admission to Post

Graduate Degree and Diploma Courses in M.D./M.S. in the year
2008. It is clarified that the observations made in this Order are
tentative and not binding, and the Writ Petition will be disposed of on
merits without being influenced by any observation made in this
Order.
List again on 5th May, 2008.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.

MARCH 03, 2008
P/VKR

