* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ (1) W.P.(C) 12417/2006

MEHAR CHAND

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. S.K. Rungta, Advocate.
versus

GAON SABHA MUKUND PUR & ORS.

..... Respondent

Through Mr. Amiet Andlay, Advocate.
+(2) W.P.(C) 2118/2007

MEHAR CHAND

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. S.K. Rungta, Advocate.
versus

TEHSILDAR CIVIL LINES DELHI &

..... Respondent

Through Ms. Avinsh Ahlawat & Ms. Nidhi
Gupta, Advocates for the respondent.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 06.02.2008

1. The petitioner Mr. Meher Chand has filed two writ petitions. The first W.P.
(C) No. 12417/2006 is for issue of mandamus and direction to the
respondents to dispose of his application under Section 85 of the Delhi Land
Reforms Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the Act, for short). It is stated in
the petition that the said application was originally filed in 1971 and pursuant
to the remand order passed by the appellate authority, it is still pending.
2. In the second petition, W.P. (C) No. 2118/2007, the petitioner has prayed
for quashing of order dated 15th February, 2007 passed by the Tehsildar
refusing to correct entries in the revenue record after observing as under:“In this context, the case was examined and

observed that the case was once referred to the then
Deputy Commissioner for further orders clarifying that
order regarding entry of mutation are to be complied
with or not. Though it is clear that the matter was
referred to the DC but further available record is
silent that what orders were passed by the then
Deputy Commissioner. Since it is a matter of
correcting the record after a long spell of 42 years,
the applicant was asked to provide the copy of
relevant record if available with him so that further
action could be taken accordingly but despite a lapse
of considerable time the applicant failed to provide
the said order which is must to dispose off(sic) the
application, hence the application filed by Sh. Mehar
Chand to correct the entry in khatoni is hereby
considered and rejected.”

3. It is also admitted by the learned counsel for the parties that the Gaon
Sabha has filed proceedings under Section 86A of the Act. These
proceedings were filed in the year 2002.
4. The dispute pertains to 29.2 bighas of land in khasra No. 321/155 situated
in the revenue estate of village Mukund Pur, Delhi. The petitioner relies upon
Intakal/sanction of mutation in favour of his father in the year 1960. The
original record unfortunately at this distinct point of time is not traceable. The
respondents, on the other hand, rely upon observation, which are found in
their records that the Intakal order was under review. The respondents are not
able to trace out the order passed on the review. It is pointed out that the
petitioner had approached for correction of the revenue entries on the basis of
Intakal order passed in the year 1960 after nearly 42 years only on 1st March,
2006. Plea of delay and laches is raised.
5. It is no doubt the responsibility of the respondents to maintain their records
but at the same time it cannot be denied that the petitioner was aware of the
fact that the petitioner's father name and the petitioner's name does not exist
in column 4 of the revenue entries from 1969 onwards as is clear from order
dated 16th October, 1979 passed by the Additional Collector, Delhi. It may be
noted that this order was passed by the Additional Collector on an appeal filed
by the petitioner after dismissal of his application under Section 85 of the Act.
It is by this order that the matter was remanded back to the Revenue

Assistant. This application under Section 85 of the Act was filed by the
petitioner's father in the year 1971. The petitioner's father, therefore, did not
move for rectification of the revenue records on the basis of the Intakal made
in the year 1960 but had preferred to file an application under Section 85 of
the Act. What was reason why petitioner's father did not apply for rectification
but preferred to file an application under Section 85 of the Act, is not known
and explained but it does lend support to the stand of the respondents that
there may have been a review order.
6. Keeping in view the chequered and long history of litigation between the
parties and to balance out equities, it will be appropriate to direct as under:i.

Proceedings under Section 85 of the Act, which have been
pending since 1971, will be decided within a period of 8 months from
today.

ii.

The petitioner will be entitled to rely upon the order of Intakal. However,
whether the said order was reviewed or recalled will be examined and
gone into by the revenue authorities. Similarly, the Revenue Assistant
and the revenue authorities will consider entries in the revenue records
for the year 1963-64 onwards including the entries made in the year
1968-69 in favour of Gaon Sabha and decide what weightage and
credence can be given to the same. What evidentiary material is

attached to the said orders will be also determined by the Revenue
Assistant and the revenue authorities.
iii.

The proceedings under Section 86A of the Act shall also continue and
will be brought to a logical end as soon as possible.

iv.

The order passed by the Tehsildar on 15th February, 2007 is not set
aside but will not be binding on the Revenue Assistant, who shall
independently apply his mind and determine the application under
Section 85 of the Act. Similar application under Section 86A of the Act
shall also be decided independently without being influenced by any of
the observations made in the said order.

7. The aforesaid directions are also being given because allegation has been
made by the learned counsel for the respondent that the petitioner has been
delaying adjudication proceedings under Sections 85 and 86A of the Act on
the ground that the present writ petitions are pending. This allegation is
controverted and denied by the petitioner.
8. In view of above directions, Mr. S.K. Rungta states that his client will not
press his application under Order XIII, Rule 8 filed in the proceedings under
Section 85 of the Act.
9. The writ petitions are accordingly disposed of.

10. It is clarified that observations made in this order are tentative and not
binding on the revenue authorities, who shall decide all pending matters
independently on the basis of evidence and applying their mind.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
FEBRUARY 06, 2008
VKR

