*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 8367/2006
BIHARI LAL YADAV
..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Suman Kapoor, Advocate.
versus
M.C.D. SLUM & JJ DEPARTMENT &
..... Respondents
Through Mr. O.P. Saxena, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%
1.

ORDER
03.04.2008
Shed No. 11, Masoodpur Dairy Farm, New Delhi was allotted to Smt.

Savitri Devi and Mr. Suraj Prakash. Subsequently, the said allotment was
cancelled due to non-payment and non-occupation and the said shed was
allotted to Mr. Balkishan vide order dated 9th August, 1982.

Allotment

made in favour of Mr. Balkishan is also stand cancelled and the said shed
now stands allotted to Mr. Ram Bilas.

2.

The petitioner herein was

found to be in occupation of the said shed in 1997 and in these
circumstances, MCD sealed the said shed. It is the case of the petitioner
that he had entered into some agreement with Smt. Shavitri Devi.
3.

The present writ petition has been filed with a prayer that the

respondents should be directed to consider application of the petitioner for
allotment of dairy farm/shed in his favour on priority basis.

4.

As far as allotment of shed No. 11 is concerned, the said shed also

stands allotted to a third party. No relief in respect of the said shed can be
granted to the petitioner. Moreover, against the sealing order the petitioner
had filed an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal, which was dismissed in
the year, 1999 and further appeal before the Lieutenant Governor was
dismissed in January, 2000. This writ petition has been filed in the year,
2006. The petition is highly belated and bad for laches.
5.

The petitioner claims to have made an application for allotment of

another shed.

Allotment of shed can be only made in terms of the

guidelines and policy framed by the respondent.

I may note here that

recently MCD had floated another scheme for relocation of unauthorized
dairies at village Goraha. Learned counsel for the petitioner states that she
is not aware whether the petitioner had made any application for allotment
of a plot under the said scheme. The petitioner’s application for allotment
will be considered, if there is any scheme under which allotment can be
made and if the petitioner is found eligible. Other than this, no direction
can be issued in favour of the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
APRIL 03, 2008
VKR

