REPORTABLE
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 14887 AND
14897 OF 2004
Date of Decision : 1st April, 2008.

MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI .... Petitioner.
Through Ms. Geeta Mehrotra, Advocate.

VERSUS
DEEPAK JAIN & ANR. .... Respondents.
Through Mr. B.B.Jain, Advocate.
% 01.04.2008
CORAM:

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ? YES

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1. As similar questions and issues arise for consideration in these two Writ
Petitions, they are being disposed of by this common judgment. Application
under Order VI, Rule 17 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter
referred to as the Code, for short) filed by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi
(hereinafter referred to as MCD, for short) raising additional grounds of appeal
will also be disposed of by this common judgment. During the course of
hearing, arguments on the said applications were also addressed.
2. The above writ petitions filed by the MCD pertain to property no. M-6, Hauz
Khas, New Delhi. The said property is owned by Mr.Deepak Jain and Ms.
Trishla Jain, (hereinafter referred to as the respondents, for short). Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 14887/2004 pertain to the year 1999-2000 and Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 14897/2004 pertains to the year 2000-2001. Assessment for these
years was made vide Order dated 28th March, 2002 passed by the Joint
Assessor & Collector. The said Order refers to notice dated 27 th March, 2000,
under Section 126 of the Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1957 (hereinafter
referred to as the Act, for short) proposing to enhance rateable value of the
property from Rs.3,72,480/- p.a. to Rs.88,78,160/- p.a. This notice was issued

on account of first letting and change of user. By Order dated 28 th March,
2002 rateable value was fixed at Rs.63,75,000/- w.e.f. 1st January, 1999,
Rs.65,87,500/- w.e.f. 1st March, 2000 and Rs.62,10,200/- w.e.f. 1st January,
2001.
3. Respondents thereafter preferred appeals under Section 169 of the Act and
the same were disposed of by the impugned Order dated 10th July, 2002. The
Appellate Court has, inter alia, held that the notice for enhancement issued
under Section 126 (1) of the Act was void on two grounds. Firstly, notice did
not disclose details and reasons for enhancing the rateable value and
secondly, notice was not served within the financial year in which it was
issued i.e.; 31st March 2000. MCD has accordingly filed the present Writ
Petitions impugning the Order dated 10th July, 2002 passed by the learned
Additional District Judge.
4. Photocopy of the notice dated 27th March, 2000 under Section 126 of the
Act has been placed on record by the respondents. The case of the
respondents is that the said notice was received on 3rd April, 2000 i.e. after
31st March, 2000. It is the case of the respondents that the said notice is a
nullity because it was not served during the financial year 1999-2000 i.e.
before 31st March, 2000. It is also the case of the respondents that the said
notice cannot be relied upon for enhancing the rateable value w.e.f. 1 st April,
2000. In this regard reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Supreme
Court in the case of Shyam Kishore and others versus M.C.D. and another
reported in 48 (1992) DLT 277 (S.C.) and Aggarwal Juneja Associates
versus M.C.D. and others reported in (89) 2001 DLT 623. On the question of
liability to pay enhanced house tax for the financial year ending on 31st March,
2000 with reference to the expression “given” used in the proviso to section

126(1) of the Act, reliance was placed upon the decision in K. Narasimhiah
versus H.C. Singri Gowda reported in AIR 1966 SC 330 and MCD versus
Dharma Properties and another reported in 120 (2005) DLT 588 (DB). On
the question that notice did not give full details and particulars and is therefore
a nullity, reliance was placed upon the decision in the case of Food
Corporation of India versus State of Punjab and others reported in AIR
2001 SC 250. Learned counsel for the petitioner, on the other hand, has
relied upon MCD versus Ramkishan Khandelwal and others reported in
101 (2002) DLT 169.
5. The question whether the notice gave sufficient details and particulars does
not require elaborate examination. The notice under Section 126 of the Act
sets out reasons for enhancement of the assessment list as under : “increase
in rateable value due to first letting and change of use”. The respondents are
owners of the building in question and in their objections have admitted that
the property was rented out to one, Dorling Kindersley (India) Pvt. Ltd. w.e.f.
1st September, 1999 on a monthly rent of Rs.6,50,000/- with interest free
security deposit of four months and advance rent of Rs.19,50,000/- equivalent
to three months rent adjustable in 18 months. It cannot be said that the
respondents were not aware of the reason and cause for issuance of the
notice for enhancement of rateable value. Judgment in the case of Food
Corporation

of

India

(supra)

relied

upon

by the

respondents

is

distinguishable because in the said case, the notice merely mentioned that the
assessment was proposed to be regularised as the property therein was
assessed on a lesser value due to inadvertent mistake and fraud. Nature of
mistake or fraud was not indicated. The assessee was asked to produce
documents in support within a month for assessing the rateable value. It was
the case of the assessee therein that there was no addition, alteration or

change in circumstances which necessitated increase in the rateable value.
Objections filed by the assessee therein were rejected and rateable value was
enhanced on the ground that previous assessment list was prepared under
mistaken impression about capacity of godown and upon verification, the
correct factual position had emerged. Notice for enhancement was quashed
by the Supreme Court holding that the notice had not specified the reason
why amendment was necessitated and therefore there was violation of the
principles of natural justice. Necessary details in order to enable the assessee
therein to meet the case was denied. Notice is issued to the affected person
so that he has a reasonable opportunity of meeting the reasons and grounds
for enhancement of the rateable value. A vague and unspecific notice does
not comply with statutory requirements and prevents a person from meeting
and answering the reasons which the Corporation has in mind for issuing the
proposal for enhancing the rateable value. In the present case, notice was
reasonably clear for the respondents to understand the reason for proposed
enhancement. The respondents-assessee were not taken by surprise as is
clear from the objections filed. The reasons for proposed enhancement were
clearly understood by the respondents. The respondents were not under any
misapprehension or confusion. It is well known that rateable values are fixed
on different parameters depending on whether or not the property is selfoccupied or is on rent.
6. The second question which arises for consideration is whether notice for
enhancement is void as it was served on 3rd April, 2000, and whether it can be
relied upon for the financial year beginning from 1st April, 2000.
7. I may mention here that the respondents-assessee in their objection dated
10th April, 2000 had specifically stated that aforesaid notice was received on

3rd April, 2000 by registered post. The objection was filed within 7 days of the
receipt of notice and, therefore, the appellant could have verified the said fact.
The Joint Assessor & Collector in his Order dated 28th March, 2002 did not
dispute and question receipt of notice under Section 126 of the Act by the
respondents-assessee on 3rd April, 2000. One of the grounds raised by the
petitioner in the amendment application is that the respondents-assessee was
served with notice under Section 126 of the Act before end of the financial
year i.e. 31st March, 2000. The petitioner has relied upon registered A.D.
cards which have been enclosed with the amendment application. The A.D.
cards do not mention the date of receipt and therefore do not help the
petitioner. The Order of Joint Assessor and Collector also goes against the
petitioner. The respondents-assessee had specifically raised the objection
and stated that the notice under Section 126 of the Act was received on 3 rd
April, 2000. Objections were filed on 10th April, 2000. It was open to the
petitioner to apply to the postal authorities in terms of Post Office Guide
(Rules and Regulations relating to Inland Posts) and reject the plea of the
respondents. Clause 169 of the said Guide provides as under :“169. Attested copies of receipts.- The sender of a
registered article may obtain an attested copy of the
original receipt signed by the addressee on payment
of the prescribed special fee provided that he makes
his application for it within six months of the date on
which the addressee signed the original receipt.”

8. The date on which notice under Section 126 of the Act was received by the
respondents is a question of fact. In view of the findings given by the Joint
Assessor and Collector and the facts stated above, it has to be held that the

notice for enhancement under Section 126 of the Act, was not served during
the financial year 31st March, 2000.
9. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the issue or giving of
notice is sufficient compliance of the proviso to Section 126 of the Act and
receipt of notice after the end of the financial year is inconsequential. Reliance
in this regard was placed upon the decision of the learned Single Judge of this
Court in the case of Ram Kishan Khandelwal (supra).
10. The Relevant Portion of Section 126 of the Act reads as under:“126. Amendment of assessment list.—

(1) The Commissioner may, at any time, amend the
assessment list(a) by inserting therein the name of any person whose
name ought to be inserted; or
(b) by inserting therein any land or building previously
omitted; or
(c) by striking out the name of any person not liable
for the payment of property taxes; or
(d) by increasing or reducing for adequate reasons
the amount of any rateable value and of the
assessment thereupon; or
(e) by making or cancelling any entry exempting any
land or building from liability to any property tax; or
(f) by altering the assessment on the land or building
which has been erroneously valued or assessed
through fraud, mistake or accident ; or

(g) by inserting or altering an entry in respect of any
building erected, re-erected, altered or added to, after
the preparation of the assessment list:
Provided that no person shall by reason of any such
amendment become liable to pay any tax or increase
of tax in respect of any period prior to the
commencement of the year in which the notice under
sub-section (2) is given].

(4) No amendment under Sub-section (1) shall be
made in the assessment list in relation to—
(a) any year prior to the year commencing on the 1st
day of April, 1988, after the 31st day of March, 1991;
(b) the year commencing on the 1st day of April,
1988, or any other year thereafter, after the expiry of
three years from the end of the year in which the
notice is given under Sub-section (2) or Sub-section
(3), as the case may be.
11. The said Section has to be read along with Section 444 of the Act, which
for the sake of convenience is reproduced below:“444. Service of notices, etc.—(1) Every notice, bill,

summons, order, requisition or other document required
or authorised by this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law
made thereunder to be served or issued by or on behalf of
the Corporation, or any of the Municipal authorities
specified in Section 44 or any Municipal officer, or any
person shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act or
such rule, regulation or bye-law, be deemed to be duly
served—
(a) where the person to be served is a company, if the
document is addressed to the secretary of the company at
its registered office or at its principal office of place of the
business and is either—

(i) sent by registered post, or
(ii) delivered at the registered office or at the principal
office or place of business of the company;
(b) Where the person to be served is a partnership, if the
document is addressed to the partnership at its principal
place of business, identifying it by the name or style under
which its business is carried on, and is either—
(i) sent by registered post, or
(ii) delivered at the said place of business;
(c) Where the person to be served is a public body, or a
corporation, society or other body, if the document is
addressed to the secretary, treasurer or other head officer
of that body, corporation or society at its principal office,
and is either—
(i) sent by registered post, or
(ii) delivered at that office;
(d) in any other case, if the document is addressed to the
person to be served and—
(i) is given or tendered to him, or
(ii) if such person cannot be found, is affixed on some
conspicuous part of his last known place of residence or
business, if within the Union Territory of Delhi, or is given
or tendered to some adult member of his family or is
affixed on some conspicuous part of the land or building, if
any, to which it relates, or
(iii) is sent by registered post to that person.”

12. The proviso to Section 126(1) of the Act states that an owner will not be
liable to pay tax by reason of amendment of the assessment list, which can be

made at any time, for the period prior to the financial year in which notice
under Section 126(2) for amendment of the assessment list is given. Owner
is, therefore, not liable to pay enhanced tax/tax retrospectively or for the
period prior to the financial year in which notice for amendment of the
assessment list is given.
13. Judgment of the learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Ram
Kishan Khandelwal (supra) deals with Section 126(4) of the Act which
prescribes time limit or limitation period for passing of an assessment order
after notice for enhancement is given. In this context it was held by the
learned Single Judge that amendment to assessment list can be made in the
year commencing after 1st day of April, 1988, if it is made within three years
from the end of the year in which notice is given. The Court was primarily
concerned with the term “made”; and whether the assessment order is made
on the date it is passed or it is made on the date when it is communicated to
the assessee. Learned Single Judge referred to some judgments relating to
Income Tax Act. However, the learned Single Judge also noticed the
difference in expression “giving” and “receipt” and after referring to judgment
in the case of K. Bhaskaran versus Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan reported in
AIR 1999 SC 3762 observed that giving of notice is different from receiving of
notice. These observations to my mind were made in the context of Section
126(4) of the Act and have to be read in the light of the subsequent decision
of the Division Bench of this Court in Dharma Properties (supra) and the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of MCD versus Qiamat Rai
Gupta and others reported in (2007) 7 SCC 309. Division Bench of this Court
in Dharma Properties (supra) has observed that the expression “giving of
notice” had been used in Sections 124(2), 124(3), 126(1), proviso to 126(1),
126(2) and 126(4) of the Act. With reference to proviso to Section 126(1) of

the Act, with which we are concerned in the present case, the Division Bench
referred to decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Narasimhiah (supra)
and quoted the following observations:“.....giving of anything as ordinarily understood in the
English language is not complete unless it has
reached the hands of the person to whom it has to be
given. In the eye of law however giving is complete in
any matters where it has been offered to a person but
not accepted by him. Tendering of a notice is in law,
therefore, giving of a notice even though the person
to whom it is tendered refuses to accept it. Thus as
soon as the person with a legal duty to give the
notice despatches the notice to the address of the
person who whom it has to be given, the giving is not
complete.”

14. Thereafter, in paras 19-24 of the said judgment it was elucidated as
under:“19. The Court held that Parliament used the words

serve, give and send as interchangeable terms.
Therefore, it was held that the expression issue to and
serve upon were equivalent expressions. The Court
held that the dictionary meaning of the expression issue
takes in the entire process of sending the notice as well
as the service thereafter. The said word used in Section
34(2) of the Act thus was interpreted by the Court to
mean serve. The limited meaning, namely, send was
held to exclude from the operation of the provision a
class of cases and introduce anomalies in the
circumstances by interpretation. Hence, the Court
accepted the wider meaning of the word issued bears.

20. The Supreme Court again had occasion to consider
Section 27 of the General Clauses Act in the judgment

of K. Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan, IV
(1999) CCR 63 (SC)=VIII (1999) SLT 147=AIR 1999 SC
3762 (hereafter called Bhaskaran’s case). There the
issue involved was the giving of notice under Section
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act to drawer of a
cheque which is returned unpaid. The Court invoked
Section 27 of the General Clauses Act and held that a
presumption could be drawn in accordance with Section
27 if it is proved that the person required to send the
notice or sends it by registered post, at the correct
address, which is delivered in the ordinary course of
post, until a contrary fact is proved.

21. The entire basis of an assessment and as in the
present case amendment to assessment list is the
issuance of notice. This factor assumes considerable
significance because the rateable value is sought to be
made effective from commencement of the year in
which the notice is given. If the notice is given on the
last date of the concerned year, it would nevertheless
relate back and the consequence of a higher rateable
value would follow. If, however, the notice is not so
issued the entire proposal to amend would be
endangered.

22. As noticed earlier, Section 444 does not use the
expression give. However, it indicates the mode of
serving notices. The limitation of accepting an
interpretation that would connote its receipt are obvious.
As has been noticed by the Supreme Court in
Bhaskaran’s case, the object of giving could be
defeated by refusal. The judgment of the Supreme
Court in Narasimhiah’s case on the other hand indicates
that mere despatch or the date of despatch itself would
complete the process of giving of a notice or the serving
of a notice. The process of giving would imply the
following steps—

(i) issue of the notice;
(ii) the despatch of the notice;
(iii) receipt of notice.

23. Although the last point in time would logically
culminate in the giving of a notice nevertheless its
uninhibited acceptance as the meaning of give may not
be appropriate. There can be various situations in which
the notice properly issued and despatched might not be
received
such
as
refusal,
absence
of
recipient/assessee, or adoption of dilatory tactics by the
recipients. Each of this would defeat the purpose of an
otherwise legitimate exercise of carrying out increase or
modification in an assessment list.

24. In our opinion, the most appropriate manner to deal
with issue would be to construe Section 444(1) having
regard to Section 27 of the General Clauses Act. The
General Clauses Act provides that unless a different
intention appears the giving of a notice is deemed to be
completed in the manner provided for, namely, by
despatching through registered post at the proper
address and upon expiry of a reasonable period from
the date of such despatch, till a contrary event is
proved. It would be clear that the underlying theme of
Section 27 is two-fold. First it enacts the mode of
service; second it also provides for or enacts a
presumption, though rebuttable, of fact. If one keeps
this in mind these too, the requirement of Section 444(1)
would mean that giving of a notice under Section 126(1)
is complete not on the date of its despatch through
registered post but on the expiry of a time on which the
notice would be delivered in the ordinary course of post,
unless a contrary date is proved.”

15. Thus, the Division Bench of this Court has held that for the purpose of
proviso to Section 126(1) of the Act, giving of notice means service of notice
or receipt of notice. Mere despatch of notice will not be sufficient for the
purpose of proviso to Section 126 (1) of the Act and the term “giving” as used
in proviso to Section 126(1) implies issue or despatch of notice through
registered post and expiry of time within which notice would be delivered to
the recipient in ordinary course by post, unless contrary is proved.
16. Reliance was placed by learned counsel for the petitioner on para 27 of
the said judgment, which reads as under :“27. On the issue of giving of notice, therefore, we are

of the opinion that the view taken by the learned Single
Judge was correct and requires no interference.”

17. Reliance of the petitioner on Para 27 is misconceived. The said paragraph
refers to Section 126(4) of the Act, i.e. the date or the period within which
assessment order for modification of the assessment list is to be made and is
not made in reference to Section 126(1) of the Act and the proviso thereto.
The above interpretation becomes clear on examining the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Qiamat Rai Gupta (supra). The Supreme Court
has held that the term “made” is not synonymous with “communicate” and in
ordinary parlance carry different meanings. It was also noticed that the word
“made” is past and past participle of the word “make”. Accordingly for the
purpose of Section 126(4) of the Act, assessment order or an order for
enhancement of the rateable value is made when the order is passed and not
when the order is communicated to the affected person. Reference in this
regard was made to the case of Collector of Central Excise, Madras versus

M/s. M.M. Rubber & Co. Tamil Nadu reported in 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 471
wherein it was observed that order or decision of an authority comes into force
and becomes operative from the date it is signed or it is made. Date of
communication of an order to the party whose rights are affected is not the
relevant date for determining whether the power was exercised within the
prescribed time. Communication of an order is a necessary ingredient to
provide opportunity to the aggrieved party to take recourse to law and raise
his defence in accordance with the statute in question. However, the present
case involves interpretation to proviso to Section 126(1) of the Act and the
expression “giving of notice” used therein. To that extent I am bound and
respectfully agree with the decision of the Division Bench in the case of
Dharma Properties (supra). In the present case, we are not concerned with
the passing of an order or the date on which the order is made. We are
concerned with “giving of notice” for enhancement of rateable value and
whether the expression “giving of notice” used in the proviso to Section 126(1)
of the Act refers to receipt of notice or mere despatch. Keeping in mind the
purpose and object behind the proviso to Section 126 (1) of the Act and the
quoted paragraphs, from the decision in the case of Dharma Properties
(supra) the expression “giving of notice” used in the proviso to Section 126 of
the Act refers to receipt of notice by the assessee in normal course and not
mere issue or dispatch. Notice should be issued in a manner that it should be
received by the assessee within normal course within the financial year .
18. I may here refer to another recent decision in the case of C.C.Alavi Haji
versus Palepetty Muhammad and another reported in (2007) 6 SCC 555.
The Supreme Court examined the proviso to Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 and has held that giving notice in the context of the
relevant provision is not the same as receipt of notice. Giving of notice is a

process of which receipt is the culmination. It was emphasised that any other
interpretation would permit a trickster cheque drawer to get premium by
avoiding a receipt of notice by different strategies and escape the legal
consequences of Section 138 of the Act. Nevertheless, in paragraphs 10 and
14 of the said judgement it was observed as under:

“10. It is, thus, trite to say that where the payee dispatches the

notice by registered post with correct address of the drawer of
the cheque, the principle incorporated in Section 27 of the GC
Act would be attracted; the requirement of Clause (b) of proviso
to Section 138 of the Act stands complied with and cause of
action to file a complaint arises on the expiry of the period
prescribed in Clause (c) of the said proviso for payment by the
drawer of the cheque. Nevertheless, it would be without
prejudice to the right of the drawer to show that he had no
knowledge that the notice was brought to his address.”
“14. Section 27 gives rise to a presumption that service of

notice has been effected when it is sent to the correct address
by registered post. In view of the said presumption, when
stating that a notice has been sent by registered post to the
address of the drawer, it is unnecessary to further aver in the
complaint that in spite of the return of the notice unserved, it is
deemed to have been served or that the addressee is deemed
to have knowledge of the notice. Unless and until the contrary is
proved by the addressee, service of notice is deemed to have
been effected at the time at which the letter would have been
delivered in the ordinary course of business.”
19. In view of the findings given above, it is held that the respondents will not
be liable to pay tax on the enhanced rateable value for the financial year
ending 31st March, 2000 as the notice was served after the end of the said
financial year. The proviso to Section 126(1) protects the respondents-

assessee and therefore tax on the enhanced rateable value cannot be
charged for the financial year ending on 31st March, 2000.
20. Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that notice for
enhancement is void and cannot come to the benefit of or can result in
enhancement of rateable value for the financial year 1st April, 2000 onwards.
Judgment of the learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Aggarwal
Juneja Associates (supra) does support the respondents-assessee.
However, the said judgment is impliedly overruled and is contrary to the
judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Subhash Chand
Goyal and another (supra) wherein a similar contention was raised by the
assessee therein but rejected, inter alia, holding as under:“Similarly, it is difficult for us to uphold the findings of
learned ADJ that if notice is served in the year for which
the proposal is sought to be made then the notice per se
would become illegal. Proviso to Section 126 provides
the answer. Notice under Section 126 is nothing but a
proposal to fix the rateable value and it is open to the
assessee to put up his case as to from which particular
date or time tax is assessable by providing details as to
the date of completion of building and other relevant
particulars. Moreover, proviso to Section 126 itself
provides that assessee would not be liable to pay tax in
respect of any period to the commencement of the year
in which notice is given. Merely because notice is not
served in the year for which the proposal is sought to be
made does not render it per se illegal and invalid.”

21. Section 126(1) permits Commissioner to amend the assessment list at any
time. No period of limitation is prescribed. The Section does not stipulate that
amendment to the assessment list will be prospective. The proviso to Section

126(1) of the Act, on the other hand, stipulates that no person shall be asked
to pay tax or tax on enhanced rateable value for the period prior to
commencement of the year in which the notice for enhancement is given.
Protection is given to the assessee from payment of tax or enhanced tax for
the period prior to the commencement of the year in which notice is given.
The proviso does not state that assessment list cannot be amended for the
period or years prior to the year in which notice is given. It stipulates that tax
or enhanced tax cannot be collected by reason of amendment in the
assessment list, prior to commencement of the year in which notice for
enhancement is “given”. Amendment of the assessment list with retrospective
effect or “at any time” is separate and distinct from liability to pay tax or a
higher tax. The liability to pay tax is only from the year in which notice under
Section 126(2) of the Act is “given”. The proviso, therefore, protects the
assessee and he is not liable to pay enhanced tax or tax pursuant to
amendment in the assessment list with retrospective effect i.e. for the period
prior to the financial year in which notice is “given”. Amendment of the
assessment list can be made at any time by following the procedure
prescribed.
22. Reliance placed upon the case of Shyam kishore (supra) by the
respondents-assessee is misconceived. The said decision concerns Section
170 of the Act and is a ratio on the question whether an assessee is required
to deposit tax before his appeal under Section 169 is heard. It was in that
context that the provisions of Sections 124-129 of the Act were examined and
summarised as the Supreme Court also dealt with the question whether taxes
were to be paid for the base year or for later years also. The question with
reference to proviso to Section 126(1) of the Act and whether a notice for
enhancement served after end of the financial year was never gone into and

examined. A decision is binding on the question which is actually decided and
is not a ratio for issues that did not arise for consideration or were not the
subject matter of the decision. Decisions or reasoning given by the High
Courts and the Supreme Court are not to be read as statutes. (Refer, CIT
versus Sun Engineering reported in (1992) 4 SCC 363 and ICICI Bank
versus Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay reported in (2005) 6
SCC 404 and also State of Orissa versus Mohd. Illyas reported in (2006) 1
SCC 275)
23. Moreover, in the present case, notice under Section 126(1) specifically
stated as under :“ As per proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 126 of the
DMC Act, you shall not be liable to pay any tax or
increase in tax, due to the amendment in the
assessment list, for any period prior to the first day of
the financial year in which notice is given. Thus if you
receive this notice upto 31-3-99, please pay taxes from
1-4-98 and if you receive this notice on or after 1-4-99,
please pay from 1-4-1999.”

24. Thus, it was made clear to the respondents-assessee that in case notice
was served after the end of the financial year, it would be valid and operative
for the period after 1st day of April, of the financial year in which the notice was
given. In the second sentence, an example has been quoted to clarify the
position. The notice in the present case therefore is effective from 1st April,
2000 and MCD will be entitled to ask for tax on the enhanced rateable value
w.e.f. 1st April, 2000 onwards.

25. In view of the above, the present Writ Petitions are allowed to the extent
indicated above. For the purpose of proviso to Section 126(1) of the Act, the
notice is effective and valid w.e.f. 1st April, 2000 and MCD is entitled to
enhanced tax on the rateable value from the said date. The matter is,
however, remanded back to the District Judge/Appellate Tribunal for decision
on merits and on other grounds of appeal raised by the respondentsassessee. Parties will appear before the District Judge/Appellate Tribunal on
22nd April, 2008 when further date of hearing will be given. As this is an old
matter, District Judge/Appellate Tribunal will hear and dispose of the matter
expeditiously and preferably within six months from the first date of hearing.
No costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

APRIL 01 , 2008.
P/VKR

