*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+(1) W.P.(C) 13556/2006

B.S.E.S.RAJDHANI POWER LTD.
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. I.S. Alag & Mr. J.S. Lamba, Advocates.
versus

CONSUMER GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL F ..... Respondents
Through Mr. Anoop Bagai & Mr. Devendra Nautiyal,
Advocates for respondent No. 2.
+(2) W.P.(C) 14873/2006

NALIN BHUSHAN CHANDHOK
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Anoop Bagai & Mr. Devendra Nautiyal,
Advocates.
versus

BSES RAJDHANI POWER LTD.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. I.S. Alag & Mr. J.S. Lamba, Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%
1.

ORDER
01.04.2008
These are two cross writ petitions, one filed by BSES Rajdhani Power

Limited and the other filed by the consumer- Mr. Nalin Bhushan Chandhok.

2.

There was a dispute between consumer and erstwhile Delhi Vidyut

Board about electricity dues and consumption charges payable with effect
from 1991. It appears from the order passed by the Consumer Grievance
Redressal Forum that due to error in software, Delhi Vidyut Board was
raising provisional bills, which resulted in levy of late payment surcharge
charge.
3.

In 2001, Delhi Vidyut Board framed and introduced a LPSC waiver

scheme. It is the case of the consumer that taking advantage of the said
scheme, he approached Delhi Vidyut Board for payment of outstanding bills
and thereafter in the month of February, 2001 payment of Rs.1,61,574/was made. The consumer claims that this payment was in full and final
settlement of all arrears. The stand taken by the Delhi Vidyut Board, it
appears was contrary.
4.

The consumer thereupon filed a writ petition being CW No.

5886/2001 in this Court. The said writ petition was disposed of by order
dated 7th August, 2002 with the consent of the parties recording as under:“Learned counsel for the parties state that in view of
the counter affidavit filed and in view of the fact that
the petitioner has availed of the scheme of waiver of
LPSC, a corrected demand is liable to be sent to the
petitioner and the petitioner can continue to deposit
current charges.
In view of the aforesaid, it is directed that corrected

demand be sent to the petitioner within two weeks
and the same shall thereafter be paid by the
petitioner. The petitioner in the meantime shall
continue to pay the current demands and on payment
of current demand the connection of the petitioner
shall not be disconnected. This is of course subject
to the condition that on receipt of amended bill the
petitioner pays the same.
Writ petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid
terms.”
5.

The net effect of the above order was that the consumer was entitled

to waiver of all LPS charges, but he shall be liable to pay for the units
consumed.
6.

In July, 2002, Delhi Vidyut Board was disbundled and BSES Rajdhani

Power Limited came into existence and was assigned rights for recovery of
dues of the Delhi Vidyut Board.
7.

Pursuant to the order passed by this Court on 7th August, 2002, a

demand was raised against the consumer.

The consumer thereupon

approached this Court by filing W.P. (C) No. 3557/2003. The said writ
petition was disposed of, referring the matter to the Consumer Grievance
Redressal Forum constituted under Section 42(5) of the Electricity Act,
2003.
8.

The said forum by its order dated 31st March, 2006 has held as

under:-

“Keeping in view the totality of the situation, the
Forum observes that delay in raising the bills on
actual reading basis for the period from 1991
onward and up to the date of amalgamation of the
connections is entirely attributed to the then
licensee of power i.e. DESU/DVB and presently
BRPL, regardless of the reasons involved.
It is difficult for any consumer to authenticate the
bills prepared on reading basis for a long period of
12 years approximately at this stage.
The Forum therefore directs that the bills be issued
in respect of the (eight) connections existing at the
premises on reading basis for a period of three
years, reckoned back w.e.f. the date of
amalgamation i.e. 2.4.2003 as per laws of limitation.
Bills issued on provisional basis earlier than three
years from the date of amalgamation i.e. prior to 2nd
April 2000 will be deemed to have been settled.”

9.

The Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum is certainly right in

observing that there can be some difficulty in raising bills on actual reading
basis for the period 1991 onwards and it will be for the Distcom to establish
the actual consumption of the units by the consumer. To this extent, no
fault can be found with the order passed by the Consumer Grievance
Redressal Forum. It is reiterated that it is the responsibility and liability of
the Distcom to establish and show actual consumption of units from 1991
and justify the electricity bill. The consumer will be entitled to benefit of
payments made by him.

In

case of any dispute about payment, the

consumer may also be entitled to some indulgence because of the delay in

raising the bill as it may be difficult to procure and get firm evidence. To
this extent also, I agree with the order passed by the Consumer Grievance
Redressal Forum. However, it is not possible to agree with the direction
given by the Consumer Grievance Redresssal Forum that Distcom will be
entitled to raise bills for a period of three years, reckoned back with effect
from the date of amalgamation i.e. 2nd April, 2003.

While giving the

aforesaid direction, respondent-Distcom has been directed to raise bills
only for the period upto 2nd April, 2000 and no computation or bills can be
raised for the period before the said date. No reason has been given in the
impugned order for the aforesaid direction except stating that this was as
per law of limitation. It is well settled that normal law of limitation is not
applicable for

recovery of electricity dues.

The period in question, is

before the Electricity Act, 2003, came into operation and will be governed
by the provisions of Electricity Act, 1910. Reference in this regard may be
made to the decision in H.D. Shourie versus Municipal Corporation of
Delhi & Another, reported in 32 (1987) DLT 73, wherein it has been
observed as under:“12. There is no provision either under the
Municipal Corporation Act or under the Electricity
Act which provides the period within which a bill for
electricity charges must be sent. According to the
Conditions of Supply the bill is to be sent monthly or

bimonthly but if no bill is sent who is the loser. The
loser obviously is the respondent-licensee who is
entitled to receive money for the electricity
consumed by a consumer but is not in a position to
receive the same unless and until it sends a bill. It is
true that considerable hardship may be caused to a
consumer if a bill for the electricity charges is sent
after lapse of a number of years and the consumer
is asked to pay a large amount in one lumpsum, but
it must not be forgotten that for all this period of time
the consumer uses the money which would have
been legitimately due and payable to the licensee
for the electricity admittedly consumed. I am quite
sure that if and when occasion arises and such
large sums of money are demanded, the
respondents would act reasonably and allow
sufficient time to the consumers to pay the amount
so demanded. Unless and until a statute clearly
limits the right of an authority to assess, compute or
to send a bill, it cannot be said that that authority
loses its right to recover the money due to it by
sending a bill within three years. Where, however,
once a bill has been sent then the period of
limitation for recovery of the same would commence
and if payment is not made within three years, the
right of the respondents to file a suit would be lost.
13. For the aforesaid reasons, it must follow,
therefore, that the respondents are at liberty to send
a bill for consumption of electricity even three years
after the electricity has been consumed.”

10.

Moreover in the present case the consumer had filed CW No.

5886/2001, which was disposed of on 7th August, 2002. The said consent
order records that LPSC shall stand waived and the consumer will continue
to make payment of current demand. It also records that the consumer will

pay corrected payment sent to him. The consumer had, therefore, agreed
to pay corrected demand for the entire period, which was made subject
matter of CW No. 5886/2001. It cannot be said that the consumer it not
liable to pay arrears for the period prior to 2nd April, 2000.
11.

In these circumstances, the matter is remanded back to the

Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum to re-examine the matter in the light
of the observations made above. It is again clarified that the consumer
may be entitled to benefit in case the Distcom is not able to establish actual
consumption of units. Consumer will be also entitled to some indulgence in
case he is not able to substantiate his claim for payment because of lapse
of time and non-availability of documents.

However, consumer will be

liable to pay for actual consumption of units but without payment of any late
payment surcharge.
12.

The writ petitions are accordingly disposed of.

13.

Parties will be at liberty to challenge the decision of the Consumer

Grievance Redressal Forum in case they are aggrieved. The consumer will
continue to make payment of current demand charges.

However, his

electricity will not be disconnected for payment of arrears, which are
subject matter before the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum. This
interim order will continue till the Forum decides the dispute.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
APRIL 01, 2008
VKR

