C.P.No.134/2006

Page 1

* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ COMPANY PETITION NO. 134/2006
% Date of Decision : October 9 , 2006

In the matter of the Companies Act, 1956
under Sections 391(2) to 393 of the Companies Act, 1956
Scheme of Amalgamation of

Shrey Promoters Private Limited

... Applicant/Transferor Company

with

EMAAR MGF Land Private Limited

... Applicant/Transferee Company
Mr. S GaneGanesh, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Vikram Dhokalia and Mr. Kamal
Budiraja

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment? -

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 2

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes
in the Digest ?
SANJIV KHANNA, J

1. The present petition under Section 391(2) to 393 of the Companies Act,

1956 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) has been filed by M/s Shrey
Promoters Private Limited (hereinafter referred to as the transferor
company) and M/s EMAAR MGF Land Private Limited (hereinafter
referred to as the transferee company).
2. The registered office(S) of the transferor company and the transferee

company are located in Delhi within the jurisdiction of this court.
3. It is stated in the petition that no proceedings under Sections 235-251 of

the Act are pending against the transferor company and the transferee
company.
4. That the transferee company and the transferor company had earlier

filed Company Application (M) No. 89/2006. The said application was
disposed of vide order dated 5th May, 2006 dispensing with the
requirement to convene and hold meetings of their shareholders and
creditors in view of the no objection certificates/consent letters issued by

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 3

them. It was stated that transferor company had no secured or
unsecured creditor as on 28.2.2006. The creditors of the transferor
company after 28.2.2006 had given their consents/no objection
certificates.
5. After filing the present petition citations were directed to be published.

As per affidavit of service citations have been published. Notice was
also issued to the Official Liquidator and the Regional Director (Northern
Region). to file their response/reply.
6. The Official Liquidator has filed reply/response, inter alia, stating that he

has not received any complaint/objection to the proposed scheme of
amalgamation. He has further submitted that on the basis of information
submitted by the transferor company, the Official Liquidator is of the
view that the affairs of the transferor company were/are not being
conducted in a manner which is prejudicial to the interest of public.
7. The Regional Director has also filed his response/reply. The first

objection raised by the Regional Director is that the proposed scheme
envisages merger of authorised share capital of the transferor company
with the transferee company and with this merger, authorised share
capital of the transferee company shall stand increased by the issued
authorised share capital of the transferor company. It is stated that the
authorised share capital of a company can be increased after following

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 4

the prescribed procedure under the Act and on payment of requisite fee
and stamp duty. The said objection has to be overruled in view of the
decision of this Court in Hotline Hol Celdings Pvt. Ltd. and Ors, In re
(2005) 127 Company Cases 165. It has been held that in case of
complete merger of the transferor company with the transferee
company, authorised share capital of the transferor company can be
added to form a part of the authorised share capital of the transferee
company. The stamp duty and the registration fee paid by the transferor
company on its authorised share capital is treated as fee and stamp
duty paid on the enhanced authorised share capital. The said decision
is squarely applicable to the present case also, as the present scheme
stipulates complete merger of the transferor company with the
transferee company.
8. The second objection raised by the Regional Director is with reference

to the balance sheet dated 15.12.2005 of the transferee company. As
per the balance sheet the transferee company had received Rs.
17,68,67,81,664/- as share application money. This amount was further
enhanced to Rs.24,49,72,27,613/- as on 31.3.2006. It is stated that it is
not clear how the transferee company could have accepted share
application money of Rs.24,49,72,27,613/- when it's authorised share
capital was/is only Rs.100 crores. It is further stated that the transferee

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 5

company vide letter dated 28.7.2006 had received share application
from Emaar Holdings, Mauritius for allotment of equity shares in the
transferee company of Rs.10/- each at a premium of Rs.540/- per share.
Similarly, the transferee company has also received from Citigroup
Venture Capital International Mauritius Ltd. Share application money for
allotment of shares of Rs.10/- each at a premium of Rs.1573/- per
share. The transferee company has, however, given an undertaking to
the Regional Director that any allotment and paid up share capital shall
be within the authorised share capital as per the scheme and the
allotment, if any, shall be made in accordance with law.
9. The Regional Director has also pointed out that the transferee company

has given advances of Rs.16,17,82,70,586/- to the 31 subsidiary
companies of the transferor company for the joint venture projects and
the said companies have, therefore, used the share application money
for business purpose for purchase of land.
10. Regional Director has also referred to the report of M/s S N Dhawan &

Co., Chartered Accountants, who have given the valuation report in
respect of share exchange ratio. As per the said valuation report each
issued and paid up equity share of Rs. 10/- of the transferor company
has been valued at Rs.2376/- per share. This is on account of value of
land purchased by 31 subsidiary companies of the transferor company.

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 6

While making reference to the report given by M/s S N Dhawan & Co.,
Chartered Accountants, it has been observed that the said valuer has
indicated that “the ultimate test of value is the willingness of the parties
to enter into the contract at an agreed price”.
11. The transferee company pursuant to the orders passed by this court

was asked to submits its reply/response to the objections raised by the
Regional Director and also a file copy of the valuation report of the
chartered accountant. In the response filed it has been stated that
application money has been received from Emaar Holdings, Mauritius
and Citigroup Venture Capital International Mauritius Ltd for allotment of
shares in the transferee company with a clear understanding that the
shares would be issued at a premium. It is further stated that as per
Section 78 of the Act, the paid up capital does not include premium
paid/payable on the shares. It is further stated that it is normal business
practice to accept share application money with premium. Undertaking
has been given that allotment and issue of shares would not exceed
limit of authorised share capital of transferee company.
st

12. In view of what has been stated in the affidavit dated 21 August, 2006

filed by the transferee company, the first portion of the objection or
observation of the Regional Director is taken care of. It has been
explained that the share application money has been received for issue

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 7

of shares at a premium and allotment of shares shall be in accordance
with law. However, the transferee company will be bound by the
undertaking that it will not exceed and shall allot shares within the limit
of the authorised share capital of the transferee company. If required,
the transferee company shall follow the procedure for enhancement of
authorised share capital.
13. With regard to advances given by the transferee company to the

subsidiary of transferor company, it has been stated that these
advances have been given in normal course of business and are in
conformity between the understanding and arrangement between the
transferor company and the transferee company. It is further submitted
that the Regional Director has failed to appreciate that both the
transferor and transferee companies are owned and controlled
substantially by same group of shareholders and, therefore, valuation of
share and determination of share exchange ratio has to be considered
in light of the said crucial circumstance. Reference in this regard is
made to the unequivocal and unanimous consent letters given by the
shareholders to the scheme of amalgamation and the exchange ratio
mentioned therein. It is mentioned that the transferor company and
transferee company are private limited companies and had two and
three shareholders respectively as on 15.12.2005. It is stated that both

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 8

companies belong to the same group. It is submitted that M/s S N
Dhawan & CO., chartered accountants have acted on the basis of land
valuation report of Mr. Vishwamitra Kain, a government approved
valuer. It is submitted that the said chartered accountant has
determined value of each share of the transferor company at Rs.2376/by following an accepted method of valuation and has furnished cogent
reasons for adopting the said valuation. With regard to the share
exchange ratio also it is submitted that the shareholders of transferor
company and transferee company are substantially the same persons
and, therefore, the share exchange ratio cannot be a valid ground to
object to the scheme of amalgamation.
14. In the additional affidavit dated 13

th

September, 2006 it is stated that a

joint venture agreement was entered into between Emaar Properties
PJSC, Dubai and MGF Group in India pursuant to which, both groups
have decided to develop real estate projects in various locations in
India. The Joint venture agreement specifically provides incorporation of
the transferee company. It is submitted that the Emaar Properties
PJSC, Dubai has agreed to purchase 40.4% shares of the transferee
company. It is further stated that Emaar Properties PJSC Dubai has
agreed to purchase 4,04,00,000 equity shares of Rs. 10/- each at a
premium of Rs.540/- per share. It is pointed out that after one year of

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 9

the said joint venture agreement, M/s Citigroup Venture Capital
International, Mauritius Ltd invested a sum of Rs.229 crores in the
transferee company for purchasing share capital at a premium of
Rs.1547.84 per share. The higher price agreed to be paid by the
Citigroup Venture Capital International Mauritius Ltd, it is stated, is on
account of higher growth potential of business of the transferee
company.
15. Some facts may be noticed here. (i) The transferor company was

incorporated

on

6.10.2005

and

the

transferee

company

was

incorporated on 18.2.2005. Thus, the transferor company was
incorporated after transferee company was incorporated. The transferee
Company it is stated was incorporated in terms of joint venture
agreement agreement dated 18.2.2005 between Emaar Properties
PJSC Dubai and MGF Group Ltd. (ii) transferee company has
transferred huge funds to the 31 subsidiaries of the transferor
companies on or before 6.12.2005 i.e. within about two months, when
the transferor company was incorporated. The transferor company itself
does not own any land. Land is owned by 31 subsidiaries of the
transferor company who were flushed with money and funds provided
by the transferee company. (iv) investment/advances given by the
transferee company of Rs. 16,178,270,286/- as on 15th December ,

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 10

2005 was/is much more than the paid up share capital of Rs. 7 crores of
the transferor company. This paid up share capital has been utilized by
the transferor company for purchase of shares in the 31 subsidiary
companies at cost price of Rs. 66,039,719/-. Thus the 31 subsidiary
companies of the transferor company have used advance/investment
made by the transferee company to purchase land,(v) total net value of
investments made by the 31 subsidiary companies on or before 15th
December, 2005 was Rs. 6,93,27,024/- ( the specific dates on which
these investments have been made have not been stated). Within about
two months from incorporation of the transferor company on 6th
October, 2005 till 15th December, 2005, the market value of the said
investments of Rs. 6,93,27,024/- made by the 31 subsidiary companies
is stated to have increased to Rs. 16,62,80,95,323/- (vi) on the basis of
the market value of the investments made by the 31 subsidiary
companies as per the valuation report, within about two months value of
each issued share of the transferor company has gone up from Rs.10/to whooping Rs. 2376/- per share (vii) the approved valuer has valued
the assets and liabilities of the transferee company at book value and
not at market price of the assets, though the said company has as per
balance sheet dated 15th December 2005 had given advance of
Rs.16,05,00,000/- to a body corporate for project related works and/or

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 11

acquisition of land for projects planned to be implemented and Rs.
80,25,00,000/- as advance under an agreement to sell.(viii) the valuer
has justified valuation of shares of the transferee company on book
value basis as the said company was passing through a transitional
phase. Value of each issued share of the transferor company on 15 th
December 2005 has been done on market value of investments made
by the 31 subsidiary companies. The valuer probably forgot that the
transferor company was incorporated two months back only on
6.10.2005 and the transferee company was incorporated earlier on
18.2.2005 and was the joint venture vehicle as per the terms of the joint
venture agreement (ix) the dates on which subsidiary companies were
incorporated has not been stated and how and when the said 31
companies became subsidiaries of the transferor company is also not
mentioned. The dates on which the subsidiary companies purchased
land has also not been mentioned. (x) the transferee company has after
15th December 2005 issued 2,96,00,000 shares of Rs.10 each @ Re.1
paid up value to two foreign companies and 30,00,000 shares of Rs.10
each to Mr. Shravan Gupta at paid up value of Re.1. It is not stated that
the said shares have been issued at premium, though earlier the joint
venture partner had agreed to purchase shares of the transferee at
premium of Rs. 540/- per share and another investor had agreed to

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 12

purchase shares at a premium of Rs.1547.84 per share. (xi) the post
merger shareholding pattern shows that the Indian group will be holding
3300000 shares and the two foreign companies shall be holding
2660000 shares. Thus, the two foreign companies shall be holding
about 45% shares and the Indian group about 60% shares in the
transferee company. The joint venture partner group company Emaar
Holding had earlier, prior in point of time deposited Rs.17,686,781,664/with the transferee on or before 15th December 2005 for allotment at
premium of Rs. 540 per share and M/s Citigroup Venture Capital
International Mauritius Ltd. Who have paid Rs.229 crores at premium of
Rs.1573/- per share. Lastly, the valuation report is a well guarded and
evasive document , which neither affirms nor negates the valuation
made. The report and the “limitations” mentioned by the valuer have
been quoted below.
16. What is not understandable and remains completely unexplained is the

incorporation of the transferor company and transfer of funds held by
transferee company into the subsidiaries of the transferor company for
purchasing land. Though it is not stated in the petition, during the course
of arguments, it was stated that under the joint venture agreement the
transferee company intends coming out with a public issue. It was
further stated that an initial public issue is likely to be announced by 31 st

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 13

March, 2007 or near about the said period. If this fact is kept in mind
probably the objective and purpose of incorporating the transferor
company and making investments in purchase of land through
subsidiaries of the transferor company becomes apparent. The three
shareholders of the transferor company in view of the share exchange
ratio would become entitled to allotment of 4.2828 shares in the
transferee company for every one share held by them in the transferor
company. Thus investment of Rs.10/- each share shall increase and get
enhanced to Rs.40.2828/- without any further investment. Mr. Shravan
Gupta, Mr. Siddharth Gupta and Mr. Siddharth Sareen who hold
23,30,220, 21,01,401 and 25,68,379 shall be allotted 2,99,80,000
shares of Rs.10 each credited as fully paid up.(see paras 5.1 and 2.1 of
the scheme).
th

17. Incorporation of the transferor company on 6 October 2005, transfer of

funds from the transferee company to the subsidiaries of the transferor
company, purchase of land by the subsidiaries of the transferor
companies from the said funds, moving of the present application for
amalgamation of the transferor company with the transferee company
etc. are all part of a well and carefully designed plan. The transferor is
basically a shell company doing no activity of its own. The entire paid up
capital of Rs. 7 crores stands transferred as subscribed and paid capital

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 14

of the 31 subsidiary companies. The subscribed and paid up capital of
the transferee company on the effective date i.e. 15th December 2005
was Rs.2 lacs only. The said subscribed paid up share capital on that
date was held by the promoters of the transferor company. Nothing
prevented and it defies logic why the transferee company did not float
and incorporate these 31 subsidiary companies or purchase land on its
own? Similarly it is not explained why one promoter/joint venture partner
of the transferee company did not invest and purchase shares in the
transferor company itself?
18. The reason is not very difficult to appreciate and understand. The

investment of Rs. 7 crores made by the promoters of the transferor
company in the transferor company will get substantially enhanced.
They shall get 4.2 shares in the transferee company for every one share
held by them in the transferor company, as per the proposed scheme.
Thus, the investment of Rs. 7 crores will jump to more than Rs. 29
crores. The paid up share capital of the transferee company shall
substantially go up with the issue of 2,99,80,000 shares credited as fully
paid up, while at the same time funds provided by the Emaar Group are
freely available (and can even be refunded) and have been effectively
used to prop up the value of each share of the transferor company. This
aspect has to be kept in mind in view of the admission made by the

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 15

counsel for the petitioner that the transferee company is going to come
out with Initial Public Offer (IPO) inviting general public to purchase
shares in the said company.
19. There are only three shareholders in the transferor company. On the

effective date the shareholders of the transferor and transferee
company were substantially common. It was always open for the
transferee company to purchase the shares held by the shareholders of
the transferor company at a mutually acceptable price. In this manner
the transferee company would have become the holding company of the
transferor company and thus gained control over 31 subsidiary
companies of the transferor company. This was an easy way and a
pragmatic method for the transferee company to take over charge and
control 31 subsidiary companies of the transferor company. This has not
been done but a cumbersome and difficult procedure to obtain sanction
of this court with the proposed scheme has been resorted to. It is
obvious that the transferor company and the transferee company seek,
seal of approval from this court on the scheme. They have in mind the
proposed initial public offering.
20. It is also quite apparent that there is a tacit understanding between the

two joint venture partners, the exact details and particulars have not
been brought out and have been hidden under the veil of secrecy. Why

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 16

and for what reason funds from the transferee company were
transferred to the 31 subsidiaries remains unknown. One promoter of
the transferee company has made investment of about 6.60 crores in
shares of the 31 subsidiaries of the transferor company. Much bigger
and higher investment has been made by the joint venture partner
Emaar Holdings, Mauritius in these 31 subsidiary companies by using
the transferee company as a conduit. With the help of these funds, the
subsidiary companies has purchased assets, these assets form basis of
fixing the Net Asset Value (NAV) at Rs.2376/- for each share of the
transferor company of face value of Rs.10/- each.
21. After the appointed date i.e. 15

th

December, 2005 one of the promoters

of the transferor and two foreign companies have been allotted shares
in the transferee company in March,2006 on face value. The two foreign
companies, Lupen Services Ltd. and Kallarister Trading Ltd. have been
allotted 44,97,600 shares and 2,21,02,400 equity shares of paid up
value of Rs.1/-. Mr. Sharvan Gupta has been allotted 30,00,000 shares
at face value of Rs.10 each at par on paid up value of Rs 1 per share. It
is not stated that these shares are allotted at a premium. Before the said
allotment, issued share capital of the transferee company was only
20000 shares fully paid up and equal to Rs2,00,000/-. It now stands
enhanced by issue of 97,10,000/- fresh shares of Rs.10 each for paid

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 17

up value of Re.1 each. Normally, I would not have gone into all these
aspects knowing fully well the jurisdiction of this court but I cannot close
my eyes especially in view of the fact that the transferee company is, in
the near future, going to invite public to invest in its shares at a
pretmium.
22. A word about the valuation report – The Statement of Limiting

Conditions mentioned by M/s S N Dhawan & CO. who also happen to
be the statutory auditors of the transferee company is indeed revealing
and the relevant portion reads as under:“In the course of valuation, SND were provided with

both written and verbal information, including market,
technical, financial and operating data. We have
evaluated the information provided to us by the
management of Emaar through broad inquiry, analysis
and review. We have not independently investigated or
otherwise verified the land valuation reports. Through
the above valuation, nothing has come to our attention
to indicate that the factual information provided was
materially misstated/incorrect or would not afford
reasonable grounds upon which to base our report. We
do not imply and it should be construed that we have
verified any of the information provided to us, or that
our inquiries could have verified any matter, which a
more extensive examination might disclose. The terms
of our engagement were such that we were entitled to
rely upon the information provided by the
managements of Emaar/Shrey/MGF without detailed
inquiry. Also, we have been given to understand by the
management that it has not omitted any relevant and
material factors and it has checked out relevance or
materiality of any specific information to the present

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 18

exercise with us in case of any doubt. Accordingly, we
do not express any opinion or offer any form of
assurance regarding its accuracy and completeness.
Except where specifically stated otherwise, our
conclusions are based on the assumptions, forecasts
and other information given by/on behalf of the
company. Emaar MGF has indicated to us that it has
understood that any omissions, inaccuracies or
misstatements may materially affect our valuation
analysis/results.
Accordingly,
we
assume
no
responsibility for the technical/financial information
furnished by Emaar/MGF/Shrey and believed by us to
be reliable.” (Emphasis supplied)
23. Similarly the said valuer has observed that “ the ultimate test of the

value is the willingness of the parties to enter into the contract at an
agreed price”.The valuer was required to give fair, objective and an
independent report. The valuer was fully aware that the report shall form
basis of the order for sanction of the scheme. In view of the reservations
and limitations expressed by the approved valuer himself, I need not
say anything, except that the valuer himself is uncertain and full of
scepticism about his own valuation. A hesitating report in the present
case is meaningless. It is difficult to act on this report and accept that
within two months from Oct.,2005 to December, 2005 the value of each
share of the transferor company increased from Rs. 10/- to Rs.2376/-. It
is like hitting repeated jackpots in derbies or winning series of lottery
tickets. I am aware that normally courts accept valuation reports given
by experts but this cannot be done in an impetuous manner

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 19

unconcerned and oblivious of the reservations expressed and the
guarded language used in the report. This court in the case of Mihir
Chakarborty V/s Multi tech Computers Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. (2001) 106
Com. Cases 150 after examining the law in detail has held as under :
“Be that as it may, the position in law seems to be that

a valuer cannot claim immunity any more if he acts
negligently in making his determination and can be
sued in tort for negligence but action against the valuer
for damages cannot come in the way when the court is
considering the validity of the valuation itself. The fact
that the parties may have agreed that the valuation
arrived at by a valuer would be binding on them, the
agreement does not imply that they will be bound even
by a valuation which is erroneous. In this country the
courts cannot be bound to accept the determination or
opinion of an expert which is erroneous as otherwise it
would amount to perpetuating the mistake. Mr. Khanna
contended that the compromise recorded by the court
constitutes a decree and if this is so the valuation
arrived at by the valuer cannot be challenged in these
proceedings. I regret my inability to accept the
submission of learned senior counsel. While it may be
true that the compromise recorded by the court
constitutes a decree but that does not mean that the
report of the valuer which was directed to be filed
under the order of this court cannot be touched in
these proceedings. In case the report suffers from
mistake or perversity, the same can certainly be set
aside in these proceedings and the matter can be
referred for fresh valuation by an expert. The court is
not bound to accept the report in case the same is
erroneous.”

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 20

24. Supreme Court in Special Land Acquisition Officer v. Sidappa Omanna

Tumari, 1995 Supp (2) SCC 168, while dealing with reliance on
valuation report has held:
“15. It has become a matter of common occurrence with the

claimants who seek enhanced compensation for their
acquired lands from court to produce the reports of valuation
of their lands in court purported to have been prepared by
the experts. No doubt, courts can act on such expert
evidence in determining the market value of the acquired
lands, but the court having regard to the fact that experts will
have prepared the valuation reports produced in the court
and will depose in support of such reports, at the instance of
the claimants, must with care and caution examine such
reports and evidence given in support thereof. Whenever
valuation report made by an expert is produced in court, the
opinion on the value of the acquired land given by such
expert can be of no assistance in determining the market
value of such land, unless such opinion is formed on
relevant factual data or material, which is also produced
before the court and proved to be genuine and reliable, as
any other evidence. Besides, if the method of valuation of
acquired land adopted by the expert in his report is found to
be not in consonance with the recognised methods of
valuation of similar lands, then also, the opinion expressed
in his report and his evidence can be of no real assistance
to the court in determining the market value of the acquired
land. Since the exercise which will be done by the expert in
arriving at the market value of the land in his report on the
basis of factual data bearing on such valuation, will be
similar to that to be undertaken by the court in determining
the market value of the acquired land, it can no doubt
receive assistance from such report, if it is rightly done and
the data on which the report is based is placed before the
court and its authenticity is established.
16. Therefore, when the valuation report of an acquired land
is made by an expert on the basis of prices fetched or to be
fetched by sale deeds or agreements to sell relating to the
very acquired lands or the lands in the vicinity, need arises

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 21

for the court to examine and be satisfied about the
authenticity of such documents and the truth of their
contents and the normal circumstances in which they had
come into existence and further the correct method adopted
in preparation of that report, before acting on such report for
determining the market value of the acquired land. The
opinion expressed in the report that the author of the report
has made the valuation of the acquired lands on the basis of
his past experience of valuation of such lands should never
weigh with the court in the matter of determination of market
value of the acquired lands, for such assertions by
themselves cannot be substitutes for evidence on which it
ought to be based and the method of valuation adoptable in
such report.”
25. I am conscious of the role of the Court under section 391 -394 of the

Act, while deciding the question whether a scheme should be
sanctioned. Opinion of the shareholders and creditors have to be given
due weight. Their collective wisdom should not be substituted. However,
such opinion is not conclusive. The court not only has inquisitorial or
supervisory role but has to also ensure that the scheme is genuine,
bonafide and in good faith. Without acting as a carping critic and being
fastidious, the court can independently apply its mind to satisfy itself that
the scheme is prima facie reasonable as a whole. The scheme must be
such, as a reasonable man of business would approve. To use the
words of the Supreme Court in Employees' Union V/s Hindustan Lever
Ltd. 1995 (supp.1) SCC 499 the scheme should pass the “prudent
business management test”. In the case of Miheer H. Mafatlal v.

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 22

Mafatlal Industries Ltd., (1997) 1 SCC 579, the following parameters
were laid :
“In

view of the aforesaid settled legal position,
therefore, the scope and ambit of the jurisdiction of the
Company Court has clearly got earmarked. The
following broad contours of such jurisdiction have
emerged:
1. The sanctioning court has to see to it that all the
requisite statutory procedure for supporting such a
scheme has been complied with and that the requisite
meetings as contemplated by Section 391(1)(a) have
been held.
2. That the scheme put up for sanction of the Court is
backed up by the requisite majority vote as required by
Section 391 sub-section (2).
3. That the meetings concerned of the creditors or
members or any class of them had the relevant
material to enable the voters to arrive at an informed
decision for approving the scheme in question. That
the majority decision of the concerned class of voters is
just and fair to the class as a whole so as to
legitimately bind even the dissenting members of that
class.
4. That all necessary material indicated by Section
393(1)(a) is placed before the voters at the meetings
concerned as contemplated by Section 391 subsection (1).
5. That all the requisite material contemplated by the
proviso of sub-section (2) of Section 391 of the Act is
placed before the Court by the applicant concerned
seeking sanction for such a scheme and the Court gets
satisfied about the same.
6. That the proposed scheme of compromise and
arrangement is not found to be violative of any
provision of law and is not contrary to public policy. For
ascertaining the real purpose underlying the scheme
with a view to be satisfied on this aspect, the Court, if
necessary, can pierce the veil of apparent corporate

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 23

purpose underlying the scheme and can judiciously Xray the same.
7. That the Company Court has also to satisfy itself
that members or class of members or creditors or class
of creditors, as the case may be, were acting bona fide
and in good faith and were not coercing the minority in
order to promote any interest adverse to that of the
latter comprising the same class whom they purported
to represent.
8. That the scheme as a whole is also found to be just,
fair and reasonable from the point of view of prudent
men of business taking a commercial decision
beneficial to the class represented by them for whom
the scheme is meant.
9. Once the aforesaid broad parameters about the
requirements of a scheme for getting sanction of the
Court are found to have been met, the Court will have
no further jurisdiction to sit in appeal over the
commercial wisdom of the majority of the class of
persons who with their open eyes have given their
approval to the scheme even if in the view of the Court
there would be a better scheme for the company and
its members or creditors for whom the scheme is
framed. The Court cannot refuse to sanction such a
scheme on that ground as it would otherwise amount to
the Court exercising appellate jurisdiction over the
scheme rather than its supervisory jurisdiction.
The aforesaid parameters of the scope and ambit of
the jurisdiction of the Company Court which is called
upon to sanction a scheme of compromise and
arrangement are not exhaustive but only broadly
illustrative of the contours of the Court’s jurisdiction.”
26. While deciding this petition I have invoked parameters 6, 8 and 9 above.

It is in public interest to over-ride the scheme. Public policy can have
many connotations but in the present case it is contrary to justice,

C.P.No.134/2006

Page 24

detrimental to commercial morality and interest of public at large.
Motivations in moving the scheme are oblique.
27. The scheme is also rejected for failure to disclose all material facts.

Pursuant to the Daphtry Sastry Committee report, proviso to section
391(2) of the Act was inserted. The petitioners must candidly place all
relevant facts before the court to judge the scheme on its own merits.
The court can give its informed opinion and decision upon full disclosure
as to the existing state of affairs and it's future. As held above full and
complete disclosure is missing in the present case.
28. In view of the above the petition is dismissed, with costs of Rs. 10,000/-

which shall be paid to the official liquidator.

October 9, 2006
mv

JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

