REPORTABLE

* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ LPA NOS. 1897 AND 1835 OF 2006
% Date of Decision : 4th March, 2008.

MR. RAVI KR. MATHUR .... Appellant in LPA No. 1897/2006.
Through Mr. Sanjay Gupta with Mr.A.K. Mathur,
Advocates.
MR. KISHAN LAL SHARMA .... Appellant in LPA No. 1835/2006.
Through Mr. Ajay Dahiya, Advocate.

VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ANR. .... Respondents.
Through Mr. P.P. Malhotra, Additional Solicitor General with Mr.Rajeev
Mehra, Mr.Digit Saikia, Mr. Chetan Chawla, Mr.Gaurav Sharma and Mr. S.
Bajaj, Advocates for UOI.
Mr. Sunil K. Jain with Mr. S. Borthakur and Mr.Ajay K. Bhatia, Advocates for
Rajasthan High Court.

CORAM:

HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1. Mr. R K Mathur and Mr. K L Sharma are members of Rajasthan Higher
Judicial Services (hereinafter referred to as RHJS, for short). Both of them
were appointed as Presiding Officers of Debt Recovery Tribunal at Delhi.
Notifications appointing them as Presiding Officers stipulated that they were
appointed for a period of 5 years from the specified dates or till they attained
age of 62 years, whichever was earlier.
2. By two separate letters dated 6th July, 2006 and 21st July, 2006, High Court
of Rajasthan sought repatriation of Mr. R K Mathur and Mr. K L Sharma,

respectively from their posting as Presiding Officers to RHJS. Pursuant to
these letters, the Central Government informed the appellants that their
posting as Presiding Officers was terminated and they stand repatriated.
3. The appellants challenged their repatriation to RHJS by filing writ petitions.
By the impugned judgment dated 7th September, 2006, the writ petitions have
been dismissed. Learned Single Judge has held that the appellants had
continued to retain their position as Judicial Officers of RHJS and being on
deputation, the Rajasthan High Court could have recalled them at any time. It
has also been held that Section 15 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Bank and
Financial Institutions Act, 1993, (hereinafter referred to as “Act”, for short)
relating to resignation and removal of Presiding Officer is not applicable as the
tenure appointment of the appellants was subservient to the original
appointment in RHJS. Reference was made to the concept of deputation “as
expounded in the case of State of Punjab and Others versus Indersingh
and others reported in (1997) 8 SCC 372.
4. Notifications issued for appointment of the appellants are identically
worded. The appellants were appointed as Presiding Officers for a period of 5
years from the date mentioned in the notifications or till they attain the age of
62 years, whichever was earlier. A tenure appointment is “an appointment to a
permanent post which an employee may or may not hold for more than a

limited period”. Tenure means “the term during which the office is held”. Once
a person is appointed to a tenure post his appointment begins when he joins
and it comes to an end on the completion of the tenure (See, L.P.Agarwal
Versus Union of India, reported in (1992) 3 SCC 526 and S. K. Kacker (Dr.)
Versus All India Institute of Medical Sciences, reported in (1996) 10 SCC
734). In S. K. Kacker (Dr.) case (Supra), the Supreme Court also examined
concept of lien of a Government servant on appointment to a tenure post. It
was observed that when a Government servant is appointed substantively to a
permanent post or a tenure post, he becomes a Government servant for the
purpose and for the period of tenure and is entitled to retain his lien unless the
same is curtailed or shortened in accordance with law.
5. Our attention was also drawn to Rule 17 of the Rajasthan Higher Judicial
Services Rules, which provides that on appointment to a tenure post, the lien
of the judicial officer on the permanent post which he was holding shall stand
suspended. The lien of the appellants as Officers in RHJS, therefore, does not
get terminated. On appointment as Presiding Officers (DRT) the appellants
did not cease to be members of RHJS and their lien continued, though it
remained under suspension. Meaning of the term “lien” has been explained by
the Supreme Court in Triveni Shankar Saxena Versus State of UP and
Others reported in (1992) Suppli 1 SCC 524. In different contexts the word

“lien” can refer to 'contractual lien, equitable lien, specific lien, general lien
etc.'. In legal sense 'lien' means “right of a man to retain it rightfully and
continuously in his possession belonging to another until the present and
accrued claims are satisfied. (Refer, Halsbury's Law as quoted in the said
judgment). Lien implies that there is something in existence to which it
attaches. It includes right of retention. Lien was defined in Paresh Chandra
Nandi Versus Controller of Stores reported in (1970) 3 SCC 870 with
reference to Railway Fundamental Rules as title of a railway employee to hold
substantively a permanent post to which he has been permanently appointed.
6. Supreme Court in its recent decision in Union of India Versus Shardindu
reported in (2007) 6 SCC 276 dealt with a case of the Chairperson, National
Council of Teachers Education (NCTE) who had been appointed for a period
of 4 years or till he attains age of 60 years, whichever falls earlier. It was held
that the Chairperson could not be summarily removed on the ground that FIR
was registered against him for his alleged earlier misconduct as an Officer of
the State Government. There was no allegation that the Chairperson was
guilty of any misconduct for the period after his appointment as a Chairperson
and in the absence of any statutory provisions in the National Council for
Teachers Education Act, 1993 it was held that the tenure appointment could
not be curtailed unless the petitioner had incurred the qualifications mentioned

in the said Act. This decision is heavily relied upon by the counsel for
appellants. However, we may notice here in the same case, the appellant
Department i.e. the State of U.P. had not asked for repatriation. The Supreme
Court also observed that strictly speaking the post of the Chairman was not a
deputationist post as in case of an All India Service person who can be sent
on deputation to the Central Government, State Government or other
organizations.
7. Decision in Shardindu case (Supra) is also distinguishable for another
reason. The appellants herein are officers of RHJS. The Rajasthan High Court
exercises control over them in accordance with Articles 233 to 235 of the
Constitution of India. The word 'control' used in Article 235 of the Constitution,
has been used in the comprehensive sense. Control and superintendence of
High Court over the subordinate courts and the person manning them both on
judicial and administrative side is contemplated by the said Articles. In
Guwahati High Court versus Kuladhar Phukan reported in (2002) 4 SCC
524) it was held that an officer belonging to State Judicial Service, who was
sent on deputation can be recalled by the concerned High Court. It was also
observed that the plea of the State Government that the lien of a State
Judicial Officer in the Judicial Service had come to an end without
consultation of the High Court cannot be accepted. Officers belonging to the

State Judicial Services are sometime lent and sent on deputation but the High
Court continues to have control over the said Officers in view of Articles 233
and 235 of the Constitution. In Kuladhar Phukan (Supra) Supreme Court
referred to the doctrine of Separation of Powers and need to insulate
subordinate judiciary from the hands of the Executive or the Legislature. All
matters touching the service carrier of incumbents of subordinate judiciary it
was held are subject matter of control of the High Court.
8. We may also note our disappointment and concern on the file notings and
the comments of the Ministry of Finance. DRTs have been formed as a
substitute for Civil Courts and perform judicial functions. To ensure
independence of the Presiding Officers, several provisions have been made to
this effect in the Act. The Act provides for establishment of an Appellate
Tribunal which is presided over by a Chairperson who is qualified to be a
Judge of a High Court or has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service in
Grade-I for atleast three years or has been a Presiding Officer of a Tribunal
for atleast three years. Security of tenure and for term of office ensures
independence. Section 15 of the Act provides that a Presiding Officer of the
Tribunal or Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed from
office except on the ground of proven misbehaviour or incapacity after enquiry
conducted in case of a Presiding Officer of the Tribunal by a Judge of a High

Court and in case of a Presiding Officer of the Appellate Tribunal by a Judge
of the Supreme Court. The Chairperson of the Tribunal has general power of
superintendence and control over the Tribunals including appraisal of work
and recording of confidential reports of the Presiding Officers. Even if there
were complaints against the appellants, the proper course was to forward
these complaints to the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal of the
Rajasthan High Court for further action. However, it appears that the
complaints of some members of the staff and others were entertained and
examined by the Ministry of Finance. This should have been avoided. We may
refer here to the observations of the Supreme Court in Ajay Gandhi versus
Bir Singh reported in (2004) 2 SCC 127, a case relating to Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal and the administrative control of the Central Government. It
was opined :
“10. The submissions of the respondent on the other

hand are: (1) The Central Government has the
necessary administrative control over the Tribunal
having regard to the power to constitute the same. (2)
The power of appointment of a member of the Tribunal
would include a power of his transfer and posting. (3)
Such a power of the Central Government is implicit from
the scheme of the Act.
11. There are a large number of instances where such
power of the President has been misused and having
regard thereto, the impugned decisions had been taken.
12. The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal exercises
judicial functions and has the trappings of a court.

13. It may be true that the Tribunal functions under the
Ministry of Law and Justice and the Law Secretary is the
member of the Selection Board. The Ministry of Law and
Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, it is accepted,
exercises a disciplinary power over the members of the
Tribunal. The Allocation of Business Rules of the
Government of India in respect of the Tribunal is placed
under the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law
and Justice. Does it mean that the Ministry of Law and
Justice exercises a supervisory jurisdiction over the
Tribunal? Supervisory control under the rules of
allocation of business relates to the administrative
matters and not the judicial ones. The functions of the
Tribunal being judicial in nature, the public have a major
stake in its functioning, for effective and orderly
administration of justice. A Tribunal should, as far as
possible, have a judicial autonomy. The provisions of
Sections 252, 254 and 255, as noticed hereinbefore,
confer a statutory power upon the President to
constitute Benches. The Appellate Tribunal is a national
Tribunal. The President, subject to delegation of powers
to Senior Vice-President or the Vice-President,
exercises administrative control over the members
thereof. The Benches are to be constituted only by the
President. No other authority is empowered to do so.”

9. The appellants herein have been recalled pursuant to orders passed by the
Chief Justice of the Rajasthan High Court. We may note that in the case of
Mr. K. L. Sharma proceedings of misconduct were initiated against him when
he was working as a Judicial Officer in RHJS before his appointment as a
Presiding Officer, DRT. The proceedings culminated in passing of the Order

dated 14th August, 2000 imposing punishment of stoppage of one annual
increment with cumulative effect. This Order was approved by the Full Court
of the Rajasthan High Court on 22nd July, 2006. Mr. K L Sharma after being
recalled submitted an application seeking voluntary retirement w.e.f. 14th
August, 2006, which was sent by fax on 3rd August, 2006. Mr. K L Sharma
during the course of proceedings before this Court, after initial hesitation,
admitted having sent this letter for voluntary retirement and his signatures
thereon. We may also note here that enquiry proceedings have been initiated
against Mr. K L Sharma for allegedly receiving illegal gratification while
working as Presiding Officer of DRT and said proceedings are still pending.
Files of Rajasthan High Court reveal that there are three other complaints and
enquiries pending against Mr. K. L. Sharma. It was in these circumstances
that the Chief Jusitce of Rajasthan High Court had recalled Mr. K. L. Sharma
in the interest of administration.
10. Similarly, in the case of Mr. R. K. Mathur, several staff members had
made serious complaints against him. Some of the women staff members had
made allegations of harassment. There were also allegations of financial
misconduct. These allegations were put up before the Chief Justice of the
Rajasthan High Court who felt that in general public interest that Mr. R. K.
Mathur should be recalled. We have refrained from mentioning in detail
allegations made in these complaints. We may also note here that both the
officers have now retired from RHJS. The appellants have also not been

performing functions as Presiding Officers since 2006 and their term in normal
course would expire on 31st March, 2008 in the case of Mr. R. K. Mathur and
31st August, 2008 in the case of Mr. K. L. Sharma as they attain age of 62
years in the said months. It will not be in the interest of institution to permit
them to work as Presiding Officers of DRT after such a long gap.
11. The appellants were always treated as deputationists of the Rajasthan
High Court. The appellants also treated themselves to be deputationists. They
were being paid deputation duty allowance in terms of Rule 4 of the Debt
Recovery Tribunal (Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of Presiding Officer) Rules, 1993. The said Rule reads as under :
“If a person holding the post on a regular basis in the
scale of pay of Rs.5900-200-6700 is appointed as
Presiding Officer of a Tribunal on tenure basis and
holds lien in his parent cadre, he shall be paid a
salary in the scale of pay specified in rule 3 plus a
deputation duty allowance at a rate as are applicable
to Group 'A' officers of the Central Government
drawing an equivalent pay.”

12. Deputation duty allowance was paid in terms of the said Rule to the
appellants because they continue to hold lien in the appointment cadre i.e.
RHJS. We may refer here to decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India
Versus V. E. Ramakrishnan reported in (2005) 8 SCC 394 in which it has
been observed as under :

“32. Ordinarily, a deputationist has no legal right to
continue in the post. A deputationist indisputably has
no right to be absorbed in the post to which he is
deputed. However, there is no bar thereto as well. It
may be true that when deputation does not result in
absorption in the service to which an officer is
deputed, no recruitment in its true import and
significance takes place as he is continued to be a
member of the parent service. When the tenure of
deputation is specified, despite a deputationist not
having an indefeasible right to hold the said post,
ordinarily the term of deputation should not be
curtailed except on such just grounds as, for
example, unsuitability or unsatisfactory performance.
But, even where the tenure is not specified, an order
of reversion can be questioned when the same is
mala fide. An action taken in a post-haste manner
also indicates malice. (See Bahadursinh Lakhubhai
Gohil v. Jagdishbhai M. Kamalia (2004) 2 SCC 65;
para 25.)”

13. In the said case the Supreme Court has observed that a deputationist can
always be repatriated to his parent service. Even when tenure of deputation is
specified, a deputationist does not have an indefeasible right to hold the post.
Ordinarily, term of deputation should not be curtailed but when exceptional
circumstances exist specified tenure can also be curtailed. In the present case
we find that the Chief Justice of Rajasthan High Court had curtailed tenure in
view of exceptional circumstances and in public interest.
14. In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present appeal and
the same is accordingly dismissed. DASTI.

(SANJIV KHANNA) JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
MARCH 4, 2008.
P

