*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 1277/2008
AZADPUR GAON RESIDENTS
WELFARE ASSOCIATION
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. K.C. Mittal with Mr.Puneet Mittal,
Advocates.
versus

D.D.A. & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Ajay Verma, Advocate for DDA
Mr. Virender Sood, Mr.Pushkar Sood and Mr.
Anshuman Sood, advocates for respondent no.4.
Ms. Jyoti Singh with Mr.Ankur Chhibber, Advocates
for respondents 2-3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%

ORDER
04.03.2008
1. This Writ Petition has been filed by Azadpur Gaon Residents Welfare
Association stating, inter alia, that the respondent-DMRC contrary to
the Master Plan of Delhi, 2021 and the building bye-laws is
constructing a Mall and a the Metro Station at Ring Road, Azadpur,
New Delhi.
2. Reference is also placed on another letter dated 19th March, 2007
written by DMRC to the Vice Chairman, DDA. It is submitted that
contrary to law, a mall is being constructed on the Green Belt though

request for change of land use from Green Belt/

recreational to

commercial is still pending and has not been decided. Learned
counsel for the petitioner has also shown photographs of the
construction work that is in progress as well as the proposed
structural drawings.
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention to the reply
filed by the Chief Public Relation Officer to the queries dated 10th
August, 2007, raised under the Right to Information Act. In reply to
Item No.1 to 3, it has been replied as under:“Item 1. : Whether the construction of Mall-cumMetro Station at Ring Road, Azadpur is being
constructed and developed on a green area proposed
in the Development Plan.
Response.: Yes. The Metro station at Ring
Road, Azadpur is being constructed and developed on
a green area.
Item 2. : Whether the land on which the said
Mall-cum-Metro Station is being developed and
constructed after converting the green area to
commercial area and whether any permission or
sanction has been obtained for change of land use.
Response : Permission for change of land use
has been applied for by DMRC on 19/03/2007 (copy
enclosed).
Item 3. : Whether the land/site at which the
Mall-cum-Metro Station is coming up was for some
other public purpose and if any permission or sanction
has been obtained for change of land use or purpose.
Response : The land/site has been allotted by
DDA to DMRC for via-duct, station and parking. At
present via-duct, station and parking are under

construction.”

4. It is clearly stated in the reply that what is being constructed is the
metro station building and parking area. In their short reply filed by
DMRC on 28th February, 2008 it has been clarified that platform and
the footprints are being constructed. It is also stated that by letter
dated 27th September, 2007, Government of India, Ministry of Urban
Development has exempted DMRC from obtaining sanction of
building plans from local authorities in respect of the metro station
including the platform area and the footprint of the metro station.
These are to be treated as part of operational structure. DMRC has,
further, enclosed letter dated 19th February, 2008 calling upon the
builder to ensure that no commercial development outside the
footprint of the station building is undertaken without approval of all
authorities concerned including formal sanction of change in land
use.
5. DMRC will be bound by the counter affidavit and will not undertake
any commercial development outside the footprint of the station
building without prior approval of the concerned authority i.e. DDA
including change of land use as stated by them in para 5 of the

affidavit.

In view of the affidavit filed by DMRC, nothing further

survives in this writ petition and the same is accordingly disposed of.
No costs.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
MARCH
P

04, 2008

