LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

LPA NO. 1091 of 2004

%

Date of Decision :
R.P. BIDANI

7th May, 2007.

.... Appellant.
Through Mr. V.P. Chaudhary, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. R.C. Gupta & Ms. Sushma, Advocates.

VERSUS
HINDUSTAN LEVER LTD. & ANR.
.... Respondents.
Through Mr. Sudhir Chandra, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Sandeep Prabhakar, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR.JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA,CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

LPA No. 1091/2004

1.

Page 2

Mr. R.P. Bidani, the appellant herein has challenged judgment

dated 27th September, 2004 passed in W.P.(C) No. 1957/1989 titled
Hindustan Lever Limited versus Industrial Tribunal-I and Another. By
the impugned judgment learned Single Judge of this Court has set
aside order/award dated 4th February, 1989 passed by the Presiding
Officer, Industrial Tribunal-I, inter alia, holding that the said tribunal
did not have the territorial jurisdiction to adjudicate the application
filed by the respondent herein, M/s Hindustan Lever Limited-the
management, under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act, for short).
2.

The facts which are relevant for adjudication of the present

appeal may now be noticed. In 1953 the appellant was appointed as
an accounts clerk in Hindustan Vanaspati Manufacturing Company
Limited, Ghaziabad.

He was working at Ghaziabad. The said

company was later on amalgamated with the respondent company.
The appellant became an employee of the respondent and continued
to work at Ghaziabad.

LPA No. 1091/2004

3.

Page 3

On 26th September, 1975 the appellant was transferred to

Delhi. The appellant protested but ultimately joined Delhi office on
8th January, 1976. It is the case of the appellant that he joined the
said office without prejudice to the pendency of the reference
proceedings challenging and questioning the order of transfer dated
26th September, 1975. The transfer was made subject matter of an
industrial dispute No. 47/1976 (later on re-numbered 42/1978 before
Labour Court, Meerut, subsequently transferred to Labour Court,
Ghaziabad).
4.

In addition to this dispute, the appellant workman was also

involved in Miscellaneous Case No. 37/1975 being an application
under Section 33C (2) of the Act for recovery of dearness allowance
payable, with progressive linkage with cost of living Index. The said
case was also filed in the Labour Court, Meerut.
5.

In 1983, a similar dispute was raised by employees of the

respondent working at Delhi with regard to freeze of dearness
allowance and also for withdrawal of canteen facilities.

The said

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 4

labour dispute was registered as ID No. 568/1983 and was pending
before the Industrial Tribunal, Delhi.
6.

While the appellant was posted in Delhi,

disciplinary

proceedings were initiated on the ground that he was a habitual
unauthorised absentee from duty and domestic enquiry was held and
his services were terminated by an order of dismissal dated 10th
August, 1984.
7.

The respondent management thereafter filed an application

under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act seeking approval of the order of
dismissal. This application was filed before the Industrial Tribunal
Delhi before whom ID No. 568/1983 reference relating to dearness
allowance and canteen facilities for employees of the respondent
company in Delhi was pending.
8.

The question raised in the present appeal is whether the

Industrial Tribunal at Delhi had/has the territorial jurisdiction to
adjudicate and decide this application under Section 33(2)(b) of the
Act or only the Industrial Adjudicator at Ghaziabad had/has the

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 5

territorial jurisdiction to decide an application under Section 33(2)(b)
of the Act.
9.

The Industrial Tribunal at Delhi by its order dated 4th February,

1989 has held that the concerned authorities at Ghaziabad have
jurisdiction to adjudicate the application under Section 33(2)(b) of the
Act. While doing so, the Presiding Officer of the Industrial Tribunal
has in substance relied upon award dated 30th April, 1985 passed by
the Labour Court, Ghaziabad holding, inter alia, that the transfer order
dated 26th September, 1975 by which the services of the appellant
were transferred from Ghaziabad to Delhi was mala fide and illegal.
10.

Learned Single Judge, however, did not find merit in the said

reasoning and in our opinion, rightly.

Learned Single Judge has

pointed out that the question of jurisdiction is not dependent upon
imponderables.

The order of termination dismissing the appellant

was passed on 10th August, 1984. At that time the appellant was
working in Delhi pursuant to the transfer order dated 26

th

September,

1975. This transfer order was quashed by an award dated 30th April,

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 6

1985 i.e. after the date of order of termination which was passed on
10th August, 1984.

On the date of termination and filing of the

application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act, the order of transfer had
not been set aside and was in operation. The appellant was working
in Delhi but the question of his transfer was under clout and challenge
before the Industrial Adjudicator at Ghaziabad. The respondent
management could not have presumed and had no ability to know the
fate of the said industrial dispute when the order terminating the
services of the appellant was passed in Delhi. Law does not require
parties to have ability of a soothsayer or a third eye to know what is in
store for them in future. Jurisdiction of the Court is determined and
decided on the date when the proceeding is initiated. If on the date
when the proceeding was filed, court/forum concerned in Delhi had
jurisdiction, subsequent events cannot have the effect of nullification
and annihilation of the right of the court/forum in Delhi to decide the
case, unless there is statutory amendment or wrong assumption of
jurisdiction at the first instance. It may be relevant to state that the

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 7

award dated 30th April, 1985 is subject matter of a writ petition before
Allahabad High Court. If the said award is set aside, would it mean
that the territorial jurisdiction would again shift from Ghaziabad to
Delhi or if the said decision is again reversed by the Supreme Court
then territorial jurisdiction of the Courts/forums will undergo a change.
This uncertainty cannot be approbated.

Thus the contention of the

appellant and the reasoning given by the learned Industrial Tribunal
that the proceedings at Delhi were not maintainable as award dated
30th April, 1985 has set aside the transfer order from Ghaziabad to
Delhi, is liable to be rejected. Thus to determine territorial jurisdiction
normally the facts as they exist on the date of the institution of the
petition should be taken into consideration and subsequent and
posterior facts, unless the enactment is to the contrary, have to be
ignored.
11.

This brings us to the principal issue and question of territorial

jurisdiction of labour court and industrial authorities to entertain an
application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act.

The answer to the

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 8

question lies in the language used by the legislature in the said
Section and the object and purpose behind the said section. The said
Section reads as under:“33. Conditions of service, etc., to remain
unchanged under certain circumstances
during pendency of proceedings.- (1) During the
pendency of any conciliation proceeding before a
conciliation officer or a Board or of any proceeding
before [an arbitrator or] a Labour Court or Tribunal
or National Tribunal in respect of an industrial
dispute, no employer shall,
( a ) in regard to any matter connected
with the dispute, alter, to the prejudice of
the workmen concerned in such dispute,
the conditions of service applicable to
them
immediately
before
the
commencement of such proceeding; or
( b ) for any misconduct connected with
the dispute, discharge or punish,
whether by dismissal or otherwise, any
workmen concerned in such dispute,
save with the express permission in
writing of the authority before which the
proceeding is pending.
(2) During the pendency of any such
proceeding in respect of an industrial
dispute,
the
employer
may,
in
accordance with the standing orders
applicable to a workman concerned in
such dispute [or, where there are no

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 9

such standing orders, in accordance with
the terms of the contract, whether
express or implied, between him and the
workman],
( a ) alter, in regard to any matter not
connected with the dispute, the
conditions of service applicable to that
workman
immediately
before
the
commencement of such proceeding; or
( b ) for any misconduct not connected
with the dispute, discharge or punish,
whether by dismissal or otherwise, that
workman:
Provided that no such workman shall be
discharged or dismissed, unless he has
been paid wages for one month and an
application has been made by the
employer to the authority before which
the proceeding is pending for approval of
the action taken by the employer.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (2), no employer shall
during the pendency of any such
proceeding in respect of an industrial
dispute, take any action against any
protected workman concerned in such
dispute
( a ) by altering, to the prejudice of such
protected workman, the conditions of
service applicable to him immediately
before the commencement of such
proceeding;
or
( b ) by discharging or punishing whether

LPA No. 1091/2004

by dismissal or
protected workman,

Page 10

otherwise,

such

save with the express permission in
writing of the authority before which the
proceeding
is
pending.
Explanation .For the purposes of this
sub-section, a “protected workman”, in
relation to an establishment, means a
workman who, being [a member of the
executive or other officer-bearer] of a
registered trade union connected with
the establishment, is recognised as such
in accordance with rules made in this
behalf.
(4) In every establishment, the number
of workmen to be recognised as
protected workmen for the purposes of
sub-section (3) shall be one per cent of
the total number of workmen employed
therein subject to a minimum number of
five protected workmen and a maximum
number of one hundred protected
workmen and for the aforesaid purpose,
the appropriate Government may make
rules providing for the distribution of
such protected workmen among various
trade unions, if any, connected with the
establishment and the manner in which
the workmen may be chosen and
recognised as protected workmen.
(5) Where an employer makes an
application to a conciliation officer,
Board, [an arbitrator, a] Labour Court,
Tribunal or National Tribunal under the

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 11

proviso to sub-section (2) for approval of
the action taken by him, the authority
concerned shall, without delay, hear
such application and pass, [within a
period of three months from the date of
receipt of such application], such order in
relation thereto as it deems fit:
Provided that where any such authority
considers it necessary or expedient so to
do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, extend such period by such
further period as it may think fit:
Provided further that no proceedings
before any such authority shall lapse
merely on the ground that any period
specified in this sub-section had expired
without
such
proceedings
being
completed.”

12.

Section 33 of the Act requires parties to maintain status quo

with regard to terms and conditions of employment during pendency
of proceedings.

Sub-Section 2, however, provides that during

pendency of an industrial dispute, an employer can in accordance
with the standing orders or in accordance with the terms of contract,
as the case may be, may discharge services of an employee by way
of dismissal, or otherwise by way of punishment for a misconduct not

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 12

connected with a pending industrial dispute. The proviso, however,
requires that no workman shall be discharged or dismissed unless he
has

been paid wages for one month and employer makes an

application to the authority before which the proceeding is already
pending. The Supreme Court in the case of Jaipur Zila Sahakari
Bhoomi Vikas Bank Limited versus Shri Ram Gopal Sharma and
others reported in AIR 2002 SC 643 has relied upon two earlier
decisions in the case of Strawboard Manufacturing Company
versus Govind reported in AIR 1962 SC 1500 and Tata Iron and
Steel Company versus Modak reported in AIR 1966 SC 380 and
has opined that Section 33(2)(b) is mandatory. Until permission is
granted by the concerned authority before whom proceedings are
pending, an order of dismissal or discharge remains incomplete and
inchoate.

Once approval is granted, the order of dismissal or

discharge relates back to the date when it was initially passed but the
workman has a right to file a complaint under Section 33A of the Act
challenging the order granting approval on the grounds available to

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 13

him. If approval is not granted under Section 33(2)(b), the order of
discharge or dismissal is inoperative/void and the employee is entitled
to reinstatement without recourse to Section 33A of the Act, which in
such situation is rendered meaningless and futile.

The Supreme

Court in this decision, over ruled it's earlier decision in the case of
Punjab Beverages Private Limited versus Suresh Chand,
reported in AIR 1978 SC 995.
13.

A reading of the above decision and also the bare Section

shows that the management is required to file an application under
Section 33(2)(b) of the Act when an order of discharge or dismissal is
passed for misconduct not connected with the pending dispute but in
respect of a “workman concerned”. Such application is required to be
filed before the authority which is dealing with the pending dispute,
though the dispute is not connected with the misconduct resulting in
order of dismissal or discharge. However, the pending dispute should
be in respect of the “concerned workman”. Therefore, the authority or
the court has to examine whether the workman is a “workman

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 14

concerned with such dispute” pending before the said labour authority
or court. If the answer is “yes”, then an application under Section
33(2)(b) of the Act will be maintainable before the said authority/court.
14.

The expression “a workman concerned with such dispute” has

been subject matter of judicial decisions by the Supreme Court and
High Courts.

The said expression not only includes a workman

directly and actually concerned with a dispute but also includes all
such workmen on whose behalf the dispute is raised as well as those
who would be bound by the award which may be passed in the said
dispute.

It is well settled that

apart from deeming exceptions

industrial disputes cannot be raised for enforcing claims of individual
workmen. What imparts to a dispute of a workman, character of an
industrial dispute is that it affects the rights of the workmen as a
class. An individual dispute can become an industrial dispute if
espoused by his fellow workmen on the ground that they have
commity of interest and direct and substantial interest in the
employment, non employment or conditions of work of the concerned

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 15

workman (Refer Indian Cable Company Limited versus workmen,
reported in (1962) 1 LLJ 409 and Western India Match Co. Ltd. Vs.
Workers Union reported in (1970) 1 SCC 225). However, for the
purpose of finding out whether a particular workman is covered by the
expression “ a workman concerned with such dispute”, the definition
of the term industrial dispute as defined in Section 2(K) and the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Indian Cable Company
Limited (supra) is of little application and relevance. Section 33(2)(b)
of the Act and the expression “a workman concerned with such
dispute” shows that the legislature has recognised and accepted that
behind the collective nature of industrial dispute, there are individual
workmen who are concerned and whose rights are decided in a
dispute which is already pending consideration and these workmen
are given protection lest their services are terminated vindictively,
mala fidely or due to unfair labour practice. The said expression not
only includes the workmen whose name is actually mentioned in the
reference but all those who may be affected by the said adjudication.

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 16

The term “concerned workmen” should not be given a narrow
construction and includes all workmen on whoes behalf the dispute
has been raised as well as those workmen who will be bound by the
award.

(Refer New India Motors Private Limited versus K.T.

Morris

reported in AIR 1960 SC 875 and Upper Ganges Valley

Electricity Supply Company Limited versus G.S. Srivastva,
reported in (1963) 1 LLJ 237 SC).
15.

The Bombay High Court in New Jehangir Vakil Mills Limited

versus N. L. Vyas, reported in 1958 (2) LLJ 573 had the occasion to
examine the said expression and has drawn a distinction between a
“concerned workman” and an “interested workman”. A workman may
have interest in a dispute for various reasons, including the fact that
he supports a fellow workman but this is not sufficient to make the
workman a “concerned workman”. The word “concerned” connotes a
kind of specific, direct interest in any legal proceedings, to which he
may not be individually a party, when

a result or adjudication is

capable of directly affecting him favourably or prejudicially according

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 17

to the result. A workman who is likely to benefit or adversely affected
by any decision will be a “workman concerned” with such dispute and
the management in such cases must move an application under
Section 33(2)(b) of the Act.
16.

It may be relevant to state here that in the present case when

the question of territorial jurisdiction was being examined, the
respondent management had filed an application calling upon the
appellant workman to specifically state whether the appellant was a
workman concerned in ID No. 568/1983 pending before the Industrial
Tribunal at Delhi. It was mentioned in the application that during oral
arguments, the appellant had stated that he was not a workman
“concerned” with the dispute in ID No. 568/1983. Accordingly, the
Industrial Tribunal was requested to record statement of the appellant
whether he was a “concerned workman” in the dispute at Delhi and
once the statement was recorded, the respondent management
agreed to reserve their rights to move and raise contentions before an
appropriate authority.

The respondent filed a reply to the said

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 18

application stating that the averments made in the application were
not relevant and material and oral arguments advanced by the
appellant workman have been totally misunderstood and twisted.
Reliance was placed upon the award of the Labour Court, Ghaziabad
dated 25

th

June, 1985 setting aside the appellant's transfer from

Ghaziabad to Delhi. The appellant workman stated that question of
making any statement did not arise. (Copy of the said application and
the said reply are available in the writ record at pages 177 to 182). It
is apparent that the appellant workman was deliberately and
intentionally avoiding direct and categorical answer to the relevant
question whether the appellant was a “concerned workman” in the
dispute at Delhi. Adverse inference therefore can be drawn against
the appellant for his refusal and failure to answer the said question
and make statement.
17.

In view of the above factual position, it cannot be denied that

the appellant was a workman concerned with the dispute pending

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 19

adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal at Delhi. The reference
subject matter of the dispute in ID No. 568/1983 was as under:“Whether the freeze endorsed upon the
dearness allowances of the office employees
of Delhi Branch of M/s Hindustan Lever Ltd,
New Delhi at a fixed point of Delhi working
class cost of living index in place of a
progressive linkage with the rise in index is
legal and/or justified if not, to what relief are
the employees entitled?
Whether the withdrawal of canteen facilities in
the branch office of Hindustan Lever Ltd is
legal/or justified. If not to what reliefs are the
employees entitled? ”

18.

In 1984, the appellant was working in Delhi. He was concerned

with the freeze of

dearness allowance and also withdrawal of

canteen facilities as an employee working with the respondent at
Delhi. Adjudication and result of the said ID No. 568/1983 would
have beneficially or prejudicially affected the appellant. Therefore, he
was a concerned workman in relation to the industrial dispute before
Industrial Tribunal at Delhi within the meaning of Section 33(2)(b) of

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 20

the Act when his services were terminated and when the application
was filed by the respondent-management.
19.

At the same time, it cannot be disputed that the appellant was

also a concerned workman with regard to the separate disputes
which were pending at Ghaziabad at the time when the order of
th

dismissal dated 10 August, 1984 was passed. The appellant was
accordingly a workman concerned in the said the disputes which
were pending at Ghaziabad. The said authorities at Ghaziabad were
also having concurrent jurisdiction to entertain and decide an
application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act.

However, mere

concurrent jurisdiction with different authorities would not divest and
or exclude territorial jurisdiction of the competent authority at Delhi
from adjudicating and deciding an application under Section 33(2)(b)
of the Act. Law recognises that forums at different locations may have
concurrent jurisdiction to adjudicate and decide disputes inter se
parties and in such cases a party has a right to invoke jurisdiction of a
forum located at a place of his choice. The party invoking jurisdiction

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 21

of a forum/authority located at a particular place cannot be non-suited
on the ground that the forum/authority at another location also has
jurisdiction. An application under Section 33(2)(b) cannot be
dismissed on the ground that a similar application would be
maintainable before a different forum also. Concurrent jurisdiction is
not a valid ground to non-suit a party invoking jurisdiction of a forum
at a particular place vested with jurisdiction by law. When
courts/forums at two or more places have jurisdiction, choice of forum
is with the person filing the proceedings.
20.

Sections 33(2)(b) of the Act does not require filing of multiple

applications for approval in all forums where proceedings are
pending. One application before a competent forum/authority is
required to be filed. Scope of enquiry for granting or rejecting
approval under section 33 (2) (b) of the Act is limited. It has to be
seen whether prima facie case is made out as regards the validity or
otherwise of the domestic enquiry against the workman. Even when
approval is granted under section 33(2) (b) of the Act, the workman

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 22

can challenge the action in an appropriate proceedings under the Act.
Order of approval is not final against the workman (Refer Cholan
Roadways Ltd. Vs. G. Thirugnanasambandam, reported in (2005)
3 SCC 241).
21.

Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that in the dispute

relating to transfer from Ghaziabad to Delhi pending before Labour
Court at Ghaziabad was the principal dispute in which the appellant
was directly and substantially involved. On this basis, jurisdiction of a
forum under Section 33(2)(b) cannot be decided.

Under the said

Section, jurisdiction of a forum is decided on the basis whether a
workman is a “concerned workman” in a dispute pending before the
authority before whom an application under Section 33(2)(b) of the
Act has been filed. The legislature in it's wisdom has not made any
distinction between two disputes-one in which the workman is the
principal or the only party and another dispute in which the workman
along with some other workmen are involved. In both situations, the
forums will have jurisdiction and an application under section 33(2)

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 23

(b) of the Act can be filed in any forum.

The argument of the

appellant, if accepted, is likely to cause lot of confusion and
uncertainty, besides technical objections and litigation, with the
management being required to first examine the question in which
dispute the worker is more prominently involved and can be classified
and regarded as a main or principal dispute. This is not the
requirement in law and Section 33(2)(b) of the Act and, therefore,
cannot be accepted. However, in a given case, power under Section
33B of the Act can be exercised to transfer proceedings under
Section 33 of the Act from one forum to another. This takes care of
any inequities and difficulties which may be faced or may come up
when forums have concurrent jurisdiction.

The said provision is

similar to Section 22 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
22.

Learned counsel for the appellant has referred to the judgments

relied upon by the learned Single Judge in the impugned judgment. In
the written submissions filed, it has been stated that the said
judgments have no application as they deal with Section 10 and not

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 24

Section 33 of the Act. This is also correct but does not decide and
resolve the issue in favour of the appellant. Section 33 and
compliance thereof depends upon pendency of proceedings before
an authority. Pendency of proceedings before the authority/forum
confers jurisdiction on that authority/forum to decide the subject
matter i.e. application under section 33(2) (b) of the Act. The said
decisions support the view we have taken. We will now refer to some
of the said decisions. Bombay High Court in Lalbhai Tricumlal Mills
Limited versus Dhanubhai Motilal Vin and others, reported in AIR
1955 Bombay 463 noticed the provisions of Bombay Industrial
Relations Act and observed that the same did not deal with the
causes of action and also does not indicate the factors that will confer
jurisdiction upon labour courts on the basis of location. It was
accordingly held that the well known tests to decide questions of
territorial jurisdiction as known in common law and jurisprudence
should be applied to decide the question of territorial jurisdiction. If
subject matter of a dispute substantially arises within the jurisdiction

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 25

of a labour court, then the said labour court will have jurisdiction. The
test is not whether any other forum located in a different place will
also have jurisdiction. The test is whether the forum approached has
territorial jurisdiction. A forum has territorial jurisdiction once subject
matter of a dispute substantially arises within its jurisdiction. In this
regard we have to find out what are the ingredients of the dispute. If
there are various ingredients of the dispute then the forum has to
examine whether an ingredient is sufficiently important to constitute
subject matter of a dispute as arising within the jurisdiction of this
Court. Under Section 33 of the Act, territorial jurisdiction is
determined by the place and forum before whom a dispute is pending
in which the workman is “concerned”.
23.

This decision was followed and referred to with approval by the

Supreme Court in Workmen of Sri Ranga Vilas Motors Private
Limited versus Sri Ranga Vilas Motors Private Limited and
others, reported in 1967 (2) LLJ 12. It was held by the Supreme
Court that well known tests relating to jurisdiction of a court or tribunal

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 26

would equally apply while deciding whether a forum under the Act has
jurisdiction. Ordinarily a workman working in an establishment could
raise a dispute at the place of establishment. What is necessary is
that there should clearly be some nexus between the dispute and the
territory of the State and not necessarily between the territory of the
State and the industry, concerning which the dispute arose.
24.

A full Bench of Patna High Court in Paritosh Kumar versus

State of Bihar, reported in 1984 LLC 1254 examined the question of
territorial jurisdiction with reference to Section 10 of the Act. It was
held that a forum located at the place where the order of termination
of services was made would patently have jurisdiction.

The second

principle is, the nexus between the territory of the state and situs of
employment of the workman. Situs of employment of the workman is
significant factor to decide territorial jurisdiction. The third principle is
to apply well known tests of jurisdiction as applicable to civil courts.
Reference in this regard was made to Section 20(c) of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 and it was held that it would be axiomatic that

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 27

the territory within which the services of an employee are wrongfully
terminated would be the territory where the cause of action would
substantially arise.

The Full Bench specifically rejected the

contention raised that Section 20 of the said Code and in particular
Clause (c) thereof conferring jurisdiction on courts where cause of
action wholly or in part arises would not be applicable to cases under
the Act. It was held that without being hyper-technical or going to the
abstruse length of saying that cause of action in a civil case and an
industrial dispute are synonymous, it must be held that there was no
sharp or exclusionary line of division between the two cases i.e. civil
disputes and industrial disputes for the purpose of determining
territorial jurisdiction. Well known principles of territorial jurisdiction
governing civil disputes on the basis of concept of cause of action
would equally apply to the Act. More importantly for us in the said
decision, the Full Bench noticed that there may be cases of
concurrent jurisdiction.

The contention that there cannot be

concurrent jurisdiction was not accepted. It was held that concept of

LPA No. 1091/2004

Page 28

concurrent jurisdiction is recognised and sanctified under the Code.
Reference was made to Lalbhai case, Indian Cables case and
Ranga Vilas Motors case(supra).

Reference was also made to

Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. versus Workmen, reported in AIR
1975 SC 1737 and Lipton Limited versus Employees, reported in
AIR 1959 SC 676. With regard to concurrent jurisdiction reference
was also made to Emerald Valley Estates versus Secretary for
Kerala Estates and Staffs' Union, reported in 1979 Labour
Industrial Cases 86 wherein it has been held as under:“It might also be noticed that to confer
jurisdiction for reference on the State
Government concerned, it is not absolutely
necessary that the cause of action wholly of
exclusively should arise in that State. There
may be cases where part of the cause of
action arose in two or more States. In such
cases, two or more States may have
concurrent jurisdiction. When the question
regarding the territorial jurisdiction crops up,
what is to be asked and answered is whether
the cause of action substantially arose in the
State, the Government of which referred the
dispute for adjudication.”

LPA No. 1091/2004

25.

Page 29

In Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. v. Union of India, reported in

(2004) 6 SCC 254 the Supreme Court examined Clause 2 of Article
226 of the Constitution of India. It was held that a writ petition would
be maintainable before the High Court even where a part of cause of
action arises. The Supreme Court quoted with approval Nasiruddin
versus STAT reported in (1975) 2 SCC 671, wherein it has been
observed as under:
“The expression “cause of action” is well known. If
the cause of action arises wholly or in part at a
place within the specified Oudh areas, the
Lucknow Bench will have jurisdiction. If the cause
of action arises wholly within the specified Oudh
areas, it is indisputable that the Lucknow Bench
would have exclusive jurisdiction in such a matter.
If the cause of action arises in part within the
specified areas in Oudh it would be open to the
litigant who is the dominus litis to have his forum
conveniens . The litigant has the right to go to a
court where part of his cause of action arises. In
such cases, it is incorrect to say that the litigant
chooses any particular court. The choice is by
reason of the jurisdiction of the court being
attracted by part of cause of action arising within
the jurisdiction of the court.”

LPA No. 1091/2004

26.

Page 30

In view of the findings given above, we find no merit in the

present appeal and the same is dismissed. However, we clarify that
we have neither examined any of the disputes on merits, nor the
contention of the appellant that the application under Section 33(2)(b)
of the Act was not maintainable and the case of the appellant is
covered under Section 33(1) of the Act. These are matters for the
learned tribunal to adjudicate and decide.

In the facts and

circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
MAY 07, 2007.
VKR/P

