W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

1
REPORTABLE

* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 8101 OF 2007
Date of Decision : April 08, 2008.
SACHIN J. JOSHI & ANR.

.... Petitioners.

Through_Sr. Advocate with Ms. Pinky
Anand
with Ms. Reeva Gujral,
Advocates.
VERSUS
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR & ANR.

.... Respondents.

Through Mr. Ajay Verma, Advocate for
DDA.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

YES

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

YES

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. M/s. Asrani Inns and Resorts Private Ltd.-petitioner no.2, has
purchased two adjacent hotel plots measuring 7220.40 sq.mt.

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

2

(hereinafter referred to as plot no.1, for short) and 7030 sq.mts
(hereinafter referred to as plot no.2, for short) at Wazirpur District
Centre, Delhi for Rs.1,27,00,00,000.00 (One hundred and twenty
seven crores only) and Rs.1,02,40,00,000.00 (Hundred and two
crores and forty lacs only) respectively in the auction held on 4th
May, 2006. The permissible built up area or Floor Area Ratio on
plot no.1 is 15,500 sq.mt. and 14,500 sq.mts. on plot no.2. One of
the terms and conditions of allotment is that the petitioners will
construct two hotels, one on each plot, within a period of 42
months. The petitioners have given two bank guarantees of
Rs.6,35,00,000.00 and Rs.5,12,00,000.00 for plot no.1 and plot
no.2 respectively, which can be invoked in case of delay in
construction

beyond

the

agreed

period.

Two

separate

Conveyance Deeds dated 3rd November, 2006 have been
executed in favour of the petitioners.
2. The petitioner-Company in December, 2006 approached Delhi
Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as DDA, for short)
for amalgamation of the two plots. A letter dated 14th December,
2006 was written. It is the case of the petitioners that they are
entitled to amalgamation of the two plots in view of the Resolution
No. 7 dated 7th Jan.,1991 of DDA permitting amalgamation of
commercial plots read with the letter dated 29th Jan.,1992 of the
Union of India, subject to payment of 10% of the bid amount or on

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

3

payment for additional FAR, whichever is higher. It is the case of
the petitioners that initially the officers of the DDA were agreeable
and on this basis the petitioners started their project with
excavation work. Plans were submitted for construction of a single
hotel on the two plots. A number of letters were written after
December, 1996 till April, 1997, but there was no response from
the respondent-DDA. Thereupon, the petitioners filed Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 4521/2007 and by Order dated 29th May, 2007, this
Court directed DDA to consider the application/representation
dated 14th December, 2006 of the petitioners for amalgamation
and communicate their decision within 15 days. By letter dated
13th June, 2007, the petitioners were informed that their request
for amalgamation of plot no.1 with plot no.2 was under
examination and for consideration of queries raised by the
Finance Department. It was further stated that after calculation of
the amalgamation charges, the file would be put to the competent
authority, i.e.; Lt. Governor for approval. It was also clarified that
amalgamation would be allowed as per the policy and subject to
payment of amalgamation charges as under :“Flat rate of 10% of the market value prevalent
at the time of application, or the market value
of the extra floor space generated by virtue of
amalgamation, whichever is greater be
recovered. This will be charged for the actual
area of plot involved.”

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

4

3. Subsequently, DDA informed the petitioners that the request for
amalgamation had been rejected vide order dated 30th July, 2007
passed by the Lt. Governor. The reasons recorded by the Lt.
Governor are as under :“The proposal of DDA to allow amalgamation of
two hotel plots sold independently, is in
contradiction to the conditions mentioned in
auction document at 3.10(vii). If the decision
was taken to auction the plots as smaller size
plots, there should not be an occasion to allow
post-auction amalgamation of two plots
particularly when it violates the auction
conditions. The proposal is rejected.
V.C. may also conduct an inquiry and fix
responsibility at the supervisory level, as to how
this case was processed for approval.”
4. The petitioners have impugned the said rejection in the present
Writ Petition. The contention of the petitioners is that in terms of
Resolution No. 7 dated 7th January, 1991 and letter dated 29th
January, 1992, the petitioners are entitled to amalgamation of the
two commercial plots. The petitioners rely upon doctrine of
legitimate expectation and submit that the order dated 30th July,
2007 passed by the Lt. Governor rejecting the request of the
petitioners is amenable to judicial review. It is stated that DDA has
not taken into consideration the relevant and material fact that
amalgamation of commercial plots is permissible under the
resolution passed by DDA and as approved by the Ministry of
Urban Development by their letter dated 29th January,1992. It is

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

5

also submitted that by allowing amalgamation of the two plots,
DDA will only become richer and will be entitled to further
payment of Rs.20,00,00,000.00. Besides the petitioners have
highlighted the ecological aspect and submitted that if the two
plots are amalgamated there will be substantial saving of valuable
resources like water, electricity and energy.
5. Power of Judicial Review under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India is not an appellate power. It confers limited jurisdiction
upon the Court to ensure that the administrative authority is bound
by the norms, standard of procedure laid down etc. It protects
individuals against arbitrary actions and ensures equality before
law as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Even in
contractual matters, State actions should confirm to Article 14 and
cannot be arbitrary. It has been repeatedly observed by the
Supreme Court that the Courts while exercising the power of
judicial review do not examine the merits of the decision but are
concerned with the decision-making process. If the public
authority has exercised it’s discretion malafidely or ignored
relevant material or taken into consideration irrelevant material,
Courts can interfere and Writs can be issued. Courts have also
applied Wednesbury's Principle of Reasonableness to examine
whether there was fair-play in action and there was no abuse or
unfair exercise of discretion. The petitioners have relied upon

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

6

following decisions : The Comptroller and Auditor General of
India, Gian Prakash, New Delhi & others versus K.S.
Jagannathan and others reported in AIR 1987 SC 537, Ramana
Dayaram Shetty versus International Airport Authority of
India and others reported in (1979) 3 SCC 489, D.T.C. Versus
D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress reported in 1991 Supp (1) SCC 600,
Union of India versus Hindustan Development Corporation
reported AIR 1994 SC 988, Delhi Science Forum versus Union
of India reported in AIR 1996 SC 1356 and Bannari Amman
Sugars Ltd versus Commercial Tax Officer and others
reported in 2005 (1) SCC 625.
6. I have examined the reasons given by the respondent-DDA in
rejecting the request for amalgamation in light of the aforesaid
principles. I have also examined the original files of DDA in which
the request of the petitioners for amalgamation was considered
and ultimately the decision to reject the said request was made.
The noting on the files reveal that the officers of DDA were of the
opinion that the request for amalgamation should be accepted.
They had relied upon Resolution No.7 dated 7th January, 1991,
which permits amalgamation of commercial plots.
7. Two reasons have been given by the respondent-DDA for
rejection of the request for amalgamation. It is firstly stated that

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

7

the plots in question are hotel plots and not commercial plots and
therefore Resolution no.7 dated 7th January, 1991 and approval
dated 29th January, 1992 of the Government of India is not
applicable. Secondly, it is stated that as per the terms and
conditions of auctions, under Clause 3.10(vii) it was specifically
mentioned :
“3.10 (vii). The successful bidder/allottee shall
not deviate in any manner from the layout plan
nor alter the size of the plot for the said purpose
either by sub-division, amalgamation or
otherwise.”
8. The DDA (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981
(hereinafter referred to as the Nazul Rules, for short) do not make
any distinction between commercial plots and hotel plots. The
term “commercial plots” is much broader, a generic term and
includes hotel plots. The Nazul Rules treat all commercial plots
alike. Thus the first contention of the respondent-DDA cannot be
accepted.
9. Rules 42 and 43 of the Nazul Rules read as under :“42. Allottee to be lessee of the Central
Government.-(1) Save as otherwise provided in
rule 44, all Nazul land allotted under these rules,
whether at predetermined rates or at fixed
premium under rule 7, or by auction or by tender,
shall be held by the allottee as lessee of the
President of India on the terms and conditions
prescribed by these rules and contained in the
lease-deed to be executed by the allottee.

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

8

(2) Every such allottee shall be liable to pay, in
addition to the premium payable in accordance
with these rules, ground rent, for holding the
Nazul land allotted to him under these rules, at
the rate of rupee one per annum per plot, for the
first five years from the date of allotment.
Provided that in the case of Nazul land allotted to
group housing cooperative societies; the ground
rent shall be charged at the rate of rupee one per
flat for the first five years from the date of
allotment.
(3) The annual ground rent payable after the first
five years referred to in sub-rule (2) shall be at
the rate of two and half per cent of the premium
originally payable.
(4) The rate of ground rent in all cases shall be
subject to enhancement after a period of thirty
years from the date of allotment.
[Provided
that
notwithstanding
anything
contained in this rule, the Authority may allot
Nazul land on free hold basis either through
auction or by tender for residential purpose or
commercial purpose;
Provided further that in the case allotment on
free hold basis, the allottee shall execute a
conveyance deed in Form BA.]
43. Lease to be executed by the allottee.Every allottee of Nazul land execute a leasedeed in accordance with Form C appended to
these rules. In addition, a lease-deed may
contain such other covenants, clauses or
conditions not inconsistent with the provisions of
Form C as may be considered necessary in the
circumstances of each case.”

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

9

10. Commercial leases or freehold commercial plots are governed
by the two aforesaid Rules and are treated as one single class
under the Rules. To this extent there is merit in the submissions of
the petitioner.
11. Rule 43, however, provides that DDA can in individual cases
fix terms and conditions of a lease deed but these cannot be
contrary to the terms and conditions mentioned in the statutory
forms prescribed under the Nazul Rules. The above stipulation
will equally apply to free hold land sold through public auction. In
such cases a conveyance deed has to be executed in form BA.
Thus, DDA cannot modify and prescribe different terms and
conditions contrary to the terms and conditions mentioned in the
statutory forms. The said forms are binding and cannot be
modified and amended by an executive policy i.e. by a Resolution
passed by DDA or even by a letter written by Union of India.
Rules are statutory and executive policy cannot amend or rewrite the Rules. Executive policy can supplement the Nazul Rules
but supplant or override them.
12. I have examined the back ground in which the Resolution
No.7 dated 7th January, 1991 and the letter of the Government of
India dated 29th January, 1992 had been passed and issued.

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

10

13. Sub-clause (4) of condition No. II of the lease deed for
commercial plots executed under Rule 43 of the Nazul Rules as
amended in 1989 prohibits amalgamation of commercial plots.
The bar is absolute and is applicable to all leases after 1989. The
relevant Clause is as under:“4) The lessee shall not deviate in any manner
from the layout plan nor alter the size of the
commercial plot for the said purpose either by
subdivision, amalgamation or otherwise.”

14. Prior to 1989 amalgamation/sub-division etc. prohibition was
not absolute or total. Specific permission of the lessor was
required. The relevant Clause as it existed reads as under:“The lessee shall not deviate in any manner
from the layout plan nor alter the size of the plot
whether by sub-division, amalgamation or
otherwise, unless specifically permitted to do so
by the lessor.”

15. In 1991, DDA recommended that the absolute prohibition in
Clause (4) of Condition No.II should be diluted and with prior
permission and subject to payment of prescribed charges,
amalgamation should be permitted. It was accordingly proposed
to modify the terms and conditions of all commercial leases with
the specific stipulation:

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

11

“The lessee shall not deviate in any manner
from the lay-out plan nor alter the size of the
commercial plot for the said purpose either by
sub-division, amalgamation or otherwise
unless specifically permitted to do so by the
lessor”.
16. On 7th January, 1991 the following Resolution was passed :“Resolution
Resolved that the proposal be approved subject
to the following:1. A flat rate of 10% of the market value
prevalent at the time of application be
recovered irrespective of the period of lease.
This will be charged for the total area of the
plots involved.
2. No reference to Building Cell or any other
Section of the Planning Wing is necessary.
3. The approval of the Central Government for
the proposed modification of the format of the
lease be obtained, as per rules.”

17. Ministry of Urban Development, Union of India thereafter by
letter dated 29th January, 1992 informed DDA that the issue has
been examined and it has been directed as under:“This issue has been examined in this
Ministry, and it is suggested that insofar as the
part 'A' of the Resolution is concerned the
following may be substituted :Flat rate of 10% of the market value prevalent
at the time of application, or the market value
of the extra floor space generated by virtue of
amalgamation, whichever is greater be

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

12

recovered. This will be charged for the total
area of plots involved.
It is also suggested that such market value of
the extra floor space generated by calculated
not later than 6 months from the date of
application for amalgamation.”

18. It is apparent from the above that the amendment proposed to
Sub-clause (4) of condition No. II of the lease deed for
commercial plots executed under Rule 43 of the Nazul Rules was
not specifically approved and accepted but the Government of
India accepted the Resolution permitting amalgamation of
commercial plots subject to the conditions specified therein.
19. It is clear from the said correspondence that the Nazul Rules
i.e. the statutory forms prescribed under Rules 42 and 43 have
not been amended or modified. Modification and amendment of
the Nazul Rules requires prescribed procedures under Sections
56, 57 and 58 of the DDA Act to be followed. The relevant
portions of the said Sections read as under:“56. Power to make rules.- (1) The Central
Government, after consultation with the
Authority, may by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes
of this Act:
Provided that consultation with the Authority
shall not be necessary on the first occasion of
the making of rules under this section, but the

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

13

Central
Government
shall
take
into
consideration any suggestions which the
Authority may make in relation to the
amendment of such rules after they are made.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely :(a) x x x x
(b) x x x x
(c) x x x x
(d) x x x x
(e) x x x x
(f) x x x x
(g) the form and manner in which notice under
sub-section (3) of section 11A shall be
published;
(h) the fee to be paid on an application for
permission under sub-section (1) of section 13
and the factors and circumstances to be taken
into consideration in determining such fee;
(j) the manner in which nazul lands shall be
dealt with after development.
57. Power to make regulations.-(1) The
authority with the previous approval of the
Central Government, may, by notificationin the
Official Gazette make regulations consistent
with this Act and the rules made thereunder,
to carry out the purposes of this Act, and
without prejudice to the generality of this
power, such regulations may provide for-

xxxx

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

14

58. Laying of rules and regulations before
Parliament.- Every rule and every regulation
made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after such rule or regulation is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or regulation, or both Houses agree
that the rule or regulation should not be made,
the rule or regulation shall, thereafter, have
effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.”

20. Admittedly, the said procedure has not been followed. The net
effect of the above discussion is that statutory forms of leases
prescribed under Rules 42 and 43 are binding. These statutory
forms cannot be modified and amended by the DDA nor can a
private party make any such request. If the statutory form
prescribed under the Nazul Rules does not permit amalgamation
of two or more plots, such amalgamation cannot be permitted.
Similarly, if the statutory form permits amalgamation with prior
permission, then in the said cases amalgamation can be allowed
and fee or charge as prescribed has to be paid. Letter dated 29th
January, 1992 by Ministry of Urban Development does not modify

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

15

or amend the terms and conditions of the statutory forms/leases.
Ministry of Urban Development cannot in fact modify the
prescribed terms which are part and parcel of the Nazul Rules.
Forms can be amended by amending the Nazul Rules, after
following the prescribed procedure. Letter dated 29th January,
1992 of Ministry of Urban Development will apply to only leases
executed prior to 1989 when amalgamation of plots was allowed
with prior permission. It will not apply w.e.f. 1989 to leases
executed under the amended Nazul Rules as under the said
leases there is an absolute bar. The said letter does not modify
the terms of the statutory form that no amalgamation or subdivision is permitted.
21. I have examined the file noting in F.No.30(1)/06/CL. From the
said file noting it is apparent that DDA has not been following the
statutory forms prescribed under the Nazul Rules. It is clear from
the file noting that after 1989, DDA has executed leases with
specific term and condition that no amalgamation shall be
allowed, but in some other cases, the term stipulates that
amalgamation would not be allowed unless specifically permitted
by the lessor. This should not happen. The format of lease in such
cases is contrary to the statutory form and is not permitted in view
of Rules 42 and 43 of the Nazul Rules.

Uniformity must be

maintained by the DDA. This is the object and purpose behind the

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

16

Nazul Rules and prevents discrimination, arbitrariness and
promotes Rule of Law.
22. In the present case, auction was for freehold plots. In such
cases conveyance deed in form 'BA' is to be executed in terms of
the Nazul Rules. The said form is different from the forms
prescribed for lease deeds. The said form does not have any
specific stipulation with regard to amalgamation of plots and
whether or not the same can be permitted and allowed. It is
however stipulated that terms of auction will be binding. Clauses 6
and 7 of the form BA reads as under:“(6) That the purchaser shall abide by the terms
and conditions of allotment/auction/tender,
which shall be treated as a part of these
presents.
(7) That the vendor reserves the right to cancel
this deed in event of breach of conditions of
allotment/auction/tender and of this deed.”

23. Therefore, DDA was competent and authorized to fix terms
and

conditions

of

auction

and

decide

whether

or

not

amalgamation of plots should be permitted. DDA had specifically
stipulated

in

the

terms

and

conditions

of

auction

that

amalgamation of plots would not be allowed. The said term of
auction is now binding between the parties. Clause 3.10 (VII)
therefore stands incorporated and is one of the terms of the form
BA or the conveyance deed executed in favour of the petitioners.
Reliance placed by the petitioner on the Circular/letter dated 29th

W.P.(C) No.8101/2007

17

January, 1992 is misconceived for the said Circular/letter relates
to lease deeds executed in terms of the Nazul Rules, where
amalgamation was permitted subject to permission by the lessor.
This letter or policy decision will not apply to cases of freehold
sale or to leases which have been executed under the Nazul
Rules prohibiting amalgamation or division of plots. A policy
decision cannot override or supplant the statutory Rules or the
statutory form including the terms prescribed. In the light of the
above discussion, it is held that amalgamation of plots cannot be
permitted in the present case and letter dated 29th January, 1992
is not applicable as it applies to lease deeds which permit
amalgamation and not to freehold plots or lease deeds which do
not permit amalgamation. The petitioner has not challenged the
terms of auction or the terms of the conveyance deed. Circular
dated 29th January, 1992 is the edifice of the petitioners’ case but
the said circular is not applicable. The terms of auction on the
basis of which the petitioner had given his bids, which have been
accepted cannot be modified. They have been given statutory
incorporation in the form BA prescribed under the Nazul Rules.
DDA cannot modify and amend terms of form BA and allow
amalgamation of two plots contrary to Nazul Rules.
24. In view of the above the Writ Petition is liable to be dismissed.
No costs.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
APRIL
P

08 ,

2008.

