* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) 2304/2007

P.L.MALHOTRA

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Neeraj Malhotra, Adv.

versus

N.D.M.C. & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Raghu Tandon, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
% 08.04.2008
1. Respondent/NDMC has earlier initiated proceedings under the Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 but the Estate
Officer dismissed the said eviction petition. NDMC challenged the said
order before the Additional District Judge but the appeal filed by NDMC
was dismissed vide order dated 10th January, 2007. The said order has
attained finality with the NDMC not filing any writ petition challenging the
order passed by the Additional District Judge.

2. NDMC within 2 months thereafter on 22nd March, 2007 issued the
impugned notice to the petitioner stating as under :
“ Chairperson, NDMC accorded approval to take

over the
possession of Shop no.8, Palika Parking, Connaught Place, New
Delhi.
It is proposed to take over the forcibly possession of the said shop
on 26.03.07 at 01.00 p.m. Director (Enforcement) is therefore
requested to depute his staff for the same and also to have the
goods removed if any found at the site at the time of taking over the
possession. An inventory of the same be also prepared for
depositing the same in Enforcement Store.”

3. The impugned notice is sought to be justified on the ground that the
petitioner had indulged in illegal activities and an FIR has been registered
for violation of intellectual property rights and as one Mr. Ramesh Kumar
was found selling pornographic and pirated movies/VCDs/MP3 players
from the shop. It is submitted that the respondent/NDMC is accordingly
entitled to take action in terms of Licence Deed and cancel the same.
4. Cancellation of the licence deed in terms of said licence is one aspect.
However, NDMC cannot forcibly take possession of the shop by taking law
in its hands. NDMC cannot act in an unconstitutional manner and indulge
in use of force and violence. Proceedings will have to be initiated under the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 against
the petitioner.
5. It is directed that the respondent/NDMC will not take forcible possession of
the shop no.8, Palika Bazar Parking, Connaught Place, New Delhi but will

take possession of the same after following the procedure prescribed by
the law.
With the above observations, the writ petition is disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA,J
APRIL 08, 2008
Vld/RN

