*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+(16) W.P.(C) 10620/2006
SACHHIN SAPRA
..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Rajiv Bansal, Adv.
versus
M.C.D. & ANR.

..... Respondent
Through Mr.Amit K.Paul, Adv. for MCD.
Mr.Rajat Wadhwa with Mr.S.K.Srivastava and
Mr.Amrik Singh, Advs.
AND

(17) W.P.(C) 10899/2006
SACHHIN SAPRA
..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Rajiv Bansal, Adv.
versus
MCD & ANR

..... Respondent
Through Mr.Amit K.Paul, Adv. for MCD.
Mr.Rajat Wadhwa with Mr.S.K.Srivastava and
Mr.Amrik Singh, Advs.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
%
03.04.2008
1. Learned counsel for the respondent/MCD seeks permission to file

action taken reports. Permission is granted. Action taken reports
are taken on record.
2. In respect of Plot No.F-19, Rajouri Garden, Delhi it is stated that

construction made in the front and rear set backs of the property
have been demolished. It is further stated that all shops on the
ground floor except for one shop are lying sealed on ground of
mis-use.

It is also stated that owners of the ground floor of the

property have filed regularization plan/application in respect of
ground floor and deposited Rs.1,35,000/- as compounding
charges but the application is pending consideration. It is open to
the

respondent/MCD

to

decide

the

compounding

application/regularization application in accordance with law. Any
party aggrieved by the order passed by the MCD will be entitled to
challenge the same as per law.
3. I do not think any further action or directions are required as far as
plot No.F-19, Rajouri Garden is concerned.
4. As far as property bearing no.F-83, Rajouri Garden, Delhi is
concerned,, it is stated by learned counsel for MCD that RCC
beam and column frame in the rear set back could not be
demolished as it would endanger the entire structure of the
building including the compoundable portion. It is stated that noncompoundable portion has been partly demolished and action has
been taken to demolish the balance non-compoundable portion to

make it inhabitable.
5. It is stated that there are two shops running on the ground floor of
the property in question and rest of the shops are lying sealed on
account of unauthorized construction. Learned counsel for MCD
on instructions from Mr.K.K.Meena, Assistant Engineer states that
the entire ground floor of the property can be used for commercial
purposes as the area in question falls under mixed land use. It is
stated that two shops are permitted on the ground floor under
MPD 2021. This is subject to orders of the Supreme Court.
6. MCD will ensure that the non-compoundable portion of the property is
not re-built

or occupied and used by any person.

As far as

application filed by the occupants of the ground floor for
permission under mixed land user is concerned, the same will be
considered and decided in accordance with law and as per the
directions issued by the Supreme Court.

Action/order of the

respondent/MCD can be challenged in accordance with law.
7. Learned counsel for MCD on instructions from Mr.Meena, Assistant
Engineer states that applications for regularization filed under the
mixed land use and under provisions of Master Plan of Delhi-2021
etc. will be decided and disposed of within six weeks from today.

Writ petition Nos.10620/2006 and 10899/2006 are disposed of.
Dasti.

SANJIV KHANNA,J
APRIL 03, 2008
RN/VKR

