LPA No. 280-2007

Page

1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

LPA NO. 280 OF 2007

%

Date of Decision :

4

th

May, 2007.

Professor Ramesh Chandra
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. R. Venkataramani, Sr. Advocate with
Ms.Neela Gokhale, advocate.
VERSUS
University of Delhi & another

.... Respondents.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. The present Letters Patent Appeal has been filed by Prof. Ramesh
Chandra (hereinafter referred to as the appellant, for short) against

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

2

th

the Order dated 27 February, 2007 disposing of the Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 11287/2007 filed by the University of Delhi, inter alia,
holding that the National Commission of Scheduled Caste
(hereinafter referred to as the Commission, for short) is a
recommendatory body and any observation made by it in it's order,
th

dated 9 may, 2006 with regard to the functionaries of University of
Delhi will not be of binding nature.
2. From the statement of facts filed by the appellant it is apparent that
he is involved in several litigations with the University of Delhi
pending in Allahabad High Court and this Court.
3. During

the

pendency

of

these

litigations,

the

Commission

constituted under Article 338 of the Constitution of India passed
th

Order dated 9 May, 2006, the operative portion of which reads as
under:i. Vice-Chancellor and Registrar, Delhi
University must ensure that the
aforesaid three impugned Executive
th
Council Resolutions of 17 October,
2005 relating to Prof. Ramesh Chandra,
are withdrawn with immediate effect.
ii. Prof, Ramesh Chandra be allowed to

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

continue to function as Director, ACBR
in consonance with the Notification no.
th
Estab.III/BRAC/95/9126 of 30 May,
1995, issued by the University of Delhi
without fear.
iii. As committed by the Secretary, UGC
before the commission the letter no.F.3th
1/2002 (CU), dated 4 August, 2005
addressed to the Vice Chancellor be
withdrawn forthwith.
th
iv. The letters dated 29 July, 2005 and
rd
23 December, or any other letter
written by Sh. Sunil Kumar, IAS, Joint
Secretary (Higher Education), Ministry
of Human Resource Development, to
Dr. Ved Prakash, Former-Secretary,
University Grants Commission, and
Sh.Bhupinder Singh Hooda, Chief
Minister of Haryana, respectively be
withdrawn forthwith.
v.
The Commission also directs the
Joint Secretary (Higher Education),
Ministry of HRD that in future such
errors resulting in injury being caused to
any member of the Scheduled Caste
community should not be committed, as
the MHRD is responsible to ensure
social justice to all in the country.
vi.
The Commission further
recommended that the UGC must
ensure social justice to all citizens of the
country and as a body monitoring
Higher Education in the country should
suo moto assume more responsibility
towards the cause of upliftment of

3

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

Scheduled Castes.
vii.
Copy of the Findings of
Investigation and Recommendations be
sent to Sh. R.S. Gaval, Chairman,
Parliamentary Forum for SC/ST's for
information and further necessary
action, if any, as he is the person who
brought this matter to the notice of the
Commission.
viii.
Copy of the Findings of
Investigation and Recommendations be
sent to the Visitor, University of Delhi
(Hon'ble President of India), Chancellor,
University of Delhi (Hon'ble VicePresident of India), Hon'ble Prime
Minister sof India, Pro-Chancellor,
University of Delhi (Hon'ble Chief
Justice of India), Hon'ble Minister of
Human Resource Development, to
ensure
that
the
above
said
recommendations/
directions
are
implemented by the UGC, MHRD and
the University of Delhi in letter and spirit
without any delay.
ix.
The Vice-Chancellor and
Registrar, University of Delhi, the
Chairman & Secretary, UGC and the
Secretary, Higher Education, Ministry of
HRD, are hereby directed to ensure
implementation
of
the
above
recommendations/directions and give
action taken report on an affidavit within
two weeks from the date of the issue of
the Findings of Investigation and
Recommendations, to the Commission”.

4

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

5

4. Aggrieved, the University of Delhi filed a writ petition in this Court
th

which was disposed of vide Order dated 27 February, 2007, inter
alia, holding that the Commission cannot pass any order of binding
nature as it is a recommendatory body. It has been further held that
the directions given in the Order are not of binding nature. However,
it has been clarified that so far as the order does not deal with the
University of Delhi or its functionaries, it shall remain undisturbed.
5. Mr. P. Venkataramani, learned Senior counsel had drawn our
attention to Article 338 of the Constitution of India and had stated
that under Clause 5 sub-clause (b), the Commission is entitled to
enquire into specific complaints with respect to deprivation of rights
and safeguards available to the Scheduled Castes. He had also
drawn our attention to Clause 8 which empowers the Commission
to investigate into matters covered by sub-clauses (a) and (b) of
Clause 5 and confers power of a civil court in respect of matters
enumerated therein. It was submitted that the Commission is not a
recommendatory body and its directions are final and binding on the

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

6

University of Delhi.
6. It is not possible to agree with the learned senior counsel that the
Commission under Article 338 of the Constitution of India is an
adjudicatory body which can issue binding directions or injunction
orders. Clause 8 of Article 338 of the Constitution of India has
conferred limited powers of a civil court on

the Commission on

matters relating to summoning and enforcing attendance of any
person in India and examining him on oath, for discovery and
production

of

documents,

receiving

evidence

on

affidavits,

requisitioning any public document or copy thereof from any court or
office, issuing commission for examination of witnesses and
documents. It also has powers of a civil court in respect of matters
which the President by a rule may confer. No such rule has been
brought to our notice. While conferring limited powers of a civil court
for some purposes, Article 338 has not given the Commission , the
power to adjudicate and pass binding and executable decrees like a
civil court. The above powers are procedural powers vested with a
Civil Court, which have been given to the Commission for the

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

7

purpose of investigation and enquiry into the complaints in terms of
sub-Clause (a) and (b) of Clause 5. A reading of Clauses 6 and 7
shows that the Commission is required to submit it's report, which is
to be placed before each house of the Parliament along with the
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken
on the recommendation made by the said Commission and in case
of non-acceptance the reasons for the same. In case the report or
any part thereof relates to matter with which a State Government is
concerned, a copy of the report is required to be forwarded to the
Governor of the State who is required to lay the report before the
legislature of the State along with memorandum explaining the
action taken or proposed to be taken on recommendation relating to
the

State

and

reasons

for

non-acceptance

of

the

said

recommendations. It is clear from the reading of Clauses 6-8 that
the reports made by the Commission are recommendatory in nature
and cannot be equated with decrees/orders passed by Civil Courts
which are binding on the parties and can be enforced and executed.
It cannot be said that the reports of the said Commission are

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

8

alternative to the hierarchical judicial system envisaged under the
Constitution of India.
7. The Supreme Court in the case of All India Overseas Bank SC
and ST Employees' Welfare Association versus Union of India
reported in (1996) 6 SCC 606 examined Clause 8 of Article 338 of
the Constitution of India and observed that while investigating a
matter under sub-clause (a) or enquiring into a complaint under subclause (b) of Clause 5 of the said Article, the Commission has been
given limited procedural powers of a civil court. It has been held that
the said powers are limited by their nature and the Commission
does not have any power like that of a civil court to issue temporary
or permanent injunction. Such powers do not inhere in the
Commission nor can such power be inferred or derived from reading
of Clause 8 of Article 338 of the Constitution of India.
8. A Division Bench of this Court in Dr. (Ms.) Deepshikha Jiwan
Pandit versus NCERT reported in ILR (2003) 2 Del. 131 had
occasion to consider Clauses 5 and 8 of Article 338 of the
Constitution of India and held that it appears that though the

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

9

Commission has power to enquire into specific complaints and make
it's report but the same is recommendatory in nature. However, the
Division Bench left the matter at that stage as the counsel for the
petitioner in the said case did not seriously contend that the “advice”
of the Commission was mandatory and binding. It was however
observed that the “advice” given by the Commission should not be
ignored by the authorities.
9. A more direct judgment on the issue is in the case of Gulmarg
Restaurant versus Delhi Development Authority reported in ILR
(2005) 1 Del. 508 in which it was observed as under:“29. It may be noticed that the appellant had even
approached the National Commission for Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribes and directions were
issued on 02.08.1997. These directions were,
however, issued in a pending disputed matter. In any
case within the Constitutional Scheme of Article 338 of
the Constitution of India, the observations of such a
Commission can only be recommendatory in nature.
The directions passed by the said Commission seek to
transfer the property in favour of the appellant a price
of Rs. 12,42,700/-, can hardly be acceptable as either
the auction bid was rightly rejected or wrongly
rejected. It would not proper for any other authority to
determine the price. However, we are not required to
deal any further with this issue since those are only

LPA No. 280-2007

Page

10

recommendatory in nature.”

10.In view of the legal position, we do not find any infirmity in the order
passed by the learned Single Judge and the present Appeal is
accordingly liable to be dismissed. We may also state here that the
present Appeal is also barred by limitation by about 16 days.
Normally, we would have issued notice on the said application but in
view of the fact that on merits itself we do not find that any case for
interference is made out, we have dismissed the appeal on merits.
All pending applications are also disposed of.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
MAY
P

04, 2007.

