LPA No. 529/2004

Page 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LETTERS' PATENT APPEAL NO. 529 OF 2004

%

Date of Decision :

rd

3 August, 2007.

SATISH KUMAR & ANR.
.... Appellants.
Through Ms. Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate.

VERSUS
UOI & ORS.
.... Respondents.
Through Ms. Anjana Gosain, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes.

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

This appeal has been filed impugning the judgment dated 20

th

February, 2004 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the Civil Writ

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 2

Petition Nos. 222/2003 and 225/2003. Some other writ petitions were also
dismissed by the impugned judgment. However, the petitioners in the said
cases have not filed any appeal.
2.

The appellants herein have prayed for issue of writ of mandamus

against Airport Authority of India, the respondent No. 2 (hereinafter referred to
as AAI, for short) to take them on duty, on the post of Junior Assistant (Driver)
th

pursuant to appointment letter dated 13 September, 2002.
3.

The appellants claim that they belong to Jat community and “Jats”

are included in the list of “Other Backward Classes” (hereinafter referred to as
OBCs, for short) as per notification dated 31

st

May, 2000 issued by the

Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. Thus, they are entitled to
appointment to the post of Junior Assistant (Driver) reserved for OBCs. It is
the case of the respondent that the appellants cannot be treated as OBCs as
“Jats" have not been included in the Central List.
4.

It is an admitted case that the appellants had applied for

employment as Junior Assistant (Driver). They claimed to be OBCs and also
claimed to be entitled to appointment to the posts reserved for OBCs. The

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 3

appellants were allowed to appear in the test with the clear stipulation that the
candidates would be required to produce the original certificate from
th

competent authority later on. On 7 August, 2000, the appellants appeared
th

and passed the said test and thereafter letter dated 13 September, 2002
was issued.

The relevant portion namely clause 13 of the offer of

appointment letter reads as under:“In case you belong to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribe/Other Backward Class and Ex-Serviceman
category, a certificate/attested copy of certificate
from appropriate authority should be sent along
with the letter of acceptance. The certificate of
SC/ST/OBC should strictly be in the enclosed
format as applicable to Central Government
employees. You will not be allowed to join the
Authority, if the certificate is not in the form as per
enclosed format.”
5.

The appointment letter also stated that it has been issued on

information furnished in the application and the personal data and other
details given therein. The candiates were required to produce the originals
and attested copy of certificate for proof of education, age, experience and
community. It was only on fulfilling the above conditions, the appellants were
required to report for duty and on failure to comply the said conditions, the

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 4

offer of appointment was to be treated as cancelled without any further
reference.
6.

The appellants produced caste certificate, which was not as per the

format specified in clause 13 of the letter of offer of appointment dated 13
September, 2002.

th

The appellants admit that they cannot furnish OBC

certificate as per the prescribed format applicable for appointment in the
Central Government. Appellants belong to Jat community and said
community is not included in the OBC central list. However, they challenged
the action of the respondent on the ground that they belong to Jat
community, which has been included in the OBC list as per the notification
issued by Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi and, therefore,
the certificate issued to them by the authority prescribed by the Government
of National Capital Territory of Delhi should be, accepted, though the said
certificate is not in accordance with the format prescribed by the Central
Government and Jat community has not been notified as an OBC community
by the Central Government.
7.

The Central Government has notified communities that are OBCs

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 5

and entitled to employment on posts reserved for OBCs. Jat community is
not included in the said list notified by the Central Government. AAI, the
respondent is a public sector enterprise belonging to the Central Government
and is following the Central Government list with regard to appointment to
posts reserved for OBCs.

Being a Central Government enterprise, it is

bound by the instructions issued by the Central Government in this regard.
th

The Central Government vide its Office Memoramdum dated 13 January,
1995 has stipulated that instructions issued thereunder would govern public
sector enterprise, financial institutions and public sector banks, that is, all
public sector enterprises.

By another Office Memoramdum dated 22

nd

October, 1993, the Central Government has specified that OBC certificate for
appointment to reserved posts should be in terms of the prescribed proforma,
which the appellants must produce to be eligible for appointment to the
reserved post. There is no specific challenge to the said notifications in the
writ petition. We are not examining the vires and validity of the said
notifications.
8.

As Jat community is not notified in the Central list, therefore, the

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 6

appellants cannot claim any right to appointment to posts reserved for OBCs
in AAI, a Central Government enterprise, which are required to filled up from
persons belonging to the communities mentioned in the Central OBC list.
9.

Learned counsel for the appellants, to justify claim of the appellants

had relied upon judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Chandigarh
Administration and Another versus Surinder Kumar and Others,
reported in (2004) 1 SCC 530. In the said case, appointments were made by
the Chandigarh Administration, a Union Territory. Government of India vide
th

its letter dated 28 July, 1986 had clarified to the said Union Territory that a
recognised Scheduled Caste/Schedule Tribe of any other State/Union
Territory would also be entitled to benefits and facilities provided for
Schedule Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the services under the Union
Territory of Chandigarh.

The said clarification was applied for all

th

appointments made till 7 September, 1999, when it was decided that no
appointments against reserved posts shall be given to candiates who are not
residents of Chandigarh and do not have a valid certificate of caste issued by
DM/SDM, Chandigarh. The Supreme Court held that the Home Secretary,

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 7

Chandigarh Administration who had issued the said clarification effective
th

from 7 September, 1999 could not have over looked the instructions of the
th

Government of India in the letter dated 26 August, 1986. The clarification
was not issued by the Government of India and was contrary to the letter
dated 26

th

August, 1986. Reference was made to Article 239 of the

Constitution of India and the right of the Government of India to issue
instructions for services in the Union Territories.

The said decision,

therefore, is on its own facts and the edifice is the instruction issued by the
Central Government for treating certificates issued by other states and Union
Territories as sufficient for the purpose of employment to reserved posts for
services in the said Union Territory.
10.

As far as appointment of OBCs is concerned, the Central

Government has its own list and as per notifications issued by the Central
Government, appointments in AAI can only be made from candidates
belonging to the communities mentioned in the said list. In several decisions,
the Supreme Court has clarified that Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes
belonging to a particular area of the country must be given protection so long

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 8

as and to the extent they are entitled to, in order to become equal with
others, but Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes who migrate from the State
of origin to another State in search of employment or for educational
purposes or the like, cannot be treated as persons belonging to Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes of the State to which they migrate. Relying on and
referring to the decision in Marri Chandra Shekhar Rao versus Dean, Seth
G.S. Medical College [(1990) 3 SCC 130], it was held by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Action Committee on Issue of Caste
Certificate to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the State of
Maharashtra versus Union of India, [(1994) 5 SCC 244], that“16. We may add that considerations for specifying a
particular caste or tribe or class for inclusion in the list of
Scheduled Castes/Schedule Tribes or backward classes
in a given State would depend on the nature and extent of
disadvantages and social hardships suffered by that
caste, tribe or class in that State which may be totally non
est in another State to which persons belonging thereto
may migrate. Coincidentally it may be that a caste or tribe
bearing the same nomenclature is specified in two States
but the considerations on the basis of which they have
been specified may be totally different. So also the degree
of disadvantages of various elements which constitute the
input for specification may also be totally different.
Therefore, merely because a given caste is specified in

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 9

State A as a Scheduled Caste does not necessarily mean
that if there be another caste bearing the same
nomenclature in another State the person belonging to the
former would be entitled to the rights, privileges and
benefit s admissible to a member of the Scheduled Caste
of the latter State “for the purposes of this Constitution”.
This is an aspect which has to be kept in mind and which
was very much in the minds of the Constitution-makers as
is evident from the choice of language of Articles 341 and
342 of the Constitution. That is why in answer to a
question by Mr Jaipal Singh, Dr Ambedkar answered as
under :
“He asked me another question and it was this. Supposing
a member of a Scheduled Tribe living in a tribal area
migrates to another part of the territory of India, which is
outside both the scheduled area and the tribal area, will
he be able to claim from the local Government, within
whose jurisdiction he may be residing the same privileges
which he would be entitled to when he is residing within
the scheduled area or within the tribal area? It is a difficult
question for me to answer. If that matter is agitated in
quarters where a decision on a matter like this would lie,
we would certainly be able to give some answer to the
question in the form of some clause in this Constitution.
But so far as the present Constitution stands, a member of
a Scheduled Tribe going outside the scheduled area or
tribal area would certainly not be entitled to carry with him
the privileges that he is entitled to when he is residing in a
scheduled area or a tribal area. So far as I can see, it will
be practicably impossible to enforce the provisions that
apply to tribal areas or scheduled areas, in areas other
than those which are covered by them... .”

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 10

Relying on this statement the Constitution Bench ruled
that the petitioner was not entitled to admission to the
medical college on the basis that he belonged to a
Scheduled Tribe in the State of his origin.”

11.

S. Pushpa and Others versus Sivachanmugavelu and Others,

(2005) 3 SCC 1, case relates to employment in the Union Territory of
Pondicherry and the Central Government instructions issued, were held to be
binding and, therefore, the decision in the case of Marri Chandra Shekhar
Rao (supra) was distinguished.

It was also noticed that right from the

beginning, Pondicherry Administration had been following the policy
whereunder migrant SCs/STs were held eligible for reserved posts in the
Pondicherry Administration. The above two decisions are not applicable and
have not decided the question raised in the present appeal. This appeal
does not pertain to migration of SC/ST or reserved candidates from one
State to other and non-compliance of any Central Government notification.
The question involved in the present appeal is whether Central Government
Public Sector Enterprise, viz. AAI is bound to follow the instructions issued by
the Central Government that only candidates belonging to the OBC list

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 11

specified by the Central Goernment are eligible for appointment to the
reserved posts.

In view of the notifications issued by the Central

Government, which AAI is bound to follow, we do not find any error in
the stand taken by AAI and the decision of the learned Single Judge.
As already stated above, the notifications of the Central Government
have not been challenged and questioned by the appellants.
12.

We may also refer here to the decision of the Supreme Court

in the case of M.C.D. Versus Veena and Others, (2001) 6 SCC 571
holding that OBC certificates issued by States other than Delhi does not
entitle them to seek employment on a reserved post in MCD. The Supreme
Court has repeatedly held and accepted that the Central Government and
State Governments can maintain separate lists of communities, eligible for
employment to the reserved posts. For appointment to a reserved post,
eligibility conditions prescribed must be met. We may also refer to a decision
of the Division Bench of this Court in Pankaj Versus Union of India [WP (C)
No. 7318 of 2005], wherein it has been held as under:-

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 12

“9. The first question which arises for consideration is
whether the petitioner belongs to OBC category and
was therefore entitled to appointment as an LDC in
terms of the advertisement published in the
th
'Emplyment News' for 1-7 November, 2003. It is
admitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that Jat
community is not included in the Central List (Mandal
List) of OBCs. The said list has been prepared by the
Central Government for the purpose of appointment in
reserved category posts meant for OBC.
Appointments to reserved posts for OBCs in the
Central Government can only be given to candidates
belonging to communities mentioned in the Central
List (Mandal List). Candidates belonging to
communities included in State Government lists are
not eligible”
13.

It was also contended by the appellants that their names had been

included in the select panel and thus, they cannot be denied employment.
This argument cannot be accepted as it is well settled that no one has vested
right to be appointed to a post because his name appears in the select panel.
Inclusion of name in the select panel does not confer any indelible right to
appointment but candidates cannot be denied employment ignoring
individual claims on arbitrary grounds or whims and fancies. (See State of
U.P. Versus Om Prakash, (2006) 6 SCC 474).
14.

In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present appeal

LPA No. 529/2004

Page 13

and the same is accordingly dismissed.

However, in the facts and

circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
AUGUST 3, 2007.
VKR/P

