LPA No. 612/2006

Page 1

*

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LETTERS' PATENT APPEAL NO. 612 OF 2006

%

Date of Decision :3rd September, 2007.

ESCORTS HEART INSTITUTE &
RESEARCH CENTRE LTD.
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. P.V. Kapur, Sr. Advocate with Mr.
Sanjeev Puri & Mr. Rohit Puri, Advocates.
VERSUS
D.D.A & ANR

.... Respondents.
Through Mr. Ajay Verma, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes.

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

Escorts Heart and Research Centre, a society registered

under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, was allotted 6.9 acres of

LPA No. 612/2006

Page 2

land by the Delhi Development Authority, the respondent No. 1. On
31st October, 2003, a show cause notice was issued to the appellant
by the respondent No. 1 as to why the allotment should not be
cancelled for violation of the condition for providing at least 25% of
the total beds for free treatment to the patients belonging to the
weaker sections of the society. The respondent No. 1 also issued
another show cause notice dated 21st April, 2004 for cancellation of
allotment/lease deed in view of the merger of the aforesaid society
into another society, which as per the respondent No. 1 was in
violation of the terms and conditions of the lease/allotment, as it
constituted transfer.
2.

By an order dated 10th June, 2005, the respondent No. 1

determined the allotment/leasehold rights granted to the appellantsociety. Accordingly direction was given to handover the said land
and building constructed thereon to the Delhi Development Authority.
3.

The appellant has

filed a civil suit being CS (OS) No.

1440/2005 before the High Court challenging the order dated 6th

LPA No. 612/2006

Page 3

October, 2005. The said suit, it is stated pertains to lands covered by
allotment letters in respect of which no perpetual lease deeds have
been executed. The appellant has stated that an application under
Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 being OMP
No. 364/2005 has been instituted.

In the civil suit and the OMP

restraint orders have been passed against the respondent No. 1
directing them not to recover the physical possession of the property.
4.

The respondent No. 1 has invoked jurisdiction of the Estate

Officer under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971. On 9th November, 2005, the Estate Officer issued show
cause notice as to why order of eviction should not be passed in
respect of 6.9 acres of land. Proceedings are pending before the
Estate Officer. In the present appeal, we are not concerned with the
proceedings pending in the suit and OMP as well as question
whether the said proceedings are maintainable. We are also not
concerned with the scope and authority of the Estate Officer to go
into the question whether the order dated 6th October, 2005

LPA No. 612/2006

Page 4

terminating the lease/grant for violation of the terms of the land/grant
is valid. The only contention with regard to question raised before us
during the course of arguments was that in view of the decision of the
Supreme Court in Express Newspapers Private Limited versus
Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 872 proceedings before the Estate
Officer are not maintainable; without jurisdiction and only civil suit is
maintainable.

The said contention did not find favour with the

learned Single Judge, who referred to the five Judges Bench decision
of the Supreme Court in Ashoka Marketing Limited and Another
versus Punjab National Bank and Others, AIR 1991 SC 855. The
learned Single Judge also relied upon decision of Division Bench of
this Court in Letters Patent Appeal No. 976/2004, titled Delhi
Development

Authority

versus

Ambitious

Gold

Nib

Manufacturing (P) Limited.
5.

Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that decision in the

case of Ashoka Marketing Limited (supra) is distinguishable as in
the said case constructed property had been given on lease/licence,

LPA No. 612/2006

Page 5

whereas in the present case grant/leasehold rights in respect of land
has been given by the respondent No. 1 and buildings worth crores
of rupees have been constructed by the predecessor in interest of the
appellant/the appellant.
6.

The limited and the short question raised before us is whether

eviction proceedings can be initiated by the respondent No. 1 under
the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971
or in view of the decision in the Express Newspapers case (supra),
the respondent No. 1 must file a civil suit for recovery of possession.
In Express Newspapers case (supra), the Supreme Court had
observed as under:“87. Nothing stated here should be construed
to mean that the Government has not the
power to take recourse to the provisions of the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971 where admittedly there
is unauthorised construction by a lessee or by
any other person on Government land which is
public premises within the meaning of Section
2 (e) and such person is in unauthorised
occupation thereof.
The constitutional position of the LieutenantGovernor : whether the Lieutenant Governor

LPA No. 612/2006

Page 6

is the successor of the Chief Commissioner of
Delhi.
88. One of the most crucial issues on which
long and erudite arguments were advanced by
learned counsel for the parties, turned on the
question as to whether the Lt. Governor was a
successor of the Chief Commissioner of Delhi.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
contended that the Lt. Governor cannot usurp
the functions of the lessor i.e. the Union of
India or the Chief Commissioner of Delhi in
relation to the lease in question. It is urged
that the Union Territory of Delhi which first
became a Part 'C' State under the
Constitution, was an entirely new constitutional
entity and therefore the office of the Chief
Commissioner of Delhi ceased to exist. It is
further urged that the Lt. Governor appointed
by the President under Article 239(1) of the
Constitution is an Administrator and he
discharges such functions as are entrusted to
him by the President of India and in the
absence of a notification under Article 239(1),
the Lt. Governor cannot usurp the functions of
the Union of India in relation to the properties
of the Union. It is pointed out that there was
no notification issued by the President of India
in terms of Article 239(1) of the Constitution
empowering the Lt. Governor to administer the
properties of the Union in the Union Territory
of Delhi.”
7.

Subsequently a five Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in

Ashoka Marketing Limited (supra) examined the provisions of

LPA No. 612/2006

Public Premises Act, 1971 and

Page 7

held that the expression

unauthorized occupation as used in the said Act includes a person
who had occupied any public premises without lawful authority as
well as those whose occupation was permissive at the inception but
subsequently ceased to be so. The second part of the definition
clause is inclusive in nature and also covers continuance of
occupation by any person of the public premises after the grant or
transfer made by any mode has expired or determined for any
reasoning whatsoever. In paragraph 30, accordingly it was observed
as under:“...........The words “whether by way of grant or
any other mode of transfer” in this part of the
definition are wide in amplitude and would
cover a lease because lease is a mode of
transfer under the Transfer of Property Act.
The definition of unauthorised occupation
contained in Section 2 (g) of the Public
Premises Act would, therefore, cover a case
where a person has entered into occupation of
the public premises legally as a tenant under a
lease but whose tenancy has expired or has
been determined in accordance with law.”

LPA No. 612/2006

8.

Page 8

Reference of the Supreme Court in Ashoka Marketing case

(supra) was drawn to Express Newspapers case (supra) and it was
clarified as under:“32. Shri Ganguli has placed reliance on the
decision of A.P. Sen, J. in Express
Newspapers Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India and
has submitted that in that case the learned
Judge has held that cases involving
relationship between the lessor and lessee fall
outside the purview of the Public Premises
Act. We have carefully perused the said
decision and we are unable to agree with Shri
Ganguli. In that case A.P. Sen, J. has
observed that the new building had been
constructed by the Express Newspapers Pvt.
Ltd. after the grant of permission by the lessor,
and, therefore, the Express Newspapers Pvt.
Ltd. was not in unauthorised occupation of the
same within the meaning of Section 2(g) of the
Public Premises Act. It was also held by the
learned Judge that the Express Building
constructed by the Express Newspapers Ltd.
with the sanction of lessor on plots Nos. 9 and
10 demised on perpetual lease can, by no
process of reasoning, be regarded as public
premises
belonging
to
the
Central
Government under Section 2(e) of the Public
Premises Act, and therefore, there was no
question of the lessor applying for eviction of
the Express Newspapers Pvt. Ltd. under the
provisions of the Public Premises Act. The

LPA No. 612/2006

Page 9

aforesaid observations indicate that the
learned Judge did not proceed on the basis tht
cases involving relationship of lessor and
lessee fall outside the purview of the Public
Premises Act. On the other hand the said
observations show that the learned Judge has
held that the provisions of the Public Premises
Act could not be invoked in the facts of that
case.”
9.

A Division Bench of this Court in Ambitious Gold Nib

Manufacturing (P) Limited (supra) after examining judgments in the
cases of Express Newspapers and Ashoka Marketing Limited
(supra) has held that proceedings before the Estate Officer are
maintainable and cases like the present one would fall in the second
part of the definition of the expression unauthorized occupation as
defined in Section 2(g) of the Public Premises Act. The said decision
being a judgment of a Coordinate Bench of two Judges is binding on
us. We respectfully agree with the reasoning given and follow the
said judgment to the extent it has been held that second part of
Section 2(g) defining the expression unauthorized occupation for the
purpose of Public Premises Act is applicable and recourse to civil
proceedings for recovery of possession is not required. The said

LPA No. 612/2006

Page 10

judgment cannot be ignored merely because a particular argument
was not raised or addressed.

We may, however, clarify that the

question of jurisdiction of the Estate Officer to decide whether there
was any breach of the grant/lease, whether there was valid and
justified determination was not raised before us during the course of
arguments and is not being determined and decided.

We have

specifically mentioned this aspect in the judgment as we find that the
appellant in the grounds of appeal has referred to the decision of the
Supreme Court in Annamalai Club versus Government of Tamil
Nadu, (1997) 3 SCC 169.
10.

Another contention raised by the appellant was that the building

constructed on the land is not public premises under Section 2(c) of
the Public Premises (Eviction for Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971
because building was never given on lease and has been
constructed by the lessee. In this connection, learned counsel for the
respondent No. 1 had drawn our attention to Clause 15 in the
perpetual lease deed, which stipulates that the lessee on

LPA No. 612/2006

Page 11

determination of the lease shall peacefully yield up the said land and
the buildings thereon to the lessor. In view of the said Clause, it
cannot be said that the building constructed on the land cannot be
regarded as the public premises.
11.

In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present

appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed. No costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
SEPTEMBER 03, 2007.
VKR

