*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 5220-22/2006
SATYAM COMPLEX JHUGGI JHOPRI WELFARE SAMITY, REGD. &
ORS.
..... Petitioner
Through Mr.(presence not given)
versus
U.O.I & ORS

%
1.

..... Respondent
Through Mr.O.P.Saxena, Adv. for Slum and JJ Wing,
MCD.
Ms.Manju Singhal, Adv. for respondent no.4
Mr.Rajan Tyagi for Mr.Rajiv Bansal for DDA.
Ms.Monika Garg, Adv. for UOI.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
01.04.2008
The petitioner M/s Satyam Complex Jhuggi Jhopri Welfare Samiti has

filed the present writ petition claiming that their members are entitled to
alternative plots in accordance with the scheme formulated and approved by
the respondents.

Members of the petitioners’ society had occupied

Government land and were removed on 01.2.2006, when the JJ Cluster was
demolished. It appears that the said action taken by MCD pursuant to the
order passed by this Court on 26.10.2005 for removal of the said cluster.
2.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention to the

documents annexed with the writ petition which includes election cards and
identity cards issued by Delhi Administration. It is stated that the JJ cluster

was in existence from 1984 and identity cards were issued on 21.3.1990.
3.

It is difficult for this Court to verify the persons who were in actual

occupation of the JJ Cluster as on 01.2.2006 and whether the persons in
whose favour identity cards were issued on 20.3.1990, had continued to
remain in possession of Jhuggis till demolition action on 1st February, 2006.
4.

The respondent/MCD in their counter affidavit has also taken a stand

that most of the encroachers had established commercial ventures and were
accordingly not entitled to any allotment. They have also enclosed copy of the
order dated 26.10.2005 passed in the contempt case No.(C) No.1255/2005, in
which relocation policy of the Slum and JJ Wing has been quoted and it has
been pointed that the said policy decision does not entitle commercial vendors
to be re-located. Thereafter, direction was given that jhuggis which were not
entitled to re-location should be demolished forthwith. This order was passed
on 26.10.2005. It is pursuant to this Court order that demolition of JJ cluster
was done.
5.

I may note here that the Division Bench of this Court had examined the

question of right of re-location and the policy framed by Slum and JJ Wing of
MCD in Wazirpur Bartan Nirmata Sangh Vs. Union of India & Ors. 103 (2003)
DLT 654 (DB).

The policy framed was partly struck down and several

directions were given.

UOI has filed an appeal against the said decision

before the Supreme Court. Partial stay has been granted by the Supreme

Court permitting the Government to make allotment in terms of their policy
subject to outcome of the said appeal.

In the present case, stand taken by

the respondents is that no allotment is required to be made to persons who
are dislocated pursuant to demolition action undertaken on 01.2.2006.

The

respondents have refused to make alternative allotments.
6.

In these circumstances, I do not think the petitioners have been able to

establish any legal right for allotment of alternative land/plot.

This Court

therefore, cannot issue any such direction. However, it is clarified that in
terms of the interim order passed by the Supreme Court, it is always open to
the respondents to consider claim of the petitioner and if found eligible as per
the policy and scheme framed, allotment of alternative plot/flat can be made.
The policy/scheme should be implemented uniformly and without any
discrimination.
The writ petition stands disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA,J
APRIL
RN

01, 2008

