*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 12209-10/2006

SELVEL MEDIA SERVICES P.LTD. &
..... Petitioners
Through Mr. Pradeep Dewan & Mr. R.B. Samaiyar,
Advocates.
versus
MCD & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Kapil Dutta, Advocate for Mr. Ajay
Arora,Advocate for MCD.
Mr. J.K. Chaudhary, Advocate for Mr. Aditya Madan,
Advocate for respondent No. 3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
01.04.2008

%
1.

The petitioner No. 1 is an advertising company and has filed the present

writ petition for direction to respondent-MCD to grant a licence under the
provisions of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957.

It is the case of the

petitioner that applications filed by the petitioner No. 1 are pending consideration
with MCD.
2.

Learned counsel for the respondent No. 3-Delhi Police in their counter

affidavit has referred to order dated 20th November, 1997 passed by the
Supreme Court whereby directions were given to the civic authorities including
DDA, Railways, police and transport authorities to remove all hoardings, which
are on the road side and are hazardous and disturb smooth and safe traffic

movement. Reference in the counter affidavit is also made to another order
dated 16th April, 2001 passed by the Supreme Court. Section 116(4) of the
Motor Vehicles’ Act, 1988 is also referred to. It is pointed out that a similar
provision has been made in Delhi Control of Erection and Exhibition of
Advertisement Devices Regulations, 1980, framed under Section 28 of the Delhi
Police Act, 1978.
3.

It is stated by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their counter affidavit that a

policy was framed in 2004 with regard to display of advertisements. It is further
stated that proposals received are considered and finalized strictly as per the
approved policy.
4.

It is pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioners that during the

pendency of the writ petition, the Supreme Court has issued certain directions
and an outdoor advertising policy was finalized on 10th September, 2007. It is
stated that the said policy is available on the website of MCD.
5.

It is open to the petitioners to move a representation before the MCD for

examination of the applications filed by them or, if required, file fresh applications
under new policy. Representation or applications, as the case may be, will be
considered by the MCD in terms of the directions issued by the Supreme Court
and the new policy framed by the MCD.

Similarly, in case the petitioner is

required to move any application under Delhi Control of Erection and Exhibition
of Advertisement Devices Regulations, 1980, steps in this regard will be taken.
In case petitioner is not entitled to grant of a licence, a speaking order will be

passed and reasons for rejecting the application will be communicated to the
petitioner.
With these observations, the writ petition is disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
APRIL 01, 2008
VKR

