REPORTABLE
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ CRL. A. NO.952/2005

% Date of Decision : 7th March, 2008.

GURDEV SINGH .... Appellant.
Through Mr.Naveen Gaur & Mr.Sudhir Kumar, Advocates.

VERSUS

STATE NCT OF DELHI .... Respondents.
Through Ms. Nandani Sahni & Mr. Ujjwal Kumar, Advocates.
%07.03.2008
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
SANJIV KHANNA, J:

st

1. The present appeal is directed against the judgment dated 1 October,

2005 and the order of sentence dated 5th October, 2005 passed by the
Additional Sessions Judge convicting the appellant Gurdev Singh under
SectionS 20/61/85 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as 'Act'). By the order of sentence, the
appellant has been directed to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of ten years and pay fine of Rs.2 lacs and in default thereof
undergo simple imprisonment for two years.
2. Learned Trial Court in the impugned judgment has held that the

appellant, on 16th August, 2002, at about 7.50 P.M. was found to be in
unlawful possession of 2 kgs of charas, at Prem Pyao, towards
Kanjhawala side, Delhi within the jurisdiction of P.S. Kanjhawala. He
was apprehended while coming on motorcycle bearing No. DL7SN6169 by SI S.A.Farooqui, Inspector Rajinder Prasad and others who
had prior information from a secret informer that a Sikh person aged
about 45-50 years would be coming from the side of Village Dabas via
Prem Pyao with Charas. Learned Trial Judge on the basis of the

statements made by the prosecution witnesses and the reasoning given
in the judgment has held that the prosecution case has been proved
beyond doubt.
3. Learned counsel for the appellant has mainly urged four grounds.

Firstly, CFSL form was not sent to the CFSL laboratory and there is a
strong possibility that the samples were tampered. Secondly, there was
violation of Section 50 of the Act as the accused was not informed of his
right to be searched before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate. Mere
option is not sufficient compliance. Thirdly, it was submitted that some
of the witnesses were not examined by the prosecution. Lastly, it was
pointed out that the public witness, Mr.Vinod had not supported the
prosecution version and, therefore, the accused should be given benefit
of doubt and conviction solely on the basis of statements made by
police officers cannot be sustained.
4. Public witness, Mr.Vinod did not support the prosecution version. He

appeared as PW-2 and in his examination in chief had stated that he
had been called by the police at Kanjhawala and made to sign some
blank papers and nothing was recovered from the accused Gurdev
Singh in his presence. He was declared hostile and was allowed to be
cross examined by the Additional Public Prosecutor. His statement
including cross examination does not support the prosecution version.

However, this itself does not entitle the appellant to be acquitted.
Statements of the police officers and their cross examinations have to
be carefully scrutinized by the Court to decide whether the prosecution
has been able to prove its case beyond doubt. Evidence of the police
officers is not un-reliable and doubtful because the public witness has
not supported the case of the prosecution. Evidence of police officers is
not to be dis-believed on this ground. Evidence of Police officers is
admissible. In such circumstances the court is to examine evidenciary
value and weight that can be given to statements made. Greater care
and scrutiny is required to ensure whether the accused was falsely
implicated, whether police officers were hostile or inimical to the
accused and whether their evidence was shaken in cross examination.
Corroboration is a rule of prudence but admissible evidence is not wiped
off because of lack of corroboration. This proposition of law has been
accepted by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Gujarat versus
Anirudhsing reported in (1997) 6 SCC 291. The said proposition has
been reiterated again in the case of Girja Prasad versus State of M.P.,
reported in (2007) 7 SCC 625,( at page 632) wherein it has been held
asunder :
25. In our judgment, the above proposition does not lay down

correct law on the point. It is well settled that credibility of
witness has to be tested on the touchstone of truthfulness and

trustworthiness. It is quite possible that in a given case, a court
of law may not base conviction solely on the evidence of the
complainant or a police official but it is not the law that police
witnesses should not be relied upon and their evidence cannot
be accepted unless it is corroborated in material particulars by
other independent evidence. The presumption that every
person acts honestly applies as much in favour of a police
official as any other person. No infirmity attaches to the
testimony of police officials merely because they belong to
police force. There is no rule of law which lays down that no
conviction can be recorded on the testimony of police officials
even if such evidence is otherwise reliable and trustworthy.
The rule of prudence may require more careful scrutiny of their
evidence. But, if the court is convinced that what was stated by
a witness has a ring of truth, conviction can be based on such
evidence.
5. The Supreme Court expressed the same opinion in the case of Kalpnath
Rai versus State, reported in (1997) 8 SCC 732 in which it was elucidated as
under :“88. There can be no legal proposition that evidence

of police officers, unless supported by independent
witnesses, is unworthy of acceptance. Nonexamination of independent witness or even presence
of such witness during police raid would cast an
added duty on the court to adopt greater care while
scrutinising the evidence of the police officers. If the
evidence of the police officer is found acceptable it
would be an erroneous proposition that the court must
reject the prosecution version solely on the ground
that no independent witness was examined. In
Pradeep Narayan Madgaonkar to which one of us
(Mukherjee, J.) was a party, the aforesaid position
has been stated in unambiguous terms, the relevant
portion of which is extracted below: (SCC p. 261, para
11)
“Indeed, the evidence of the official (police)

witnesses cannot be discarded merely on the
ground that they belong to the police force and
are, either interested in the investigating or the
prosecuting agency but prudence dictates that

their evidence needs to be subjected to strict
scrutiny and as far as possible corroboration of
their evidence in

material particulars should be sought. Their
desire to see the success of the case based on
their investigation, requires greater care to
appreciate their testimony.”
89. In Balbir Singh v. State this Court has repelled a
similar contention based on non-examination of
independent witnesses. The same legal position has
been reiterated by this Court time and again vide
Paras Ram v. State of Haryana, Sama Alana Abdulla
v. State of Gujarat, Anil v. State of Maharashtra, Tahir
v. State (Delhi).”
6. Prosecution has led evidence of Head Constable Naresh Kumar who
appeared as PW-3, Inspector Rajinder Prasad PW-4, SI S.A. Farooqui PW-5,
ACP Ishwar Singh PW-7, Constable Davinder PW-9 and SI Rajinder Kumar
PW-10. The said witnesses were present when the appellant-accused was
arrested with charas. The said Officers have stated that on 16th August, 2002
the appellant, Mr.Gurdev Singh was intercepted near Prem Pao about 7.50
p.m, when he was coming on motorcycle and on the search, he was found to
be carrying 2 kgs of charas. The statements made by the said Officers are
reliable, trustworthy and have not been dented in their cross examinations.
Learned counsel for the accused was not able to point out any substantial or
major contradiction in their statements. All of them have stated on oath that
pursuant to secret information, a raiding party was formed and Nakabandi
was made. As per the secret information, a Sikh person was to come on a
motorcycle from Sultanpuri road carrying charas. They have further stated
that at about 7.50 p.m., Mr.Gurdev Singh came on a motorcycle and was

stopped and thereafter overpowered. In the meantime, ACP, Ishwar Singh
(PW-7) also reached the spot. Notice under Section 50 was given to the
accused and charas was found in three pullandas, one was of big size and
two others of small sizes. The weight of the single big bag was 1 kg and the
two small bags were 500 gms each. Three samples of 100 gms were
prepared on the spot and marked as S1, S2 and S3 and were sealed with the
seal of SAF and RPA. They have also stated that CFSL form was filled on the
spot and both seals were affixed thereon. Motorcycle of the accused was
taken into possession and personal search of the accused was also done.
The original pullandas were produced before the witnesses, who identified the
seal of SAF and RPA which were found to be intact. The said pullandas were
marked as Ex.PW-1, Ex.PW-2 and Ex.PW-3. Some witnesses also identified
the motorcycle of the accused. The quantity recovered in the present case is
substantial, 2 kgs of charas.
7. The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that Constable
Ramdhari, driver of ACP and wireless operator of ACP were not examined
and therefore, the prosecution version should be disbelieved, cannot be
accepted. The prosecution has examined as many as 6 witnesses who were
present at the time of search on 16th August, 2002, when the accused was
apprehended carrying charas. It cannot be said that their statements do not

hold and should be disbelieved because prosecution could have produced
other witnesses also to support their case. Multiplication of witnesses is not
required, specially when substantial number of eye witnesses were examined
and have been able to prove the case of the prosecution. Reliance in this
regard can be placed on Chaudhari Ramjibhai Narasangbhai versus State
of Gujarat reported in (2004) 1 SCC 184 and Jai Prakash versus State
(Delhi Administration) reported in (1991) 2 SCC 32.
8. Learned counsel for the accused relied upon Ex.PW1/A Malkhana register
and the entries made on 28th October, 2002. There are two entries of the said
date. The first entry states that three samples had been handed over to
Mr.Girdhari for being sent to FSL Malviya Nagar, Delhi. The second entry also
of the same date states that three CFSL samples had been handed over to
PW-6, Constable Rakesh for being deposited with FSL, Malviya Nagar. Both
entries have been made by PW1, Head Constable Radha Kishan and bear his
signature.

9. I have examined the statement of PW-1, Radha Kishan. He has
stated that three samples along with CFSL form were given to
Constable Rakesh

to be deposited with FSL, Malviya Nagar. He was not cross examined
and asked why there were two entries both dated 28th October, 2002.
The only question put to Constable Radha Kishan in the cross
examination was that entry dated 28th October, 2002 does not mention
that CFSL form was also sent to FSL, Malviya Nagar through
Constable Rakesh Kumar. Learned counsel for the appellant had also
drawn my attention to Ex.PW1/B. The transport receipt mentions that
three samples with seals SAF & RPA were sent through Constable
Rakesh Kumar. It was pointed out that the documents signed by
Constable Radha Kishan also does not mention that CFSL form was
also sent along with samples. Constable Rakesh Kumar was
examined as PW-6. He admitted that three samples and CFSL from
were given to him to be deposited with FSL, Malviya Nagar. The said
witness was not cross examined on the aspect that the samples were
infact not given to him for being deposited in FSL or were given to Mr.
Girdhari. Thus, Radha Kishan PW1, incharge of Malkhana who had
made entries in Malkhana register and Constable Rakesh Kumar PW6 was not cross examined and questioned on the three samples given
to PW-6 for being deposited with FSL, Malviya Nagar. To that extent,
their testimonies remain completely unchallenged. Both witnesses had

also stated that CFSL form was sent along with samples. It is correct that both
the Malkhana register and the transport receipt (Ex.PW1/A and PW1/B) do not
mention about CFSL form. However, this fact alone, I do not think dents the
prosecution version so as to create a doubt in the mind of the Court that there
was tempering. Mention of CFSL form may have been missed.
10. In this regard, I may refer to the CFSL report dated 29th November, 2002.
The said report specifically states as under:“The Parcel(s) three in number marked 'S1', 'S2' & 'S3'

which were sealed and tallied with specimen seal
impression forwarded.“

Thus, CFSL report is clear that the seals on three samples i.e. S1, S2 and S3
were tallied with the specimen seal impression forwarded to the said
laboratory. The CFSL form contained the specimen seal impression. The
accused never moved an application for cross examination of the Senior
Scientific Officer, Forensic Science Laboratory under Section 293 Cr.P.C.
Therefore, the contention of the appellant that the CFSL form was not
forwarded to the laboratory and the entire prosecution version should be
disbelieved on this ground cannot be accepted. I may also refer here to two
judgments of this Court in Shamim Versus State of Delhi (Crl. Appeal
No.161/2000) decided on 19th October, 2006 and Navin Kumar Versus State
reported in 1999 (1)

SCC (Delhi) 62. In the case of Shamim (supra), it was observed that when
CFSL report states that the seals were intact and tallied with the specimen
seals, it would indicate that the laboratory in question had received the CFSL
form. In the case of Navin Kumar (supra), it was again observed that when
CFSL report states that parcel seal samples tallied with the specimen seals
and were intact, it would show that there was no tampering with the samples,
unless there was some other evidence to the contrary. Judgment in the case
of Safiullah Versus State (Delhi Administration) reported in 1993 (1) C.C.
cases 497 (HC) of this Court relied upon by the learned counsel for the
appellant is distinguishable. In the said case, the ASI who had appeared at
PW-2 did not state anything about filling up of CFSL form and Moharrar
Malkhana also did not state that the articles were sent to the chemical
examiner along with CFSL form. In these circumstances, the Court gave
benefit of doubt to the accused therein, as even the seals were also not
handed over to any independent witness. Another decision of this Court in
Pradeep Kumar versus State reported in 1990 (1) C.Crl.Cases 69 (HC) is
also distinguishable because in the said case the SHO had not supervised
sealing of the parcels and seals were not given to any independent witness.
11. Learned counsel for the accused submitted that there was difference in
quantity of the three samples at the time when they were prepared and as per

report of FSL. It is stated that three samples were of 100 gms each, whereas
as per the report of FSL, three samples were found to be of 105 gms (sample
S1), 96.7 gms (sample S2) and 96.26 gms (sample S3). It has come on
record that when the samples were prepared, they were weighed on a manual
scale (see, cross examination of PW3 Constable Naresh Kumar and
statement of PW7, ACP Ishwar Singh). Electronic scales normally used by
Forensic Science Laboratories are far more sophisticated and precise. The
difference in weight is not substantial to accept the contention of the learned
counsel for the appellant. Another contention raised by the appellant was that
the seals were not handed over to the private witness. In the present case,
three original packets Ex.P1, P2 and P3 and the three samples were sealed
by seals of SAF and RPA. This has been stated by PW-3 Head Constable
Naresh Kumar, PW-4 Inspector Rajinder Prasad, PW-5 SA Faruooqui PW7
Ishwar Singh and Constable Davinder PW-9. The seal of SAF belongs to SI
S.A.Farooqui and the seal RPA belongs to Inspector Rajinder Parsad. PW-7
Ishwar Singh, ACP Crime Branch was also present on the spot when the
sealing was done. Mere fact that the seals were not given to the public
witness, does not in the facts of the present case and in view of the
categorical statements of these witnesses, justify any doubt. The Officers
have to use the seals for several purposes. Even if seal is given to a public
witness, it is normally returned back shortly. Statement of PW-1 Radha Kishan

does not create any doubt or suspicion that the samples or the pullandas were
tampered with. Quantity recovered is substantial. Case of implant or false
implication has not been made out on the basis of evidence on record.
Reference can be made to the observations of the Supreme Court in
Kalpanath Rai's case (supra) quoted above.
12. The last contention which requires consideration is on the aspect of Section
50 of the Act. In the notice under Section 50 of the Act, it was mentioned that
Mr.Gurdev Singh s/o Sh. Harnam Singh R/o A-86, Wazipur, Industrial Area, Delhi
was put to notice and informed that the police officers had information that he
had Charas, which was punishable under the Act. He was further informed by
the said notice that if he wanted he could be taken before a Gazetted Officer or a
Magistrate for his personal search and as per his wishes either of them could be
called at the spot. The accused has made an endorsement on the said notice in
his own handwriting that he did not want his personal search before anyone.
The personal search memo Ex.PW4/A is witnessed by Inspector Rakesh Kumar
(PW3) and ACP Ishwar Singh (PW7) in addition to Mr.Vinod

(PW2) who as already stated above has not supported the prosecution

version. The short question is whether the notice satisfies requirements of
Section 50 of the Act. In State of Punjab Versus Balbir Singh reported in
1994 Crl.L.J. 302, it was held that Section 50 of the Act is mandatory and
important valuable safeguard. It was held that failure of the empowered officer
to inform the suspect that if he so requires, he could be produced before a
Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate would amount to non-compliance of Section
50. Thereafter, the Supreme Court in State of Punjab Versus Baldev Singh
reported in (1999) (6) SCC 172 again examined Section 50 of the Act and
held that it is the obligation and duty of the empowered officers before
conducting search of the suspect on the basis of prior information to inform
the suspect, that he has right to have his search conducted in the presence of
a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate. Failure to inform the suspect of his right,
rather than mere choice, would render the search illegal and would amount to
violation of Section 50 of the Act. The question whether Section 50 is
mandatory or not, was answered by holding that it was imperative obligation
and duty of the empowered Officer to ensure that the suspect was informed
about existence of his right to be searched before a Gazetted Officer or a
Magistrate. Though failure to inform an accused about his right might not

vitiate the trial as such, but because of inherent prejudice that would be
caused to an accused it would render the conviction and sentence

unsustainable. It was further held that when the prosecution disregards
Section 50 of the Act, it does so at it's peril. I may also note here the relevant
portions of the conclusion given by the Supreme Court which are as follows:“(3) That a search made, by an empowered officer, on prior

information, without informing the person of his right that, if he
so requires, he shall be taken before a Gazetted Officer or a
Magistrate for search and in case he so opts, failure to
conduct his search before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate,
may not vitiate the trial but would render the recovery of the
illicit article suspect and vitiate the conviction and sentence of
an accused, where the conviction has been recorded only on
the basis of the possession of the illicit article, recovered from
his person, during a search conducted in violation of the
provisions of Section 50 of the Act.
(4) That there is indeed need to protect society from criminals.
The societal intent in safety will suffer if persons who commit
crimes are let off because the evidence against them is to be
treated as if it does not exist. The answer, therefore, is that
the investigating agency must follow the procedure as
envisaged by the statute scrupulously and the failure to do so
must be viewed by the higher authorities seriously inviting
action against the concerned official so that the laxity on the
part of the investigating authority is curbed. In every case the
end result is important but the means to achieve it must
remain above board. The remedy cannot be worse than the
disease itself. The legitimacy of judicial process may come
under cloud if the Court is seen to condone acts of
lawlessness conducted by the investigating agency during
search operations and may also undermine respect for law
and may have the effect of unconscionably compromising the
administration of justice. That cannot be permitted. An
accused is entitled to a fair trial. A conviction resulting from an
unfair trial is contrary to our concept of justice. The use of
evidence collected in breach of the safeguards provided by
Section 50 at the trial, would render the trial unfair;

(5) That whether or not the safeguards provided in Section 50
have been duly observed would have to be determined by the
Court on the basis of evidence led at the trial. Finding on that
issue, one way or the other, would be relevant for recording
an order of conviction or acquittal. Without giving an
opportunity to the prosecution to establish, at the trial, that the
provisions of Section 50, and particularly the safeguards
provided therein were duly complied with, it would not be
permissible to cut-short a criminal trial;
(6) That in the context in which the protection has been
incorporated in Section 50 for the benefit of the person
intended to be searched, we do not express any opinion
whether the provisions of Section 50 are mandatory or
directory, but, hold that failure to inform the concerned person
of his right as emanating from Sub-section (1) of Section 50,
may render the recovery of the contraband suspect and the
conviction and sentence of an accused bad and
unsustainable in law;
(7) That an illicit article seized from the person of an accused
during search conducted in violation of the safeguards
provided in Section 50 the Act cannot be used as evidence of
proof of unlawful possession of the contraband on the
accused though any other material recovered during that
search may be relied upon by the prosecution, in other
proceedings, against an accused, notwithstanding the
recovery of that material during an illegal search;
(8) A presumption under Section 54 of the Act can only be
raised after the prosecution has established that the accused
was found to be in possession of the contraband in a search
conducted in accordance with the mandate of Section 50. An
illegal search cannot entitle the prosecution to raise a
presumption under Section 54 of the Act.”
13. The said judgment has been considered in Prabha Shankar Dubey
Versus State of M.P. reported in 2004 (2) SCC 56. In the said case,
reference was made to several other decisions. It was noticed that no

prescribed form is required or mentioned in Section 50 and what is intended is
that the suspect should be aware of existence of his right. In each case on
examination of facts it has to be decided whether requirements of Section 50
have been satisfied. Supreme Court recently in Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja
Versus State of Gujarat reported in (2007) 1 SCC 433 has referred the issue
of exact purport of Section 50 to a larger Bench on the question whether it is
the duty of the Enforcing Officer to inform the suspect about his right to be
searched before a gazetted officer or a magistrate or the conditions of the
Section are satisfied when an offer is given to the suspect. However, in para
8, it was observed that even in Baldev Singh's (supra) case, the
Constitutional Bench had observed that it was not necessary that the accused
should be informed about his right in writing. Search memo or
contemporaneous document need not specifically mention that the suspect
was informed of his right. Oral evidence of the officer who conducted the
search is sufficient. Thus it depends upon the oral evidence of the Officer who
conducts the search. In the present case, notice under Section 50 of the Act
has been given in Hindi and the extract of words used are as follows:“Aap chahe toh aap apni talashi kisi rajpatrit adhikari

(Gazetted Officer) ya Magistrate ke samne karva
sakte hai jinko aapki ichcha anusar yaha mauka par
bulwaya ja sakta hai.”

14. It is somewhat difficult to exactly translate the said words into English and
decipher whether the accused was informed of his right or only an offer was
made. SI SA Farooqui (PW-5), the empowered officer, who had given the said
notice has stated that the accused was told that he could be produced before
a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate but the accused refused and declined the
said offer. In his cross examination, SI S.A. Farooqui has specifically stated
as under:“It is incorrect to state that accused was not informed

about his right of

search before Gazetted Officer or Magistrate.
Vol. It is however, correct that there is no mention in
the document.”
15. I may also note that PW-7 Ishwar Singh has stated that he was present
when notice under Section 50 of the Act, Exh. PW5/B was issued. PW-7
Ishwar Singh is a Gazetted Officer. In his statement on oath PW-7 Ishwar
Singh has stated that he had also informed the accused that he is ACP and a
Gazetted Officer. Mr. Ishwar Singh was not the authorized/empowered officer
who had conducted the search. Thus appellant was searched before a
gazetted officer. SI S.A. Farooqui (PW-5) was the empowered officer who had
conducted the search. In Ahmed Versus State of Gujarat, reported in (2000)
7 SCC 477, it was held that even if an empowered officer is a gazetted officer,
Section 50 of the Act should be complied with. Empowered officer cannot act
in a dual capacity as an empowered officer and as a gazetted officer also.
Mere fact that the empowered officer is a gazetted officer is not sufficient
compliance of Section 50 of the Act.
16. The present case is covered by the decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of State of Rajasthan versus Ram Chandra reported in (2005) 5 SCC
151, where it was observed :
18. If the person so requires, the officer referred to
under sub-section (1) of Section 50 may detain the
person to bring him before the gazetted officer or the
Magistrate, as the case may be. As was noticed in

Raghbir Singh case the Act affords the person to be
searched a safeguard to the effect that he may require
the search to be conducted in the presence of a
senior officer. The senior officer may be a gazetted
officer or a Magistrate depending upon who is
conveniently available. That being the purpose of the
Act, if any gazetted officer even if he is a police officer
of a particular rank is present nearby when the
accused is detained, the accused may be asked as to
whether he would like to be searched in the presence
of that officer or a Magistrate. The foundation of the
stand taken by the accused-respondent which found
favour with the High Court is that if he is a member of
the raiding party the requirements of Section 50 are
not met. This is not legally tenable, and in any event
on the facts of the present case it was not so because
PW 3, the Deputy Superintendent of Police reached
the spot after the person was detained.
21. The conclusions of the High Court would have
been correct if the officer proposing to effect the
search is a gazetted officer and he gives option to be
given under Section 50 to the person detained to be
searched in his presence. In that event, the
requirement of Section 50 would not be met because
the officer proposing to effect the search cannot act in
dual capacity; first as an officer authorised under
Section 42 to search a person and second as the
gazetted officer in whose presence the accused may
opt to be searched.
22. The object of the Act being that the search is
conducted in the presence of a superior officer, in
order to lend transparency and authenticity to the
search, it cannot be held as a principle in law that if a
superior officer happens to be with the officer
authorised (which the High Court has described as
being a member of the raiding party) the position
would be different. The High Court proceeds on the
basis that there may be bias on the part of the officer

because he was accompanying the officer authorised.
Such a presumption is not legally available.
23. The High Court was, therefore, not correct in
holding that the search in the presence of PW 3 was
not in compliance with the requirements of Section 50.
Stress is on the search being conducted in the
presence of any of the enumerated categories of
officers. In S. Jeevanantham v. State it was
contended by the accused that investigation having
been conducted by the complainant police officer, the
conviction in terms of Section 8(c) read with Section
20(b)(ii) of the Act was vitiated. The plea was repelled
relying on the decision of this Court in State v. V.
Jayapaul. It was observed that nothing was pointed
out to show that the investigation had caused
prejudice or was biased against the accused. In the
instant case, the accused was informed of his rights
and options to be exercised. He consented to be
searched in the presence of PW 3. Therefore, it was
not open to him even to urge non-compliance with
Section 50.”
17. The said opinion is given further credence by the observations of the
Supreme Court in an earlier decision in the case of T.T Haneefa versus
State of Kerala reported in (2004) 5 SCC 128. In the said case the Supreme
Court expressed it's opinion in following words:
“7. If the accused says that search shall be in the presence

of a gazetted officer or a Magistrate, the officer can choose
any one of them depending upon the availability of gazetted
officer or the Magistrate. In this case the appellant was
given an option to be searched in the presence of the
Magistrate, he did not exercise that right. The counsel for
the appellant drew our attention to the decision of this Court
in Beckodan Abdul Rahiman v. State of Kerala wherein this
Court held that there was violation of Article 50 of the NDPS
Act. It is pertinent to note that the nature of option given to
the accused by the searching officer and the facts show

that in that case the inquiry was made by the searching
officer as to whether the accused would like to meet any
higher officer or a gazetted officer and the accused replied
in the negative. These words used by the searching officer
were certainly not in compliance with Section 50 of the
NDPS Act. It was in that background this Court set aside
the conviction on the ground that there was violation of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act. In the instant case, we do not
think there is any violation of Section 50 of the NDPS Act,
as the accused was given the right to be searched in the
presence of a Magistrate and as he failed to opt for that, we
do not think that there was any procedural illegality.”
Reference can also be made to Vijaysinh Chandubha case (supra).
18. In these circumstances, I reject the arguments of the appellant that there
was violation of Section 50 of the Act in the present case.
19. In view of the above, I do not find any merit in the present appeal and the
same is dismissed.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
MARCH 7, 2008.
RN/P

