C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.1

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
COMPANY JURISDICTION

COMPANY PETITION NO.73 OF 2006

DATE OF DECISION: 9th October, 2006

In the matter of The Companies Act, 1956;
under Sections 391 to 394 of the Companies Act, 1956;

Scheme of Amalgamation of :

M/s Karamchand Appliances Pvt. Ltd.

M/s Roshni Appliances Pvt. Ltd.

...Transferor Company No. 1.

....Transferor Company No. 2.

With

M/s S.C. Johnson Products Pvt. Ltd.

....Transferee Company.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.2

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment? 2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? Yes
SANJIV KHANNA, J :

1. This petition under Sections 391 (2) -393 of the Companies Act, 1956

(hereinafter referred to as Act) has been filed by M/s Karamchand
Appliances Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as transferor company
No.1) and M/s Roshni Appliances Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as
transferor company no.2) and M/s S.C.Johnson Products Pvt. Ltd.
(hereinafter referred to as transferee company).
2. The registered offices of the two transferor companies and the

transferee company are located in Delhi, within the jurisdiction of this
Court.
3. It is stated in the petition that no proceedings under Sections 235-251 of

the Act are pending against the transferor company and the transferee
company.
4. The two transferor companies and transferee company had earlier filed

CA(M) Nos.12/2006 and 74/2006. The said applications were disposed
of vide order dated 16.1.2006 and the requirement to hold and convene

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.3

meetings of the shareholders of the two transferor companies and the
transferee company for the purpose of considering and approving the
proposed scheme of amalgamation was dispensed with. Meetings of the
creditors of the transferor companies and the transferee company were
also dispensed with. However, direction was given that meeting of the
unsecured creditors of the transferor company no.1 will be held. In
terms of the said directions meeting of the unsecured creditors of the
transferor company no.1 was held on 20.2.2006. The Chairperson
appointed by this Court for the purpose of the said meeting has
submitted his report dated 27.2.2006. As per the report, 23 unsecured
creditors were present in the said meeting and all of them have
unanimously approved the proposed scheme of amalgamation.
5. After filing of the present petition, citations were directed to be

published. Affidavit of service has been filed stating that citations have
been duly published.
6. Notices were also issued to the O.L. and the Regional Director (NR).

The O.L. has filed his report and stated that no objections/complaints
had been been received by him to the proposed scheme of
amalgamation. He has further stated that on the basis of information
submitted by the two transferor companies, he is of the view that the
affairs of the said companies do not appear to have been conducted in

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.4

a manner which is prejudicial to the interest of it's members and public
interest.
7. The Regional Director has filed his report, inter alia, raising two

objections. It is firstly submitted that the authorized share capital of the
two transferor companies cannot be clubbed and added to the
authorized share capital of the transferee company without following the
prescribed procedure under the Act and without payment of the stamp
duty and fee to the ROC.
8. The aforesaid objection raised by the Regional Director was considered

by this Court in Hotline Hol Celdings Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. (2005) 127
Comp. Cases 165 and was overruled. It has been held that in a case of
complete merger, authorized share capital of the transferor company
can be added to the authorized share capital of the transferee company
and no stamp duty and fee is required to be paid in such cases.
Following the above decision, the above objection raised by the
Regional Director (NR) is rejected.
9. The second objection raised by the Regional Director (NR) is that the

proposed scheme of amalgamation requires reduction of capital and
payment to the preferential shareholder out of the security premium
account. It is stated that this can be permitted and allowed after

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.5

following the prescribed procedure under Sections 100-101 of the Act in
accordance with the provisions of Section 78 of the aforesaid Act.
10. The matter was heard at length on 6

th

September, 2006. However,

before the order was signed, Rule 85 of the Companies (Court) Rules,
1959 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) came to my notice and,
therefore, the matter was listed for directions on 12th September, 2006.
11. Learned counsel for the petitioner companies has drawn my attention to

the object and purpose behind Sections 100-104 read with Rule 85 of
the Rules. It is submitted that the underlying basis and purpose is to
protect the interest of the creditors and the shareholders concerned who
may suffer or have adverse effect or likely to have adverse effect on
account of reduction of share capital. Reliance in support of the
submissions has been placed on the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court in the case of Novopan India Limited; In Re: G.V.K. Hotels
Limited, (1997) 88 Company Cases 596, judgment of Madras High
Court in the case of Asian Investments Limited and others (1992) 73
Company Cases 835 and judgment of Calcutta High Court in the case
of Mcleod Russel (India) Ltd. (1997) 4 Company Law Journal 60.
12. It was brought to the notice of the learned counsel for the petitioner

companies that this Court had dispensed with the requirement to issue
notice to unsecured creditors of the transferor company no.1 to whom

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.6

Rs.5,000/- or less was payable. Learned counsel for the petitioners,
however, pointed out that this was in terms of the directions issued by
this Court in order dated 16th January, 2006 passed in CA(M) No.
12/2006 and CA No. 74/2006. It was further stated that only
Rs.1,18,000/- was due and payable to the said unsecured creditors of
the transferor company no.1. It was also stated that the other unsecured
creditors to whom the transferor company no.1 owed more than Rs.11
crores had approved the scheme. It was submitted that the transferee
company was/is the holding company of the transferor company No. 1
and transferor company No. 1 in turn was/is the holding company of
transferor company No. 2.
13. My attention was also drawn to clauses 9.1, 10.A1 and 10.B1 of the

scheme which deal with reduction of paid up share capital of the
transferee company.
14. Rule 85 of the Rules stipulates that where the proposed compromise or

arrangement involves reduction of capital, the procedure prescribed
under the Act and the said Rules relating to reduction of capital and the
requirements of the Act and the Rules shall be complied with before
compromise or arrangement relating to reduction of capital is
sanctioned.

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.7

15. In the case of Novopan (supra) the scheme envisaged reduction of

share capital to offset existing losses. It was specifically noticed that the
proposed reduction of share capital did not involve either diminution of
liability in respect of unpaid share capital or payment to any shareholder
of any paid up share capital. The proposal for reduction was under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 100 of the Act. The decision will
support the case of the petitioner to the extent the scheme envisages
reduction of share capital to offset losses and falls under clause (b) of
Section 100 of the Act. However, the said decision is of no assistance to
the petitioners insofar as the scheme envisages payment to the
preferential shareholder of the paid up share capital. Similarly, in the
case of Asian Investments (supra) the scheme provided for extinction of
share capital of the transferee company as some shares in the
transferee company were held by the transferor company. Pursuant to
merger under the scheme, shares held by the transferor company in the
transferee company could not have been transferred to the transferee
company. The transferee company could not be owner of its own
shares. In these circumstances, it was held that Rule 85 of the Rules
was not applicable and, therefore, Sections 101 and 102 of the Act were
also not applicable. The scheme itself was held to be covered by
Section 391 and 392 of the Act and a case of amalgamation simplicitor,

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.8

where entire assets and liabilities of the transferor company were
transferred to the transferee company and there was no release of any
asset. The issue before the Calcutta High Court in the case of Mcleod
Russel (supra) was also substantially different from the controversy
before this court. In the said case the scheme provided for cancellation
of investment made by the transferor company in the equity share
capital of the transferee company. It was held that where a proposed
scheme of amalgamation stipulated merger of transferor company with
the identity of the transferee company, Rule 85 had no application as
the transferor company stands transferred as a whole to the transferee
company.
16. The relevant provisions have been considered in depth and detail by

Gujarat High Court in the case of Maneckchowk and Ahmedabad
Manufacturing Company Ltd. (1970) 40 Company Cases 819.
Reference was made to definition of the term “scheme” in Section 390 of
the Act and it was held that a scheme could also envisage modification
and/or reduction of share capital. With reference to Rule 85 of the Rules

it was observed that a scheme could certainly envisage re-organisation of
share capital as a part of the scheme itself but in cases where the
scheme envisaged reduction of share capital Rule 85 had to be given full

effect to. Therefore, Company Court can sanction “re-organisation” of

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.9

share capital in a scheme, without following the procedure for reduction
of share capital as envisaged under Section 100 to 104 of the Act.
However in cases of reduction of share capital, Rule 85 was applicable
and accordingly sections 100 to 104 of the Act were applicable. The
court also made a distinction between mandatory provisions and
directory provisions and it was held that a scheme which envisaged
reduction of share capital to set off losses was different and distinct from
a scheme which involved either diminution of liability in respect of
unpaid share capital or payment to any shareholder of the paid up share
capital. Reduction envisaged by cancellation of the paid up share capital
that was lost or unrepresented by available assets was treated as
distinct category under Section 100 of the Act. In such cases it was not
mandatory to follow the procedure prescribed in Section 101(2) of Act,
unless directed by the court. However, the court held that where
proposal involved reduction or diminution in liability in respect of unpaid
share capital or payment to any shareholder of any paid up share
capital, the procedure under Section 101 of the Act was mandatory.
17. Following the above decisions, in so far as the scheme envisages

setting off and reduction of security premium account by writing off debit
balance/losses in the profit and loss account of the transferee company
amounting to Rs. 1,189,019,000/-, Rule 85 does not come into

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.10

operation if one follows the reasoning of Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Novopan India (supra). Even if one follows the reasoning given in
Maneckchowk and Ahmedabad Manufacturing (supra) I do not find any
impediment in not sanctioning the scheme to this extent as Rs.
1,189,019,000/- is to be written off towards debit balance/losses in the
profit and loss account with correspondence reduction in the security
premium account. In the case of transferee company, all the
shareholders and the creditors have unilaterally approved the said
scheme and thus there is substantial compliance with Sections 100 to
104 of the Act.
18. This leaves us with the second question whether repayment of share

premium to the preference shareholders of the transferee company with
reduction of the security premium account requires compliance with
provision of Section 100 to 104 of the Act in view of Rule 85. As
discussed above, the scheme envisages transfer of paid up share
capital premium to the preference shareholder of the transferee
company. Rule 85 read with provisions of Section 100 to 104 are
mandatory and must be complied with.
19. In the present case the transferee company has only two shareholders.

The said shareholders have given their written consent to the proposed
scheme of amalgamation including reduction of the share capital by

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.11

payment from security premium account. Similarly, the transferee
company has only two unsecured creditors and no secured creditors.
Two unsecured creditors are group companies of the transferee
company. The unsecured creditors have also unilaterally given their
consent letters and no objection certificates to the proposed scheme of
amalgamation. In these circumstances, I am exercising my discretion
under Section 101(3) of the Act and I do not think it is necessary and
required that the procedure mentioned in Section 101(2) should be
followed. Passing of special resolution and calling for meeting of the two
unsecured creditors of the transferee company would be an empty and
meaningless formality. I may state here that strictly speaking creditors of
the two transferor companies are not concerned with and do not fall
within the four corners of Section 101(2) of the Act. The creditors of the
transferor companies do not become creditors of the transferee
company, till the scheme is sanctioned and duly approved. Till then they
continue to be creditors of the transferor companies and their rights as
creditors are protected and governed by Section 391-392 of the Act.
The creditors of the transferor companies have approved the scheme
under Section 391 and 392 of the Act.
20. A word of caution, this court has not examined and gone into the

question whether the transferee company is permitted and allowed to

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.12

repay and repatriate the share premium paid for purchase of the
preference shares. No such objection has been raised by the Central
Government in its reply/response. This issue is left open. In case there
is any restriction and/or no such approval is granted or can be granted
for repayment and repatriation of the share premium, this portion of the
scheme shall stand nullified and cancelled. This, however, will not affect
the other portion of the scheme which has been sanctioned. It will be
open to the parties and others to move an appropriate application
before this court for modification or clarification if required.
21. Having regard to the averments made in the petition, the material

placed on record and the affidavit filed and reply of the Regional
Director and the Official Liquidator, the petition is allowed subject to the
above observations. I am satisfied that the prayer made in the petition
deserves to be allowed. I do not find any legal impediment not to
sanction the scheme of amalgamation. Hence subject to the above
observations sanction is hereby granted to the above mentioned
scheme of amalgamation under Sections 391-394 of the Act. The
transferee company will comply with statutory requirements. Certified
copy of this order will be filed with the Registrar of Companies within
five weeks from the date of the order. Upon the scheme becoming

C.P.No.73/2006

Page No.13

effective from the appointed date, the transferor companies shall stand
dissolved without being wound up.
22. The petition is disposed of.

DASTI.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
October 9, 2006
rn/vkr/mv

