*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 11996/2006
S.N.SINGH

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. V Sudeer, Adv.
versus

M.C.D. & ORS

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Vikas Dudeja for Mr. Rajiv Dawar, Adv.
for MCD

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%

ORDER
09.04.2008
1. The petitioner is owner and occupant of MIG flat no.45 (III floor), Pocket
A3, Sector-8, Rohini. He made a number of complaints against illegal
constructions in flats no.33, 36, 37, 40, 41, 44 and 48. It is stated in the
writ petition that as a result of unauthorized construction in these flats,
the petitioner was put to unnecessary inconvenience and harassment
as the flats are connected by a common stair case.
2. Pursuant to the report of the Court Commissioner, action was taken by
respondent/MCD and unauthorized construction in flat no.41, which is
located below the flat of the petitioner was demolished. As a result of
the unauthorized construction in

flat no.41, an additional room had

been constructed which by default had resulted in an extended balcony
over the roof of the room below.
3. It is the case of the petitioner that while demolishing the unauthorized
construction including the room constructed by owner of flat no.41,
petitioner’s flat was deliberately damaged by officers of MCD. Petitioner
had filed photographs of the damage caused to his flooring

in the

original balcony, window and a pillar.
4. Respondent/DDA including its officers have filed a short affidavit stating
that demolition action was undertaken pursuant to report submitted by
the Court Commissioner and during the said demolition action on
22.6.2006 projection on municipal land was partly removed and RCC
slab was punctured making the unauthorized portion unusable.
5. It is stated that unauthorized construction was noticed at ongoing stage
in the flat of the petitioner i.e. A-3/45. Sector-8, Rohini and therefore the
same was also demolished. This statement made in paragraph 6 of the
counter affidavit is vague. It has not been specifically stated as to what
was the nature of unauthorized construction, which was going on in the
flat of the petitioner. In paragraph 7 it is mentioned that the petitioner
had raised parapet wall and the same was unauthorized. Para 6 of the
counter affidavit refers to ongoing construction, whereas para 7 of the
counter affidavit refers to parapet wall and the same being

unauthorized. Report of the Court Commissioner attached with the
counter affidavit does not refer to unauthorized construction in the flat of
the petitioner and refers to unauthorized construction in flat no.41.
Report submitted by Executive Engineer, Building (Rohini Zone)
annexed with the counter affidavit also does not refer to any demolition
or to any demolition action on account of unauthorized construction in
the flat of the petitioner namely flat no.45, A3, Sector-8, Rohini. The
photographs enclosed by the petitioner show that the petitioner in order
to protect and secure his flat and belongings had fixed iron grills on the
roof of the unauthorized room constructed by owner of flat no.41. In this
regard my attention has been drawn to public notice published in
newspaper dated 26.6.2006 which make reference to 6.4.1 and permits
construction of parapet wall not exceeding one meter. It is also not
difficult to appreciate the anxiety and difficulty of the petitioner, as owner
of the flat below him, namely flat no.41, had constructed an additional
room and the ceiling of the said additional room projected outside the
flat of the petitioner. For the purpose of security and safety it is apparent
that the petitioner had fixed iron railing. Damage caused to pillar,
flooring and window, which is apparent from the photographs enclosed
with the petition has not been denied.

6. In view of the facts and circumstances stated above I feel that the
petitioner should be awarded costs of Rs.10,000/- for the harassment
and inconvenience caused to him because MCD did not take action
against unauthorized construction made by owner of house no.41, A3,
Sector-8, Rohini and also for causing damage to the floor, pillar and the
window in the premises of the petitioner. MCD will pay aforesaid cost
within 4 weeks from today by sending a cheque to the petitioner by
post. In case, the aforesaid costs are not paid within 4 weeks, petitioner
will be entitled to interest at the rate of 10% p.a. from the date of this
order till payment.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Dasti.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
APRIL
Vld/P

09, 2008.

