*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 17480/2006

ISHTIYAQ HUSSAIN
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Arun Kumar Singh, Advocate.
versus
VICE CHAIRMAN, D.D.A.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Yeeshu Jain, Advocate for DDA.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%
1.

ORDER
07.04.2008
The petitioner had applied for allotment of a flat under Narela

Housing Scheme- 2004. The original brochure has been produced before
me. The scheme was open from 23rd Februry, 2004 to 31st March, 2004
and was for allotment of about 3500 flats, which were ready for occupation.
The allotment was to take place on the basis of draw of lots and
unsuccessful registrants were to be refunded the registration amount
deposited by them.

It was also specifically stipulated that a separate

waiting list of 25% of the flats will be maintained for a period of six months.
2.

It is the case of the petitioner that he was allotted a flat under the said

scheme but he did not receive demand-cum-allotment letter. It is further

stated that he came to know about the said allotment only on 26th April,
2006, when he received show cause notice why his allotment should not be
cancelled. The petitioner replied to the said show cause notice but he was
informed that his allotment stands cancelled. In these circumstances, the
petitioner has filed the present writ petition in this Court.
3.

It is the case of respondent-DDA that demand-cum-allotment letter

was sent to the petitioner by speed post and the said letter was duly served
as the acknowledgement card was received back, without the original
letter.

Learned counsel for the petitioner points

out that

the

acknowledgement card does not bear the signature of the petitioner.
However,

he

does

not

acknowledgement card.

dispute

the

address

mentioned

on

the

Normal presumption under Section 27 of the

General Clauses Act and Section 114 of the Evidence Act is that the
allotment letter was received by the petitioner. There are no circumstances
to doubt

the averment made by the respondent-DDA in their counter

affidavit that original letter envelop containing demand-cum-allotment letter
was sent to the petitioner by speed post and the acknowledgement card
without the envelop was received back. Presumption, therefore, is that the
petitioner was duly served and had received the demand-cum-allotment
letter.

4.

I have also examined the brochure relating to Narela House Scheme-

2004. In Clause 8 of the said brochure it is mentioned that every effort
would be made by DDA to conduct draw of lots in the month of April-May,
2004 and the result of the draw of lots would be displayed at Vikas Sadan,
on the website of DDA and will be also published in leading newspapers.
Another clause in the said brochure states that a separate waiting list of
25% of the flats will be declared in the order of priority but this waiting list
would be valid only for six months.

The registrants who were not

successful in the draw of lots will be refunded the registration money.
Another condition stipulated in the brochure was that unsuccessful
applicants would be refunded the registration amount without interest.
5.

It is difficult to believe that the petitioner would have remained quiet

and not asked for the refund of the registration amount of Rs.30,000/- from
31st March, 2004 till 26th April, 2006, specially when the scheme itself
envisaged that the draw of lots was likely to be held in the month of AprilMay, 2004.

The draw of lots was in fact held on 31st August, 2004.

Conduct of the petitioner is a clear indicator that the petitioner had received
demand-cum-allotment letter but had failed to make payment.
6.

Clause 12.5 of the brochure reads as under:“Applicants not getting refund within one month from
holding the draw are advised to contact the nodal

branch of the bank in which application was
deposited. DDA will not pay any interest in case of
postal delay or applicant not available at given
address or in case of incomplete address.”
7.

Under Clause 16 of the brochure it was also specified that the allottee

will be liable to make payment within ninety days and maximum period for
making payment was 180 days.

The said clause stipulates that if an

allottee fails to submit required document and does not make payment
within 180 days, there would be automatic cancellation and the amount
deposited by the allottee shall be forfeited.

Automatic cancellation has

taken place and the petitioner has no claim. DDA has acted in terms of the
scheme, which is a binding contract between the petitioner and the DDA.
The terms and condtions of scheme itself are not subject matter of
challenge before this Court.
8.

In view of the above, I do not find any merit in the present writ petition

and the same is dismissed.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
APRIL 07, 2008
VKR

