*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 23037/2005
SUNIL KUMAR

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. S.N. Choudhary, Advocate.

versus
D.T.C.

..... Respondent
Through Ms. Saroj Bidawat, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%
1.

ORDER
05.05.2008
The petitioner was working as a driver with Delhi Transport

Corporation. On 29th March, 1986, the petitioner while driving a bus struck
a pedestrian at a road crossing as a result of which the pedestrian expired.
FIR under Sections 279 and 304A of Indian Penal Code was registered
against the petitioner.

The petitioner’s services were terminated under

Cluase 9 (b) of DRTA Rules on the ground that the petitioner had caused a
serious accident.
2.

In the counter affidavit it is mentioned that on checking the

petitioner’s memo it was found that he had taken only 35 to 40 minutes to
reach the accident point from the bus terminus at NOIDA, though the
scheduled running time from the said terminus till the last point was one

hour twenty minutes. Thus, it is stated in the counter affidavit that the
petitioner was over speeding.
3.

The petitioner claims that he was acquitted in the criminal case on

23rd November, 1998 and, therefore, he should be reinstated. It is further
stated that the termination of the petitioner under Rule 9 (b) of DRTA Rules
was without show cause notice etc., therefore, bad for violation of principles
of natural justice. It is further stated that the petitioner is ready and willing
to work with the respondent corporation and gives up his claim for back
wages.
4.

It is stated in the counter affidavit that the petitioner had earlier

invoked jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal under the provisions of Industrial
Disputes Act.

However, the petitioner did not file any claim and

subsequently the reference was returned back unanswered.

It is also

mentioned in the counter affidavit that the petitioner had approached
Labour Officer but his case was again turned down on the ground that it
was a very old case and it would be not be feasible to consider the request
regarding his reinstatement in service. The respondent corporation has
stated in the counter affidavit that the acquittal of the petitioner was on the
ground of lack of evidence and not on merits.
5.

The petitioner has filed the present writ petition only in October, 2005.

The petition is, therefore, bad for laches and undue delay. It is apparent
that after acquittal of the petitioner in 1998, he has been working or
employed with a third person or was self employed. Keeping in view the
time gap and the fact that the petitioner had earlier approached Labour
Tribunal, I do not think it will be appropriate for this Court to entertain the
present writ petition or pass any order reinstating the petitioner. In these
circumstances, this Court is not inclined to entertain the present writ
petition.
The writ petition is dismissed.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
MAY 05, 2008
VKR

