FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) NOS. 605-06 OF 2006

%

Date of Decision :

7th September, 2007.

EXPRESS TOWERS P.TD & ANR.
.... Appellants.
Through Mr. Pravin K. Jain, Mr. L.K. Garg and Mr.V.K.
Mehra, Advocates.
VERSUS
MOHAN SINGH & ORS.
.... Respondents.
Through Mr. H.L. Narula, Advocate for respondents 1-2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

YES.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

YES.

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

The appellants, Express Towers Pvt. Ltd. and its Director- Mr. R.C.

Goel, have filed the present Appeal against the Order dated 22 nd August,
2006 dismissing their application under Order XII, Rule 6 read with Section
151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the
Code, for short) for passing a decree of specific performance on the basis of
admissions made by Mr.Mohan Singh and Smt. Jit Kaur, the respondent nos.

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 2

1 and 2 herein.
2.

The appellants had entered into an “agreement to sell” dated 21 st

May, 1987 with the respondent nos. 1 and 2 for purchase of property no. B7/118, Safdurjung Enclave, New Delhi for sale consideration of Rs.23.50
lakhs. Rs.1 lakh was paid in advance to the respondent nos. 1 and 2 out of
the total sale consideration and the balance sum of Rs.22.50 lakhs remained
payable. The said amount was payable by bank drafts at the time of
execution of the sale deed and possession was to be given to the appellants
after full payment and encashment of the bank drafts.
3.

The Appropriate Authority-Income Tax Department by Order dated

10th July, 1987, decided to exercise its pre-emptive right to purchase the said
property under Chapter XX-C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter
referred to as the Act, for short).

The Order passed by the Income Tax

Department was made subject matter of Writ Petition No. 2275/1987 filed by
the appellants. By an interim Order dated 26th August, 1987 it was directed
that the possession of the property will be with the Income Tax Department
and the same should not be disturbed. During the pendency of this Writ
Petition, by an another interim Order dated 29th July, 1992, Rs. 22.50 lakhs
was paid to the respondent nos. 1 and 2 by the Income Tax Department.
The Court while passing the said Order noticed that Rs.1 lakh was payable to
the appellants herein and the said amount would be paid whenever the
appellants appear in the said proceedings.

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

4.

Page No. 3

Writ Petition No. 2275/1987 was disposed of vide Order dated 1st

March, 1993 with a direction to the Income Tax Department to reconsider
their decision for pre-emptive purchase of the property in view of the decision
of the Supreme Court in C.B. Gautam versus Union of India reported in JT
1992 (6) SC 678. In this Order, the Court noted the submission of the learned
counsel for the respondent nos.1 and 2 that they were entitled to interest in
case of pre-emptive purchase.
5.

By Order dated 5th November, 1993, the Income Tax Department

again reiterated its earlier order and passed an order for pre-emptive
purchase of the property.
6.

Aggrieved, the appellants herein filed Writ Petition (Civil) No.

4357/1993 which was allowed vide Judgment dated 17th December, 1997. By
the said Judgment, pre-emptive purchase Order dated 5th November, 1993
passed by the Appropriate Authority was quashed. The Judgment dated 17th
December, 1997 was affirmed by the Supreme Court.
7.

The appellants herein thereafter filed another Writ Petition (Civil) No.

5654/2001 against the Income Tax Department. This Writ Petition was
disposed of on 12th December, 2001 with the direction that the appellants
herein will deposit

Rs.22.50 lakhs with the Income Tax Department and

thereupon the said Department will issue 'no objection certificate' in Form No.
37-I and thereupon possession of the property will be handed over by the
said Department to the appellants herein. The claim of the Income Tax

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 4

Department that interest on Rs.22.50 lakhs should be paid by the appellants
was rejected. It may be noted here that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 were not
present in the Court when Judgment dated 12th December, 2001 was
passed.

The

said

respondents

thereafter

filed

an

application,

RA

No.2299/2002, for review of the said judgment. The said application was
disposed of vide Order dated 16th March, 2002 with the following
observations:“Even in the writ petition, the applicant herein had
not sought to be impleaded as a party. It was
never contended that the Agreement to Sell for
one reason or the other has become
unenforceable.
xxxxx
This Court while passing the said Order dated
12.12.2001 was not concerned with any inter-se
disputes between the parties. If the applicant has
any grievance(s) against the writ petitioner in
relation to the said agreement for sale, it can
agitate the same before the appropriate forum.”
8.

We have examined the copy of the Agreement to Sell dated 21st

May, 1987 between the appellants and the respondents. The said Agreement
nowhere states that possession of the property has been handed over to the
appellants. It is further provided in the said Agreement to Sell that
possession of the property would be handed over after encashment of the
draft paid towards total sale consideration on execution of the sale deed. The
Agreement also records that the sale deed would be executed within 60 days

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 5

after obtaining permission from the Income Tax Department and on failure of
the appellants to pay the said amount, earnest money of Rs.1 lakh paid by
the appellants would be forfeited.
9.

It may be relevant to reproduce here some of the averments made

in the plaint and the written statement. In paragraph 9 of the plaint, the
appellants have stated that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 herein did not ask
for possession of the property and the only request before the Writ Court was
that they were entitled to interest on the delayed payment. The Court in its
Order dated 1st March, 1993 allowed the respondents to raise this issue
before the Appropriate Authority. In paragraph 20 onwards of the plaint, it is
stated that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 herein have executed three separate
sale deeds in favour of third persons who have been arrayed as defendants
3-5. It is alleged that the said sale deeds are forged and fictitious documents
and part of a fraud played by the respondent nos. 1 and 2. It is further
claimed that the same are null and void and unenforceable. Para 26 of the
plaint reads as under:“That the property grabbers like Defendants No.3
to 5 would have got made some fraudulent and
fictitious documents may be in collusion with the
Defendants No. 1 & 2 and hence the Sale Deeds
dated 30.9.1988, 18.9.2000 and 22.9.2000 are
liable to be declared as null and void; illegal; not
enforceable; not binding on Plaintiffs and are
liable to be ignored and set-a-side. The aforesaid
Sale Deeds are also invalid and illegal. If the
defendants No. 1 and 2 have executed this Sale
Deed dated 30.9.1988 than also they could not

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 6

have dare and they had no authority to execute
such Sale Deed and are barred by Section 52 of
the Transfer of Property Act and that is by the
principle of lis pendens.
The Sale Deeds dated 30.9.1988; 18.9.2000 and
22.9.2000 cannot prevent Plaintiffs from getting
the Title Deeds executed from Defendants No. 1
and such Defendants as this Hon'ble Court deems
fit and proper.”
10.

In the written statement, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have stated as

under:“That the defendant No. 1 and 2 were in
USA in the year 1988 and they could not had
signed or executed any sale deed at Delhi in
respect of their property No. B.7/118, Safdarjung
Enclave Extension, New Delhi on 30.9.1988. If
there is any such document, the same is nothing
but has been prepared by some miscreants after
forging signatures of the defendant No. 1 and 2.
These persons need to be brought to book and
proseucted for the crime they have committed to
sell the property of the defendants No. 1 and 2 in
their absence from India. This Hon'ble Court may
like to order detailed and discrete enquiry into the
whole episode so that the culprits should not go
scold free.
That in view of the facts as stated on
behalf of Defendant No. 1 and 2, the suit for
Specific Performance, Declaration, Perpetual and
Mandatory Injunction and also in Aid of Specific
Performance filed by the plaintiffs against the
answering defendants is not maintainable as the
agreement to seel made between the defendants
and the plaintiffs has already expired and that
there is no new agreement between the parties
which now can be enforced.
In fact the
possession of the property in dispute which was
taken over to the defendants No. 1 and 2 and not

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 7

to the plaintiffs. Since the plaintiffs have taken
over the property directly from the Income Tax
Department, without involving the defendants, no
suit for specific performance against the answering
defendants lies.
That the contents of para 4 of the suit are not
denied. The Appropriate Authority of the Income
Tax Department asked the Defendant No. 1 and 2
to hand over the property under the same terms
and conditions of the agreement dated 21.5.1987
and the defendatns were compelled to hand over
the vacant possession of the suit propety under
pressure and dures on 20.8.1987 alongwith
original documents such as sale deed, sanctioned
plans, completion certificate of the building and
other necessary documents. The Income Tax
Department, however, did not pay the amount of
consideration money of Rs.23,50,000/- at that
time. The defendants visited the Income Tax
Office to collect the cheque for the promised
consideration money on 21.8.1987, 22.8.1987 and
28.8.1987 but could fnot get the same. On
28.8.1987, the defendants were told that the
plaintiffs M/s. Express Tower Pvt. Ltd. Had gone
into litigation and the Hon'ble High Court had
stoppd the payment. The defendants then left for
USA on 29.8.1987 and came back to India only on
10.9.1991. Necesssary entries to this effect have
been made of their departure from Delhi and
arrived at USA are made in their passports
(Passport No. L960044 on page 8 and 17 of Smt.
Jeet Kaur and Passport No. M-165538 on pages
10 and 21 of Shri Mohan Singh). Copies of these
passport are enclosed and marked as AnnexureD/1 Colly.”
11.

The respondent nos. 1 and 2 have not specifically disputed some

facts in their written statement but have raised various pleas including the
defence that the suit is not maintainable as Agreement to Sell between the

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 8

parties has already expired and the appellants had taken possession of the
property from the Income Tax Department without either involving or getting
consent of the said respondents. It is further stated that the said respondents
were residing in U.S.A. and various orders were obtained by the appellants
without proper service of notice on the respondents. It is pointed out that
there was substantial delay in payment of the sale consideration even by the
Income Tax Department and the respondent nos. 1 and 2 have not received
Rs. 22.50 lakhs from the appellants but from the Income Tax Department. It
is also stated that the Income Tax Department was not competent to transfer
possession of the property to the appellants and the ownership rights still
vests with the respondent nos. 1 and 2.
12.

It may be interesting to note here that the appellants have also

made Mr.Bijender Kumar, Mr. Niranjan Vasishtha and Mr. Shafiqur Rehman,
as parties to the said Suit and impleaded them as defendants Nos. 3, 4 and
5. It is alleged in the plaint that the respondent nos. 1 and 2 have sold the
property to the said persons by executing three registered sale deeds on
different dates and mutation has been carried out in the records of the MCD.
Allegations of fraud have been made. The respondent nos. 1 and 2 have
denied executing any document in favour of the said persons and it is stated
that the respondent nos.1 and 2 were in U.S.A. during the period between
29th August, 1987 to 10th September, 1991.The appellants, on the other hand,
claim that these documents have been executed by the respondent nos. 1

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 9

and 2. The said defendants have been proceeded ex-parte and evidence has
to be led by the parties. It is also the case of the appellants that execution of
the said documents does not prevent the appellants from getting decree of
specific performance.
13.

It is well settled that pleadings including written statement have to

be read as a whole to decide whether there is unequivocal and clear
admission by a party. The respondent nos. 1 and 2 have denied executing
any documents or sale deeds in favour of the defendant nos. 3-5 in the plaint.
It is claimed that their signatures have been forged and the persons
responsible must be brought to book and prosecuted. The defendants Nos.
3-5 have not appeared in the Suit and have been proceeded ex-parte. As
noticed by the learned Single Judge, the Court has not proceeded under
Order VIII and passed any decree. The appellants herein being the plaintiffs
have been asked to lead evidence on the pleas and contentions raised. It is
only after evidence is led and the respective claims and stands are
adjudicated that it can be decided whether the alleged sale deeds are forged,
fabricated and fictitious documents. The Court will also examine whether the
appellants or the respondent nos. 1 and 2 were responsible for executing the
said documents. Another contention raised by the respondent nos. 1 and 2
is that the Income Tax Department could not have handed over possession
to the appellants. The Income Tax Department had taken possession of the
property from the respondent nos. 1 and 2 and once the order passed under

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 10

Chapter XX-C of the Act was set aside and status quo ante was restored,
possession should have been handed over to the said respondents. Another
plea taken by the said respondents is that the Agreement which was entered
into between the appellants and the respondent nos. 1 and 2 has already
expired and there is no agreement between the parties which can be
enforced. What is the effect of orders being passed by the Income Tax
Department under Chapter XX-C of the Act on the said Agreement; whether
the said Agreement can still be enforced as per clauses of the Agreement
and understanding between the parties, are all matters which require
adjudication. Parties must be given full opportunity to plead their case and
establish it by leading evidence. Their right to have a fair trial should not be
curtailed and scuttled. It cannot be said that the respondent nos. 1 and 2
have made unequivocal and unambiguous admission of facts which entitles
the appellants to a decree on the basis of admissions. The respondent nos. 1
and 2 have also made claim for interest which fact is admitted in the plaint
itself.
14.

Under Order XII, Rule 6 of the Code, a decree can be passed or a

suit can be dismissed when admissions are clear and unambiguous and no
other interpretation is possible. The Court also is vested with a right to ask for
independent corroboration of facts, even when denial in the pleadings is not
specific. Right to pass a judgment or order under Order XII, Rule 6 of the
Code is discretionary and not mandatory. It may not be safe and correct to

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 11

pass a judgment under Order XII, Rule 6 of the Code when a case involves
disputed questions of fact and law which require adjudication and decision.
Even when a party has made an admission, the Court need not dismiss or
allow the suit. Judgment on the basis of admissions is not a matter of right
but a matter of discretion for the Court. Similarly relief of specific
performance is a discretionary relief. The discretion, whether or not a decree
for specific performance of an immovable property should be passed, is to
be exercised or rejected by taking into account several factors and
circumstances. Conduct of the parties is also to be examined. In this regard it
may be stated that the appellants have taken possession of the property from
the Income Tax Department and the respondent nos.1 and 2 had not given
possession of the property to the appellants. Section 20 of the Specific Relief
Act reads as under:20. Discretion as to decreeing specific
performance .(1) The jurisdiction to decree
specific performance is discretionary, and the
court is not bound to grant such relief merely
because it is lawful to do so; but the discretion of
the court is not arbitrary but sound and
reasonable, guided by judicial principles and
capable of correction by a court of appeal.
(2) The following are cases in which the court may
properly exercise discretion not to decree specific
performance
( a ) where the terms of the contract or the
conduct of the parties at the time of entering into
the contract or the other circumstances under
which the contract was entered into are such that

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 12

the contract, though not voidable, gives the plaintiff
an unfair advantage over the defendant; or
( b ) where the performance of the contract would
involve some hardship on the defendant which he
did not foresee, whereas its non-performance
would involve no such hardship on the plaintiff;
( c ) where the defendant entered into the contract
under circumstances which though not rendering
the contract voidable, makes it inequitable to
enforce specific performance.
Explanation 1 .Mere inadequacy of consideration,
or the mere fact that the contract is onerous to the
defendant or improvident in its nature, shall not be
deemed to constitute an unfair advantage within
the meaning of clause ( a ) or hardship within the
meaning of clause ( b ).
Explanation 2 .The question whether the
performance of a contract would involve hardship
on the defendant within the meaning of clause ( b )
shall, except in cases where the hardship has
resulted from any act of the plaintiff subsequent to
the contract, be determined with reference to the
circumstances existing at the time of the contract.
(3) The court may properly exercise discretion to
decree specific performance in any case where
the plaintiff has done substantial acts or suffered
losses in consequence of a contract capable of
specific performance.
(4) The court shall not refuse to any party specific
performance of a contract merely on the ground
that the contract is not enforceable at the instance
of the other party.”

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

15.

Page No. 13

The above Section was referred to by the Supreme Court in Jai

Narain Parasrampuria versus Pushpa Devi Saraf, reported in (2006) 7
SCC 756 and it was held that conduct of both the parties has to be examined
before passing a decree for specific performace or awarding compensation.
Reference was made to several Texts on equity and equitable remedies and
circumstances/cases where damages can be awarded in substitution for an
order of specific performance. The court also examined the question what
should be the quantum and measure of compensation. In the said case, as
the parties were guilty of serious misconduct and both of them had abused
process of law by filing frivolous litigations and had suppressed material
facts, the Supreme Court declined to grant decree of specific performance
and directed that compensation should be paid. In the said decision, several
earlier decisions of the Supreme Court have been referred to. In the case of
Nirmala Anand versus Advent Corportion (P) Limited, reported in (2002)
8 SCC 146 , the Supreme Court affirmed the principle that grant of decree of
specific performance lies in the discretion of the court and decree will not
follow as it is legal to do so.

Several facts have to be taken into

consideration including conduct of the parties, facts and circumstances of the
case, though ordinarily a plaintiff would not be denied relief of specific
performance only on account of abnormal increase in prices during the
pendency of litigation.

However, equities have to be balanced and the

question, who is defaulting party and whether any party is trying to take

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 14

undue advantage over the other as also question of hardship has to be gone
into and examined. Totality of circumstances have to be considered and in a
given case phenomenal increase in prices during the pendency of litigation
can be one of the considerations besides many others for refusing a decree
of specific performance.
16.

It may be also noted here that the Income Tax Department had sold

the property in an open auction held on 17th September, 1993 for a sum of
Rs.78.10 lakhs.
17.

In view of the facts and circumstances stated above and the

defence raised by the respondent nos. 1 and 2, we do not think that in the
present case a decree on the basis of admissions under Order XII, Rule 6 of
the Code should be passed. Various issues and contentions are raised and
involved. We feel the present case requires adjudication of contentions which
should be decided after regular trial. The respondent nos. 1 and 2 will suffer
injustice and denied fair trail in case the suit is decreed at this stage. Keeping
in view the facts mentioned above, we feel that the appellants should be
asked to prove and establish their case in trial by leading evidence.
18.

In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present Appeal

and the same is accordingly dismissed. It is clarified that the observations
and findings recorded above are for the purpose of deciding the present
appeal against an Order passed on an application under Order XII, Rule 6 of

FAO(OS) Nos. 605-06/2006

Page No. 15

the Code. The suit will be decided and disposed of on merits without being
influenced by any observations made above.
No Costs.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
SEPTEMBER 7, 2007.
P/VKR

