FAO(OS) 102-2004

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

FAO(OS) NO. 102 OF 2004

%

Date of Decision :

16

th

March, 2007.

M/S. RITE APPROACH GROUP LTD.
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. Jasmeet Singh, Advocate.
VERSUS
M/S.ROSOBORONEXPORT
.... Respondent.
Through Mr. Siddhartha Dave, Advocates
.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. M/s. Rite Approach Group Ltd (hereinafter referred to as the
appellant, for short) has filed the present Appeal against the Order
th

dated 25 May, 2004 passed by the learned Single Judge rejecting

FAO(OS) 102-2004

Page 2

it's application under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 (hereinafter referred to as the Act, for short).
2.

Learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon the decision of
the Court of Appeal in the case of Mareva versus International
Bulkcarriers reported in (1980) 1 All.ER 213 and submitted that
M/s.Rosoboronexport (hereinafter referred to as the respondent, for
short) is liable to pay to the appellant, commission of Rs.28.8 crores
on sale of six helicopters by M/s Kazan Helicopters Ltd. to Border
Security Force. Reliance is placed upon agency agreement between
the appellant and M/s Russian Technologies and it claimed that the
respondent herein has taken-over the said company. It is submitted
that the Government of India should be injuncted by Mareva
injunction from making full payment of the two helicopters to the
respondent and the respondent should be restrained from dealing
with the said helicopters.

3. Detailed facts have already been noted by the learned Single Judge
in the impugned Order and are therefore not reproduced. However,
the learned Single Judge in the impugned Order has noted that the

FAO(OS) 102-2004

Page 3

Government of India is not a party to the so called arbitration clause
existing between the appellant and the respondent. Contention of the
respondent that the respondent was not an agent of the appellant,
dealings between the appellant and M/s Russian Technologies were
separate and independent and agency agreement is not binding on
the respondent and other pleas were raised.
4. Learned Single Judge has noted that the number of helicopters and
their models and that the supplies made to the Ministry of Home
Affairs did not tally with the agreement between the appellant and
M/s Russian Technologies, which was in respect of 16 helicopters to
be supplied to Ministry of Defence. Moreover, the Ministry of Defence
had in the agreement specifically stipulated that there shall be no
agent for the purpose of intercession, facilitation or for in any way
recommendation to the Government of India or any of the
functionaries of the Government. Learned Single Judge further
noticed that the respondent is a State owned undertaking of the
Government of Russia and therefore has sufficient assets to satisfy
any decree in favour of the appellant. Lastly, it was observed that

FAO(OS) 102-2004

Page 4

provisions of Order XXXVIII, Rule 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (hereinafter referred to as the Code, for short) or conditions
stipulated therein can be read into Section 9 of the Act but the strict
preconditions specified in the said provision were not satisfied in the
present case. Learned Single Judge relied upon the case of
M/s.Global Company versus National Fertilizers Ltd. Reported in
AIR 1988 Delhi 397 and an unreported judgment of the Bombay High
Court in the case of National Shipping Company versus Sentrans
Industries Limited, in Appeal No.852/2003
5. We need not enter into detailed controversy as the respondent has
th

filed an affidavit enclosing therewith letter dated 19 August, 2005. In
this letter, it has been specifically stated that the respondent has
already received the entire money from the Government of India
towards supply/sale of the two helicopters. The aforesaid letter was
th

filed along with affidavit dated 7 November, 2005. Learned counsel
for

the

appellant,

in

these

circumstances,

took

repeated

adjournments and at the time of hearing, filed in the Court, a copy of
nd

the affidavit dated 2 March, 2007. In this affidavit it is stated that to

FAO(OS) 102-2004

Page 5

the best of the knowledge and belief of the appellant, the respondent
has not received money from the Government of India under the
th

Agreement dated 14 April, 2000 and Letter of Credit of June, 2003
bearing No.0096103DC028270. This affidavit as filed shows that the
appellant does not have full information and knowledge and has
merely presumed that the sale consideration of the two helicopters
has not been paid. The said affidavit is no statement and affirmation
under oath that can be relied upon. In Sukhwinder Pal Bipan
Kumar versus State of Punjab, reported in (1982) 1 SCC 31, it was
observed

that an affidavit

asserting or denying

allegations as

correct to the best of the deponent's knowledge is no affidavit and is
contrary to requirement to Order 19, Rule 3 of the Code which
requires the deponent to disclose nature and source of his
knowledge with sufficient particularity. Moreover, the application
under Section 9 of the Act was filed in 2004 and till today, during the
last three years, the appellant has not invoked the arbitration clause.

6. The appellant is based in Singapore and Austria. The respondent is

FAO(OS) 102-2004

Page 6

a company operating and having its registered office in Russia.
Without examining and going into the question whether injunction can
be issued on an application under Section 9 of the Act by the Courts
in India, it may be noticed that the Court of Appeal in the case of
Mareva versus International Bulkcarriers (supra) had held that
freezing injunction should not be granted unless a person has a legal
or equitable right, it appears that a debt is due and owed and there is
danger that the debtor may dispose of his assets before the judgment
is passed so as to defeat the decree which may be passed.
Injunction order even as per the Court of Appeal can be issued in
extraordinary circumstances. Mareva or freezing injunction is passed
when there is evidence or material to show that the debtor is acting in
a manner or is likely to act in a manner to frustrate subsequent
order/decree of the court or tribunal. The Court therefore freezes the
assets of the debtor to prevent the assets from being dissipated, to
prevent irreparable harm to the creditor. It prevents a foreign
defendant from removing his assets from the jurisdiction of the court.
It is like and akin to “attachment before judgment” and conditions

FAO(OS) 102-2004

Page 7

mentioned in the said provision should be satisfied before freezing
junction order is passed. (See Formosa Plastic Corporation Ltd.
Versus Ashok Chauhan reported in 76(1998) DLT 817 and Uppal
Eng. Co. (P) Ltd. Versus Cimmco Birla Ltd. reported in 121 (2005)
DLT 539). The respondent-Company is owned by Russian
Government and there is no such allegation that the respondent
company is trying to defeat and play a fraud by moving/transferring
its assets. We agree with the reasoning given by the learned single
judge.
7. We do not find any merit in the present Appeal and the same is
dismissed.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
MARCH
P

16, 2007

