*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 1582/2008
SARLA GULIANI & ANR.
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. M.K. Singh, Advocate.
versus
N.D.P.L. & ANR.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. K. Datta, Advocate for NDPL.
Mr. Rajesh Harnal, Advocate for respondent no.2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
11.03.2008

%

1.

Respondents have been served. Learned counsel for the respondent no.2 states

that a civil suit is already pending between the petitioner and the said respondent. He
further states that some incorrect averments have been made in the writ petition but the
landlord does not have any objection in case electricity connection of the petitioner is
restored subject to the condition that respondent no.2 will not be liable to pay the
electricity charges/dues.
2.

In the present case, there are inter se disputes between the petitioner, who is

tenant and the respondent no.2-landlord. Learned counsel for the petitioner states that
he is ready and willing to deposit three months security deposit on the basis of past
average consumption pattern. Petitioner is entitled to electricity supply to enjoy his
tenancy rights.
3.

In view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and to protect the

interest of the parties, the following directions are passed:-

(1) The petitioner will file a fresh application with the respondent Distcom
for installation of electricity connection in his name. The said
application will be processed as per Rules but without insisting on No
Objection Certificate from the respondent no.2.
(2) In addition to other charges, the petitioner will deposit three months
security deposit based upon past consumption pattern. The amount
will be calculated by the respondent-Distcom. The respondentDistcom will be at liberty to ask for enhanced security deposit
depending upon future consumption pattern.
(3) The petitioner will continue to pay consumption charges as raised by
the respondent-Distcom every month. The security charges will not be
adjusted against payment of current dues. The security amount will be
refunded to the petitioner without interest if and when the petitioner is
evicted or vacates the premises, subject to adjustment if any on
account of arrears. The respondent-Distcom will be entitled to
disconnect electricity in case current dues are not paid.
4.

It is made clear that the respondent no.2-landlord will not be responsible

or liable to pay current electricity charges on the meter which is being installed in
the name of the petitioner. The petitioner will furnish and give details of his bank
account and permanent address to the respondent-Distcom.
5.

This Order is passed without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the

petitioner and the respondent no.2 in respect of their inter se dispute.
With the above directions, the Writ Petition is disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.

MARCH
P

11, 2008

