* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ W.P.(C) 2848/2007
SATYA DEEN MAURYA & ORS.

..... Petitioners

Through Mr. Kuldeep Kumar, Advocate.
versus
COMMISSIONER OF M.C.D. & ANR

..... Respondents

Through Mr. Ajay Aroar & Mr. Kapil Datta, Advocates.
Ms. Iram Majid for counsel for respondents 4-5.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
% 10.03.2008

1. The petitioners herein are jhuggi-jhopri dwellers who are in occupation
of Government land located at Lodhi Road Institutional Area, Lodhi
Road, New Delhi. It is the case of the petitioners that they have been in
occupation of the said land since 1980 and rely upon Delhi Laws
(Special Provisions) Act, 2006. Learned counsel for the petitioners also
places reliance upon Clause 4.2.3.1 of Master Plan of Delhi 2021 and
submits that the petitioners being jhuggi jhopri dwellers are entitled to
alternative allotment of built up accommodation on 25 sq.mts. of land.

2. I have considered the contentions raised by learned counsel for the

petitioners but do not find any merit in the same. It is pointed out by the
Slum & JJ Department of the MCD in their counter affidavit that a joint
survey of the area was conducted by the Central Public Works
Department, the land owning agency and the representatives of the
Slum & JJ Department in the year 1998 to ascertain the eligible number
of squatters. As per the Joint Survey Report, 72 jhuggi-jhopri were
found at the site. The land owning agency deposited re-location charges
of Rs.19,19,000/- for relocation of the eligible jhuggi-jhopri dwellers. On
scrutiny, it was found that 39 dwellers were eligible for relocation on 18
sq.mts plots and 11 jhuggi-jhopri dwellers were found eligible for 12.5
sq.mts. plots. It is further stated by the Slum & JJ Department of the
MCD that the area in question is required to provide parking space as
due to want of space, cars are parked on the main road leading to traffic
jams and congestion in the area.
3. Section 3(1)C of the Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 and the

2007 Act grant limited protection and do not apply when slums and
jhuggi-jhopri clusters are removed by clearing the land required for
specific public purpose. In the present case, the land in question is
required for providing parking space and to ensure smooth flow of traffic
in the area. As per the respondents, clearance of land is required for

specific public project and therefore in view of Section 4(d) of the Act no
protection is available to the petitioners. Further the petitioners as per
the policy decision are being allotted plots. It may be mentioned here
that a Division Bench of this Court in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4441/1994
titled Okhla Factory Owners' Association and another versus G.N.C.T.D.
and others, has quashed the rehabilitation policy of the Government.
The said decision is now subject matter of an appeal before the
Supreme Court. By interim Order dated 4th September, 2003, the
Supreme Court has held that the authorities may allot land to slums and
jhuggi-jhopri dwellers but such allotment would clearly specify that the
allotment would be subject to the result of the said appeals.
4. In the present case, alternative allotment in the form of plots of land

measuring 18 sq.mts. and 12.5 sq. mts. is being made to all eligible
jhuggi-jhopri dwellers. The matter has been pending with the
Government since 1998 and the C.P.W.D., (the land owning agency),
has after site verification deposited Rs.19,19,000/- for relocation of the
petitioners. I do not think it will be appropriate to prolong removal or
delay the relocation process. It is apparent that the petitioners are
reluctant to accept relocation and want to reside on the Government
land.

5. Reliance placed by learned counsel for the petitioners on Clause 4.2.3.1

of the Master Plan of Delhi 2021 and the contention that they are
entitled to built-up accommodation on 25 sq.mts. of plot and not plots of
land measuring 18 sq.mts. and 12.5 sq. mts., cannot be accepted. The
said Clause refers to problem of relocation of the existing squatters and
three fold strategy of relocation being pursued. One of the
recommendation made in the aforesaid Clause is for allotment of builtup accommodation on 25 sq.mts. of land. However, the said
recommendation is not to be implemented immediately. The said
Clause notes that during the period 1981-2001, resettlement of
squatters' slums was done on 18 sq.mts. or 12.5 sq.mts. plots which
were given on licence basis. It was noticed that there were number of
aberrations and due to certain other aspects, this policy should be
progressively abandoned and substituted by an alternative approach.
Parameters for alternative approach have also been recommended.
One of the parameters suggested is allotment of built up structures on
25 sq.mts. of land.
6. It cannot be said that till an alternative approach or policy is formulated,

the

authorities are

powerless

and cannot follow the

existing

policy/schemes of resettlement. The existing scheme has not been
abandoned or declared void in the Master Plan of Delhi 2021. The

existing scheme/policy will continue till further decision is taken and
policy guidelines in terms of alternative approach are framed. It is
apparent that the petitioners are occupying prime land located in the
heart of the Capital and therefore they are reluctant to shift to the
resettlement areas/location. In view of the stand taken by the
respondent and explanation given by them in their counter affidavit, I do
not find any merit in the Writ Petition and the same is accordingly
dismissed.
7. The respondent-Slum & JJ Department of the MCD will abide by the

averments made in their counter affidavit with regard to the relocation of
the jhuggi-jhopri clusters at Sai Baba Camp, Behind Sai Baba Temple,
Lodhi Road Institutional Area, Lodhi Road.
8. At this stage, learned counsel for the petitioner states that the

petitioners are willing to file individual undertakings in this Court
specifically stating the date(s) on which they will vacate the said Camp
and shift. Liberty is

granted

to the

petitioners

to file such

undertakings/affidavits along with an application. As and when such
affidavits along with an application are filed, the same will be considered
on merits.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.

MARCH 10, 2008
P

