FAO(OS) NO. 106 OF 2005

Page 1

UNREPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) NO. 106 OF 2005 & CM No.13065/2006

%

Date of Decision : 17th September, 2007.

M/S.RAAMRAJ KALA MANDIR & ANR.

.... Appellants.

Through Mr. S.K. Mehra & Ms. Mamta Mehra, Advocates.
VERSUS
M/S.NAHATA LIMITED

.... Respondent.

Through Mr. Pramod B. Agarwalal, Ms. Praveena Gautam,
Dr.Manmohan Sharma & Mr. Raman Mishra, Advocates
Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, Sr. Advocate with Ms. Jasmine
Damkewala & Ms. Seema Sunnd. Advocates for applicantStar India (P) Ltd.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

The appellant No. 1, M/s Raamraj Kala Mandir has filed the present

appeal against the Order dated 7th February, 2005 granting injunction and
restraining the appellant from telecasting the film “Ganga Jamuna Saraswati”.

FAO(OS) NO. 106 OF 2005

2.

Page 2

The respondent-M/s Nahata Limited has filed a suit for recovery of

Rs.1,62,46,215/- against the appellant No. 1 and M/s. Gemini Pictures Circuit
(P) Ltd.-appellant No. 2. The respondent had also filed injunction application
under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(hereinafter referred to as the Code, for short) for restraining the appellant
from telecasting and delivering prints of the feature film “Ganga Jamuna
Saraswati”, which application stands allowed by the impugned order.
3.

It is an admitted case of the parties that an Agreement dated 15th May,

1986 was executed between the appellant No. 1 and the respondent, for
finance to the extent of Rs. 75 lakhs, pursuant to which respondent had
financed a sum of Rs. 56.25 lakhs to the appellant No. 1. This amount was
to be repaid as per the covenants of the Agreement. Negative of the said film
was deposited with appellant No.2. These were not to be handed over by the
appellant No. 2 to the appellant No. 1 without the consent of the respondent
or till the appellant No. 1 remained bound by the covenants of the said
Agreement. Relevant clauses of the Agreement have been reproduced in the
impugned Order. We may refer only to one Clause, namely, Clause 5 of the
Agreement which reads as under :“In consideration of the premises aforesaid as
security for repayment of all the amounts due and
payable hereunder the producers shall simultaneously
with the execution hereof address a letter to the said
Gemini Colour Laboratory or such other laboratory with
whom negatives prints etc. of the said picture are
deposited or to be deposited from time to time,

FAO(OS) NO. 106 OF 2005

Page 3

irrevocably by authorizing it to hold the said negatives
prints etc. in trust for an in the name and on behalf of
the financiers. It will be further clarified in the said letter
that the negatives are to be maintained in the name of
the financiers only till such time that all the amounts that
may become payable by the producers to the financiers
in terms of this agreement are paid by the producers to
the financiers in full and once the same are so paid to
full whether the same has become due of not. (sic)”
(emphasis supplied)
4.

In addition

to this Agreement the appellant No.1 had vide letter

dated 25th November, 1992 asked the appellant No.2 to transfer the
negatives of the film “Ganga Jamuna Saraswati”

to the name of the

respondent. It was also stated in the letter that till they settle the dues of the
respondent and obtain the release letter, the arrangement will continue. The
letter, however, clarifies that the appellant no.1 would be however entitled to
fulfill its existing obligations to the distributors in supplying the prints for the
balance period till 23rd December, 1998. Thus there was partial eclipse on
rights of the respondent in view of already existing obligations of the
appellant No. 1, but restricted to supply of the prints to existing distributors
for the period upto 23rd December, 1998. By another letter dated 27th
November, 1992, the appellant No.2 confirmed that they have transferred the
negatives of the above film in favour of the respondent and till accounts are
settled and clearance is obtained, they shall follow the instructions of the
respondent.
5.

Learned Single Judge has also extensively dealt with the further

FAO(OS) NO. 106 OF 2005

Page 4

correspondence between the parties for preparation of Betacam Cassettes
for telecasting of the feature film. For this purpose, request was made by the
appellant No.1 to the respondent. By referring to the said correspondence,
the learned Single Judge has concluded that the parties also understood the
Agreement to mean and read that the appellant No. 1 could not negotiate
television telecasting and satellite rights in the film “Ganga Jamuna
Saraswati” and required permission and consent of the plaintiff-respondent
as these rights vested with the plaintiff-respondent.
6.

Learned counsel for the appellant No.1 submitted before us that the

said letters have been misunderstood, misread and intention of the parties
was different. He specifically drew our attention to the lines/contents of the
letter dated 25th July, 1997 written by the appellant No. 1 to the respondent
wherein it was stated that the appellant No. 1 had never stated in its earlier
letters that the respondent had offered to purchase TV rights of the film. We
may state here that under the Agreement the negatives of the film “Ganga
Jamuna Saraswati” which were lying with the appellant No.2 were transferred
to respondent who had right and authority to deal with the said negatives till
the accounts are settled and a release letter is issued. The only exception
carved out was supply of prints to the distributors, in view of the already
existing agreements entered into between the appellant No.1 and the said
distributors. Reading of the letter dated 25th July, 1997 shows that the
negatives continued to remain with the respondent. The appellant No.1

FAO(OS) NO. 106 OF 2005

Page 5

wanted to telecast the film “Ganga Jamuna Saraswati” and for this purpose
had sought permission from the respondent with the explicit understanding
that the entire proceeds/consideration will be paid and deposited with the
respondent.
7.

Learned Single Judge has also rightly made reference to IA No.

894/2000 which was filed by the appellant. Prayer clause (b) to the said
application reads as under:“(b) T.V.Rights which is assigned by S.
Raamanathan in the name of M/s.Nahata and Co. to be
reassigned in the name of Mr.S. Raamanathan.”
8.

In paragraph 6 of the said application, the appellant had stated that

he had been trying very hard to negotiate T.V. and satellite rights of the said
film to pay the balance amount to the respondent. The prayer clause (b)
referred to above has been made in the light of the said averment. Alongwith
the said application, the appellant had also filed letter dated 4th November,
1999 written between the counsel for the appellant no.1. The said letter
specifically refers to the fact that T.V. rights have been assigned to the
respondent and there is need to reassign the said rights to a third party. It is
also stated that a letter from the respondent is required to prepare Betacam
Cassettes which is essential for telecasting.
9.

In view of the facts stated above, we do not think that the interim

order dated 7th February, 2005 passed by the learned Single Judge

FAO(OS) NO. 106 OF 2005

Page 6

restraining the appellant from exhibiting/telecasting the film “Ganga Jamuna
Saraswati” in cinema halls and through the medium of television and satellite
requires any interferrence. To this extent, the interim order passed by the
learned Single Judge is upheld. However it is clarrified that it will be open to
appellant No. 1 or the respondent to move an appropriate application before
the learned Single Judge for exhibiting/telecating or transfer of satellite right
in respect of the film “Ganga Jamuna Saraswati” in case they have any
concrete proposal with specific monetary consideration. On any such
application being filed the same will be considered on merits and the Ld.
Single Judge can also pass an order how and whether sale consideration
should be appropriated to the respondent or deposited in the court. The
direction is being given as the market value of the film is bound to come
down with passage of time and this may not be in the interest of the parties.
10.

Learned Single Judge has also noticed that the feature film “Ganga

Jamuna Saraswati” had been telecast on 7th July, 2001 by the channel Star
Plus. Star India Ltd was directed to deposit the sum payable to the appellant
for telecasting of the said film in the Court. The said deposit has been made.
It is stated that an application has been filed by Star India Ltd., which is
pending consideration before the learned Single Judge. It will be open to the
learned Single Judge to decide and dispose of the said application without in
any manner being influenced by the observations made in the impugned
Order or the interim order dated 21st August, 2006 passed by the Division

FAO(OS) NO. 106 OF 2005

Page 7

Bench.
11.

The Appeal and the application are accordingly disposed of.

However, in the facts and circumstances of the case there will be no order as
to costs. It is also clarrified that the suit will be decided by the Ld. Single
Judge without being influenced by any observation in order dated 7th
Feburary, 2005 or this order. The above observations/findings have been
recorded only for the purpose of disposal of the interim injunction application.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
SEPTEMBER
P

17, 2007.

