FAO(OS) No.38-2007

*

Page No.1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) NO. 38 OF 2007

%

Date of Decision :

16

th

March, 2007.

Smt. Renu Sharma & Anr. ....
Appellants.
Through Mr. Lala Ram Gupta, Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Manish Vashisht, Advocate.
VERSUS
Titan Industries Ltd & Anr
.... Respondents.
Through Mr. A.S.Chandhiok, Sr. Advocate with
Ms.Manmeet Arora, Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J :
1. The present Appeal has been filed by Smt. Renu Sharma, the

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.2

appellant, for setting aside Order dated 11

th

December, 2006

passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing her application
under Order IX, Rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(hereinafter referred to as the Code, for short).
2. The appellant herein is the defendant in the Suit-CS(OS)
No.898/2003. The said Suit has been filed by M/s.Titan Industries
Ltd., the respondent, for recovery of goods and damages and in
the alternative, a decree for recovery of Rs.1,60,05,742/-.
3. It is alleged in the Suit that the appellant herein being one of the
franchisees/agents of the respondent had been dealing with the
nd

respondent since 2 October, 1996.
4. The appellant could not be served by ordinary process and was
served by publication in the newspaper 'The Statesman” and was
proceeded ex-parte vide Order dated 23

rd

April, 2004. The

appellant moved an application for setting aside of the ex-parte
Order on 2

nd

June, 2006. The said application was registered as

I.A. No. 7184/2006. By the impugned Order this application was
dismissed by the learned Single Judge.

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.3

5. Learned Single Judge rejected the application of the appellant
herein, filed under Order IX, Rule 7 of the Code, inter alia,
holding that three attempts were made to serve notice upon the
appellant herein by registered post as well as ordinary process
but without success. Learned Single Judge relying upon the
reports of the process server as well as the postal authorities,
came to the conclusion that the appellant herein was avoiding
service and accordingly had rightly directed substituted service
through publication.
6. We have heard learned counsel for the parties who have drawn
our attention to the reports of the process server and the postal
authorities. During the course of hearing, learned senior counsel
for the appellant had stated that he is ready and willing to pay
costs of Rs.50,000/- to the respondent in case the Order directing
ex-parte proceedings is set aside.
7. It may be relevant to state here that the above-mentioned Suit
th

th

was filed on 29 March, 2003. Vide Order dated 24 April, 2003
notice was issued restraining the appellant herein, her agents

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.4

and nominees from alienating, transferring, creating a mortgage,
etc. the properties mentioned in the Schedule attached to the
application for stay and the goods mentioned in Annexure-A to
the plaint. Order-sheet shows that the defendant-appellant herein
th

could not be served for the next date i.e. 11 July, 2003 and
accordingly fresh notices were directed to be issued for 10
September, 2003. On 10

th

th

September, 2003, as per service

reports, the appellant was out of India and therefore the Court
th

directed issue of fresh summons for 25 November, 2003.
8. The respondent-plaintiff had filed an application under Order V,
Rule 20 of the Code for substituted service by publication but the
th

Court vide Order dated 10 September, 2003 rejected the said
request. However, the said prayer was allowed by the next Order
th

dated 25 November, 2003 with a direction that the appellant be
served by substituted means by publication in the newspaper
th

“The Statesman” for 10 March, 2004. Thereafter, on the basis of
publication, vide Order dated 23

rd

April, 2004, the defendant-

appellant herein was proceeded ex-parte.

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

9.

Page No.5

The reports of the process server and the postal authorities
indicate that on each occasion, neither the process server nor the
post man was able to meet the appellant personally and tender
summons to her.

10.The reports of the postman show that service on the two
addresses at Patparganj and Hauz Khas village could not be
served as no such person/firm was found. Summons could not
be personally served on the appellant at 9B, Telegraphic Lane,
New Delhi and the postman recorded that intimations were
issued and thereafter the envelopes containing the summons
were returned back as 'unclaimed'.

The postman has not

recorded the name and details of the persons on whom
intimations were issued.
11. As far as the reports of the process server who had undertaken
the service of summons are concerned, the process server did
not meet and tender the summons personally on the appellant.
As per the report dated 7

th

July, 2003, the premises

at

Patparganj was found to be in occupation of M/s.Rajwarah

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.6

International Pvt. Ltd. and one person, Mr. Chawla refused to
accept the summon after stating that he had spoken to Mr.
Sharma who had told him not to receive the court papers and
had informed that Ms. Renu Sharma, i.e. the appellant was not
available as she was in U.S.A. However, the report of the
process server is not signed by Mr. Chawla but by an employee
Mr.Asif. Signatures of Mr. Asif are also available on the process
server's reports when he allegedly tried to serve summons on the
appellant herein at 9B, Telegraphic Lane, New Delhi on 16

th

th

August, 2003 and 20 August, 2003. It is also stated in these
reports that Mr.Asif or Mr.Sayed Asif Ali is an employee in the
plaintiff company, i.e. the respondent herein. As per another
th

report of the process server, on 16 August, 2003, the guard on
duty who refused to give his name informed him that Ms.Renu
Sharma had gone out of Delhi. As per the process server's
th

report, on 20 August, 2003, the guard who identified himself as
Santosh verbally informed the process server that Ms.Renu
Sharma had gone out and he shall enquire from Mr.J.K.Sharma.

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.7

Mr. Santosh allegedly talked to Mr. J.K.Sharma on telephone and
the guard thereafter refused to accept the summon stating, inter
alia, that Mr. J.K.Sharma

had informed him that Ms.Renu

Sharma had gone to USA and he would not accept the summon.
It may be relevant to state here that the process server did not
speak to Mr.J.K.Sharma personally and the process server did
not take signature of the guard-Mr. Santosh on the report.
Similarly, in the report of the process server dated 16

th

November, 2003 it is stated that he along with an employee of
the plaintiff, Mr.Sayed Asif Ali, had gone to 9B, Telegraphic Lane,
New Delhi and the guard verbally informed them that “Madam
was present inside”. The guard asked them about the purpose of
the visit and went inside. Thereafter, a domestic servant came
out and informed the process server that Ms.Renu Sharma was
not at home. Thereupon, the process server pasted a copy of the
summon on the outer wall of the premises in the presence of
Mr.Sayed Asif Ali. The other reports are of similar nature.
12. A perusal of the above reports show that attempts, both by

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.8

registered post as well as by ordinary process were made, to
serve the appellant herein. However, on none of the occasions
the process server or the postal authorities were able to meet the
appellant or any adult male member of the family. Most of the
times the interaction was with the guards and on one occasion
with a person who was in occupation of the premises at
Patparganj. It may be relevant to state here that the learned
th

Single Judge while hearing the matter on 10 September, 2003
after perusing the reports felt that a case for passing an Order for
substituted service had not been made out. It was specifically
recorded by the learned Single Judge that as per the reports, the
defendant-appellant herein was out of India and therefore fresh
summons were directed to be issued.
13. It may be relevant to state here that in May 2004, meeting had
taken place between the appellant and the respondent in the
office of the learned counsel for the respondent-company. Mr.
Mukesh Kalia, advocate had also participated in this meeting
along with the appellant. Mr. Mukesh Kalia, advocate has filed an

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.9

affidavit stating that in the meeting, discussion took place for
settlement of accounts but the said meeting did not fructify. In his
st

affidavit dated 21 August, 2006 Mr. Mukesh Kalia, advocate has
stated that the respondent-company or their advocate did not
disclose in his presence that they had filed any suit against the
appellant. It is difficult to verify the said statement except by oral
evidence and cross-examination. However, it is difficult to believe
that the appellant would have engaged a lawyer and would have
gone to the office of the learned counsel for the respondentcompany but did not deem it appropriate to appear in the Court.
In normal course the appellant would have filed an application for
setting aside of the ex-parte Order rather than wait for a further
period of two years and then move an application.
14. Provisions of Order V of the Code relates to service of
summons. Order V, Rule 12 of the Code enjoins that wherever it
is practicable, service should be made on the person concerned
unless the person has an agent empowered to accept service.
Thus the requirement under law is that attempt should be made

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.10

to serve notice personally on the party unless there is an agent
empowered to accept service.
Code

Order V, Rules 13 and 14 of the

relate to service of summons on an agent in certain

circumstances. The said Rules, however, are not applicable to
the present case. Order V, Rule 15 of the Code empowers the
process server to serve summons on any adult male member of
the family, if the party is found to be absent when service of
summons is sought to be effected on him at his residence and
there is no likelihood of the party being found at the residence
within reasonable time and he has no agent empowered to
accept service. Explanation to the said Rules clarifies that a
servant is not regarded as a member of the family within the
meaning of Order V, Rule 15 of the Code. However, while
effecting service under Order V, Rule 15 of the Code, process
server has to record a specific finding that the party is absent
from his residence and there is no likelihood of the party being
found at the residence within reasonable time. The service can
be effected only on an adult member of the family of the party.

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.11

Process server has therefore, to take care and caution on noting
down the name and details of the adult member of the family.
15.

It may also be relevant to state here that in none of the

reports of the process server, the time when the process server
had gone to serve the summon has been mentioned. Further, it
appears that on all the occasions the process server who had
gone to serve summons at the three addresses was the same
person. It is rather unusual that on all the three occasions the
administrative agency had appointed the same process server to
serve the summon.
16. Order V, Rule 16 of the Code requires that a person on whom
copy of the summons has been tendered or delivered shall affix
his signatures on the copy. In the present case, the persons to
whom the summons were allegedly delivered/tendered have not
signed any endorsement on the copy.
17.Order V, Rule 17 of the Code stipulates that where a party or his
agent

or

any

adult

member

of

the

family

refuses

to

sign/acknowledge or where the process server after using all due

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.12

and reasonable diligence is unable to find the party as he is
absent and there is no likelihood of the party being found at the
residence within reasonable time, the process server shall affix a
copy of the summon on the outer door or some other
conspicuous part of the house where the party ordinarily resides
or carries on business or works. The process server thereafter is
required to file a report

containing necessary details and

circumstances necessitating service by affixation.
18. Order V, Rule 19 of the Code requires that where summons has
returned under Rule 17 without affidavit of the process server,
the process server shall be examined on oath by the Court and
on such further enquiry the Court can declare that the summon
has been duly served. Where a process server has furnished an
affidavit, the Court still has power to examine the process server
and conduct such enquiry and thereafter decide whether the
summon is duly served. Order V, Rule 19A of the Code stands
omitted pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,
1999 w.e.f. 1

st

July, 2002 but the said provision now stand

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.13

incorporated in Order V, Rule 17 of the Code.
19. We are conscious of the fact that parties do delay service of
summons to stall and prolong proceedings. In fact there are
circumstances which raise suspicion and indicate that the
appellant herein was delaying service of summons. It is admitted
by the appellant from her application that the three addresses on
which attempts were being made to serve notices are correct.
Attempt to serve notices

was not made once but on three

occasions both by ordinary process as well as by registered A.D.
cover. Similarly, on publication, notices were sent by UPC by
“The Statesman”, a third party. There is also compliance of Order
XXXIX, Rule 3A of the Code by the respondent. The appellant it
is stated is wife of a senior police officer and was deliberately
delaying and avoiding service of summons.
20. However, any judicial decision, where adequate opportunity is
not given to a party to present his version of the case, can result
in injustice. The Courts have to strike a delicate and difficult
balance between both the parties. It is difficult to prove and

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.14

establish the facts, allegations and counter allegations without
going deeper into the matter and giving opportunity to the parties
to examine witnesses and cross-examine them. Sometimes it
can become difficult for the Court to decide the question of
“sufficient cause” as required under the provisions of Order IX,
Rules 7 and 13 of the Code without recording evidence, thus
delaying the matter and prolonging the litigation. Weighing and
balancing equities on both the sides and with a view to expedite
the progress of the case and not to stall the same by asking the
parties to lead evidence, we feel it would be appropriate to allow
the present appeal and set aside the ex-parte order subject to
payment of costs of Rs.50,000/- to the respondent. In taking this
view we are also keeping in mind the principle of law that no
person should be condemned unheard and just and fair
opportunity should be granted. Normally, principles of natural
justice require that proceedings should not be conducted in the
absence of parties, unless there are compelling circumstances,
costs can be imposed to award adequate compensation.

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.15

Supreme Court in the case of Rani Kusum versus Kanchan
Devi and others reported in (2005) 6 SCC 705, while examining
the provisions of Order VIII, Rule 1 of the Code has observed
that processural law has the object of advancing cause of justice.
In adversarial system, a party should be given adequate
opportunity to participate in the proceedings and processural law
should not be construed in a manner so as to leave the party
helpless. Processural law has to do substantial justice and is
always subservient to and is an aid of justice. It should not be
construed in a manner to obstruct a party from pleading it's case
and representing himself. Keeping these principles in mind we
feel that substantial justice will be done in case we allow the
appellant to appear in the matter subject to payment of costs as
aforesaid.

This we feel will do substantial justice. We may

mention here that the appellant is already appearing in the suit
and the case has been fixed now for cross-examination of the
witnesses of the appellant who have filed affidavit by way of
evidence. We also find that after the appellant was proceeded

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.16

against ex-parte, the respondent had taken a long time to file
affidavit by way of evidence of his witnesses. The matter was
repeatedly adjourned at the request of the respondent herein.
21.We may, however, deal with the judgments relied upon by the
respondent as the Appeal is being allowed subject to payment of
costs. In the case of Emess Advertising Service versus The
Hindustan Times reported in AIR 1998 Delhi 14, the Court was
satisfied with the substituted service by way of publication in the
newspaper. The Court also noticed that the notice was also sent
by UPC by the said newspaper. In the case of Bhushan Tyagi
versus

Attar Kali reported in 67 (1997) DLT 496 the Court

referred to the conduct of the defendant therein who had
inspected the Court file but did not move any application for
setting aside the ex-parte Order. The Court felt that the
defendant therein was trying to over-reach the Court. In Rajesh
Arora verssus Mukesh Jain & others reported in 93 (2001)
DLT 328 the Court was dealing with the provisions of Order
XXXVII, Rule 3 of the Code and in that context it was held that

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.17

sterner standards of service as laid down in Order V were not
required to be complied with. Order XXXVII, Rule 3 of the Code
relating to service of summons for judgment, requires summons
to be left at the address furnished by the defendant. The said
case has no application to the facts and circumstances of the
present case. The last judgment relied upon by the respondent is
in the case of Smt. Vitthalbhai.G. Ghodake versus United
Western Bank limited and others reported in AIR 2003
Karnataka 266, wherein the Court observed that one of the
defendant therein was duly served by registered post but the
registered post letters sent to other defendants were returned
back with the endorsement "not claimed". All the defendants
were staying in the same address. The Court after examining the
evidence came to the conclusion that the proceedings were
within the knowledge of the defendants and they had deliberately
by choice decided not to participate in the proceedings and
therefore application under Order IX Rule 13 for setting aside the
ex-parte Order was dismissed.

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.18

22. The Appeal is accordingly allowed and Order dated 11

th

December, 2006 dismissing IA 1784/2006 is set aside. Ex-parte
rd

order dated 23 April, 2004 is also set aside subject to payment
of costs of Rs.50,000/- by the appellant to the respondent. Costs
will be paid within two weeks.
23. The appellant will file written statement within three weeks from
today. Replication, if any, will be filed within three weeks
thereafter. Parties will file documents/additional documents
along with written statement/replication within the period
stipulated therein.

List before the Joint Registrar for
th

admission/denial of documents on 10 May, 2007. The above
time schedule shall be strictly adhered to by both the parties.
24.List the matter before the learned Single Judge for compliance
th

and payment of costs, etc. on 17 April, 2007.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.19

CHIEF JUSTICE
March
P

16, 2007.

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.20

FAO(OS) No.38-2007

Page No.21

