*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 1889/2008

SAI SAMARPAN TRADERS P. LTD.
..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Valmika Mehta, Sr. Adv. with Mr. P K
Mishra and Mr. Takeshwar Nath, Advocates
versus
M.C.D. & ANR.

..... Respondents
Through : Mr. Kapil Dutta, Advocate for MCD
Mr. Rakesh Makhija, Advocate for respondent no.2

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%

ORDER
11.03.2008
1. The petitioner M/s Sai Samarpan Traders Pvt. Ltd., has filed the present
writ petition impugning the order dated 5th March, 2008 passed by the
Appellate Tribunal, MCD dismissing application for interim stay of
construction. The petitioner has filed an appeal before the Appellate
Tribunal challenging grant of sanction for construction of first floor and
second floor in property bearing no.T-11, Green Park Extension, New
Delhi. The sanction has been granted on an application filed by Ms.
Shobhna Bhargava (respondent no.2 herein).
2. The petitioner had earlier filed a civil suit against respondent no.2 which
was dismissed as withdrawn in October, 2007 after recording the
statement of respondent no.2 that he shall construct after obtaining

sanction of building plans from MCD.
3. Thereafter respondent no.2 applied for sanction of building plans and
MCD has sanctioned building plans for construction of unconstructed
portion on the first floor and the second floor. The petitioner has filed an
appeal before the Appellate Tribunal challenging the action of MCD
sanctioning the building plans for construction of balance portion of the
first floor and the second floor.
4. Two main contentions are raised by the petitioner. Firstly, it is submitted
that the respondent no.2 is not the owner of the second floor and cannot
be permitted to construct on the second floor. Secondly, it is submitted
that MCD was wrong in granting sanction as foundations do not permit
construction of the second floor and MCD has not examined the
question of structural safety.
5. Both aspects were examined by the Appellate Tribunal, while passing
an interim order dated 5th March, 2008. Tentative and prima facie
findings have been recorded by the Appellate Tribunal on both aspects.
My attention is drawn to the Sale Deed dated 12th July, 1988 which was
executed by Smt. Satya Sondhi, the admitted owner, in favour of the
respondent no.2. Clause 3 of the said Sale Deed reads as under :
“The vendee shall have the exclusive right and power to
construct, built and erect on the said floor of the property in
accordance with Municipal by-laws in addition to the

structure and building existing thereon. Vendee shall have
the right to construct any buildings or structures over and
above the said floor in accordance with the Municipal byelaws and shall have right to sell, convey, transfer and assign
any structure so built to any person or persons as the case
may be. The vendor shall sign and provide all relevant
documents which the vendee may require and need for the
purpose of carrying out building and construction activities
as mentioned hereinabove.”
6. A bare perusal of the above clause shows that what was transferred
and sold to respondent no.2 was the first floor and exclusive right and
power to construct, build and erect on the said floor of the property. The
respondent no.2 was also given right to construct any building and
structures over and above the said floor i.e. the second floor.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, relies upon clause 6 of the
Sale Deed which reads as under :
“The vendee’s undivided interest in the soil as more fully
described in Schedule-I hereunder written shall remain joint
for all times with the vendor and/or other co-owners who
may hereafter or hereto have acquired right, title and
interest in the land and in any building or structure
constructed over and above on the second floor in the said
property, it being hereby declared that the interest in the soil
is impartible.”
8. The aforesaid clause states that respondent no.2 will have undivided
interest in the soil or land which shall remain joint for all times to come.
The said clause also mentions that any building or structure constructed
on or above the second floor of the property will be jointly held by the

vendor or co-owners.
9. I need not examine the two clauses in depth and detail and give any
final decision on this aspect. It is stated by counsel for respondent no.2
that they are constructing over first floor and second floor and no
construction above or on third floor is to be made. If required, the
petitioner may file a civil suit for adjudication of the rights of the parties. I
may mention here that the Sale Deed dated 4th August, 2004 in favour
of the petitioner is only in respect of the ground floor portion of the
property including front lawn, rear courtyard, entire driveway along with
50% undivided, indivisible and impartible ownership rights in the land
beneath ground floor. Clauses 12 and 13 of the Sale Deed dated 4th
August, 2004, I do not prima facie think assist the petitioner. Clause 12
will come into operation in the event the building is damaged or does
not remain in existence. The said situation has not arisen. Clause 13
confirms that after the transaction the seller will not have any claim or
right, title, interest on the portion of property or part thereof which has
been sold to the petitioner. I may, however, note here that the Sale
Deed in favour of the respondent no.2 is earlier in point of time and was
executed on 12th July, 1988. What was sold and transferred to
respondent no.2, could not have been sold and transferred to the
petitioner in the Sale Deed executed on 4th August, 2004 and 11th April,
2005.
10.

I may mention here that Single Judge of Delhi High Court in the

case of Kuldeep Mehta Vs. Jagdeep Mehta bearing CS(OS)
No.1963/1997 has held that a party having terrace right has the right to
construct on floors above the terrace. Similarly, a party having rights on

ground floor, has right to construct on the ground floor and below.
11.

On the question of structural safety the respondent no.2 has also

filed papers with MCD and it is claimed that the foundation of
building/property can take structural road of the first floor and the
second floor. MCD has examined the matter of structural safety
including the structural safety certificate furnished by respondent no.2.
MCD is satisfied. Tribunal will examine this aspect on merits while
deciding the appeal.
12.

It is possible that the petitioner is raising this objection only to stall

construction. I feel the Appellate Tribunal was justified in rejecting the
application for interim relief. The Tribunal has also gone into the
question of balance of convenience and irreparable loss which may be
caused to respondent no.2, in case the construction is stopped.
13.

In view of the above I do not find any merit in the writ petition and

the same is dismissed. However, it is recorded that the findings given
above are tentative and not final. The observations made above will not
be binding on the Appellate Tribunal or on the Civil Court in case the
petitioner decides to file a civil suit. The Appellate Tribunal as well as
Civil Court will go into all aspects including the rights of the petitioner
and respondent no.2 independently without being influenced by any
observations.

14.

It is also recorded that above observations are made because

learned counsel for the petitioner wanted to press his case on merits.
Otherwise this court was not inclined to go into these aspects. Keeping
in view the nature of controversy between the parties, the Appellate
Tribunal can consider request of the petitioner for expeditious disposal
of the appeal.

SANJIV KHANNA,J
MARCH

11, 2008 (vld)

