* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) 1977/2007

V.K.MALHOTRA

..... Petitioner
Through Ms.Richa Kapoor, Adv.

versus

D.D.A.

..... Respondent
Through Mr.Vibhu Shankar, Adv. for DDA.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 10.03.2008

1. In 1995, the petitioner was registered under Expandable Housing Scheme
on payment of Rs.15,000/- towards application money. In 1995, he was
allotted a flat in Dwarka but the petitioner did not avail of the said allotment
allegedly on the ground that basic amenities were not available to the said

locality. DDA accepted this factual position and on 1st September, 2000
issued a letter to the petitioner that the Competent Authority had acceded his
request for allotment of another flat at Dwarka at current cost.
2. In October, 2000, the petitioner was allotted flat No.257, Sector-13, Pocket1, Phase 1, Dwarka and a demand cum allotment letter with block dates
30.10.2000 and 04.11.2000 was issued. As per the said letter, the disposal
cost of the flat was Rs.3,88,400/-.
3. It appears that immediately thereafter, the CBI registered a case against
the Officers of the DDA and some property dealers for irregularities in
allotments made in Expandable Housing Scheme, 1995. 48 files including file
of the petitioner were requisitioned, investigated and scrutinized by CBI. CBI
thereafter filed a charge sheet in the Court against Officers of DDA, property
dealers

and

allottees.

However,

upon

investigation,

Mr.V.K.Malhtora, was completely exonerated

and

the

the

petitioner

charge

sheet

specifically mentions as under:“During the investigation no evidence came forth which could

establish the linkage of S/Sh. Puran Chand, VK Malhtora and
Ms. Nirmal Gupta with any of the property dealers.”
4. In spite of the charge sheet giving clean chit to the petitioner, DDA refuses
to make allotment of the flat to the petitioner. Repeated representations were
made but without success. The petitioner also sent legal notice but no

response was received. Thereupon the petitioner move an application under
Right to Information Act and by the letter dated 4th January, 2007, the
petitioner was informed that the flat in question which was allotted to the
petitioner was cancelled on account of failure to pay the demanded amount
and was allotted to Mr.S.K.Kaul in the draw held on 5th September, 2002 and
therefore, Mr.V.K.Malhotra is not entitled to the said flat. In the counter
affidavit filed by the DDA, a similar stand has been taken. It has been stated
that allotment made in favour of the petitioner was cancelled and the flat in
question was re-allotted to Mr.S.K.Kaul in the draw of lots held on 05.7.2002.
It is however, admitted that the file in question was taken by CBI/ACP for
investigation in the criminal proceedings. It is also not disputed that the
petitioner has been fully exonerated and there is no evidence to show that the
petitioner was involved in any wrongful or illegal act to ensure allotment of flat.
5. The petitioner in the rejoinder affidavit has filed copy of data downloaded
from the website of DDA. Details show that Mr.Sanjay Kumar Kaul was
allotted flat No.257, Category A, Sector 13, Pocket -1, Phase 1, Dwarka,
which is a different flat from one that was allotted to the petitioner. The
downloaded data from DDA website further reveals that the flat in question is
still registered and stand allotted to the petitioner and not to any third person.
This is clear from Annexure P1 at page 65 of the rejoinder affidavit.

Confronted with the said evidence DDA has now admitted their fault in the
sur-rejoinder filed by them. It is however, stated that it is a case of bonafide
mistake as Mr.Sanjay Kumar Kaul was allotted a flat at Dwarka in Pocket 1,
Phase 1, Mayur Vihar, Delhi and the flat allotted to the petitioner is in PhaseII. It is difficult to believe that it is a case of bona fide mistake as Officers of
DDA are aware that Dwarka has separate Sectors and Phases. However, I
will give benefit of doubt to the Officers of DDA.
6. The next question which arises for consideration is whether the petitioner
should be asked to pay current cost or should be allotted a flat on the basis of
allotment letter dated 1st September, 2000. It is not denied by DDA that in
October, 2000, the file of the petitioner was taken aware and requisitioned by
CBI and later after investigation CBI has given a clear chit to the petitioner.
The petitioner has also mentioned in the writ petition that file of Ms.Nirmal
Gupta was requisitioned by CBI but she too exonerated and thereafter
Ms.Nirmal Gupta was given possession of the flat , which was allotted to her.
The petitioner has been writing letters to the DDA from July, 2002 onwards
requesting them to confirm the allotment and give him possession of the flat.
Several such letters have been placed on record. DDA by letter dated
03.8.2003 had informed the petitioner that his case would be taken up for

consideration after file is received back from CBI. In these circumstances,, it is
directed as under:1) DDA will get re-confirmation from the CBI whether the petitioner has been
given a clean chit and has been exonerated in RC No.DA1-2000-A062
registered on 5th November, 2000. The aforesaid exercise will be completed
within one month from today, If required, Officers of DDA will personally visit
the office of CBI.
2) Based upon the response by the CBI, afresh demand cum allotment letter
will be issued to the petitioner on the basis of disposal cost of Rs.3,88,400/-.
3) The petitioner will be liable to pay simple interest @ 12% per annum of
Rs.3,88,40/- with effect from 1st December, 2000 till 31.3.2008. No further
interest will be payable w.e.f. 1st April, 2008 till fresh demand cum allotment
letter is issued by the DDA and thereafter interest will be payable as per the
policy of DDA. No interest is being paid after 1st April, 2008 till allotment letter,
to ensure early response from DDA.
With the above observations and directions, the writ petition is disposed of.
DASTI.

SANJIV KHANNA,J

MARCH 10, 2008
RN/vld

