LPA No.90-2007

*

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA NO. 90 OF 2007

%

Date of Decision : 15

th

May, 2007.

RAMESH KUMAR
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. N.S. Dalal, Advocate.
VERSUS
DTC

.... Respondent.
Through Mr.J.S. Bhasin, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

The appellant-Mr. Ramesh Kumar was working as a Conductor

in DTC.
2.

th

On 14 October, 1991 checking staff of four persons found that

LPA No.90-2007

Page 2

ten passengers had paid Rs.10/- to the appellant but the appellant had
not issued them any ticket. It was also found that the said passengers
had been short-charged by Rs.5/-. Statements of the passengers were
recorded in writing. When confronted, the appellant admitted his mistake
and gave ten unpunched tickets of value of Rs15/- to the ticket checking
staff. The checking staff also tried to verify the cash available in the bag
of the Conductor but the conductor threw some money out of his bag.
3.

On the basis of the reports submitted by the checking staff,

departmental proceedings were initiated. The Enquiry Officer in his report
rd

dated 3 January, 1992 held that all the charges against the appellant
stood proved. The Enquiry Officer also referred to the past record of the
appellant that he had earlier twice accepted money from the passengers
th

but had failed to issue the tickets. By Order dated 5 February, 1992, the
appellant was removed from service. Simultaneously, an application
under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter
referred to as the Act, for short) was filed.
4.

th

The Industrial Tribunal vide its Order dated 26 July, 2001 held

that the respondent had failed to establish that the appellant had

LPA No.90-2007

Page 3

committed any misconduct and dismissed the application under Section
th

33(2)(b) of the Act. Order dated 26 July, 2001 of the Industrial Tribunal
was made subject matter of Writ Petition No. 1937/2003 filed by the
respondent herein.
5.

The appellant herein also filed a Writ Petition before this Court

which was registered as Writ Petition (Civil) No. 5073/1998. This Writ
Petition was filed by the appellant against the award passed by the
Industrial Tribunal dated 26

th

August, 1996 in Industrial Dispute No.

368/1994. By the said Award, it was held that the Order of termination
th

dated 20 October, 1991 passed by the respondent was just and fair. The
enquiry proceedings and order of removal passed was therefore upheld.
6.

There are, therefore, two conflicting orders of the industrial

adjudicators. By award dated 26

th

August, 1996, the order dated 26

th

October, 1991 terminating services of the appellant has been upheld. It
has been further held that the enquiry conducted by the respondent
herein was just and fair and the order of punishment of removal from
service was appropriate. This Order, it has been held by the learned
Single Judge would operate as res judicata in so far as the contentions

LPA No.90-2007

Page 4

and issues raised in the said award, were also subject matter of the
application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act filed by the respondent
seeking permission to terminate the service of the appellant. However, it
appears that neither the respondent nor the appellant brought the award
th

dated 26 August, 1996 to the notice of the industrial adjudicator deciding
the application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act. Thus, the two industrial
adjudicators have given contradictory findings on the same subject matter
and on similar issues.
7.

In view of the conflicting decisions of industrial adjudicator, the

learned Single Judge examined both the decisions and held that the
learned industrial adjudicator while deciding the application under Section
33(2)(b) of the Act had failed to appreciate the scope of his jurisdiction
under the said provision, which is limited. It was held that the industrial
adjudicator could not weigh the evidence as if it was deciding a criminal
case. Accordingly, the Writ Petition No. 1937/2003 filed by the
respondent was allowed and the Writ Petition No. 5073/1998 filed by the
appellant was dismissed.
8.

Aggrieved the appellant has approached this Court by way of

LPA No.90-2007

Page 5

the present Letters Patent Appeal. The contention of the appellant before
us is that the findings recorded by the industrial adjudicator while
deciding the application under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act were justified
and proper. Our attention was drawn to para 17 onwards of the Order
dated 26

th

July, 2001 passed by the industrial adjudicator. Learned

counsel for the appellant relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court
in the case of Narinder Mohan Arya versus United India Insurance
Company Ltd and others reported (2006) 4 SCC 713 and submitted
that the departmental proceedings are quasi-criminal in nature and
therefore failure to examine passenger witnesses in the enquiry
proceedings was fatal.

9.

Learned counsel for the appellant also drew our attention to

alleged written note of one of the passengers stating that they had
dropped the tickets while alighting from the bus and as they were asked
to pay fine or give statements in writing, they made the statement in
writing that the conductor had failed to issue tickets inspite of payment,
which was incorrect and the conductor-appellant herein was not at fault. It

LPA No.90-2007

Page 6

was stated in this letter that whatever the said passengers had stated
earlier was false.
10.

Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, drew our

attention to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of
Haryana versus Rattan Singh reported in (1977) 2 SCC 491 and other
decisions of this Court following the said judgment in which it has been,
inter alia, held that examination of passenger witnesses in a domestic
enquiry is not mandatory and vital, if there is sufficient evidence to show
and establish that the passengers were not issued tickets and the amount
paid by the passengers was misappropriated.
11.

Nature of enquiry proceedings under the service law is quite

distinct and separate from the proceedings under the Criminal law. The
two proceedings cannot be equated. In criminal law an accused is
entitled to benefit of doubt and the charge against an accused must be
proved and established beyond all reasonable doubt. The reason is
obvious. Question of liberty of the individual is involved. Civil proceedings
or enquiry proceedings are decided on the basis of preponderance of
possibilities. In Rattan Singh (supra) it has been held by the Supreme

LPA No.90-2007

Page 7

Court that domestic enquiry should take into consideration materials
logically probative to a prudent mind and there is no allergy to even hearsay evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility. In this
context it was pointed out that failure to examine passenger witnesses
will not vitiate the domestic enquiry or make it null and void. We cannot
forget that it would be virtually impossible for an enquiry officer to compel
the passenger witnesses to appear for cross-examination by the
respondent or the workman. It may be relevant to state here that the
statements of the passenger witnesses were recorded by the checking
staff at the time of the incidence itself. The statements were made
immediately after alighting from the bus. The checking staff were
produced before the Enquiry Officer as well as the Industrial Adjudicator.
They have repeated their statements before the Enquiry Officer as well
as the industrial adjudicator, inter alia, stating that on enquiry from ten
lady passengers they were informed that the tickets were not issued to
the lady passengers though they had paid Rs.10/-. The said lady
passengers thereafter paid Rs.5/- which was short-charged and the
conductor gave ten unpunched tickets of Rs.1.5/- each. It is also an

LPA No.90-2007

Page 8

admitted fact that the appellant has signed the challan. The checking staff
did not have any personal grudge and ill-will towards the appellant. No
such evidence has been produced. The checking staff are independent
persons and there is no reason or cause to disbelieve their statements.
There was no reason for the checking staff to falsely implicate the
appellant. The purported written communication signed by one of the lady
passengers cannot be relied upon and was rightly ignored by the Enquiry
Officer. In the said statement, a lady passenger admits having earlier
made a statement in writing that the tickets had not been issued and had
alleged that the earlier written statement was false.
12.

While dealing with this aspect in the case of Rattan Singh

(supra), the Supreme Court has observed as under:“4. It is well settled that in a domestic enquiry
the strict and sophisticated rules of evidence
under the Indian Evidence Act may not apply.
All materials which are logically probative for a
prudent mind are permissible. There is no
allergy to hearsay evidence provided it has
reasonable nexus and credibility. It is true that
departmental authorities and Administrative
Tribunals must be careful in evaluating such
material and should not glibly swallow what is
strictly speaking not relevant under the Indian

LPA No.90-2007

Page 9

Evidence Act. For this proposition it is not
necessary to cite decisions nor text books,
although we have been taken through caselaw and other authorities by counsel on both
sides. The essence of a judicial approach is
objectivity, exclusion of extraneous materials
or considerations and observance of rules of
natural justice. Of course, fairplay is the basis
and if perversity or arbitrariness, bias or
surrender of independence of judgment vitiate
the conclusions reached, such finding, even
though of a domestic tribunal, cannot be held
good. However, the courts below misdirected
themselves, perhaps, in insisting that
passengers who had come in and gone out
should be chased and brought before the
tribunal before a valid finding could be
recorded. The 'residuum' rule to which counsel
for the respondent referred, based upon
certain
passages
from
American
Jurisprudence does not go to that extent nor
does the passage from Halsbury insist on
such rigid requirement. The simple point is,
was there some evidence or was there no
evidence - not in the sense of the technical
rules governing regular court proceedings but
in a fair commonsense way as men of
understanding and worldly wisdom will accept.
Viewed in this way, sufficiency of evidence in
proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal is
beyond scrutiny. Absence of any evidence in
support of a finding is certainly available for
the court to look into because it amounts to an
error of law apparent on the record. We find, in
this case, that the evidence of Chamanlal,

LPA No.90-2007

Page 10

Inspector of the Flying Squad, is some
evidence which has relevance to the charge
levelled against the respondent. Therefore, we
are unable to hold that the order is invalid on
that ground.”

13.

The said decision has been subsequently followed in the case of

Regional Manager, U.P.S.R.T.C., Etawah and others versus Hoti Lal
and another reported in (2003) 3 SCC 605. In this case the Supreme
Court while upholding the order of dismissal from service on the ground
that the conductor was guilty of non-issue of tickets worth Rs.16/- and
therefore caused loss to the State Exchequer had observed:
“10. It needs to be emphasized that the court
or tribunal while dealing with the quantum of
punishment has to record reasons as to why it
is felt that the punishment was not
commensurate with the proved charges. As
has been highlighted in several cases to which
reference has been made above, the scope
for interference is very limited and restricted to
exceptional
cases
in
the
indicated
circumstances. Unfortunately, in the present
case as the quoted extracts of the High
Court's order would go to show, no rea sons
whatsoever have been indicated as to why the
punishment was considered disproportionate.
Reasons are live links between the mind of the
decision taken to the controversy in question

LPA No.90-2007

Page 11

and the decision or conclusion arrived at.
Failure to give reasons amounts to denial of
justice. [See Alexander Machinery (Dudley)
Ltd. v. Crabtree 1974 ICR 120 (NIRC)] A mere
statement that it is disproportionate would not
suffice. A party appearing before a court, as to
what it is that the court is addressing its mind.
It is not only the amount involved but the
mental set-up, the type of duty performed and
similar relevant circumstances which go into
the decision-making process while considering
whether the punishment is proportionate or
disproportionate. If the charged employee
holds a position of trust where honesty and
integrity
are
inbuilt
requirements
of
functioning, it would not be proper to deal with
the matter leniently. Misconduct in such cases
has to be dealt with iron hands. Where the
person deals with public money or is engaged
in financial transactions or acts in a fiduciary
capacity, the highest degree of integrity and
trustworthiness
is
a
must
and
unexceptionable. Judged in that background,
conclusions of the Division Bench of the High
Court do not appear to be proper. We set
aside the same and restore order of the
learned Single Judge upholding the order of
dismissal.”

14.

Similar view has been taken by this Court in Delhi Transport

Corporation versus Om Pal and others reported in 113 (2004) DLT
307 and Delhi Transport Corporation versus N.L. Kakkar and others

LPA No.90-2007

Page 12

reported in 110 (2004) DLT 493.
15.

It may be relevant to state here that any industrial adjudicator

while dealing with the question of domestic enquiry under Section
33(2)(b) of the Act has limited jurisdiction. Scrutiny by the industrial
adjudicator is confined to ensuring that the action of the management is
not malafide, on account of vindictiveness and on account of extraneous
reasons due to unfair labour practice. The said provision requires
approval in case of the “concerned workmen” when a dispute under the
Industrial Disputes Act is already pending. The industrial adjudicator is to
ensure that there is no perversity or arbitrariness.
16.

While examining an application under Section 33(2)(b) of the

Act, the Industrial Adjudicator is required to take a prima facie view about
the validity of domestic enquiry keeping in view the limited purpose and
object of the said Section. If

approval is granted the “concerned

workman” ceases to be an employee from the date of termination of his
services by the employer. If approval is not granted under Section
33(2)(b) by the industrial Adjudicator, the “concerned workman” remains
in service as if no order terminating his services was passed. If approval

LPA No.90-2007

Page 13

under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act is granted, the workman has option to
challenge the discharge or dismissal in an appropriate proceeding before
the Industrial Tribunal under the Industrial Disputes Act. If an Industrial
Dispute is raised, the Industrial Adjudicator is required to answer the
reference inspite of the fact that an approval was earlier granted under
Section 33(2)(b) of the Act. Surprisingly, in the present case the Industrial
Adjudicator has dismissed reference of the workman under Section 10 of
the Act and upheld the order terminating his services but another
Industrial Adjudicator has dismissed application of the management for
approval under Section 33(2)(b) of

the

Act. It

may also

be noticed

here that order rejecting reference under Section 10 was passed by
Industrial
the

Adjudicator on 26.08.1996, i.e., prior to the order passed by

Industrial

Adjudicator

rejecting

approval

application

of

the

management under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act which was passed on
26.07.2001.
17.

The Supreme Court in case of Cholan Roadways Ltd. v. G.

Thirugnanasambandam, reported in (2005) 3 SCC 241 has held that
the jurisdiction of the Industrial Adjudicator under Section 33(2)( b ) of the

LPA No.90-2007

Page 14

Industrial Disputes Act is restricted and it cannot be compared to
jurisdiction under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act. The Supreme
Court in this case observed as under:“While exercising jurisdiction under Section
33(2)( b ) of the Act, the Industrial Tribunal is
required to see as to whether a prima facie
case has been made out as regards the validity
or otherwise of the domestic enquiry held
against the delinquent, keeping in view the fact
that if the permission or approval is granted, the
order of discharge or dismissal which may be
passed against the delinquent employee would
be liable to be challenged in an appropriate
proceeding before the Industrial Tribunal in
terms of the provision of the Industrial Disputes
Act. In Martin Burn case (AIR 1958 SC 79) this
Court stated: (AIR p.85, para 27)
“A prima facie case does not mean a case
proved to the hilt but a case which can be said
to be established if the evidence which is led in
support of the same were believed. While
determining whether a prima facie case had
been made out the relevant consideration is
whether on the evidence led it was possible to
arrive at the conclusion in question and not
whether that was the only conclusion which
could be arrived at on that evidence. It may be
that the Tribunal considering this question may
itself have arrived at a different conclusion. It
has, however, not to substitute its own
judgment for the judgment in question. It has

LPA No.90-2007

Page 15

only got to consider whether the view taken is a
possible view on the evidence on the record.
(See Buckingham & Carnatic Co. Ltd. v.
Workers of the Company 1952 Lab AC 490.)”

18.

In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present

Appeal and the same is dismissed. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
MAY 15, 2007.
P

LPA No.90-2007

Page 16

