* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ W.P.(C) 10666-77/2005
HAKIM ARJUN SINGH & ORS.

..... Petitioners

Through Mr. Sumit Kumar Khatri, Advocate.

versus

MCD

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Anoop Bagai, Standing Counsel &
Mr. Devendra Nautiyal, Advocate for the MCD.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 11.02.2008

1. The petitioners herein were licensee/occupants of about 20 shops situated
at Roshanara Road, near Pulbangash, Delhi. It is admitted by the learned
counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners were not owners of the said
shops and were licensees.

2. The shops in occupation of the petitioners were owned by MCD and were
acquired by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation for construction of the metro in
Delhi. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation paid compensation for the said land to the
MCD and thereafter in the year 2002 wrote to the petitioners informing them
that they should vacate the shops.
3. It is admitted that on 20th May, 2003 possession of the shops was taken
over by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation and area has been utilised for the
construction of the metro network.
4. In the month of March, 2003, MCD informed the petitioners that they are
being offered built up shops on perpetual lease basis at a cost of
Rs.3,07,900/- (estimated) subject to final construction cost calculated and also
approval of the Corporation. The petitioners did not accept and comply with
the offer of allotment. No payments were made. It may be noted here that the
shops being allotted to the petitioners at Sanjay Gandhi Transport Nagar were
on permanent lease hold basis and not on licence fee basis. The rights being
offered to the petitioners were better, than mere rights as licensees. The
petitioners, it appears, made some representations to the MCD for an
alternative site but the same were not accepted. In the representations, the
petitioners had prayed that they should be allotted shops at Indra Market and
they should not be relocated at Sanjay Gandhi Transport Nagar.

5. In the month of February, 2005 after nearly two years from the date the
petitioners were dispossessed, the present writ petitions were filed. It is
submitted that the petitioners should be allotted shops at Indra Market instead
of Sanjay Gandhi Transport Nagar. Objections were raised by the Registry
and it took the petitioners almost three months to rectify the said objections
and the petition was refiled on 30th May, 2005. It is apparent from the above
that the petitioners are guilty of undue delay and laches. The petitioners have
approached this Court only in February-May, 2005 though the offers were
made to them in March, 2003. This delay remains unexplained. The
respondents have also in the counter affidavit referred to similar writ petitions,
which were filed in the year, 2003 being W.P. (C) Nos. 377/2003, 3909/2003
and 479/2003 titled Manohar Lal versus Government of NCT of Delhi &
Others, Sanjeev Sethi & Another versus Government of NCT of Delhi &
Others and Arjun Singh versus Government of NCT of Delhi & Others.
These writ petitions were dismissed by the Court holding, inter alia, that the
petitioners therein had no right to claim re-location only at Indra Market, when
they had been given benefit of re-location at Sanjay Gandhi Transport Nagar.
6. The petitioners' cases are not different and are similar to cases of Manohar
Lal, Sanjeev Sethi & Another and Arjun Singh and accordingly will meet the
same fate. If at all, the petitioners have approached this Court belatedly and,

therefore, their claim is weaker. I do not, therefore, find any merit in the
present writ petitions and the same are dismissed.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioners at this stage states that the petitioners
will make a representation to the MCD for allotment of shops at Sanjay
Gandhi Transport Nagar. The petitioners may make a representation within
ten days. MCD may consider and dispose of the representation in accordance
with their policy within two months.
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
FEBRUARY 11, 2008
VKR

