LPA Nos.709-10/2006

Page No. 1
REPORTABLE

*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA NOS. 709-10 OF 2006

%

Date of Decision :

th

10 July, 2007.

SHRI TARSEM KUMAR GARG & ANR.
.... Appellants.
Through Mr. Vikas Mahajan, Advocate.
VERSUS
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
.... Respondent.
Through Mr. Rajiv Bansal, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. The present Letters Patent Appeals impugn judgment dated 24

th

March, 2006 passed in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1613/1998 titled

LPA Nos.709-10/2006

Page No. 2

Tarsem Kumar Garg and another versus Delhi Development
Authority and others. Learned Single Judge has held that the
appellant does not have any right to permanent allotment of the
kiosks which were allotted to the appellants on licence basis for a
period of 11 months in 1988/89.
2. Learned counsel for the appellants questioned the impugned
rd

judgment on the basis of the Order dated 23 September, 2003
passed by the permanent Lok Adalat, Delhi Development
Authority.
3. The appellant no.1 pursuant to tenders floated by the respondentDelhi Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the DDA,
for short) being the highest tenderer was allotted kiosk no.7 at
DDA Complex, Vikas Sadan on monthly licence fee of Rs.3,502/-.
Similarly, another kiosk was allotted to appellant no.2 on the basis
of tender submitted by him on a monthly licence fee of Rs.
5250.70. The first appellant took possession of the kiosk on 16

th

November, 1988 and the respondent no.2 took possession of the
th

kiosk allotted to him on 8 May, 1989.
4. Notice inviting tenders specifically stated that the kiosks would be
allotted on licence basis for a fixed period of 11 months only.

LPA Nos.709-10/2006

Page No. 3

Therefore, the persons tendering and giving bids for allotment of
kiosks were aware that the allotment was for a limited time of 11
months and was not on a permanent allotment or allotment on
ownership basis. The appellants had also made their offer and
given their bids keeping in view the limited period for which the
licence was issued and the right was granted. In these
circumstances, we do not think the appellants have any right to
ask for extension of the licence period which had expired in 1989
and 1990 respectively. In fact the appellants have over-stayed and
continued to use and occupy the kiosks for the last 17 years, much
beyond the period of their licence. In writ proceedings, it will not be
just and fair to modify and alter the terms and conditions of
allotment on the basis of which the appellants had submitted their
tenders in 1988-89, after the licence period. Had it been known to
others that the licence period can be extended, they may have
agreed to pay a higher fee. To allow the appellants to continue in
the kiosks will be unjust and unfair to others who may be
interested in giving their bids for the kiosks and seek to carry on

LPA Nos.709-10/2006

Page No. 4

business from the kiosks. In fact to permit and allow the appellants
to become permanent allottees or to continue in the kiosks any
further will amount to violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of
India as it will amount to discrimination and denying of rights of
other persons who may be interested in giving their bids and
carrying on business from the kiosks. Rights of other persons
cannot be ignored in the favour of appellants.
5. We entirely agree with the reasoning given by the learned Single
Judge who has examined the Public Law Doctrine and has
referred several decisions of the Supreme Court with reference to
th

Circular dated 19 February, 1992 issued by the Government of
India for ensuring proper implementation of the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971. Learned Single
Judge has held that the Circular has to be read and understood in
the larger context in which it was issued and cannot be applied to
cases where allotment is made on licence fee basis for a limited
period with a clear understanding that after expiry of the licence
period fresh allotment after inviting bids shall be made. Learned

LPA Nos.709-10/2006

Page No. 5

Single Judge has extensively quoted from the judgment of
this Court in C.J. International Hotels Limited versus N.D.M.C.
reported in (2003) 3 AD (Delhi) 733 wherein reference to earlier
judgments of the Supreme Court in the case of Barelly
Development Authority versus Ajay Pal Singh

reported in

(1989) 2 SCC 116, Vriganto Naveen versus Government of
Andhra Pradesh & others reported in AIR 2001 SC 3609 and
several other cases was made. The finding and observations of
the learned Single Judge are apt and we find no reason to
interfere and hold to the contrary.
6. As pointed out by the learned Single Judge, the Order dated 28

th

September, 2003, of the Lok Adalat, as is apparent from the last
paragraph of the Order itself, was merely recommendatory in
nature. No adjudication of rights had taken place and DDA never
consented or agreed to the said Order. The recommendation
made by the Presiding Officer, Lok Adalat was not accepted by the
DDA. In fact, the stand taken by the DDA is that on 22

nd

August,

1995 kiosk no.4, Vikas Sadan, was auctioned for a period of 11

LPA Nos.709-10/2006

Page No. 6

months on a monthly licence fee of Rs.52,500/-. However, it is the
case of the appellants that the said allottee could not generate
enough income and therefore vacated the kiosk. It is open to the
appellants to give their bids in the tenders/auctions for allotment of
kiosks. They must compete with others and cannot be given any
previlege and shown indulgence. The appellants have to be
treated at par and on equal footing as others. No discrimination
can be permitted. However, the appellants have stated that
several kiosks in Vikas Sadan are lying vacant and have not been
put to auction/bidding by the DDA. Thus, it is submitted, the
Respondent

has created artificial scarcity and also deprived

public from participating and giving their bids. Learned counsel for
the

appellants

have

submitted

that

the

appellants

have

apprehension that even after taking possession of the kiosks they
will not be put to auction/bidding for a long period and the allottees
of the kiosks will enjoy monopoly and charge exorbitant fee from
the general public for providing services required by them. There
is no such allegation in the Appeal and we hope and trust that the

LPA Nos.709-10/2006

Page No. 7

respondent-DDA will not like the common man who visits the DDA
Office at Vikas Sadan, to be exploited. We are sure that DDA will
keep in mind that the allotment of kiosks at Vikas Sadan ensures
that basic services and facilities are made available to the general
public who visit the DDA office. In case the kiosks are not put to
auction/tender and allotted, situation of artificial scarcity may be
created leading to exploitation of the general public. This also
causes loss of revenue to the respondent-DDA and encourages
unauthorized encroachment on government land.
7. In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present
Appeals and the same are accordingly dismissed. In the facts and
circumstances of the cases, there will be no order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
JULY
P

10, 2007

