*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 17298/2006 & CM 4269/2008, CM 2203/2008
S.N.AWASTHI

..... Petitioner
Through Mr.S.C.Singhal, Adv.

versus
M.C.D. & ORS.

..... Respondent
Through Mr.Ajay Arora with Mr.Kapil Dutta, Advs. for
MCD
Ms.S.Fatma, Advs. For respondents 3-4.
Mr.Rishi Manchanda, Local Commissioner.
Mr.S.P.Mehta , Adv. for respondent no.2 with
respondent no.2 in person.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
%
19.03.2008
1. Pursuant to the last order and as there was dispute whether
encroachments made in the public street had been removed, I had
appointed Mr.Rishi Manchanda, advocate as a Local Commissioner.
The lay out plan of the area in question was also furnished to
Mr.Rishi Manchanda, advocate to report whether there was any
encroachment on public land by the private respondents.
2. Mr.Rishi Manchanda, advocate has filed his report stating, inter alia,
that the public street/gali is clear/from all encroachments. He has
also filed photographs in support of the said statement. It is also
mentioned in his report that earlier possibly some persons had

encroached upon the gali/public street but encroachments have been
removed.
3. In view of the report filed by the Local Commissioner, I do not think any
further orders are required to be passed in the present writ petition.
MCD will ensure that the public street is not encroached upon and
the respondents also directed not to encroach the public street.
Periodical inspection of the area at least once in every two months
will be done by the Officers of MCD and they shall maintain a spot
visit register in this regard. The register will be handed over to the
new incumbent whenever there is change of Officer and the new
Officer will confirm the factual situation stated in the register.
4. Learned counsel for MCD states that action as per law will be taken, if
there is any unauthorized construction or encroachments by the
petitioner.
5. In these circumstances, I am not inclined to pass any further order on
any application or the writ petition.

The writ petition and the

applications are disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA,J
MARCH 19, 2008
RN

