WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.1

REPORTABLE
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ WRIT PETITION NO. 2182/1994
% Date of Decision : 10th October, 2007.

RAKESH AGARWAL

.... Petitioner.
Through Mr.Prashant Bhushan with Mr.Sumeet
Sharma, Advocates.
VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ANR

.... Respondent.

Through Mr.R.P.Bhatt, Sr.Adv. with Mr.O.P.Agarwal
and Mr.Yogendra Kumar for respondent no.2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR.JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.2

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1. This writ petition is filed for direction to the Government to conduct a
thorough audit and investigation by the Comptroller and Auditor General into
the Market Intervention Operations (hereinafter referred to as MIO for short)
undertaken by National Dairy Development Board at the behest and on the
mandate by the Government of India. It is alleged that National Dairy
Development Board had deliberately flouted the terms and conditions of MIO
as stipulated in the letter dated 6th April, 1989 thereby causing loss to the
National exchequer. Reference is made to the report of Mr. P.V. Desai which
has mentioned that the Union of India had suffered loss of Rs.71.53 crores as
on 31st March, 1992 due to violation of MIO by National Dairy Development
Board. This figure includes loss of Rs.10.79 crores on account of excess
interest paid to the banks, Rs.14.36 crores loss on reduced value of the
inventory, Rs.37.64 crores towards trading loss and Rs.8.74 crores for excess
price charged by STC for importing Palmolein. During the course of
arguments, our attention was also drawn to the findings and observations in
the report of Mr. P.V. Desai, which has been placed on record.
2. Learned counsel for the respondent no.2-National Dairy Development
Board, on the other hand, has referred to the National Dairy Development
Board Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the Act, for short) and stated that

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.3

the Board is a corporate body. Reliance was placed upon Sections 28, 29 and
47 of the said Act. Our attention is also drawn to the reasons why the MIO
was introduced by the Government of India and the facts and figures show
that the entire operation was successful and had achieved the desired result.
3. In the late 1980's, India was not self-reliant in oil seeds. Oil seeds/edible oil
was being imported on payment made in foreign exchange, which was scarce.
Indian consumers suffered because they had to pay higher prices due to
scarcity and as prices were volatile. In India, the consumer price was four
times higher than the price of edible oils available abroad.
4. A Technology Mission on Oilseeds (TMO for short) was set up in May,
1986, pursuant to the decision taken by the Ministry of Agriculture. Till then,
edible oil sector was totally unorganized and the prices were highly
speculative and fluctuating. Trade was controlled by a group of persons, who
have been described by the respondents as “Telia Rajas”(oil barons). The
then scarce foreign exchange was being utilized for importing oilseed/edible
oil, which was having an adverse impact on the Indian economy.
5. On 30th May, 1988, Government of India constituted a high powered
Committee called “Empowered Committee on Oil Seeds Policy” (ECOP) to
implement integrated policy on oilseeds production, import, distribution and
pricing for accelerating self-reliance. MIO scheme was formulated by ECOP.

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.4

6. On 6th April, 1989, National Dairy Development Board was appointed as the
agency to implement MIO scheme under the integrated policy on oil seeds.
The terms and conditions for MIO were approved by ECOP.
“The objectives of the MIO were :(i) to establish wholesale prices of edible oils within the
specified lower and upper limits of the price band to be
specified by the Empowered Committee from time to time;

(ii) to channelise imported oil, other than that to be
released by Department of Civil Supplies through the PDS,
into the market (including vanaspati industry) in such a
manner as to achieve objective (i);

(iii) to buy, stock and sell oilseeds and oils in order to
achieve objective (i);

(iv) to build up stocks during years of surplus production so
as to tide over the need for heavy imports during years of
lean production; and

(v) to put the edible oil and oilseeds market on a healthy
and stable basis minimizing speculation and hoarding.”
7. National Dairy Development Board was given full functional autonomy to
achieve the above objectives. A Market Intervention Fund (MIF) of Rs.30
crores was to be built up by National Dairy Development Board to meet

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.5

possible losses in MIO. MIF was to be funded by the price difference of
Rs.2000/- per tonne, between the market price that was higher and the
purchase price of imported edible oil to be made available to National Dairy
Development Board by the State Trading Corporation. Any surplus beyond the
said amount of Rs.30 crores would accrue to the Government and any losses
suffered by National Dairy Development Board would be charged to the MIF.
Losses beyond Rs.30/- crores were to be reimbursed by the Government to
National Dairy Development Board. The terms and conditions further provided
that separate accounts for the operations would be maintained and submitted
half yearly. For procurement of oil seeds/edible oil, National Dairy
Development Board was permitted to nominate self-reliant units who were
permitted to draw on National Dairy Development Board Credit limits at the
risk of National Dairy Development Board. The operation, was to be monitored
by a Special Action Committee of Secretaries on prices.
8. The principal objective behind the MIO was to ensure remunerative returns
to the farmers, while at the same time maintain reasonable and stable prices
for the benefit of the consumers. The objective was somewhat contradictory
as higher prices would have encouraged farmers to shift to growing oilseeds
but would have dissatisfied consumers. The objective was sought to be
achieved by increasing oil seeds production and making India self-reliant and

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.6

in the meanwhile, oilseed/ edible oil was to be imported to meet the demand,
ensuring that the domestic market and consumers do not suffer on account of
artificial scarcity and manipulation in prices. One of the main purpose was to
regulate the trade and prevent manipulation, hoarding and speculation in oil
seeds and edible oil trade.
9. The edifice of the case built up in the writ petition and in the arguments
before us is the report given by a Committee headed by Mr.P.V.Desai. ECOP
in its meeting held on 12th February, 1993 had appointed this Committee
consisting of Mr.P.V.Desai, Chairman, Mr.M.P.Gupta, Member, Mr.K.R.Rao,
Member and Mr.Srinivasa Madhur, Member. Mr.P.V.Desai and Mr.M.P.Gupta
gave a joint report. As per their report, MIO had not proved to be an effective
instrument of market intervention in the wholesale market of oil seeds and
edible oil. This report also states that non-fixation of the price bands had left
MIO rudderless and they recommended that the scheme should be
foreclosed. However, if the Government considered that it was desirable to
continue with the scheme, commercial considerations should be incorporated
and introduced into the scheme and certain modifications were required
specially to prescribe the extent of Government obligation towards recouping
of trading losses. On the question of reimbursement of losses suffered by
National Dairy Development Board, Mr.P.V.Desai and

Mr.M.P.Gupta

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.7

recommended that losses due to fall in inventory value as on 31st March, 1992
to the extent of Rs.14.36 crores should be reimbursed. It did not recommend
the case for compensation and recouping losses suffered by National Dairy
Development Board to the extent of Rs.10.79 crores on account of interest
burden. On the question of reimbursement of Rs.8.74 crores, due on account
of STC charging more than Rs.15,000/- per tonne on imported “Palmolein”,
and Rs.14.92 Crores, on account of expenses relating to retail market
operation, it was stated that the said amounts could be considered for
reimbursement. The claim for reimbursement of trading losses of Rs.37.64
crores due to “subsidised retail price” of “Dhara” was also adversely
commented upon. The two Members were of the view that the said losses had
not arisen due to the MIO and National Dairy Development Board should have
taken care to recoup the entire costs while fixing retail prices. The
Government however, could consider post facto reimbursement to National
Dairy Development Board as a subsidy including the quantum, as the said two
Members felt that the losses had arisen because of subsidized operations of
National Dairy Development Board.
10. Mr.K.R.Rao, in his dissenting report has opined to the contrary. He felt
that the two other members in their report had made errors in their analysis by
treating MIO as a commercial operation, and working of the National Dairy

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.8

Development Board had not been appreciated. Sufficient quantity of imported
oil was not made available to National Dairy Development Board as was
envisaged, this had contributed to the losses. Mr.K.R.Rao has held that
National Dairy Development Board was justified in direct entry into retail
operations, which was done with the knowledge of the Department of
Agriculture and ECOP. This Member of Committee felt that MIO had been a
success. Farmers were getting reasonable price and consumers too were
assured of supply of edible oil at reasonable prices. It was also highlighted
that import of oil seed production had gone down, exports had increased and
fluctuations in prices of edible oil were effectively controlled.
11. The fourth Member of the Committee Mr.Srinivasa Madhur, it appears had
never attended the proceedings. However, he examined the report given by
Mr.P.V.Desai and differed with the views expressed by him and by
Mr.M.P.Gupta. He felt that MIO had been a reasonable success in ensuring
stabilization of the oil sector and keeping the prices within a range. The edible
oil imports had come down drastically and had there been better availability of
imported oil, MIO results would have been better. He specifically noted that
the report of Mr.P.V.Desai had referred to lower and upper limits of the price
bands, on the basis of derived prices based on NAFED formula, and whether
the average purchase and selling price of oil by National Dairy Development

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.9

Board were within the said price band, but while doing so, Mr.P.V.Desai did
not take into consideration or examine the actual market prices of edible oil
and seeds. This, it was felt was not justified and the MIO had to be viewed as
means or an instrument of maintaining open market prices within the broad
range. He referred to the minutes of ECOP meeting relating to the retail
marketing and observed that retail marketing by National Dairy Development
Board was done with full knowledge of ECOP, understanding its implications
and impact.
12. After the respective reports were received, ECOP considered the same in
its 27th meeting held on 26th April, 1993. After detailed discussion and thought,
it was decided that Rs.14.36 crores due to fall in inventory value should be
reimbursed as National Dairy Development Board was justified in making
purchases at the market price and holding was necessary. Regarding loss of
Rs.10.79 crores on account of interest paid by National Dairy Development
Board, ECOP referred to Clause 4(j) of the terms and conditions of MIO and
observed that it was agreed that the credit would be available to National
Dairy Development Board at 15% per annum. Similarly, loss of Rs.14.92
crores on account of retail marketing was directed to be reimbursed as ECOP
was authorized to lay down guidelines for MIO and had from time to time
endorsed retail operations. In respect of loss of Rs.8.74 crores on account of

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.10

supply of edible oil by STC at the rates above Rs.15,000/- per tonne, ECOP
noticed that MIO envisaged supply of imported oil by STC to National Dairy
Development Board, at a price, Rs.2000/- per tonne, below the minimum price
band but price bands were not fixed for the OY 1991-92 and onward.
However, for the year OY 1990-91, it was specifically agreed and approved
that imported oil should have been supplied by STC at Rs.15,000/-/MT as no
price band had been fixed. ECOP also noticed that supply of imported edible
oil was essential to enable the National Dairy Development Board to generate
surplus funds for MIO. Thus it recommended that Rs.8.74 crores should be
reimbursed. ECOP also recommended reimbursement of Rs.22.72 crores
towards trading losses incurred by National Dairy Development Board on
MIO. ECOP held that the objective of MIO was to regulate the price, exert
moderating influence, ensure remunerative prices to the farmers and
reasonable purchase price for the consumers. ECOP felt that the inventory
levels were required to be built up and carried over long periods and these
costs could not have been fully recovered through sales. Cost of inventory
built up and carrying cost had to be paid as it was in conformity with the
overall role of National Dairy Development Board envisaged and contribution
made in stabilizing the oil prices through MIO. The Committee noticed that
some of the commitments that were initially given to National Dairy
Development Board could not be fulfilled by the Government itself and,

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.11

therefore, certain deviations in the scheme were approved and permitted.
ECOP was always in picture and had knowledge about the retail market
losses likely to be suffered. However, as there was variation in the original
scheme, reimbursement, it was observed, would require Cabinet approval.
13. In addition to these reports, we also have a report of a Committee headed
by Mr. Sharad Joshi, a Standing Advisory Committee. This committee
examined the so called deficiencies and shortcomings of MIO. The Committee
questioned 6 Oil Seeds Growers Co-operative Societies and 1,50,000 edible
oil seeds growers. The Committee did not rule out that some of the farmers
might have been under the influence of National Dairy Development Board but
observed that most of them had expressed very strongly about the
advantages they had received in terms of oilseed prices under MIO. It was
also noted that the allegation that purchases were done in open market was
not supported by facts and figures of operations by growers co-operative. The
Committee felt that MIO had a difficult start because of non-availability and
failure to import edible oil for sale by National Dairy Development Board. The
impact on oil prices of the market operations was noticed, but concern was
expressed that in the future the National Dairy Development Board could
come under influence of local politicians. After examining the data, it was
found that the price spread in groundnut oil had narrowed down to 25% to the

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.12

great advantage and benefit of the middle class consumers. In the final
valuation, it was concluded, that National Dairy Development Board had done
considerable work in developing infrastructure storage of oilseeds and oil
transportation and certain recommendations were made.
14. It is clear form the facts stated above that the question of loss suffered in
MIO was thoroughly examined and evaluated by the Government of India.
Committees were appointed and they have submitted their reports giving
reasons and basis. Union of India after examining the respective stand and
reasoning has partly reimbursed to National Dairy Development Board the
losses suffered in MIO. To some extent the Union of India was also conscious
of the fact that the MIO would result in losses. That is why a fund of Rs.30
crores was established initially with another clause for sale of imported edible
oil to National Dairy Development Board at Rs.2,000/-/MT less than the
market price to offset losses. The objective of MIO was to purchase oilseed
from the farmers to ensure remunerative prices and thus encourage farmers
to grow oilseeds. In contrast, the other objective of MIO was to bring down the
edible oil prices for the consumers. Both the objectives, considering their
inherent nature could result in losses to National Dairy Development Board.
Similarly, to be a catalyst, an effective intervener in the market operations,
National Dairy Development Board was required to build up buffer stock. It is

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.13

obvious that fluctuation in the prices of oilseed and edible oil could and would
cause losses to National Dairy Development Board and that there would be
increase in carrying costs. It is an admitted fact that there was fall in market
price during 1991-92. Union of India itself has clarified that MIO was not a
commercial operation but was a part of the Government's overall food security
policy for the benefit of consumers, general public as well as oilseeds sector.
Union of India having considered various aspects had examined losses
suffered

by

National

Dairy

Development

Board

and

had

directed

reimbursement.
15. Public Interest Litigation is an effective tool and has been effectively
utilised to enforce public duties and correct arbitrary actions and inactions on
the part of the authorities. It instills Rule of Law, protects rights of citizens and
ensures compliance of Law by the authorities. It's benefits and advantages
are well established. However, even while dealing with Public Interest
Litigations, courts are conscious that they should not impinge and expand the
scope to deal with the policy matters relating to economics and finance.
Courts do not examine relative merits and demerits of political or economic
theories or economic policies of the Government. Courts also do not examine
whether a particular policy is desirable, until and unless violation of
fundamental rights or statutory rights is alleged and proved. Administrative

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.14

actions are tested by the Courts by applying well known parameters of judicial
review that they should be fair and that it should be free from the taint of
arbitrariness and that there should be substantial compliance with norms and
procedure.
16. In economic or financial matters, authorities have always been given a
large measure of latitude while applying Article 14 as these are complex
problems, which require pragmatic approach. Every Government has right to
implement its policies and doctrines, unless they violate fundamental rights or
statutory rights etc. Though most economists and tax experts have highlighted
benefits of consistency and continuity but experimentation, trial and error in
economic and financial matters is an accepted position. Neither a court is to
interfere with errors or mistakes, unless a sound case for “judicial review” is
made out nor can a Court strike down a policy because some other decision
appears to the Court to be better or more logical. This is left to Executive
discretion, whose actions as per the Constitution are subject to Legislative
scrutiny and control. These aspects were examined and considered by the
Supreme Court in Balco Employees' Union (REGD.) versus Union of India
and Others, reported in JT 2001 (10) SC 466. After referring to several other
earlier judgments , the Supreme Court has held that unless a policy framed is
absolutely capricious and not formed by reason or logic, completely arbitrary

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.15

and founded on mere ipse dixit of the Executive functionaries, violates Article
14 or other Constitutional provisions or is in conflict with any statutory
provision, Courts will not interfere and tinker with the policy decision. The
question of efficacy or otherwise of policy normally cannot be made subject
matter and Courts should not themselves go into matters relating to political or
economic philosophy. Similar observations have been made by the Supreme
Court in Federation of Railway Officers Association and Others versus
Union of India, reported in (2003) 4 SCC 289, wherein it was held that when
matters require technical expertise, courts will not interfere unless the
decisions are inconsistent with the Constitution or statute or otherwise
arbitrary or completely irrational. Thus, whether or not there should have been
a MIO and what should have been the guiding factors, to what extent National
Dairy Development Board should have been permitted to intervene, whether
retail operations were required and whether retail operations were required to
be subsidised are all economic policy matters relating to the field of finance
and politics. What was desirable and what should have been done and was
required to be done, had to be decided by the Executive, whose actions were
subject matter of questioning, scrutiny and control by the Parliament. While
keeping these parameters in mind, we have to examine the averments and
allegations made in the writ petition. The scrutiny and examination done by

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.16

us, is not of a sleuth,using a magnifying lens finding minor faults and errors.
Secondly, hindsight makes us wiser. We gain from experience.
17. We have gone through various records including the report of Mr. P.V.
Desai and others. We may agree or disagree with some of the findings given
in one report or the other, but that by itself will not be a good ground to accept
the prayers made in the writ petition. We are satisfied that the Government
had a clear and bona fide objective and purpose when it constituted TMO and
had allowed MIO operations. The Government was also conscious of the fact
that operations required some flexibility and freedom to the operating agency.
Some amount of flexibility was inherent in the scheme itself as commercial
and financial angles were involved and attempt was being made to regulate
an un-organised market which was highly volatile and speculative, by
intervention in the market. Modification or alteration in policy is also a right of
the policy makers. ECOP in its wisdom and keeping in view the market
situation, did not fix price band for oilseeds after first two years. Reasons for
the same have been given. The said reasons have been accepted by two
Members of P.V. Desai Committee and also by Mr. Sharad Joshi. Thereafter,
ECOP examined the whole controversy in detail including losses suffered by
NDDB and whether these losses should be accepted and reimbursed by the
Government. Matter was also examined by the Union Cabinet. Similarly, the

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.17

question whether NDDB should have engaged in retail trading directly has
been considered and examined. ECOP has endorsed the retail marketing as it
was felt that this was essential and required for MIO operations. Earlier terms
and conditions of MIO was also fixed by ECOP. ECOP, therefore, had right to
modify and change the terms and conditions of the MIO. We do not think that
the reasons and justifications given and accepted by the Union of India can be
regarded as arbitrary, capricious or completely irrational, which require judicial
intervention in a Public Interest Litigation.
18. Whether MIO should have been introduced, whether National Dairy
Development Board should have been asked to act, what should have been
the terms and conditions of MIO, whether ECOP should have fixed the price
band for the year 1991-92 onwards etc. are all policy matters for Union of
India to examine and consider. It is apparent from the facts stated above that
these aspects were considered and examined and different views expressed
by various Committees were scrutinized before final decision for partially
reimbursing losses to National Dairy Development Board was taken. These
are all economic policy matters.
19. ECOP was made fully aware of the retail marketing operation undertaken
by National Dairy Development Board. The said operation undertaken by
National Dairy Development Board has been justified on the ground that it had

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.18

a direct impact on the retail consumer price and thus prevented speculative
trade and resultant exploitation of the consumers. It is a stand of the Union of
India that retail marketing was required and necessary steps were done with
the knowledge and approval of ECOP and had governmental approval. This
was justified on the ground that in view of non-supply of imported oil, the
indigenous oil procured by National Dairy Development Board was not
sufficient for market intervention. In these circumstances, it was decided to
allow National Dairy Development Board to do direct retail marketing. This
also prevented mis-use of MIO, adulteration and siphoning/black-marketing,
as had happened in the case of oils sold through PDS.
20. Learned counsel for the appellant laid considerable emphasis on the
failure of the ECOP to stipulate lower and upper limits of the price band, and it
was submitted that this was contrary to the terms and conditions of the MIO.
Respondent No.2 and other respondents have admitted that price bands were
fixed by ECOP for first two years and not thereafter. It was stated that this was
deliberately done by ECOP. This was contrary to the original terms and
conditions of the MIO but the terms and conditions of the MIO could be
modified and amended. Blame for not fixing price band is on ECOP and
National Dairy Development Board cannot be blamed for the same. Moreover,
we find that clause 2(i) of the terms and conditions of MIO required fixing of

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.19

price bands for lower and upper limits in respect of edible oils and not in
respect of oil seeds. Thus failure to fix the price band for edible oil would have
permitted and allowed National Dairy Development Board or its agents to
purchase edible oil from the market at any price, without any lower or upper
limit being specified. It gave more freedom to the National Dairy Development
Board and its agents. It may be noted that in the financial year 1991-92, there
was fall in the market price of edible oil, specially in respect of groundnut oil.
However, ECOP did keep and monitor the performance of National Dairy
Development Board and the MIO. It was a conscious decision, as it was felt
that in view of the changed market condition, this was not required. It may be
relevant to state here that Mr.P.V.Desai in his report has pointed out that there
was fall in market price of edible oil in 1991-92. The reasons why the ECOP in
its 17th meeting held on 24th April, 1991 decided to do away with the price
band as stated were
A. Shortfall in domestic production which was likely to continue.
B. Non-availability or limited availability of imported edible oil due to
foreign exchange crises.
C. Overall demand supply position was not not known.
D. Many of the parameters of MIO were altered or modified.

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.20

21. The reasons for not fixing price bands has been examined and considered
indepth by the Department of Agriculture.
22. There is also ample data and figures which show that efforts of the
government were successful in the long term. Edible oil prices became much
lower and at the same time oil seeds production increased meaning thereby
that the farmers were getting the remunerative prices and the consumers
were being supplied oil at reasonable prices. Oil seed production in India
increased substantially from 10.8 million tonnes in 1985-86 to 21.8 million
tonnes in the year 1993-94, marking an increase of 201%. Import of edible oil
came out from peak of Rs.1309 crores in the financial year 1984-85 to Rs.52
crores in 1993-94. The value of exports in this sector increased from Rs. 257
crores in 1985-86 to Rs. 2300 crores in 1993-94 marking an astonishing rise
of 906%. Further, the intra seasonal market fluctuation in prices came down
by about half. The oil seeds sector became a foreign exchange earner for the
country instead of one which required foreign exchange for import. The
petitioner claims that this was because of substantial increase in production of
non traditional oilseeds like soyabean and sunflower. Whatever be the reason,
the policy adopted and implemented had the desired results and this court
cannot as a technical financial expert determine and decide as to why the
policy was successful and what were the contributing factors. The petitioner

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.21

cannot claim any right to act a super-analyst and object to the considered
decision of the Union of India, unless a case for dereliction of constitutional or
statutory provisions, arbitrariness or irrationality on the part of the Union of
India is made out.
23. Learned counsel for the petitioner had specifically drawn our attention to
the tables mentioned in the report prepared by Mr.P.V.Desai. The table
mentions “derived” oil price as per the support price of oil seeds and derived
oil price from “the price” of oil seeds fixed as per NAFED formula. It may be
noted that the support price is fixed by the Government but the same is not
the market price and is not the remunerative price that would encourage the
farmers to grow oil seeds. The price fixed as per NAFED formula is less than
the average market price of oil seeds and falls somewhere in between the
market price and the support price. If we compare the average price paid by
National Dairy Development Board for oil, with the raw oil price
derived/calculated as per NAFED formula of oilseeds in the report of Mr. P.V.
Desai , we find that in 1989-90, the average purchase price paid by National
Dairy Development Board for groundnut was Rs.21608/-, which is less than
the derived raw oil price calculated on the basis of NAFED oil seeds formula
of Rs.24694/-. The same was the situation in the year 1990-91, with the
difference between the two being Rs.32238/- and Rs.36753/-. However, in the

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.22

year 1991-92, the average price paid for groundnut oil was Rs.36,116, which
was higher than the derived market price using NAFED formula for oil seeds
of Rs.35,764/-.
24. With regard to Mustard oil for all the three years, the average price paid by
National Dairy Development Board was much lower than derived raw oil price
calculated using NAFED formula of oil seeds. Moreover, it was for the
government to decide whether or not to subsidies sale price of edible oil.
Lower oil price was for the benefit of the consumer.
25. There is one statement in the report given by Mr.P.V.Desai to the effect
that large quantity of edible oils were purchased when the prices were lower
and small quantity of oil was sold when the prices were higher. There is
nothing to substantiate the statement made. No facts and figures with
reference to date of purchase/sale, quantity purchased/sold and the price
have been stated.
26. Another contention raised by the petitioner may be noted. It was pointed
out that there was no audit and examination of accounts of the Co-operative
Societies who had acted as agents for procurement of oil seeds and then
offered edible oil to National Dairy Development Board. It was submitted that
this resulted in huge profits by the Co-operative societies and no verification
or scrutiny of the accounts of the said co-operative societies was done.

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.23

National Dairy Development Board however, has explained that direct
marketing for the purchase of oilseeds and oils would have resulted in spurt of
prices and, therefore, consciously it was decided to associate Co-operative
Societies as agents to purchase oil seeds. Credit was given to the Cooperative Societies for procurement of oilseeds with first option to National
Dairy Development Board to purchase edible oil from the cooperative
societies at the price quoted by the said societies. On the National Dairy
Development Board refusing the first purchase option, the Co-operative
Societies were required to sell the edible oil in the open market at a rate not
less than that offered to the National Dairy Development Board and return the
sale proceeds to National Dairy Development Board. In such cases, the
amount advanced to the Co-operative Society for procurement of oilseed was
to be returned along with interest. The accounts were accordingly settled. The
said procedure has not been specifically referred to and criticized by Mr.
P.V.Desai in his report.
27. However, the petitioner has pointed out that the accounts of the cooperative societies were not available and were not scrutinised by any
Committee and, therefore, the purchase price of oilseeds has not passed
through any examination and verification. No scrutiny has been done. It would
have been better if such scrutiny had been undertaken. Purchase of oil seeds

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.24

by National Dairy Development Board through it's agencies was a part of the
MIO scheme and personal benefit to a private party at the cost of the public
exchequer is a cause of concern. Defalcation of public funds is a valid ground
for courts to interfere. It is apparent that ECOP was monitoring the prices of
oilseeds and edible oils and, therefore, examining the whole process of
purchase and sale. The method adopted by NDDB -the first purchase option
clause to purchase edible oil or refund of upfront amount paid with interest by
the cooperative societies with other stipulations were all a part of the self
regulatory mechanism that prevented misuse, as the price paid for oil seed is
reflected in the purchase price of edible oil. It is the also case of National
Dairy Development Board that the co-operative societies suffered huge losses
during this period and many of them have closed down. This court cannot give
any firm or affirmative opinion one way or the other. However, keeping in view
the contentions raised as well as the stand of National Dairy Development
Board and the Government of India, we do not think any useful purpose at this
point of time will be served by asking CAG or any other agency to have a
deeper probe into the matter. Another reason is that MIO is no longer in
operation and after nearly 15 years, to dig out books of accounts, vouchers
and figures and find out whether there was any manipulation in purchase of oil
seeds and pin point the persons involved will be an exercise in futility.

WPC No.2182-1994

Page no.25

28. Keeping all these aspects in mind, we do not see any purpose in issuing
any directions in the writ petition. The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
However, we clarify that we have not been examining the legal issue and
question whether Comptroller and Auditor General can be directed to audit
accounts of National Dairy Development Board. In the facts and
circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
OCTOBER 10, 2007.
RN/P

