FAO(OS) 37-2007

*

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) NO. 37 OF 2007

%

Date of Decision :

NITIN JAIN

th

19 April, 2007.

.... Appellant.
Through Mr. Naresh K. Thanai, Advocate.
VERSUS

ANUJ JAIN & ORS.
.... Respondents.
Through Nemo
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

The appellant herein, Mr. Nitin Jain along with five others, who

are the respondents 1-5 in the present Appeal had filed a suit
No.946/2000 for partition and rendition of accounts against the

FAO(OS) 37-2007

Page 2

respondents 6-14. It was stated in the Suit that the appellant and the
respondents herein belong to one family and are members of S.P. Jain
(HUF). The members of the said HUF had also constituted smaller HUFs.
Details of the properties owned by the said HUFs are mentioned in the
annexure to the suit.
2. The appellant and the respondents herein filed IA No. 2592/2001
under Order XXIII, Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(hereinafter referred to as the Code, for short) for compromise.
Paragraphs 2, 3 and the prayer clause in the application are
relevant and are reproduced below:“2. That the parties are in relation to each other.
The plaintiffs are children of the defendants no.2 to
5 and Nos.7 to 10, and the defendants No.2 to 5
are the sons of the defendants No.1 and 6. The
parties are constituents of various bigger and
smaller HUFs, viz S.P. Jain (HUF) and others.
3.
That during the pendency of the present
proceedings, the parties hereto have negotiated
and arrived at a settlement. In pursuant to the
settlement, parties distributed the moveable and
immovable properties. The possession of
respective portions have also been taken over by
the parties. The properties stood orally partitioned.
Parties so as to avoid any dispute in future have
decided to incorporate the terms of settlement in

FAO(OS) 37-2007

Page 3

the present application and the same are as
follows:I. Property No. H-32, Sainik Farm New Delhi
(a) x x x x x x
(b)x x x x x x
(c)x x x x x x
(d)x x x x x x
II. E-7, Kalindi Colony, New Delhi
xxxxxx
III. 17.9% share in Tower-A of the premises
constructed at Plot Nos.5 & 7, Serial No.82,
Varsova, Mumbai
xxxxxx
IV. x x x x x x
4.
In the facts and circumstances explained
above it is most respectfully prayed that this
Hon'ble Court may be pleased to decree the suit in
terms of settlement detailed in preceding paras.”
rd

3. By Order dated 23 April, 2001, the statements of the parties were
recorded by the learned Single Judge and aforesaid application
was allowed accepting the compromise. It was also recorded as
under:“The compromise is accepted and recorded.
Decree, as prayed, in terms of the compromise, is
granted. I.A. 2952/2001 and Annexures A and B
thereto shall form part of the decree.”

4. The Registry, however, did not prepare the decree-sheet on the

FAO(OS) 37-2007

Page 4

ground that the same can be drawn after valuation report of all the
properties is placed on record and the stamp duty @ 1% under
th

Article 45 of the Stamp Act is paid. Office note dated 4 May, 2002
to this affect was prepared.
5. The appellant filed an application being I.A. No. 13902/2006, which
was dismissed vide the impugned Order dated 13

th

December,

2006 passed by the learned Single Judge. Learned Single Judge in
the impugned Order has held that no family arrangement much less
oral family agreement of partition was alleged and therefore the
parties must comply with the office note of the Registry and only on
payment of stamp duty the parties will be entitled to the decreesheet.
6. A Partition Deed is an instrument of partition and has been defined
in Section 2(15) of the Stamp Act. The said investment is
chargeable to duty as per Schedule 1, Article 45 of the Stamp Act.
Stamp duty payable on an instrument of partition is @ 1% of the
value of the property. A decree of partition passed by a Court is
also an instrument of partition as defined in Section 2(15) of the

FAO(OS) 37-2007

Page 5

Stamp Act, which reads as under:“2(15). “Instrument of partition” means any
instrument whereby co-owners of any property
divide or agree to divide such property in severalty,
and includes also a final order for effecting a
partition passed by any revenue-authority or any
Civil Court and an award by an arbitrator directing
a partition.”
7. However, Courts have recognised oral partitions in cases of joint
families. An oral partition is not an instrument of partition as
contemplated under Section 2(15) of the Stamp Act. Therefore, as
it is not an instrument, on an oral partition no stamp duty is payable.
8. The Courts have recognised that it is legally permissible to arrive at
an oral family settlement dividing/partitioning the properties and
thereafter record a memorandum in writing whereby the existing
joint owners for the sake of prostriety record that the property has
been already partitioned or divided. The memorandum does not
by itself partition the properties but only records for information
what has already been done by oral partition. The memorandum
itself does not create or extinguish any rights. A record of oral
partition in writing is created. The writing records a pre existing right

FAO(OS) 37-2007

Page 6

and does not by itself partition the properties for the first time. As
the memorandum only records oral partition which has already
taken place but does not in praesenti create any right, it cannot be
treated as an instrument creating partition. [ Refer, Tek Bahadur
Bhujil versus Debi Singh Bhujil and others reported in AIR 1966
SC 292), Bakhtawar Singh versus Gurdev Singh reported in
(1996) 9 SCC 370, Kale versus Dy. Director of Consolidation
reported in (1976) 3 SCC 119, Roshan Singh versus Zile Singh
reported in AIR 1988 SC 881 and Bachan Singh versus Kartar
Singh and others reported in 2001 (10) JT (SC) 64.]
9. In view of the legal position explained above, it follows that a
decree of partition is an instrument of partition and therefore is
required to be stamped under Schedule 1 of Article 45 r/w Section
2(15) of the Stamp Act. However, an oral family settlement dividing
or partitioning the property is not required to be stamped. Similarly,
a memorandum recording an oral family settlement which has
already taken place is not an instrument dividing or agreeing to
divide property and is therefore not required to be stamped.

FAO(OS) 37-2007

Page 7

10.Relevant paragraphs of the application for compromise and the
orders passed by the Court have been quoted above. In the
application it is specifically stated that the parties had entered into
an oral family settlement and had distributed movable and
immovable properties. In fact it is further stated that the parties had
already been put in possession of the respective portions and the
possession had been taken over. The compromise application
merely records the oral family settlement to avoid any ambiguity.
Therefore, in this case the Court was not required to pass any
decree of partition but only declare the existing factual position on
the date when the compromise application was filed, that the
parties had entered into an oral family settlement and had
partitioned and separated the properties amongst themselves. It
was a decree of declaration that there exists an oral family
settlement that was passed and no decree that amounts to an
instrument of partition under Section 2(15) of the Stamp Act was
passed.

Thus, the objection raised by the Registry that the

appellant and other co-owners must furnish valuation report and

FAO(OS) 37-2007

Page 8

pay stamp duty is not correct and legally tenable. However, it is
clarified that in case the appellant or any of the co-sharers want to
have a decree of partition prepared by the Registry, they shall have
to file valuation report and also pay stamp duty.
11.One more clarification is required. Clause (a) to (c) of Section 17(1)
of the Registration Act deals with the documents which require
compulsory registration. A decree of partition requires registration
under Section 17(1)(b) of the Registration Act. However, by virtue
of Section 17(2)(vi), Clause (b) to Section 17(I) (b) would not apply
to “any decree or order of a Court except the decree or order
expressed to be made on a compromise and comprising
immovable properties other than that which is the subject matter of
the suit or proceedings.” [See, P.K. Nangia versus Land &
Development Officer reported in AIR 1998 Delhi 260 (DB) and
Bhoop Singh versus Ram Singh Major reported in (1995) 5 SCC
709].
12.

With the above clarifications and observations, Order dated 13

th

December, 2006 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing

FAO(OS) 37-2007

Page 9

I.A. No. 13092/2006 is set aside. Appeal is accordingly allowed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order
as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
APRIL
P/VKR

19, 2007.

