FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

*

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005
Date of Decision: 15th May, 2007.

%

M/S MAURIA UDYOG LTD.
..... Appellant.
Through Mr. Ravi Gupta, Advocate.
versus
CORPORATION BANK & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through Mr. Adarsh B. Dial, Sr. Adv. with Ms.
Sumati Anand, Advocate for respondent No.1.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

By way of present appeal, M/s Mauria Udyog Limited has

challenged and questioned order dated 11th April, 2005 passed by
the learned Single Judge dismissing the applications - IA Nos.
388/2005 and 564/2005 for an ad interim injunction under Order
XXXIX, Rules 1 and 2, and IA No. 879/2005 under Order XXXX,
Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to
as the Code, for short) for appointment of a Receiver.
2.

Facts in brief relevant for deciding the present appeal may be

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

noticed.
Lusamatex

Page 2

The appellant had entered into a contract with M/s
Maquinas

Texteis,

LDA

Protugal

for

purchasing

equipment and ancillary items mentioned in sale contract No.
245/2004 dated 21st April, 2004 for total sale consideration of EURO
2,20,000.

Out of the said amount, EURO 22,000 was paid in

advance and the remaining balance of EURO 1,98,000 was secured
by an irrevocable letter of credit issued by Corporation Bank,
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 herein. This letter of credit was opened on
1st June, 2004 and it's validity was upto 31st August, 2004.
3.

It is the case of the appellant that the respondent No. 4, the

seller had failed to send certificate of origin in respect of 17 items
mentioned in the purchase order and, therefore, Corporation Bank
should not have honoured the letter of credit and made payment to
the seller, the respondent No. 4. It was submitted that in view of the
discrepancy in the letter of credit and failure to issue certificate of
origin, the goods remained detained at the port, resulting in heavy
demurrage charges being levied and were ultimately auctioned by
the customs/port authorities.
4.

It may be relevant to state here that before filing of the suit on

17th January, 2005, the respondent Corporation Bank had already
remitted the amount under the letter of credit to the negotiating bank
on 10th January, 2005. To this extent, on the date the suit was filed,

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

Page 3

it was already infructuous.

Prima facie there are several

circumstances which suggest that the appellant was aware that this
payment had already been made. The real purpose and prospect of
the suit was to prevent the respondent Corporation Bank from
invoking bank guarantee issued in it's favour by the respondent No. 3
viz. State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur. This bank guarantee came to
be issued in favour of the respondent Corporation Bank on 29 th
November,

2004

as

a

counter

guarantee

for

a

sum

of

Rs.2,31,34,165/- including the amount covered by the letter of credit,
which was issued by the respondent Corporation Bank in favour of
the seller respondent No. 4.

The said guarantee was issued by

State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur as the appellant had wanted a
change and substitution of it's bankers and release of it's charged
assets and guarantees executed by the appellant and others in
favour of the respondent Corporation Bank in respect of credit
facilities and for issue of the said letter of credit in favour of the
respondent seller. Some of the relevant terms of the bank guarantee
are reproduced below:“a) The
Guarantor
guarantees
and
undertakes to make payment of amount that
may become due to the Bank from the Mauria
Udyog Limited under these guarantees & LCs
issued by the Bank as particularised in
Schedule-I hereto in accordance with this
counter guarantee executed by the Guarantor

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

Page 4

in favour of the Bank.
b)
It shall be open to the Bank to call upon
to Guarantor to make the payment when the
amount becomes due to the beneficiary under
the guarantee executed by the Bank and the
guarantor shall pay the same within two
working days from the date of receipt of such
demand.
c)
The Guarantor shall not be entitled to
raise any dispute regarding the amount
payable to be paid or liability of the Bank in
terms of the guarantee & LCs issued by the
Bank on account of Mauria Udyog Limited.
d)
The Guarantor shall be bound to pay to
the Bank within two working days of receipt of
demand and without demur the amount
demanded of the Guarantor in respect of the
guarantee & LCs issued in the event o f they
being invoked.
e)
XXXX
f)
XXXX
g)
The Guarantor undertakes to indemnify
the Bank against all losses, damage, interest,
charges, expenses etc. that the Bank may
suffer or that may be caused to the Bank on
account of the Bank Guarantees & LCs issued
by the Bank on account of the Mauria Udyog
Limited.”
5.

The said terms clearly show that the guarantee given by State

Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur to the respondent Corporation Bank is
unconditional. The said bank has agreed to make the payment as
demanded without any demur and without questioning the right of the
Corporation Bank. It is well settled that in cases of unconditional
irrevocable bank guarantees like the present one, the courts do not
grant interim stay or injunction unless a case of "egregious fraud" or

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

Page 5

irretrievable injury/injustice, which constitutes special equity is made
out. Egregious fraud is established when there is a clear fraud of
which the bank has notice and the fraud is by the beneficiary who
seeks to benefit by the said fraud committed by him. The fraud must
be of a nature so as to vitiate the entire underlying transaction. (See
BSES Limited versus Fenner India Limited and Another, 2006 (2)
SCC 728 and other cases cited in the said judgment). It is also
equally well settled that a bank guarantee is a separate and distinct
contract from the main or the principal contract i.e. the contract
between the

beneficiary and the person at whose behest the

guarantee was issued.
6.

In this case between the appellant and the respondent,

Corporation Bank, the latter had issued a letter of credit as per the
instructions of the appellant in favour of the respondent seller. The
said letter of credit was honoured and the payment was made before
the suit was filed by the appellant. The respondent Corporation Bank
has invoked the bank guarantee, the second contract, issued by
State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur for payment of it's dues. The
guarantee is unconditional. The question raised is whether invocation
of the bank guarantee should be stayed in view of well settled
parameters as expounded by the courts in this respect.
7.

The appellant submitted that the respondent Corporation Bank

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

Page 6

is guilty of fraud. In this regard he referred to the statements and the
averments made by the State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, the
respondent No. 3 in their written statement. The said respondent in
it's written statement has alleged that it was not aware about the
discrepancies, the defects and disputes between the respondent
Corporation Bank and the appellant with regard to payment of the
letter of credit in favour of the respondent seller. These averments in
the written statement filed by the State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur to
our mind do not make out a case of egregious fraud on the part of
the beneficiary of the counter guarantee i.e. the Corporation Bank. If
at all, it shows that the appellant had concealed certain facts from
the State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur. The beneficiary i.e. the
respondent Corporation Bank cannot be denied and deprived of their
contractual rights, well recognized by the Contract Act and legal
decisions, from invoking the guarantee and encashing the same.
8. The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the
respondent Corporation Bank, had contrary to law and the terms of
the letter of credit, made payment to the respondent buyer and thus
committed fraud is also without merit.

It was submitted by the

counsel for the appellant that the respondent buyer had failed to
furnish documents including certificate of origin for the goods sold.
The certificate of origin as furnished it was argued related to only

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

Page 7

four items and no certificate of origin was furnished for the remaining
balance 13 items. It was also stated that the respondent Corporation
Bank did not inform the appellant that the respondent seller had
subsequently furnished certificate of origin relating to 16/17 items. In
this regard learned counsel for the appellant referred to the
correspondence

exchanged

between

the

appellant

and

the

respondent Corporation Bank.
9.

It is admitted by both the parties that documents under the

letter of credit were received by the respondent Corporation Bank on
12th August, 2004. There were discrepancies which were conveyed
to the negotiating bank/respondent seller by letter dated 14th August,
2004 written by the respondent Corporation Bank.

One of the

discrepancies mentioned was relating to one crane for loading and
unloading the dying machines, STAHLE winch capacity 2000 kg.year
1996. The respondent Corporation Bank has clarified that inspection
test certificate issued by Bureau Veritas had certified that the goods
had been inspected but the chartered engineer's certificate
mentioned 17 items, against 16 items mentioned in the commercial
invoice.

The 17th item was the crane which was not specifically

mentioned.

This defect was rectified and after due rectification,

documents were re-submitted to the respondent Corporation Bank
on 25th August, 2004.

After re-submission, the said defect was

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

removed.

Page 8

The appellant was aware that documents had been

submitted for payment of the letter of credit, as is apparent from the
letter dated 13th August, 2004. The appellant was also aware that
there were some discrepancies that had been pointed out by the
respondent Corporation Bank. It also appears that the appellant was
aware that the documents were re-submitted by and on behalf of the
respondent seller on 25th August, 2004 as is clear from an undated
letter which was received by the respondent Corporation Bank on
27th August, 2004. In this letter it is specifically mentioned that the
"beneficiary has submitted fresh documents in relation to the
discrepant documents already received".

The appellant further

called upon the bank not to honour the documents as they were
discrepant and contrary and not in conformity with the terms and
conditions of the letter of credit. The respondent Corporation Bank
has also explained that the noting dated 28th August, 2005 made by
the Manager of the Corporation Bank that they were yet to receive
revised/rectified documents was made, as the said manager was not
aware that the documents had been received, though the appellant
probably had knowledge of the same as is clear from the letter.
However, subsequent letters written by the appellant dated 1st
October, 2004 onwards, show that the appellant was aware and had
knowledge that revised/rectified documents had been received but

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

Page 9

the appellant kept on insisting that the letter of credit should not be
honoured.
10.

The appellant repeatedly asked the respondent Corporation

bank not to honour the letter of credit. Later on the appellant wanted
change in the terms and conditions of the letter of credit by
requesting for delivery in the presence of the shipper or his
authorized representative for which they would deposit EURO
1,00,000 immediately and the balance amount would be remitted
within 60 days, subject to the goods being found complying with the
contract. The said clause also required checking of the goods to the
satisfaction of the appellant. Further the appellant stated that he
was not required to pay demurrage/ container detention charges.
These requests of the appellant were communicated to the
respondent seller but were not accepted. In response, the
respondent seller asked the respondent Corporation Bank to
unequivocally and definitely state what was intended by open
delivery.

On being informed, the appellant vide letter dated 25th

October, 2004, stated that open delivery means checking physical
quantity and other qualities and on checking the machines and on
being satisfied regarding performance of the machine as per the
contract, they shall make balance payment within 60 days. It was
further stated that demurrage/detention charges levied on the

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

Page 10

container would be borne and paid by the respondent seller.
Thereafter, the appellant was informed that the beneficiary had
confirmed that it shall stand by the earlier proposal and not deviate
from the same.
11.

There was some correspondence exchanged by the parties but

the respondent Corporation Bank referred the matter to the
International Chamber of Commerce, who vide their opinion dated
31st December, 2004, advised the respondent Corporation Bank to
make payment as the corrected documents had been received within
the stipulated period i.e. before the expiry of the Letter of Credit.
Accordingly the payment was made.
12.

We do not think any error can be found in the action and

conduct of the respondent Corporation Bank. If at all the said bank
was obliging and going out of the way to hold and delay payment
under the letter of credit. It is well settled that banks should not
delay payment under the letter of credit and a letter of credit once
invoked should be normally honoured. Letters of Credit have been
referred to as life lines of international industrial trade and
commerce. Interference by the courts, unless an exceptional case of
fraud etc. is made out, should not be resorted to. The Supreme
Court in the case of Federal Bank Limited versus V.M. Jog
Engineering Limited and Others, reported in AIR 2000 SC 3166

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

Page 11

has examined importance of letter of credits and the reason why
courts are reluctant to grant injunction orders. Reference was also
made to Uniform Customs and Practices (UCP, for short) for
documentary credit, which are deemed to be incorporated into every
documentary credit if the said words are used in the document itself.
The said rules relating to contents of certificate of origin provide as
under:“Contents of certificates of origin
198. The certificate of origin must appear to
relate to the invoiced goods. The goods
description in the certificate of origin may be
shown in general terms not inconsistent with
that stated in the credit or by any other
reference indicating a relation to the goods in
a required document.”
13.

In view of the above, the conduct of the respondent corporation

cannot be faulted with in honouring and making payment of the letter
of credit.
14.

The contention of the appellant that the letter of origin had only

four items, has been rightly rejected by the learned Single Judge. It
has been pointed out that the said items are mentioned on last page
of the documents, which were sent to the respondent Corporation
Bank. The first page consists of 13 items. The learned Single Judge
has recorded that the appellant had not come to the Court with clean
hands.

FAO (OS) NO. 110/2005

15.

Page 12

For the reasons given above and by the learned Single Judge

in the impugned order, we do not find any merit in the present appeal
and the same is dismissed. The respondent Corporation bank will
also be entitled to costs which are assessed at Rs.10,000/-.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
MAY 15, 2007.
VKR/P

