FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) NO. 67

OF 2007

th

%

Date of Decision : 19 April, 2007.

NATIONAL PROJECTS CONSTRUCTION
CORPORATION & ANR.
...... Appellants.
Through Mr. Amarendra Saran, ASG with Ms.
Madhu Saran, Mr. Amit Kumar, Mr. Amit
Anand Tiwari, Mr. Vivek Singh & Mr. Jai
Bansal, Advocates.

VERSUS
SADHU SINGH & CO.
.... Respondent.
Through Mr. G.N.Aggarwal, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 2

SANJIV KHANNA, J :

1. By the present Order, we will be deciding the question of
territorial jurisdiction.
th

2. On 30 October, 1996 an Award was passed by Mr. K.D. Thite,
Retd. Chief Engineer, Central Water Commission. On 21
February,

1997,

Construction

the

appellants-M/s.

Corporation

Ltd,

who

are

National

st

Projects

questioning

the

jurisdiction of this Court, filed objections to the said Award
under Sections 30 and 33 of the Arbitration Act, 1940
(hereinafter referred to as the Act, for short). After about 9 years
when the matter was finally being heard by the learned Single
Judge, the appellant herein raised objection to the territorial
jurisdiction of this Court. The learned Single Judge noticed that
the objection did not form part of the pleadings and held that it
was too late for the appellants to raise the same. It was further
held that this Court did not lack inherent jurisdiction and
therefore the parties by consent or by act of omission and

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 3

commission had waived their right to object to lack of territorial
jurisdiction. Learned Single Judge also noticed that though the
works were executed in the State of Himachal Pradesh but the
contract between the parties was executed at New Delhi and
therefore Courts, both at Himachal Pradesh and Delhi,
had/have jurisdiction to take cognisance of the proceedings
under the Act.
3. Learned Additional Solicitor General while questioning the
Order passed by the learned Single Judge submitted that
Section 34(1) of the Act is an over-riding provision and as
proceedings for appointment of arbitrator had been initially
initiated in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, parties by
consent or acquiescence or by act of omission and commission
could not have conferred jurisdiction on this Court. It was
argued that the present case is one of lack of inherent
jurisdiction. In this regard, he relied upon two decisions of the
Supreme Court in Kumbha Mawji versus Dominion of India
reported in AIR 1953 SC 313 and Guru Nanak Foundation

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 4

versus Ratan Singh and Sons reported in (1981) 4 SCC 634.
4. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that
the appellants had voluntarily invoked and unconditionally
submitted to the jurisdiction of this Court by filing objections
under Sections 30 and 33 of the Act. It was pointed out that the
issues in the case were

framed on 14

th

September, 1998.

Reference was made to Section 41 of the Act and Section 21 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the
Code, for short). Reliance was placed upon the following
judgments : National Aluminium Co. Ltd versus Pressteel
and Fabrication Pvt. Ltd and another reported in (2004) 1
SCC 540, Hira Lal Patni versus Kali Nath reported in AIR
1962 SC 199, Pathumma and others (daughter of Koopilan
Uneen) versus Kuntalan Kutty (son of Koopilan Uneen)
reported in AIR 1981 SC 1683, Koopilan Uneen's versus
Koopilan Uneen's reported in AIR 1981 SC 1683, M/s. Savani
Transport Pvt. Ltd versus Gangadhar Ghosh reported in
(1986) 1 CHN 443, Mazid Ali (decd.) through LRs versus

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 5

Shri Lakshman Rabidas and others reported in AIR 1992
Guahati 91, Punjab National Bank and others versus M/s.
Millen Sales Corporation and others reported in AIR 1997
Rajasthan 151 and Shri Prasun Roy versus The Calcutta
Metropolitan Development Authority and another reported in
1987 (4) SCC 217.
5. Facts relevant for deciding the question may now be noticed.
th

On 18 August, 1986, an Agreement was executed between the
appellant and the respondent at Delhi for execution of works
contract in the State of Himachal Pradesh.
6. Disputes and differences arose between the parties and the
arbitration clause was invoked by the respondent. In May 1989,
the respondent had filed a Petition under Sections 8 and 20 of
the Act before the High Court of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla
for filing of the arbitration Agreement and appointment of an
Arbitrator. However, it appears that before the filing of the
Petition, the appellant had appointed a sole Arbitrator and on
th

19 October, 1989 when this fact was brought to the notice of

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 6

the High Court of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla, the Petition was
dismissed as infructuous.
7. Subsequently, there was change in the sole Arbitrator with
Mr.K.D. Thite, Retd. Chief Engineer, Central Water Commission
being appointed as an arbitrator. He made and published his
th

Award on 30 October, 1986.
8. Objections to the Award under Sections 30 and 33 of the Act
st

were filed by the appellant in this Court on 21 February, 1997.
In the objections no plea challenging the territorial jurisdiction of
th

this Court was raised. On 14 September, 1998 issues were
framed on the objections filed by the appellant under Sections
30 and 33 of the Act. It is admitted that objection to the
territorial jurisdiction was raised before the learned Single
Judge during the course of final arguments in the year 2006.
Challenge to territorial jurisdiction was never raised in the
pleadings.
9. The answer to the question depends upon the provisions of
Sections 2(c) and 31(4) of the Act and Sections 20 and 21 of

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 7

the Code. For the sake of convenience, the said provisions are
reproduced below:
Section 2 (c) :”Court” means a Civil Court
having jurisdiction to decide the questions
forming the subject-matter of the reference if
the same had been the subject-matter of a
suit, but does not, except for the purpose of
arbitration proceedings under section 21,
include a Small Cause Court”
Section
31(4)
:
“JurisdictionNotwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this Act or in any law for the time being in
force, where in any reference any application
under this Act has been made in a Court
competent to entertain it, that Court alone shall
have
jurisdiction
over
the
arbitration
proceedings and all subsequent applications
arising out of that reference and the arbitration
proceedings shall be made in that Court and in
no other Court.”
Section 20, CPC
: Other suits to be
instituted where defendants reside or cause
of action arises.-Subject to the limitations
aforesaid, every suit shall be instituted in a
Court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants
where there are more than one, at the time of
the commencement of the suit, actually and
voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 8

personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the defendants, where there are
more than one, at the time of the
commencement of the suit, actually and
voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or
personally works for gain, provided that in such
cases either the leave of the Court is given, or
the defendants who do not reside, or carry on
business, or personally work for gain, as
aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
Explanation: A corporation shall be deemed to
carry on business at its sole or principal office
in India or, in respect of any cause of action
arising at any place where it has also a
subordinate office, at such place.”
“21. Objections to jurisdiction-(1) No
objection as to the place of suing shall be
allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court
unless such objection was taken in the Court of
first instance at the earliest possible
opportunity and in all cases where issues are
settled at or before such settlement, and
unless there has been a consequent failure of
justice.
(2) No objection as to the competence of a
Court with reference to the pecuniary limits of
its jurisdiction shall be allowed by any
Appellate or Revisional Court unless such
objection was taken in the Court of first

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 9

instance at the earliest possible opportunity,
and, in all cases where issues are settled, at or
before such settlement, and unless there has
been a consequent failure of justice.
(3) No objection as to the competence of the
executing Court with reference to the local
limits of its jurisdiction shall be allowed by any
Appellate or Revisional Court unless such
objection was taken in the executing Court at
the earliest possible opportunity, and unless
there has been a consequent failure of justice.”
10.Section 2(c) of the Act states that a Court

has jurisdiction to

decide the subject matter of arbitration, if on the same subject
matter it had jurisdiction to entertain a civil suit. Thus, in view of
Section 2(c) of the Act, if any of the parties were competent to
invoke jurisdiction of this Court in a civil suit on the subject
matter, this Court will be a competent court and have territorial
jurisdiction. The contract between the parties was executed in
Delhi and therefore at least part of cause of action has arisen in
Delhi. To this extent, there is no dispute between the appellant
and the respondent that this Court has territorial jurisdiction to
decide the objections under Sections 30 and 33 of the Act in

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 10

view of Section 20 of the Code read with Section 2(c) of the Act.
11.The appellant, however, contends that in view of the nonobstante provision in Section 31(4) of the Act, the High Court of
Himachal Pradesh at Shimla alone has exclusive jurisdiction to
decide the objections under Sections 30 and 33 of the Act as
the respondent had earlier invoked jurisdiction of the said High
Court by filing a Petition under Sections 8 and 20 of the Act. It
has been held in Kumbha Mawji (supra) that Section 31(4) of
the Act would apply even after award is made. The phrase “in a
reference” it was observed, is comprehensive enough to also
cover an application made after the arbitration is complete and
the award is made. Accordingly, it was held that Section 31(4)
of the Act would vest exclusive jurisdiction in the Court in which
an application for filing of an Award was made for the first time
under Section 14 of the Act. In the case of Guru Nanak
Foundation (supra) it was held that Section 31(4) carves out
an exception to general question of jurisdiction as it is a nonobstante clause and excludes anything contained in the whole

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 11

Act or any other law for the time being in force.

Once

conditions of Section 31(4) of the Act are satisfied, the Court
where the proceedings under reference were initiated at the first
instance stands vested with exclusive jurisdiction to the
exclusion of other Courts mentioned in Section 31(1) or as
envisaged in Section 14(2) of the Act. Section 31(4) ousts the
jurisdiction of other Courts and confers sole and exclusive
jurisdiction to the court whose jurisdiction was invoked for the
first time in a reference under the Act.
12.The object and purpose behind Section 31(4) is to avoid conflict
of decisions by different Courts in respect of arbitration
proceedings pursuant to a reference. Under the provisions of
Sections 15 to 20 of the Code, different Courts can have
concurrent jurisdiction on the subject matter of arbitration.
Parties may have option to invoke jurisdiction of Courts at
different places of their choice. To prevent scramble and
conflicting decisions, with the parties having right to approach
courts at different places under Sections 15 to 20 of the Code,

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 12

Section 31(4) of the Act was enacted to ensure that once
jurisdiction of a Court of competent jurisdiction at one place is
invoked by one party then all further proceedings under the Act
will take place in the Court whose jurisdiction was invoked first
and not in the Courts at other places.
13.Section 31(4) therefore acts as an overriding exception to
Sections 15 to 20 of the Code relating to the place of suing. The
right and option of the parties under Section 15 to 20 of the
Code gets curtailed and restricted. Section 31(4) of the Act is a
non-obstante and a over-riding provision which applies
irrespective of whether or not a court has jurisdiction to
entertain subsequent proceedings under the Act in view of
Sections 15 to 20 of the Code, when jurisdiction of a competent
court has been earlier invoked.
14.Section 21 of the Code, on the other hand, does not deal with
jurisdiction of the Courts to deal with a subject matter. Section
21 cannot be invoked by any party to institute a suit or file
proceedings under the Act. Section 21 incorporates principle of

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 13

estoppel and acquiescence as enshrined in Section 115 of the
Evidence Act. It prohibits a person from challenging territorial
jurisdiction of a Court after the said party has submitted to the
jurisdiction of the Court.

Section 21 of the Code does not

confer jurisdiction on any Court but prevents a party from
challenging and questioning the jurisdiction of the Court. The
object and purpose of Section 21 of the Code is distinct and
separate from the object and purpose behind Sections 15 to 20
of the Code.
15.Section 21 of the Code is applicable in view of Section 41 of the
Act which makes all provisions of the Code applicable to
proceedings in the Court initiated under the Act. The object and
purpose behind Section 21 of the Code and the scope of it's
operation is not in any way curtailed, circumscribed or
controlled by Sections 15 to 20 of the Code and also by Section
31(4) of the Act.

In P.K. Ramachandran versus State of

Kerala and others reported in (2005) 11 SCC 486 question
arose about territorial jurisdiction of the Court in proceedings

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 14

relating to a challenge of the award under the Act. The High
Court came to the conclusion that the Court where proceedings
had been initiated did not have territorial jurisdiction. In these
circumstances the orders were set aside as vitiated for want of
territorial jurisdiction to be transferred to a competent court. The
Supreme Court set aside the judgment holding that the matter
was squarely covered by Section 21 of the Code and want of
territorial jurisdiction must be pleaded at the earliest opportunity
and in all cases before issues are settled. It was further held
that the appellate or revisional court should not upset an order
or decree for want of territorial jurisdiction unless it is satisfied
that it has resulted in consequential failure of justice. This
judgment does not directly deal with the question raised but
holds that Section 21 of the Code is applicable to proceedings
under the Act
16.If the above distinction between Sections 15 to 20 and Section
21 is kept in mind, there is no difficulty in applying the nonobstante provisions of Section 31(4) of the Act to Sections 15 to

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 15

20 of the Code and not to Section 21 of the Code. Section 31(4)
of the Act will therefore over-ride and confer exclusive
jurisdiction to the competent Court whose jurisdiction was first
invoked by any of the parties on the basis of the provisions
mentioned in Sections 15 to 20 of the Code. Section 21 of the
Code operates in a different sphere and is not curtailed and
over-written by non-obstante clause contained in Section 31(4)
of the Act. Section 21 of the Code has independent existence
and prevents a party from challenging the territorial jurisdiction
of the Court, which is not subject matter of Section 31(4) of the
Act. Section 31(4) of the Act does not state when and in what
circumstances a party can or cannot challenge jurisdiction of
the court.
17.It may also be mentioned here that it is well settled that there is
difference between inherent lack of jurisdiction which goes to
the root or competence of the Court to adjudicate a case and
mere lack of territorial jurisdiction or pecuniary jurisdiction.
(Refer, Kiran versus Chaman AIR 1954 SC 340, Hira Lal
versus Kalinath AIR 1962 SC 199 and Koopilan (supra).

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 16

18. In the case of Hira Lal Patni (supra) it was held as follows:
“4. ...There was no inherent lack of jurisdiction in
the Bombay High Court where the suit was
instituted by the plaintiff-decree holder. The plaint
had been filed after obtaining the necessary leave
of the High Court under clause 12 of the Letters
Patent. Whether the leave obtained had been
rightly obtained or wrongly obtained is not a matter
which can be agitated at the execution stage. The
validity of a decree can be challenged in execution
proceedings only on the ground that the court
which passed the decree was lacking in inherent
jurisdiction in the sense that it could not have
seisin of the case because the subject-matter was
wholly foreign to its jurisdiction or that the
defendant was dead at the time the suit had been
instituted or decree passed, or some such other
ground which could have the effect of rendering
the court entirely lacking in jurisdiction in respect of
the subject-matter of the suit or over the parties to
it. But in the instant case there was no such
inherent lack of jurisdiction. The decision of the
Privy Council in the case of Ledgard v. Bull [13
Indian Appeals 134] is an authority for the
proposition that consent or waiver can cure defect
of jurisdiction but cannot cure inherent lack of
jurisdiction. In that case, the suit had been
instituted in the Court of the Subordinate Judge,
who was incompetent to try it. By consent of the
parties, the case was transferred to the Court of
the District Judge for convenience of trial. It was
laid down by the Privy Council that as the court in
which the suit had been originally instituted was

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 17

entirely lacking in jurisdiction, in the sense that it
was incompetent to try it, whatever happened
subsequently was null and void because consent
of parties could not operate to confer jurisdiction
on a court which was incompetent to try the suit.
That decision has no relevance to a case like the
present where there could be no question of
inherent lack of jurisdiction in the sense that the
Bombay High Court was incompetent to try a suit
of that kind. The objection to its territorial
jurisdiction is one which does not go to the
competence of the court and can, therefore, be
waived. In the instant case, when the plaintiff
obtained the leave of the Bombay High Court on
the original side, under clause 12 of the Letters
Patent, the correctness of the procedure or of the
order granting the leave could be questioned by
the defendant or the objection could be waived by
him. When he agreed to refer the matter to
arbitration through court, he would be deemed to
have waived his objection to the territorial
jurisdiction of the court, raised by him in his written
statement. It is well settled that the objection as to
local jurisdiction of a court does not stand on the
same footing as an objection to the competence of
a court to try a case. Competence of a court to try
a case goes to the very root of the jurisdiction, and
where it is lacking, it is a case of inherent lack of
jurisdiction. On the other hand, an objection as to
the local jurisdiction of a court can be waived and
this principle has been given a statutory
recognition by enactments like Section 21 of the
Code of Civil Procedure. Having consented to
have the controversy between the parties resolved
by reference to arbitration through court, the

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 18

defendant deprived himself of the right to question
the authority of the court to refer the matter to
arbitration or of the arbitrator to render the award.
It is clear, therefore, that the defendant is stopped
from challenging the jurisdiction of the Bombay
High Court to entertain the suit and to make the
reference to the arbitrator. He is equally stopped
from challenging the authority of the arbitrator to
render the award. In our opinion, this conclusion is
sufficient to dispose of the appeal.”
19.

In Koopilan (supra) the Supreme Court has held that in view of

Section 21, the objections to place of suing can be entertained by the
Appellate Court when three conditions are cumulatively satisfied and
co-exist : (i) objection of territorial jurisdiction was taken at the first
instance; (ii) taken at the earliest possibility and where issues are
framed before settlement of issues and (iii) there has been
consequential failure of justice. It has not been argued before us that
there has been consequential failure of justice and/or the other two
conditions are satisfied in the present case. In fact the appellant had
filed objections under Sections 30 and 33 of the Act before this court.
The objection to territorial jurisdiction was raised for the first time after
9 years when the objections were being heard. It will be unjust and

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 19

unfair to the court and the respondent to allow the appellant to raise
this objection after substantial time has been spent by the court. In
case of Church of South India Trust Association versus Telugu
Church Council, (1996) 2 SCC 520 the Supreme Court observed as
under:
“27. ...In Section 21 of the present Code , it
has been provided that No objection as to the
place of suing shall be allowed by any
appellate or revisional court unless such
objection was taken in the court of first
instance at the earliest possible opportunity
and in all cases where issues are settled at or
before such settlement, and unless there has
been a consequent failure of justice. Having
regard to the said provision, it has been held
that though the defect of jurisdiction, whether
it is pecuniary or territorial, or whether it is in
respect of subject-matter of the action, strikes
at the very authority of the court to pass any
decree and such a defect cannot be cured
even by consent of parties, the policy of the
Legislature has been to treat objections to
territorial jurisdiction as technical and not open
to consideration by an appellate court, unless
there has been a prejudice on the merits.
(See: Kiran Singh v. Chaman Paswan).”

20.

It is accordingly held that the challenge to territorial

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 20

jurisdiction therefore cannot be raised before us by the
appellant as the three conditions mentioned above are not
satisfied. Section 31(4) of the Act does not in any way over-ride
and eclipse Section 21 of the Code. Section 21 of the Code
continues to apply independently of Section 31(4) of the Act.
We reject the contention and ground raised by the learned
counsel for the appellant questioning the territorial jurisdiction of
this Court to entertain and decide the objections filed by the
appellant under Sections 30 and 33 of the Act.
21.

To come up for further hearing on the objections filed by the
th

appellant before the Regular Bench on 30 April, 2007. Costs of
this order will form part of the final order.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
April
P

19, 2007.

FAO(OS) 67-2007

Page 21

