*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 1630/2007

VIJAY KUMAR

..... Petitioner
Through Mr.L.B. Rai, Advocate.

versus
DDA

..... Respondent
Through Mr.M.M.Singh, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
%
10.04.2008
1.

In 1989, the petitioner got himself registered under the Special Housing

Registration Scheme for SC/ST Persons by depositing Rs.12,000/. It is the
case of the petitioner that in spite of writing letters, he was not allotted any plot
and in these circumstances he had filed Writ Petition (Civil) No. 8305/2006
against DDA. The Writ Petition was disposed of on 23rd May, 2006. The only
prayer made in the Writ Petition was that the petitioner should be made aware
of the present status of his application. The Court recorded that as per the
records produced by the learned counsel for the DDA,

allotment was made

in favour of the petitioner in 2002 but the postal envelope containing the
demand cum allotment letter was returned back with the report “left”. In these

circumstances, while disposing of the Writ Petition, it was observed that the
petitioner was now made aware of the fate of his application and he should
take further action in consultation with his lawyer.
2.

The petitioner thereafter moved an application under Right to

Information Act and got the details of the allotment made in 2002 as well as
detail of the postal envelope containing the demand cum allotment letter. The
petitioner has filed the present Writ Petition claiming right to allotment.
3.

The stand of the respondent-DDA is that the petitioner was allotted a flat

in 2002, but the demand cum allotment letter was received back unserved
with the remark “left” and the registration of the petitioner stands cancelled.
4.

Learned counsel for the petitioner on the other hand has drawn my

attention to several documents filed by the petitioner including the caste
certificate issued by the Deputy Commissioner, North District, Delhi, copy of
FIR No. 656/2000, copy of telegrams as well as income tax returns which
clearly show that the petitioner in 2002-03 was residing at 3734, Kuch
Mohaltar Khan, Mori Gate, and had not shifted from the said address.
Demand cum allotment letter was sent at this address. The petitioner states
that he never received the demand sum allotment letter and the report of
postal authority that the petitioner had left the said address was wrong. The
voluminous documents filed by the petitioner support the stand of the
petitioner. The postal report is wrong.

5.

The petitioner has suffered and denied allotment because of wrong

endorsements made by the postal authorities stating that the petitioner had
left the said address. The postal authorities had only once tried to serve the
petitioner. It may be noted here that the respondent also did not make a
second attempt to send the letter. No show cause notice was issued before
terminating and cancelling the registration of the petitioner. The petitioner had
got himself registered in the year 1989 and has waited for more than 18 years
since then for allotment of a flat. It is difficult to conceive that the petitioner
would have refused to accept the said demand cum allotment letter issued in
the year 2002 after waiting for 13 years. Preponderance predicates that the
petitioner would have happily accepted the allotment letter had the postal
authorities tried to serve the envelope containing the allotment letter on the
petitioner. His long wait to have a roof over his head would have come to an
end.
6.

Keeping in view the above facts, I feel that the petitioner should be

given the benefit of another allotment and his registration should not be
treated as cancelled. Petitioner will, therefore, be entitled to allotment of a
MIG flat on current costs. Allotment will be made within a period of three
months from today. If required, DDA will conduct a mini draw.
Writ Petition is accordingly disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
APRIL
P/VKR

10, 2008.

