* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) 99/2007

ANJALI MIRCHANDANI

..... Petitioner

Through : Mukesh Anand with Mr. Shailesh Tiwari,
Advocates

versus

D.D.A.

..... Respondent
Through : Mr. Yeeshu Jain, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 13.02.2008

The petitioner was registered in 1982 under the Self Financing Scheme.
On 20th October, 1983 she was allocated a flat at Sarita Vihar. The file of DDA
relating to the said period is missing. The petitioner, however, claims that she
did not receive the allocation letter. It appears that in 1986 the petitioner for

the first time represented that she had not received allocation letter and the
same may have been lost in transit. However, after writing letters in 1986 the
petitioner became silent and stopped correspondence though it is alleged that
on 23rd July 1989 one letter was written to the Lieutenant Governor. The
purported letter dated 23rd July, 1989 does not indicate and mention the
registration number, the scheme or any other details. There is no proof that
the said letter was served or even sent to the Lieutenant Governor.
It is apparent that the petitioner maintained silence after 1986 and did
nothing for another 10 years till 1996. On 9th April, 1996, the petitioner again
sought to revive her claim to the allocation of flat made in 1983 at Sarita Vihar.
Paragraph 2 and 3 of the said letter reads as under :
“I understand that in the draw, i was declared successful
to the allocation of flat SF+TF-Sec 1, PKT D, SARITA
VIHAR, New Delhi. this I came to know through my
father who happened to know from the DDA notice
board.
On non-receipt of Demand cum allocation letter from
DDA, I sent a reminder in February, 1984. As i did not
receive the allotment all these years, many reminders
were issued and personal visits were made during all
these years.”
Paragraph 2 makes it apparent that the petitioner was aware of
allocation of flat at Sarita Vihar in 1983 and her father had seen her name
displayed on the DDA notice board.

It may be noted here that in the meanwhile the petitioner was allocated
another flat at Kondli Ghoroli under the same registration in the Self Finance
Scheme. The petitioner refused to accept the said allotment by her letter
dated 29th December, 1990.
The petitioner also applied and was registered under the 6 & 6A Self
Financing Scheme which was floated in the year 1991. She was allocated a
flat in Jasola, which is near Sarita Vihar in the year 1992. The petitioner
however, could not arrange for the money to pay installments and sought for
extension of time. Extension of time was not granted and the allocation was
cancelled on 18/8/92.
The petitioner also applied for a allotment of plot of land at Rohini. She
has been allotted 60 sq.mts plot at Rohini. She has paid full consideration for
the said plot.
Now, the petitioner wants to reagitate her claim over the flat at Sarita
Vihar. The petitioner relies upon letter dt.10th February, 2000 which was
written by the respondent stating that her request for allocation of flat in Block
D category 3, Sarita Vihar which was allocated to her in 1983 has been
examined and acceded to. This letter was withdrawn by the DDA on 1 st
October, 2002 and the petitioner was asked to apply for refund of the
registration amount. DDA has explained in the counter affidavit the

circumstances under which letter dated 10th February, 2000 was issued and
why it was withdrawn on 1st October, 2002. It appears that the petitioner had
made representation which was examined by the Grievance Redressal
Committee appointed by DDA and on the recommendation of the Committee,
the letter was issued. However, a letter from the Dy. Director (Housing), DDA
written on 29th April, 2003 clarifies that when the case was examined by the
Audit Party as well as the Crime Branch, it was found that there was a delay
of nearly 8 years and Grievance Redressal Committee had condoned the
delay in gross violation of existing policies. Reference was also made to the
fact that the petitioner had been allotted a flat at Kondli Ghoroli which she did
not accept and had subsequently applied under a different Self Financing
Scheme and was allotted flat at Jasola on 31st December, 1991. She had
requested for extension of time to make payment but this was refused and the
allocation was cancelled. It was specifically stated that the petitioner after

cancellation of the said allocation had again sought to revive her claim in
1996 for allotment of Sarita Vihar flat allocated to her in 1983.
The present writ petition was filed in the year 2007 and the petitioner
claims right to allotment of a flat at Sarita Vihar on the basis of allotment letter
which was issued in the year 1983 and also seeks to rely upon the letter dated

10th February, 2000 which was withdrawn on 10th January, 2002. The petition
itself highly belated and is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches.
In view of the above facts, I do not think that the petitioner is entitled to
allotment of a flat at Sarita Vihar on the basis of allocation made in 1983.
Petitioner will send details of bank account and the original registration
receipt within 10 days to the respondent/DDA. DDA will refund the entire
amount deposited by the petitioner along with interest in terms of their scheme
and policy within 3 weeks from the date the original receipt and details of bank
accounts are furnished.
Accordingly, the Writ Petition is disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.

FEBRUARY 13, 2008
vld/P

