* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) 837/2008

M/S.BAHUJAN KALYAN SAMITI (REGD.)

.....Petitioner

Through Mr. P. Chakraborty,Advocate.

versus

UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Neeraj, Advocate for
GNCTD.
Mr. O.P. Saxena, Advocate for DDA.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 19.02.2008

1. The petitioners had occupied acquired land for which compensation has
already been paid to the land owners. The respondent-DDA has demolished
structures and removed encroachments to construct a road having adequate

width as per the lay out plan. Learned counsel for the petitioner does not
dispute that demolition was required in public interest as the road is to be
utilized by the general public. The petitioner, however, claims right to
allotment of alternative land on the basis of demolition. He relies upon the
scheme for regularization of unauthorized colonies. It is also submitted that
the demolition was carried out in violation of the provisions of the Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971.
2. I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the
petitioner but do not find any merit in the same. The petitioners were
unauthorized occupants who had encroached upon Government land. The
entire colony has not been demolished in view of the scheme for
regularization which is pending consideration. Only those houses on the
portion earmarked for the public road in the lay out plan have been
demolished. As rightly pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioner
himself, general public interest requires that the road should be free from all
encroachments and of an adequate width as stipulated in the lay out plan to
ensure smooth flow of traffic.
3. The petitioner cannot claim any right to alternative allotment contrary to the
policy framed by the respondent-DDA and MCD. The said policy basically
relates to relocation of J.J. Clusters. It is not the case of the petitioner that

they are covered by the said policy. Admittedly, in the present case, the pucca
construction made by the petitioners on the Government land have been
demolished, to make way for the road. I may here make reference to the
judgment of this Court in Wazirpur Bartan Nirmata Sangh versus Union of
India reported in (103) 2003 DLT 654. Appeal against the said judgment filed
by the respondent-UOI is pending before the Supreme Court. Liberty has
been granted by the Supreme Court to the respondents-local authorities to
follow their policy. In the present case, the respondents themselves are of the
opinion that the petitioners' case is not covered by any policy. On the contrary,
the petitioners want this Court to issue mandamus that the respondents
should allot alternative land to them. In view of the above, I am not inclined to
issue any such direction or Mandamus.
4. The petitioners have relied upon the provisions of Public Premises (Eviction
of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971. The petitioners were admittedly
unauthorized encroachers on the Government land. They have not been
allotted and did not occupy the land at the initial stage pursuant to any
allotment letter issued by the respondents. It cannot be said that the
petitioners were or are entitled to any protection or can be regarded as being
in settled possession. This contention of the petitioner is therefore rejected.

5. In view of the above, I do not find any merit in the present Writ Petition and
the same is accordingly dismissed.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
FEBRUARY 19, 2008
P

