*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 14910/2006
RAJINDER SINGH
..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Jyoti Singh, Advocate.
versus
UOI & ORS

..... Respondent
Through Ms.Sangeeta Chandra, Advocate for
counsel.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%
1.

ORDER
10.04.2008
Case of the petitioner is that he is a nephew of late Mr.Mam Chand,

a bachelor who expired on 8th August, 1999. The petitioner has also
obtained probate of the last Will executed by late Mr.Mam Chand.
2.

DDA has refused to transfer the allotment of plot no.103, Block-D,

Bagdola (Dwarka) measuring 175 sq.mts. on the ground that the petitioner
himself had filed documents like affidavit handing over physical possession,
receipt agreement and General Power of Attorney executed by late
Mr.Mam Chand in favour of the petitioner.

It is stated that late Mr. Mam

Chand had transferred the property to the petitioner during his life time. I

have examined these documents. These documents do not mention that
any consideration was paid by the petitioner to the deceased for execution
of the said documents. The so-called agreement to sell in fact is an
arbitration

agreement

which

also

refers

to

some

other

understanding/agreement between the petitioner and late Mr.Mam Chand.
3.

I feel that the matter requires deeper scrutiny and examination as the

petitioner is nephew of the deceased-late Mr. Mam Chand, who died
without any Class I legal heirs. It will be open to the petitioner to establish
and satisfy DDA that no sale consideration was paid for execution of the
aforesaid documents by producing copy of bank accounts and other
details, etc. It will be also open to the petitioner to explain why the
deceased-Mr.Mam Chand had executed the said documents in favour of
the petitioner.
4.

Unearned increase is certainly payable in cases where transfer is

made for consideration and Will is also one of the documents executed by
the allottee as a part of the said transaction.

However, in case there was

no transaction or transfer between the allottee and the beneficiary under
the Will and the Will is executed out of natural love and affection, different
consequences will flow.

5.

In these circumstances, I feel that the respondent-DDA should re-

examine the matter and pass a speaking order dealing with the contentions
raised by the petitioner. Petitioner will also be given an opportunity of
personal hearing and right to produce documents and affidavits in support
of his claim . Petitioner will appear before the Deputy Director (L&A) on 5 th
May, 2008 at 3.00 p.m. A speaking order will be passed by the DDA. It will
be open to the petitioner to challenge the said order, if required.
Writ Petition is accordingly disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
APRIL
P/VKR

10, 2008.

