C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.1

Reportable

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

COMPANY JURISDICTION

COMPANY APPEAL NO. 4/2005

DATE OF DECISION: 19th February, 2007
M/S CHOPRA HOSPITAL (P) LTD.,
THROUGH ITS DIRECTORS & ORS.

.......Appellants.
Through Mr. R. Singh, Advocate.

VERSUS

MS. USHA CHOPRA

....... Respondent.
Through Mr. H.L. Tiku, Sr. Adv. with
Mr.Sangram Patnaik & Ms. Laxmi Chauhan,
Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.2

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
SANJIV KHANNA, J :
1. The present Appeal under Section 10F of the Companies Act, 1956

(hereinafter referred to as the Act, for short) has been filed by Dr. Ashok
Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala, Dr. (Mrs.) Nirmala Dwarkadas and Mrs.
Smita Motiwala (hereinafter referred to as the appellants). The
appellants claim to be representing M/s Chopra Hospital Private Limited
(hereinafter referred to as the hospital). The respondent in the present
Appeal is one Dr. (Mrs.) Usha Chopra.
2. The respondent herein had filed a petition under Sections 397-398 of

the Act against the appellants herein, the hospital and some others. The
said petition was allowed by the Company Law Board by its order dated
2nd March, 2005 with the conclusion that alleged appointment of Dr.
Ashish Gupta and Dr. Anil Agarwal as Directors on 14th May, 1999 was
void and illegal and accordingly appointments of other directors made

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.3

by them would also fail. The appointment of directors was also faulted
for want of notice to the respondent and her husband, who admittedly
were the first and continuing Directors of the hospital. It has also been
held that allotment of shares in the hospital to the appellants and
members of their group was contrary to the provisions of the Act and
Memorandum and Articles of Association and therefore, bad in law. The
Company Law Board has given a finding that the respondent and her
husband are the only Directors and shareholders of the hospital, all
other appointments and shareholding have been set aside.
3. It may be noted that Dr. Ashish Gupta and Dr. Anil Agarwal have not

challenged and questioned the judgment dated 2nd March, 2005 and
have accepted the same.
4. An appeal under Section 10F of the Act is maintainable only on

questions of law and is normally decided on the basis of facts as found
by the Company Law Board by applying principles of law to the said
facts. This is because on findings of fact, Company Law Board is the
final authority. Thus, facts as found by the Company Law Board cannot
be challenged in the present Appeal except on the ground of perversity
or on the ground that the facts as found were based on no material and
evidence.

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.4

5. The Supreme Court in Sree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. versus CIT reported

in 1956 SCR 691, after examining similar provision, namely, section 66
of the Income Tax Act,1922 had observed:
“21. ...In Wali Mohammad v. Mohammad Baksh 57IA 86:59
MLJ 53, Sir Benod Mitter exhaustively reviewed the
authorities on the questions and stated the law in the
following terms:
No doubt questions of law and fact are often difficult to
disentangle, but the following propositions are clearly
established:
( 1 ) There is no jurisdiction to entertain a second appeal on
the ground of erroneous finding of facts, however gross the
error may seem to be: See Durga Choudrain v. Jawahir Singh
Choudhri
1889-90)
17
IA
122,
127.
( 2 ) The proper legal effect of a proved fact is essentially a
question of law, but the question whether a fact has been
proved when evidence for and against has been properly
admitted is necessarily a pure question of fact. Nafar
Chandra Pal v. Shukur 1917)-180 45 IA 183 .
( 3 ) Where the question to be decided is one of fact, it
does not involve an issue of law merely because
documents which were not instruments of title or otherwise
the direct foundation of rights but were really historical
matters, have to be construed for the purpose of deciding
the question. See Midnapur Zamindary Co. v. Uma Charan
Mandal
45
MLJ
663
PC:
29
CWN
131.
( 4 ) A second appeal would not lie because some portion
of the evidence might be contained in a document or
documents and the first appellate court had made a
mistake as to its meaning: See Nowbutt Singh v. Chutter
Dharee Singh (1873)19 Suth WR 222.

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.5

25. We have discussed the authorities at great length, as
some of the observations contained therein appear, at first
sight, to render plausible the contention of the appellant, and
it seems desirable that the true meaning of those
observations should be clarified, lest error and misconception
should embarrass and fog the administration of law. The
position that emerges on the authorities may thus be summed
up:
( 1 ) When the point for determination is a pure question of
law such as construction of a statute or document of title,
the decision of the Tribunal is open to reference to the
court
under
Section
66(1).
( 2 ) When the point for determination is a mixed question
of law and fact; while the finding of the Tribunal on the facts
found is final its decision as to the legal effect of those
finding is a question of law which can be reviewed by the
court.
( 3 ) A finding on a question of fact is open to attack, under
Section 66(1) as erroneous in law when there is no
evidence to support it or if it is perverse.
( 4 ) When the finding is one of fact, the fact that it is itself
in inference from other basic facts will not alter its character
as one of fact.”

6. Again in Raja Bahadur Kamakhya Narain Singh versus CIT reported in
(1969) 3 SCC 791, the Supreme Court observed:“The case of Sree Menakshi Mills Ltd. v. CIT holds that

where an ultimate finding on an issue is an inference to
be drawn from facts found on application of a principle of

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.6

law, there is a mixed question of law and fact and such
an inference in such a case is a question of law open to
review by the Court. On the other hand, when the final
determination of the issue does not involve any
application of a principle of law, an inference is a pure
inference of fact drawn from the other basic facts. Such
an inference can be attacked only if there is no evidence
to support it, or, if it is perverse. Since the expression
“adventure in the nature of trade” implies the existence of
certain elements in the transactions which in law would
invest them with the character of trade or business and
the question on that account becomes a mixed question
of law and fact, the Court can review the Tribunal’ s
finding if it has misdirected itself in law.”

7.In Sir Shadi Lal Sugar and General Mills Ltd. versus CIT reported in
(1987) 4 SCC 722, it was held:“15. When a conclusion had been reached on an

appreciation of a number of facts established by the
evidence, whether that was sound or not must be
determined, not by considering the weight to be attached
to each single fact in isolation, but by assessing the
cumulative effect of all the facts in their setting as a
whole. Where an ultimate finding on an issue was an
inference to be drawn from the facts found, on the
application of any principles of law, there would be a
mixed question of law and fact, and the inference from
the facts found was in such a case, a question of law.
But where the final determination of the issue equally
with the finding or ascertainment of the basic facts did
not involve the application of any principle of law, an
inference from the facts could not be regarded as one of
law. The proposition that an inference from facts was
one of law was, therefore, correct in its application to
mixed questions of law and fact, but not to pure
questions of fact. In the case of pure questions of fact an
inference from the facts was as much a question of fact

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.7

as the evidence of the facts. In the instant case there is a
finding of fact and unless it could be said that all the
relevant facts had not been considered in a proper light,
no question of law arises.
16....Non-appreciation may give rise to the question of
law but not mere misappreciation even if there be any
from certain angle. Change of perspective in viewing a
thing does not transform a question of fact into a
question of law.”
8. Recently, the Supreme Court while examining section 100 of the Code of
Civil Procedure,1908 in case of Hero Vinoth (Minor) versus Seshammal,
reported in (2006) 5 SCC 545 elucidated upon the subject in the following
manner :
“24. The principles relating to Section 100 CPC relevant for

this case may be summarised thus:
( i ) An inference of fact from the recitals or contents of a
document is a question of fact. But the legal effect of the terms
of a document is a question of law. Construction of a document
involving the application of any principle of law, is also a
question of law. Therefore, when there is misconstruction of a
document or wrong application of a principle of law in
construing a document, it gives rise to a question of law.
( ii ) The High Court should be satisfied that the case involves
a substantial question of law, and not a mere question of law.
A question of law having a material bearing on the decision of
the case (that is, a question, answer to which affects the rights
of parties to the suit) will be a substantial question of law, if it is
not covered by any specific provisions of law or settled legal
principle emerging from binding precedents, and, involves a
debatable legal issue. A substantial question of law will also
arise in a contrary situation, where the legal position is clear,
either on account of express provisions of law or binding
precedents, but the court below has decided the matter, either

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.8

ignoring or acting contrary to such legal principle. In the
second type of cases, the substantial question of law arises not
because the law is still debatable, but because the decision
rendered on a material question, violates the settled position of
law.
( iii ) The general rule is that High Court will not interfere with
the concurrent findings of the courts below. But it is not an
absolute rule. Some of the well-recognised exceptions are
where ( i ) the courts below have ignored material evidence or
acted on no evidence; ( ii ) the courts have drawn wrong
inferences from proved facts by applying the law erroneously;
or ( iii ) the courts have wrongly cast the burden of proof. When
we refer to decision based on no evidence, it not only refers to
cases where there is a total dearth of evidence, but also refers
to any case, where the evidence, taken as a whole, is not
reasonably capable of supporting the finding.”
9. The appellants herein have framed as many as 13 question of law, these
are as under:(i) Whether the company petition was maintainable on the
basis of power of attorney ?
(ii) Whether a petition under Section 397/398 was
maintainable when there were no jurisdictional facts and the
respondent filing the petition had acted against the interest
of the company causing substantial damage and coming
without clean hands?
(iii) Whether the Company Law Board was justified in
putting the onus on the appellants (respondents before the
Company Law Board) to prove the appointment of directors
on 14.05.1994 and increasing of authorised share capital,
which took place when respondent and her husband were
directors/shareholders and appellant no.2 came into the
picture much thereafter on 15.09.1999?

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.9

(iv) Whether any adverse inference would have been
taken against the appellants who had produced all the
documents in their possession and had pointed out how
respondent had stolen the documents from the Company's
registered office and from chartered accountant office, to
avoid explaining her conduct regarding appointment of
directors and increase in share capital with the sole
intention of causing injury to the company?
(v) Whether the appointment of directors, which were on the
basis of Form 32 signed by the respondent, in accordance
with the agreement and clause 48 of the Articles of
Association could have been challenged by the respondent
who was responsible for these acts, after more than 3 years
with the sole intention of denying the very existence of the
company?
(vi)Whether a company petition is maintainable at
behest of respondent who passes a resolution
increasing share capital allowing others to invest in
shareholding and then turning volte-face and denying
very act of increase in share capital?

the
for
the
the

(vii)Whether a petition by respondent, who is in fiduciary
relationship as a director of the company, should have been
at all entertained when she asked for disconnection of
electricity and vehemently opposed its restoration in this
Hon'ble Court and also asked for cancellation of registration
of the hospital, which is the only business of the company
and thus has already affected the company substantially?
(viii) Whether a company petition at the behest of
respondent could have been entertained, when with
malicious intention she claimed the Company's property
as her own property?
(ix) Whether the findings of the Company Law Board can be
legally sustained when

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.10

(a) they are against the interest of protecting the
company.

(b) throwing the company in the hands of the respondent
who has already damaged the company and is
interested in its closing down.

(x) Whether the protection of the company and its survival,
protection of the shareholders and the business of the
company is the paramount aim under the Company's Act,
which the Company Law Board is statutorily bound to
protect?
(xi) Whether the finding of the Company Law Board
suffering from omission of relevant facts, non-consideration
of Appellants submissions and taking one-side approach
can be legally sustained?
(xii) Whether it was permissible for the Company Law
Board to distort the agreement, its aim and intention
and ignoring relevant clauses when all actions of the
company ought to have been seen from the terms and
conditions of the agreement?
(xiii) Whether Company Law Board was justified in accepting
serious unfounded allegations levelled by the respondent
without discussing reply thereto by the appellants and not
giving any finding on the uncontroverted actions of the
respondent, which were detrimental to the company; an
approach which lacks fairness and violates principles of natural
justice?
9A. The questions of law as framed by the appellant are like grounds of
appeal. The issues and contentions raised can be divided into three specific
questions that were raised and were argued by the appellants. These are:-

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.11

(i) Whether the company petition before the Company Law
Board was maintainable on the basis of the Power of Attorney
in favour of Mr. Kamal Kapoor ?
(ii) Whether the decision of the Company Law Board is
perverse and contrary to facts, evidence and the agreement
dated 19th April,1999 ?
(iii) Whether the Company Law Board has decided the factual
disputes by wrongly placing onus upon the appellant ?.
10. Learned Company Law Board in the impugned order has not specifically

dealt with the first question. However, the fact that the petition was filed
through an attorney was noticed in the impugned order. This question
was examined and decided in the order dated 16th Nov.,2004. A copy of
the Power of Attorney in favour of Mr.Kamal Kapoor executed by the
respondent has been filed. The Power of Attorney is registered and
authorises Mr. Kamal Kapoor to initiate, institute and conduct all legal
proceedings against Dr.Ashok Dwarkadas Motiwala and Dr. (Mrs.)
Nirmala Dwarkadas and others acting on their behalf. The Company
Law Board noticed that in the photocopy of the Power of Attorney the
date on which it was executed had been left blank, but had been filled
up in the original. As admittedly the Power of Attorney is registered, the
date of execution, even if by mistake had been left blank in the relevant
paragraph of the document, is not of significance. This by itself will not
make the Power of Attorney a void document. Date on which the Power
of Attorney was registered is available. Moreover, the respondent was

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.12

asked and called upon to reiterate and confirm that she had authorized
Mr. Kamal Kapoor to file the petition. This was done. Sections 196 to
200 of the Contract Act,1872 permit and allow retrospective
authorisations. Moreover, the first question to the extent whether the
respondent had executed the Power of Attorney is essentially a
question of fact and not a question of law. The first question is
accordingly answered in favour of the respondent and against the
appellants.
11. The second question is the core issue and has to be answered keeping

in mind the limited scope and jurisdiction of this Court under section 10F
of the Act.
12. The facts as found by the Company Law Board are as under:-

(i) The respondent and her husband are both permanent residents of
United Kingdom.
(ii) The respondent in 1981 acquired perpetual lease hold rights from
the Delhi Development Authority in a plot of land located at DDA
Community Center, Yusuf Sarai, New Delhi-110049. The plot allotted to
the respondent was as a Non-Resident Indian and was a commercial
plot allocated for construction of a nursing home.

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.13

(iii) The respondent took loan from Citi Bank and a nursing home was
constructed. Equipments and gadgets were also purchased by the
respondent.
(iv) The hospital is a private limited company. It was incorporated on
13th May, 1999 with the respondent and her husband, Dr. Satish Kumar
Chopra as the promoter Directors and the shareholders. The authorised
share capital was Rs.1,00,000/- divided into 10,000 equity shares of
Rs.10/- each. On the date of it's incorporation, the entire share capital
was subscribed, issued and paid by the respondent and her husband.
13. The above findings and facts have not been disputed by the appellants

and the respondent.
14. The appellants relied upon the agreement dated 19

th

April,1999 and

stated that the said agreement concludes respective rights inter-se the
parties and findings of the Company Law Board are contrary to the
terms agreed and settled by the said agreement.
15. The respondent had entered into an agreement dated 19

th

April, 1999

with Dr. Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala. The agreement records
that Dr. Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala was supervising functioning
of Chopra Hospital, the nursing home since 1992 as an honorary
adviser and honorary Director of National Pediatric Centre, which was

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.14

established in the said nursing home in 1994. Financial support for the
said Centre had been given by the respondent. However, technical help
had been given by Dr.Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala. The
agreement also records that the respondent had not been able to
supervise the functioning and inspection of the nursing home as she
was not in India. The parties had agreed to enter into a long term
agreement on permanent basis with each other for effective and
efficient working of the nursing home. The respondent agreed to reorganise the business by converting the sole proprietorship into a
private limited company viz. Chopra Hospital Private Limited and
comply with formalities in this regard. The liabilities, capital expenses,
losses and profits of the Nursing Home prior to 1st April, 1999 were to be
borne, paid and enjoyed by the respondent and not by the appellants.
After 1st April, 1999 profits and losses were to be shared between the
appellants and the respondent.
16. Clause 4 of the agreement is relevant and for the sake of convenience

is reproduced below:“UC and DD have agreed to own and share the

business in the ratio of 49% and 51% respectively. For
this purpose, UC would disinvest its existing equity in
the company to the extent of 51% in favour of DD
and/or his family members.”

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.15

17. The above clause stipulates disinvestment of existing equity in the

company by the respondent (who has been described as UC), to the
extent of 51% in favour of Dr. Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala and
his family members (described as DD in the agreement). The clause
therefore indicates that the respondent would be the initial shareholder
of the company to be incorporated and thereafter there would be
disinvestment of the shareholding held by the respondent to the extent
of 51% in favour of Dr. Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala and his
family members. Thus disinvestment of shares by the respondent in
favour of the appellants was required. The agreement does not stipulate
that Dr. Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala will automatically get or will
be issued shares in the company to be incorporated. The appellants
were not allotted any shares on incorporation. The agreement only talks
about disinvestment of the shares by the respondent in favour of the
appellants. It is admitted that the respondent and her husband were the
promoters and initial shareholders of the hospital. It is also admitted that
the respondent had not dis-invested/transferred any shares in favour of
the appellant or his family members. It is well known fact that there has
been stupendous spiral in land prices in Delhi between 1981, when
lease hold rights were purchased by the respondent, and 19 th April,
1999, when the agreement was entered into. It is not difficult to visualize

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.16

and understand why the respondent had agreed to transfer her shares
in the company by disinvestment i.e. on payment for transfer of shares
held by her and her husband. This was natural and normal as the for the
entire investment as done by the respondent. The respondent alone
continued to be liable for her existing liabilities and loans. Therefore the
agreement after recording general understanding between the parties to
do business, required disinvestment of the “existing” equity by the
respondent in favour of the appellants. The consideration to be paid by
the appellants to the respondent and her husband was however not
stated in the agreement. It is admitted that no payment has been made
by the appellants to the respondent or her husband for purchase of the
shares. Transfer of shares or disinvestment did not take place with the
agreement. Disinvestment was to take place in future point of time.
18. Further, for transfer/disinvestment of shares, the procedure under the

Act and Memorandum and Articles of Association was required to be
scrupulously followed and complied with. Agreement by itself without
transfer/disinvestment of shares was/is of no consequence. Similarly,
the agreement did not result in appointment of the appellants as
directors of the Hospital. Compliance with the procedure and the
provisions was required.

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.17

19. As already stated above, the hospital was incorporated as a company

on 13th May, 1999. Company Law Board has given a finding, which has
not been questioned and challenged before me, that the respondent
and her husband had left India for United Kingdom on 3rd May, 1999
and thereafter except for two short trips from 5th December, 1999 to 12th
December, 1999 and from 7th February, 2000 to 20th February, 2000,
they did not come back to India during the the next two years.
20. It is the case of the appellants that on 14

th

May, 1999, a meeting of the

Board of Directors of the hospital was held. The respondent and her
husband had participated in the said meeting and they had nominated
Dr. Ashish Gupta and Dr. Anil Agarwal as Additional Directors. Reliance
in this regard was placed upon form No. 32 dated 19th May, 1999, which
is signed by the respondent. This appointment has been disbelieved as
admittedly both the respondent and her husband were not in India on
14th May, 1999. No document was placed on record to establish that a
meeting dated 14th May,1999 was held and any resolution for
appointment of Dr. Anil Aggarwal and Dr. Ashish Gupta was passed.
21. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that Dr.Ashish Gupta and

Dr. Anil Agarwal were members of the respondent group. However, he
did not deny that both Dr.Ashish Gupta and Dr. Anil Agarwal are related
to Dr.Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala, one being his cousin and the

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.18

other one being his nephew. There was no cause and occasion for the
respondent or her husband to appoint Dr.Ashish Gupta and Dr. Anil
Agarwal as Directors, immediately one day after the incorporation of the
company.
22. Similarly, Company Law Board has held that nothing has been brought

on record to show and establish that any notice was issued to the
respondent or her husband for taking decision on the enhancement of
authorised share capital and for allotment of shares to the appellants
and their family members. As a result of alleged issue of these shares at
par on face value, the shareholding of the respondent and her husband
was reduced to 34.95% and the shareholding of the appellants
increased to more than 65%,whereas under the agreement even after
disinvestment of shares it should have been 49% and 51% respectively.
23. The Company Law Board has mentioned that the appellants had filed

four volumes consisting of six hundred odd documents in support of
their stand. However, they did not file any document in support of (i)
holding of meeting dated 14th May,1999 for appointment of Dr. Ashish
Gupta and Dr. Anil Aggarwal as additional directors, (ii) holding of the
meeting for increase in authorized share capital, (iii) holding of the
meeting for allotment of shares to the appellants and their family
members and (iv) holding of the meeting for appointment of the

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.19

appellants and their family members as directors. Nothing has been
produced to show that the respondent or her husband were issued
notices of any of the meetings of Board of Directors in which resolutions
in above terms were allegedly passed. Decisions taken in a meeting of
the Board of Directors without giving notice of the meeting to every
director is void. Notice to all directors of a meeting of the Board of
Directors is essential for validity of any resolution (See, Dankha Devi
Aggarwal Versus Tara Properties (P) Ltd. reported in (2006) 7 SCC
382 and Parmmeshwari Prasad Gupta Versus Union of India
reported in (1973) 2 SCC 543). In Kamal Kumar Dutta Versus Ruby
General Hospital reported in (2006) 7 SCC 613, the above principle
has been expanded and the Supreme Court has observed that proper
service of notice is mandatory.In that case a short notice to the Non
Resident directors at their local addresses, knowing that they were
residing abroad was held to be bad. The meeting thus convened was
held to be invalid for want of proper notice.
24. The allegation that the respondent had taken away the relevant

documents from the Chartered Accountant's office has been rejected by
the Company Law Board by giving cogent and valid reasons. There was
also no material to show and establish that the said documents would
have been kept in the premises of the Chartered Accountant and not in

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.20

the premises of the hospital. In his letter dated 15th July,2002, the
chartered accountant had informed Registrar of Companies that on 5th
May, 2002 the respondent had come to their office and demanded to
see her income tax file. The chartered accountant claimed that when the
files were shown, the respondent took away the files in a hurry and in
this process she also took away the files containing original balance
sheets, audit notes, working papers, certificates etc. It is not stated in
this letter that the original Register of Meeting of Board of Directors had
been taken away. The original register recording minutes of the
resolution of the Board of Directors/attendance register is an important
register. Had the said register been taken away by the respondent, it
would have been specifically referred to and mentioned in the letter.
Documents/papers pertaining to issue of notices for the alleged Board
meetings in 1999, normally, would not have been required by the
auditor.
25. The Company Law Board has also noticed that the respondent had given

her personal Fixed Deposit Receipts for taking loans from a bank.The
said loans continued even after incorporation of the company, with the
Fixed Deposit Receipts given by the respondent as a security.
26. The papers produced on record show that the book value of the hospital

land and building as on 1st August, 1999 was Rs.5,02,000/- and

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.21

Rs.18,27,117/- respectively. These figures represent the depreciated
value and were much less than the actual market price of the land and
st

building as on 1 August, 1999. No reasonable person would have agreed
to be reduced to a minority shareholder after making substantial

investment and after giving personal guarantees to banks that continued,
by allotment of shares on the basis of book value and issue of shares to

the extent of 65% to a third party on par i.e. on face value. On the issue
of fresh shares to the appellants, no payment was made to the respondent
though she became a minority shareholder and lost control of the

company. Shares allegedly allotted to the respondent represented the net
book value after reducing all liabilities. These liabilities which remained

outstanding as per the agreement continued to be payable by the
respondent alone.
27. Learned counsel for the appellant during the course of arguments

referred to letters dated 10th February, 2000 and 26th February, 2001,
written by the respondent to the Delhi Development Authority and joint
letter of guarantee executed by the respondent with Dr. Ashish Gupta
and Dr.N. Dwarkadas respectively. Regarding letter dated 26th
February, 2001, the respondent had produced before the Company Law
Board letter dated 4th June, 2006 written by Corporation Bank, Haus
Khas, New Delhi that the letter dated 26th February, 2001 was never

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.22

received by the bank. Photocopy of the letter of guarantee dated 16th
May, 2000 shows that the same had been signed by the respondent at
places marked by pencil. The guarantee agreement further shows that
the respondent had given her personal guarantee to the bank. No one
else stood as a guarantor. One agreement has been signed by Dr.
Ashish Gupta and the other agreement has been signed by Dr.(Mrs.)
Nirmala Dwarkadas as authorised signatory of the hospital and not in
the capacity as Directors of the hospital.
28. After examining the entire facts and material on record, the Company

Law Board did not feel it expedient to give unnecessary emphasis and
place reliance on some letters allegedly written by the respondent. In
fact, the Company Law Board after examining the material on record
came to the conclusion that there was merit in the stand of the
respondent that she had signed some blank papers and these papers
had been misused. In this regard, the Company Law Board relied upon
suit for permanent injunction, which had been filed by the hospital under
the signatures of Dr. Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas Motiwala. In the plaint, it
has been specifically mentioned that the respondent was a NonResident Indian and she had left India and was working and living in
United Kingdom and was not taking active part in the running of the
hospital.

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.23

29. Findings of the Company Law Board are largely findings of fact which

have been given on the basis of material and documents placed before
the said Board by applying the principles of preponderance of
possibility. It cannot be said that the decision of the Company Law
Board and the findings of fact are perverse, based on no evidence or
material. These findings cannot be regarded as findings, which no
reasonable fact finding authority would have reached on the basis of the
evidence and material available and filed before the Company Law
Board. Thus, appellate Court under Section 10F of the Act cannot
substitute the said findings while deciding the questions of law.
30. In view of the above the second question is answered in favour of the

respondent and against the appellants.
31. This brings us to the third question. In the Appeal, the appellants have

stated that they were appointed as Directors only on 15th September,
1999 and, they, were not responsible and aware of the functioning of
the hospital before the said date. Therefore, the burden of explaining
the alleged appointment of additional directors, issue of capital etc.
before 15th September, 1999 was not upon the appellants but for the
respondent to explain. It was argued that the onus was wrongly placed
upon the appellants and it was for the respondent to explain the
appointment of the additional directors and issue of capital etc. This

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.24

argument overlooks the recitals made in the agreement dated 19th April,
1999, which specifically records that Dr. Ashok Mohan Dwarkadas
Motiwala had been supervising the functioning of the nursing home as
an honorary adviser and even as an honorary Director of National
Pediatric Centre since 1992-94. It also overlooks the fact that both Dr.
Ashish Gupta and Dr. Anil Agarwal are relatives of the appellants. The
appellants in their civil suit have themselves admitted that they were in
charge of and looking after day to day affairs of the hospital and the
respondent was non-resident Indian living in United Kingdom. The
appellants were in charge of and managing the affairs of the hospital.
Normally, therefore, the appellants should have produced the records of
the hospital in support of their appointments as directors, issue of
shares etc.
32. The Supreme Court in Anil Rishi versus Gurbaksh Singh, reported in

(2006) 5 SCC 558,examined the question of onus and burden of proof
and it was observed :
19. There is another aspect of the matter which should be
borne in mind. A distinction exists between burden of
proof and onus of proof. The right to begin follows onus
probandi. It assumes importance in the early stage of a
case. The question of onus of proof has greater force,
where the question is, which party is to begin. Burden of
proof is used in three ways: ( i ) to indicate the duty of
bringing forward evidence in support of a proposition at

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.25

the beginning or later; ( ii ) to make that of establishing a
proposition as against all counter-evidence; and ( iii ) an
indiscriminate use in which it may mean either or both of
the others. The elementary rule in Section 101 is
inflexible. In terms of Section 102 the initial onus is always
on the plaintiff and if he discharges that onus and makes
out a case which entitles him to a relief, the onus shifts to
the defendant to prove those circumstances, if any, which
would disentitle the plaintiff to the same.
20. In R.V.E. Venkatachala Gounder v. Arulmigu
Viswesaraswami & V.P. Temple the law is stated in the
following terms: (SCC p. 768, para 29)
“29 . In a suit for recovery of possession based on title it is

for the plaintiff to prove his title and satisfy the court that
he, in law, is entitled to dispossess the defendant from his
possession over the suit property and for the possession
to be restored to him. However, as held in Addagada
Raghavamma v. Addagada Chenchamma there is an
essential distinction between burden of proof and onus of
proof: burden of proof lies upon a person who has to
prove the fact and which never shifts. Onus of proof shifts.
Such a shifting of onus is a continuous process in the
evaluation of evidence. In our opinion, in a suit for
possession based on title once the plaintiff has been able
to create a high degree of probability so as to shift the
onus on the defendant it is for the defendant to discharge
his onus and in the absence thereof the burden of proof
lying on the plaintiff shall be held to have been discharged
so as to amount to proof of the plaintiffs title. “
33. The Supreme Court also observed that ordinarily, the burden of proof

would be on the party who asserts in affirmative the issue and it rests,
after evidence is gone into, upon the party against whom, at the time the
question arises, judgment would be given, if no further evidence were to
be

adduced

by

either

side.

It

was

held

that

when

fraud,

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.26

misrepresentation or undue influence is alleged by a party, normally, the
burden is on the person making the allegation to prove such fraud,
undue influence or misrepresentation. But, when a person is in a
fiduciary relationship with another and the latter is in a position of active
confidence,

the

burden

of

proving

the

absence

of

fraud,

misrepresentation or undue influence is upon the person in the
dominating position. In such a case the burden of proving the good faith
of the transaction is upon the dominant party, that is to say, the party
who is in a position of active confidence. A person standing in a
fiduciary relation to another has a duty to protect the interest given to his
care and the court watches with jealousy all transactions between such
persons so that the protector may not use his influence or the
confidence to his advantage.When the party complaining shows such
relation, the law presumes everything against the transaction and the
onus is cast upon the person holding the position of confidence or trus t
to show that the transaction is perfectly fair and reasonable, that no
advantage has been taken of his position. The above observations were

made with reference to section 111 of the Evidence Act. The appellants
had to prove that there was fair play in the transaction and the alleged
appointments of directors, issue of capital, etc were genuine and as per
law.

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.27

34. The third question, therefore, is also answered against the appellants

and in favour of the respondent.
35. In view of above findings on the three questions of law framed above,

the present Appeal under section 10F of the Act is liable to be
dismissed with costs, which are assessed as Rs. 10,000/-.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
February 19, 2007
VKR/P

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.28

C.A.No.4/2005

Page No.29

