* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ W.P.(C) 4713/2007

M.MUTHU

..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Gaurav Duggal, Advocate

versus
N.D.P.L.

..... Respondents
Through : Mr. K. Datta, Advocate for respondent no.1
Mr. K K Gupta, Advocate for respondent no.2

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 18.02.2008

1. The petitioner is in occupation of premises bearing no.20, South Patel

Nagar, New Delhi. The petitioner has taken on lease the aforesaid
premises from M/s Sanatan Dharma World University Trust. An
unregistered lease deed dt.4th September, 2004 was executed between
the petitioner and the respondent/trust. As per the said unregistered

deed, the term/tenure of the lease is for 5 years. The petitioner has also
paid security deposit of Rs. 12 lakhs to the Trust.
2. It is the case of the respondent/trust that the petitioner has defaulted in

payment of the rent and the tenancy was terminated by notice dt.15th
January, 2007. It is also the case that the advance of Rs.12 lakhs paid
to the trust has been adjusted.
3. The respondent/trust has filed civil suit CS(OS) No.1437/2007 against

the petitioner and one Mr. R. Muthu Krishnan Reddiar. A decree for
ejectment is prayed for in the said suit.
4. I need not examine the inter se disputes between the petitioner and the

respondent/trust in the present writ petition as these are subject matter
of the civil suit. It is, however, an admitted case that no order for
ejectment has been passed.
5. A short controversy which arises for consideration in the present writ

petition is regarding electricity connection. It is the case of the petitioner
that he has applied for change of the name for which he made an
application dated 29th May, 2007 but the said application has not been
processed. It is also the case of the petitioner that on 27th April, 2007
electricity supply was disconnected but was restored on 25th February,
2007 only to be subsequently again disconnected.

6. Respondent no.2/Trust is not ready and willing to give No Objection

Certificate for installation of electricity connection in the name of the
petitioner. At the same time it cannot be denied that eviction
proceedings are still pending adjudication against the petitioner and no
adverse order or decree has been passed. The question whether the
petitioner is in arrears or has committed any default and is liable to be
evicted will be decided by the Civil Court. I do not think the petitioner
should be deprived of electricity as a civil suit is pending between the
petitioner and his landlord. At the same time I have to be careful that the
respondent no.2/Trust is not burdened with any financial liability on
account of electricity dues. In these circumstances the following
directions are issued :
1. The

petitioner

will

file

a

fresh

application

with

the

respondent/Discom for installation of an electricity connection in
his name. The said application will be processed as per the rules
but without insisting on NOC from the respondent no.2-Trust.
2. The petitioner will deposit in advance two months average

monthly consumption charges on the basis of past consumption
pattern. The amount will be calculated by the respondent-Discom.
In addition petitioner will continue to pay consumption charges
every month. Two months security charges will not be adjusted for
payment of current dues, which shall be paid every month. The

security amount will be refunded to the petitioner without interest,
if and when the petitioner is ejected subject to adjustment on
account of arrears. The respondent/discom will be entitled to
disconnect electricity in case current dues/charges for every
month are not paid. The respondent/Discom can ask the petitioner
to increase the security deposit depending upon the consumption
pattern.
3. The petitioner will pay entire arrears of electricity charges within

two weeks but on or before the electricity connection is granted to
the petitioner.
4. It is made clear that the respondent no.2 will not be responsible or

liable to pay current electricity charges which will be paid the
petitioner.
5. The petitioner will furnish and give details of his present bank

accounts to the respondent/discom as well as his permanent
address. In case the petitioner shifts his residence or opens a new
bank

account

the

same

shall

also

be

informed

to

respondent/discom. An Indemnity Bond will be furnished by the
petitioner in favour of the Discom that he shall continue to pay
electricity charges and dues every month.
6. These directions may be modified and are subject to orders that

may be passed in the civil suit.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Dasti.
SANJIV KHANNA, J.

FEBRUARY 18, 2008.
vld/P

