* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) 816/2008

ZILE SINGH TANWAR & CO. & ANR ..... Petitioner
Through Counsel for Mr. A. Maitri, Advocate.
versus
MCD & ANR

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, Standing
Counsel & Mr. Alok Singh, Advocate for MCD.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 18.02.2008
1. The petitioner was awarded contract for resurfacing of internal roads of

Block-D, New Friends Colony on 13th July, 2007 and for resurfacing of
peripheral roads in Sri Niwaspuri, Central Zone on 1st August, 2007. It is
admitted that the petitioner did not perform the said contract. In fact, no
resurfacing work was started pursuant to the said work orders.
2. My attention is drawn to letter dated 3

rd

September, 2007 written by the

petitioner to the respondent-MCD. In this letter it is stated that the work
could not be started due to rainy season as the same was not suitable
for road work. It is also stated that this was the main reason why the

work could not be started. However, in another letter dated 26th
October, 2007 it was stated that the work for resurfacing of the road
could not be started as the hot mix plant belonging to the petitioner had
been sealed by Haryana State Pollution Control Board by their letter
dated 21st August, 2007. In this regard, my attention has been drawn to
letter dated 21st August, 2007 issued by Haryana State Pollution Control
Board. The said letter states that the hot mix plant of the petitioner was
not operated after closure of the unit by the Regional Officer on 10th
April, 2007.
3. It was the responsibility of the petitioner to comply with the pollution

norms in terms of The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1981. If the petitioner did not comply with the terms of the said Act and
his hot mix plant was closed, the respondent-MCD cannot be blamed for
the same and the said reason cannot be a good ground not to comply
with the work orders. It was for the petitioner to find alternative source
and meet his contractual obligations. Failure to comply with the statutory
requirements of The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981,
can hardly be a justification or ground not to do resurfacing of roads
under the contract.
4. In view of the above, I do not find any merit in the present writ petition

and the same is accordingly dismissed.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
FEBRUARY 18, 2008
VKR/P

