* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) 1407/2003

TAJUDDIN & ORS.

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Sudhir Nandrajog, Adv.

versus

D.D.A. & ORS.

..... Respondent
Through Ms.Saroj Bidawat, Adv. for UOI.
Mr.Gaurav Sarin, Adv. for DDA.
Mr.H.P.Sahu for Mr.Sanjay Poddar, Adv. for
Respondent no.3.
Mr.K.S.Bhati for Delhi Wakf Board.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 26.03.2008

1. The petitioners claim to be the residents of village Begumpur and have

filed the present petition for direction to the respondents including Delhi
Wakf Board and DDA to maintain graveyard in khasra no.110 of village
Begumpur, Delhi and not to use the said land as a park or garden.
Direction is also sought to restrain DDA from taking possession of the
graveyard and make a public park in the said area.
2. In the writ petition it is mentioned that the land in question was also subject

matter of SLP (Civil) No.6757/1983 titled “Delhi Wakf Board vs. UOI and
Ors.” which was disposed of on 10.04.1990 with a direction to Land
Acquisition Collector to conduct a fresh enquiry and if he comes to a
positive finding as to the existence of any tomb or graveyard or the like, he
shall exclude such portion or portions from acquisition. One of the prayers
made in the writ petition is that the Land Acquisition Collector, Union of
India and GNCT of Delhi should enquire in terms of the directions issued
by the Supreme Court.
3. The respondent/DDA in their additional affidavit filed on 17.8.2006 has

clarified that the aforesaid SLP and Order dated 10.4.1990 related to
village Lado Sarai and not village Begumpur. It is clear that the petitioners
have made false and incorrect averments in the writ petition and have not
come to the Court with clean hands. However, I have examined other
contentions raised by the petitioners on merits.

4. By Order dated 30th April, 2007, file of WP(C) No.7589/2000 tilted „Sakina

Vs. UOI‟ was summoned. The file is available and I have examined the
same. In the said writ petition also reference was made to SLP
No.6757/1983 titled Delhi Wakf Board Vs. UOI & Ors. Ms. Sakina had filed
the said writ petition as owner of Khasra no.110 of village Begumpur,
Delhi, stating inter alia, that the village had been in existence since the
time of Alauddin Khilji and the land has been shown in the revenue record
as Kabristan where kabar/graves of the petitioner‟s ancestors exist and the
said graveyard is adjoining residential premises of Abadi of the said
village. Copy of the revenue records of the said village were also enclosed.
This writ petition also mentions that Notification under Section 4 of the
Land Acquisition Act was issued on 15.12.1961, for which declaration was
made on 26.6.1962 and the Collector of Land Acquisition had made his
Award on 31.10.1962. A Division Bench of this Court examined the
contentions raised and dismissed the said writ petition observing as under
:
“As per the affidavit filed on behalf of DDA possession of the

land was taken over on 23.11.1962 which was followed by
another notification issued under Section 22(1) of the Delhi
Development Act on 3.1.1968 making over the land to the
DDA. Challenge now made in this petition is not highly
belated but without any substance. Learned counsel for the
petitioner states that the petitioner was seeking her remedy
before the Civil Court and was asked to avail remedy to
challenge acquisition proceedings. Needless to add that the
civil suit was also filed only in the year 1997 being civil suit

no.809/97 which was dismissed as withdrawn on 22.1.2001.
Dismissed.”

5. It is clear from the above findings of the Division Bench that this Court has

held that Ms. Sakina should not be permitted and allowed to question and
challenge Notification issued under Section 22 of the Delhi Development
Act dated 3.1.1968 after lapse of 32 years in the year 2000. The Division
Bench also noticed that Ms. Sakina had earlier filed civil suit but was not
successful. The reasoning given by the Division Bench in the aforesaid writ
petition no.7589/2000 is equally applicable to the present case also. I may
note here that the present writ petition, in fact, was filed in the year 2003.
The subject matter of the present

writ petition is

identical to

W.P.No.7589/2000 i.e. the land is Kabristan and DDA should not develop
the said land. However, one distinction may be noticed here, Ms. Sakina
had stated that it was a personal graveyard and not a public Kabristan.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioner however, contends that the petitioners

are not concerned with the land acquisition proceedings and are relying
upon Gazette Notification dated 16th April, 1970 issued under Section 5(2)
of the Wakf Act, 1954 by which khasra no.110 of village Begumpur
measuring 2 bighas and 8 biswas was declared as a Wakf property. It is
submitted that the respondent/DDA has not filed any civil suit questioning
and challenging the said Notification even after the said Notification was

brought to their knowledge and thus, the land in question is conclusively
established as a Wakf land. He also made reference to the affidavit filed by
the revenue authorities of the GNCT of Delhi in which it is stated that as
per Jamabandi land in question is recorded as graveyard.
7. I have examined the contentions raised by learned counsel for the

petitioners. Pursuant to Orders passed by this Court the revenue
authorities were asked to inspect the area in question. Inspection was
conducted on 17.5.2004 by the Land Acquisition Collector, SDM, South
District and others. The findings given by them are as under :
“ At the site some graves were also found and they have

also been depicted in the Naksha Nazaria. 03 pakka
graveyards exist at this kh. No. It is not possible to
ascertain the age of these graveyards, but they have not
been constructed in the recent past. Apart from this, 02
graveyards were found demolished at the site. The
photographs of the temporary encroachment, pakka
construction, temple, graveyards is also enclosed along
with report.”

8. It is clear from the above findings that only 3 pucca graves exist in the said

khasra but it was not possible for the officers concerned to ascertain the
age of the said graves, though the graves are not of recent past. Apart
from three graves, there were two more graves which were found
demolished at the site. The question which arises for consideration is
whether the said alleged graveyard was/is a public graveyard and

therefore a Wakf property or a graveyard used by a family or a private
graveyard. Reference can be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court
in „Syed Mohd. Salie Labbai Vs. Mohd. Hanifs‟ reported in (1976) 3 SCR
721. In the said judgment, the Supreme Court noticed distinction between
a public graveyard which has been used by the public for burial and a
private graveyard. User in cases of public graveyard should be
immemorial. Private graveyard on the other hand is confined to burial of
corpses of the founder, members of family or descendents. The Supreme
Court also noticed that to give a finding that a graveyard is a public
graveyard, it should be proved and established by instances adequate in
character, number and extent. Only when there is evidence then the
presumption will be that the dedication was complete and the property had
become a public graveyard, where the public has a right to bury their dead.
Once it is established that the graveyard in question is a public graveyard,
it would vest with the public and constitute Wakf. Accordingly four rules
were laid down as under :
“ The following rules in order to determine whether a

graveyard is a public or a private one may be stated :
1. That even though there may be no direct evidence of dedication

to the public, it may be presumed to be a public graveyard by
immemorial user i.e. where corpses of the members of the
Mahomedan community have been buried in a particular
graveyard for a large number of years without any objection from
the owner. The fact that the owner permits such burials will not
make any difference at all;

2. That if the graveyard is a private a family graveyard then it

should contain the graves of only the founder, the members of
his family or his descendants and no others. Once even in a
family graveyard members of the public are allowed to bury their
dead, the private graveyard sheds its character and becomes a
public graveyard;
3. That in order to prove that a graveyard is public by dedication it
must be shown by multiplying instances of the character, nature
and extent of the burials from time to time. In other words, there
should be evidence to show that a large number of members of
the Mahomedan community had buried their corpses from time
to time in the graveyard. Once this is proved, the Court will
presume that the graveyard is a public one; and
4. That where a burial ground is mentioned as a public graveyard in
either a revenue or historical papers that would be a conclusive
proof to who the public character of the graveyard.”

9. The case of Syed Mohd Salie (supra) related to disputes between two

sections of the muslim community. The Supreme Court noticed that there
was overwhelming oral and documentary evidence to prove that the land in
question was a public graveyard by immemorial user. Supreme Court
quoted with approval the decision of the Privy Council in Ballabdas versus
Noor Mohd. reported in AIR 1936 PC 8,3 wherein reference with approval
to following observation in the case of Sheoraj Chamar versus Muder Khan
reported in (1934) ALJ 809 by Allahabad High Court was made :“ But in cases where a graveyard has existed from time

immemorial or for a very long time, there can be a
presumption of a lost grant. It is open to a court to infer from
circumstances that a plot of land covered by graves, which
has been used as a graveyard, is in fact a graveyard and
had been set apart as such by the original owners and made
a consecrated ground even though a registered document is
not now forthcoming.”

10. The Supreme Court also approved of the observations made by Madhya

Pradesh High Court in the case of Mohd. Kassam versus Abdul Gafoor
reported on AIR 1964 MP 227 in which it was held as under:“ On this point suffice it to say that we are of the view that a

kabaristan cannot be a private kabaristan unless it is used for
the family members exclusively. Once the public are allowed
to bury their dead it ceases to be private property…. There
was no discrimination about the user.
It was being used by the predecessors of the
defendants as well as by the public. This will indicate that it
was not a private kabaristan.
Under the Mohammadan law if a land had been used
from time immemorial for burial ground then the same may be
called a wakf although there is no express dedication.”

11. Applying the aforesaid tests to the present case and in the light of the

factual findings mentioned in the inspection report dated 17.5.2004, it
cannot be said that the graveyard, is a public graveyard. Only 5 graves
were found. Immemorial user as a public graveyard has not been
established by instances adequate in character, in number and extent. Ms.
Sakina‟s contentions and statements made in W.P.(C) No.7589/2000 were
to the contrary. Ms. Sakina was the owner of the land.
12. As far as revenue entries are concerned the same were also relied upon

by Ms. Sakina in her Writ Petition no.7589/2000. A Division Bench of this

Court did not find any merit in the same. Moreover she had also filed a civil
suit relying upon the said revenue entries but did not succeed. The Civil
Judge noticed that many of the revenue entries were made in 1996. The
revenue entries do not establish and prove that the land is a general or a
public Kabristan. Kabristan may be private or public but a private Kabristan
is not a Wakf.
13. I may also refer here judgment of the Supreme Court in Board of Muslim

Wakf Vs. Hadi Begum AIR 1993 Suppl. (1) SCC 192 in which reference
was made to earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Board
of Muslim Wakf versus Radha Kishan reported in (1979) 2 SCR 148 in
which it was observed as under:“………….The right, title and interest of a person who

is non-Muslim and is in possession of certain property is
not put in jeopardy simply because that property is included
in the list published under sub-section (2) of Section 5 and
he is not required to file a suit in a civil court for declaration
of his title within the period of one year and the list would
not be final and conclusive against him. Sub-section (4) of
Section 6 makes the list final and conclusive only between
the Board, the mutawalli and the person interested in the
wakf.”
14. In the case of Board of Muslim Wakfs v. Radha Kishan, reported in (1979)

2 SCC 468 it was observed by the Supreme Court as under :“39. It follows that where a stranger who is a non-

Muslim and is in possession of a certain property his right,
title and interest therein cannot be put in jeopardy merely
because the property is included in the list. Such a person
is not required to file a suit for a declaration of his title

within a period of one year. The special rule of limitation
laid down in proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 6 is not
applicable to him. In other words, the list published by the
Board of Wakfs under sub-section (2) of Section 5 can be
challenged by him by filing a suit for declaration of title
even after the expiry of the period of one year, if the
necessity of filing such suit arises.”

15. By virtue of notification issued under Section 22(1) of the DDA Act on

3.1.1968, the land in question was handed over to the DDA and vests in
the said authority. Delhi Wakf Board in spite of repeated opportunities has
failed to file its counter affidavit and place on record relevant documents in
support of the Notification. The proceedings under Section 4(3) of the Wakf
Act, 1954 have not been placed on record. In the present case there is no
evidence or material to show that any notice was issued to the
Government of India or the GNCTD during the course of enquiry under
Section 4 of the Act. Therefore, Explanation to Section 6(1) of the Wakf
Act, 1995 will also not be applicable. It is not pleaded by the petitioner that
respondent no.1-UOI or the GNCTD were issued notice in the enquiry
proceedings. There is no evidence of dedication to Wakf. The only
allegation is of immemorial user as a public graveyard.
16. I may here refer to the judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in

“Punjab Deh and Gram Sabha Vs. Punjab Wakf Board and Ors.” reported
in AIR 1969 Punjab and Haryana 344. In the said case the land in question

was described as Gair Mumkin Kabristan and was recorded as Shamlal
Deh in Jamabandi for the year 1910 and 1945-46. A Single Judge of
Punjab and Haryana High Court held that there was no evidence to
establish intention of anyone whatsoever to dedicate of the property and
the nomenclature of the Jamabandi entries of the property, without proof of
the user was not sufficient. Reference was made to “Mohd. Shah Vs.
Faizuddin Ansari” AIR 1956 Supreme Court 713 in which it was held as
under:“…..it can also be accepted as a matter of law that a Wakf

normally requires expressed dedication but if land has been
used from time to time immemorial for religious purpose,
then the land used by user Wakf although there is no
evidence of express dedication”.

17. Reference was also made to “Jeevan Singh Vs. Karandi” reported in AIR

1927 Lahore 664 in which it was held that “nobody can acquire by
prescription a right to bury the dead in the land belonging to other persons,
such an easement being unknown to law.” Similar view was again
expressed by Lahore High Court in “Kripa Singh Vs. Nabivak Baksh”
reported in AIR 1932 Lahore 256 that a right to bury or burn out bodies on
land belonging to other person is not an easement recognized by law and
cannot be acquired by prescription. Therefore, immemorial user as a
general or public Kabristan has to be established.

18. In view of the reasoning given above, I do not find any merit in the present

writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed. However, the
respondent-DDA will ensure that the graves are not demolished and
proper respect is given to the said graves while constructing and
converting the said land to a park. No costs.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.
MARCH 26, 2008
Vld/P/vld

