FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) NO. 4 OF 1998

%

Date of Decision : 20th July, 2007.
PRAKASH KAUR
.... Appellant.
Through Ms. Ruchi Sindhwani, Advocate.
VERSUS
K. G. RINGSHIA
.... Respondent.
Through Nemo.
AND
FAO (OS) NO. 213 OF 1990
EVEREST CONSTRUCTION CO. ...Appellant.
Through Mr. Mohinder J.S. Rupal, Advocate.
VERSUS
SMT. PRAKASH KAUR
...Respondent.
Through Ms. Ruchi Sindhwani, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

1.

Page 2

As similar legal issues arise for consideration in the present

appeals, viz. FAO(OS) No. 4/1998 Ms. Prakash Kaur versus K.G.
Ringshia and Everest Construction Company versus Ms. Prakash
Kaur in FAO(OS) No. 213/1990, they are being disposed of by this
common order.

The question raised in the present appeals is

regarding territorial jurisdiction of the courts in Delhi to entertain the
suits for declaration filed by the respondent in FAO(OS) No.
213/1990 and the appellant in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998. The appellant
in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998 and the respondent in FAO (OS) No.
213/1990 is the same person namely Ms. Prakash Kaur, now
represented by her legal representatives. The question pertaining to
territorial jurisdiction has been decided on the preliminary objection
raised by the appellant in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998 and respondent in
FAO(OS) No. 213/1990. It may be stated here that parties had not
led evidence and the aforesaid question was decided by the learned
Single Judge on the basis of the facts and averments made in the
plaint itself. At this stage and for deciding the present appeals, the
averments and facts stated in the written statement are irrelevant
and cannot be taken into consideration.
Facts in FAO(OS) No. 213/1990
2.

Ms. Prakash Kaur in 1989 filed the suit for declaration in the

Delhi High Court, which now stands transferred to District Court

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 3

against Everest Construction Company, the appellant herein. The
appellant is a partnership firm having its office at Bombay. It does
not have any office at Delhi. As per the averments made in the
plaint, the respondent or Ms. Prakash Kaur had entered into an
agreement dated 13th October, 1981 with the appellant.

The

agreement was executed at Bombay, now known as Mumbai. As
per the said agreement, the appellant had agreed to sell to Ms.
Prakash Kaur, a flat described as 606 on 6th floor of the building
proposed to be constructed by the appellant at Prabha Devi in
Mumbai.

The building was

to be called Resham Tower.

It is

claimed in the plaint that the total consideration for purchase of the
flat is Rs.2,32,875/- to be paid in 14 installments. Ms. Prakash Kaur
claims that she has paid Rs.12,875/- on two different dates as per
receipts issued. It is further stated that Ms. Prakash Kaur shifted
from Mumbai to Delhi and intimation was given to the appellant and
her new address was furnished vide letter dated 13th July, 1982. The
construction had remained stalled due to some difficulties and in
January, 1987 construction re-started and at that time Ms. Prakash
Kaur had sent a demand draft of Rs.50,000/- by registered letter
dated 28th January, 1987 to the appellant towards on account
payment.

The said demand draft was not returned back by the

appellant and remained with the appellant.

Ms. Prakash Kaur

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 4

thereafter wrote another letter dated 24th/28th December, 1987 to the
appellant to which a reply dated 28th January, 1988 was received
from the appellant denying existence of any agreement between the
parties and the demand draft of Rs.50,000/- was sent back along
with the letter.

Thereafter, some correspondence exchanged

between the parties including legal notices. Not being satisfied, Ms.
Prakash Kaur filed the suit for declaration in Delhi. By the said suit,
Ms. Prakash Kaur sought declaration that letters dated 28th January,
1988 and 21st December, 1988 written by the appellant

herein

denying existence of agreement between the parties are null and
void and of no effect and the agreement dated 13th October, 1981
continues to remain operative and binding on the parties.
Paragraphs 19 and 21 of the plaint are relevant for the purpose of
deciding the present appeal and read as under:“19. That the cause of action arose on 13th
October, 1981 when the Agreement was
entered into between the Plaintiff and the
Defendant and from time to time thereafter
and finally on 21st December, 1988 when the
Defendant by his letter informed the Plaintiff
that no agreement had been entered into
between the parties.
21. That the cause of action substantially and
materially arose at Delhi where the letters
dated 28th January 1988 and 21st December
1988 written by the Defendant to the Plaintiff
denying the existence of the Agreement were
received. This Hon'ble Court has, therefore,
jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit”.

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

3.

Page 5

It may be relevant to state here that it is an admitted case of

the parties that the building in question mentioned in the agreement
has not been constructed by the appellant and possession and title
of the flat cannot be transferred and passed on to any person
including Ms. Prakash Kaur.
4.

Learned Single Judge by the impugned order dated 18th

September, 1990 has held that mere agreement to sell in view of
Section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act does not create any
interest in an immovable property and, therefore, Section 16(d) of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as the Code,
for short) is not applicable and Section 20 of the Code is applicable.
It has been further held that a part of cause of action has arisen in
Delhi as

letter dated 24th/28th December, 1987 written by the

appellant to Ms. Prakash Kaur was received by her at Delhi. By the
said letter, the appellant denied existence of the agreement between
the parties. In this regard, learned Single Judge has relied upon
decision of the Delhi High Court in M/s Raja Brothers, Cloth
Merchants Chandni Chowk, Kucha Rehman, Delhi versus M/s
Chanrai Uttam Chand, ILR (1969) Delhi 931, wherein it has been
held that a part of cause of action arises at the place where
revocation letter terminating the contract is received and accordingly
courts located at the place where revocation letter is received have
jurisdiction. The learned Single Judge also rejected the contention

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 6

that the suit is not maintainable in view of Section 34 of the Specific
Relief Act as only relief of declaration is prayed for and no further
reliefs, even if available have not been prayed for. Learned Single
Judge held that the first question which was required to be decided
is whether there was any agreement to sell between the parties and
not any interest or right in land and in this view of the matter Ms.
Prakash Kaur is entitled to file the present suit in view of the first part
of Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act.
Facts in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998
5.

Ms. Prakash Kaur has filed a suit for declaration that letter

dated 20th November, 1984 written by the respondent in the present
appeal, namely K.G. Ringshia is null and void and of no effect and
agreement dated 10th November, 1979 continues to remain operative
and binding on the parties.

It is alleged in the plaint that vide

agreement dated 10th November, 1979, Ms. Prakash Kaur has
agreed to purchase flat described as No. D on 3rd floor in the multistoreyed building known as 'Aditya', which the respondent is to
construct at Chakla Village, Andheri (East) in Bombay, now known
as Mumbai. The appellant had paid Rs.3,942/- before the execution
of the agreement to sell. As per Ms. Prakash Kaur, construction of
the building got stalled and delayed for various reasons. However, it
is admitted in the plaint that the agreement was signed and executed

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

between the parties at Mumbai.

Page 7

Thereafter, Ms. Prakash Kaur

shifted to Delhi and intimated to the respondent change in her
address.
parties.

Some correspondence was exchanged between the
Ms. Prakash Kaur received letter dated 20th November,

1984 that had been dispatched from Mumbai to the appellant-plaintiff
at Delhi, inter alia, claiming that Rs.3,942/- paid by Ms. Prakash Kaur
at the time of execution of agreement dated 10th November, 1979
had been refunded and paid to her son and the agreement was
cancelled by mutual consent. The contents of the letter dated 20 th
November, 1984 are disputed by Ms. Prakash Kaur. It is stated that
Rs.3,942/- was never refunded and the agreement is binding
between the parties.
6.

Learned Single Judge by the impugned order decided the

preliminary issue No. 1 with regard to territorial jurisdiction. Relying
upon the decision in the case of Everest Construction Company
versus Prakash Kaur, which is subject matter of the appeal in
FAO(OS) No. 213/1990, learned Single Judge has held that Section
16(d) of the Code is not attracted and Section 20 of the Code is
applicable and, therefore, Ms. Prakash Kaur is entitled to file the suit
for declaration at a court where the cause of action or a part thereof
arises. Learned Single Judge, however, held that no part of cause of
action has arisen in Delhi as vide letter dated 20th November, 1984, the

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 8

respondent-defendant had stated that the agreement was cancelled
by mutual consent at Mumbai and the amount of Rs.3,942/- paid by
Ms. Prakash Kaur at the time of execution of the agreement dated
10th November, 1979 was refunded back to her son at Mumbai. In
these circumstances, learned Single Judge held that no part of
cause of action has arisen in Delhi and the preliminary objection was
accepted and the plaint filed by Ms. Prakash Kaur directed to be
returned.
Contentions:7.

We have heard the learned counsel appearing for Ms. Prakash

Kaur the respondent-plaintiff in FAO(OS) No. 213/1990 and the
appellant in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998. We have also heard counsel for
the appellant, Everest Construction Company in FAO(OS) No.
213/1990. However, there has been no appearance on behalf of
K.B. Ringshia respondent in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998, in spite of the
case being repeatedly adjourned to enable the counsel to address
arguments.
8.

Learned counsel for the appellant, Everest Construction

Company in FAO(OS) No. 213/1990 submitted that the letter made
subject matter of the suit though received in Delhi was posted in
Mumbai and that the post office had acted as an agent of Ms.
Prakash Kaur and, therefore, the fact that the letter dated 24 th/28th

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 9

December, 1987 was posted from Mumbai

and delivered to Ms.

Prakash Kaur at Delhi was of no consequence. In this regard he
relied upon Dr. Annada Prasad Pattnaik versus State of Orissa and
Others, AIR 1989 Orissa 130 and Mazharul Islam and others versus
Khacher Bux and another, AIR 1969 Allahabad 554.

It was

submitted that when letter or communication is delivered by post as
a mode requested for by the recipient, the postal authorities act as
the agent of the recipient. Reliance was also placed upon Unit Trust
of India versus Ravinder Kumar Shukla, AIR 2005 SC 3528.
Reference was also made to Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act
and upon Anirudha Padhan versus Chhai Padhan and others, AIR
1981 Orissa 74, Ram Saran and another versus Smt. Ganga Devi,
AIR 1972 SC 2685 and Om Prakash and Another versus Anar Singh
and Others, AIR 1973 Allahabad 555.

Judgment of the Supreme

Court in Harshad Chiman Lal Modi versus DLF Universal Limited and
Another, AIR 2005 SC 4446 was referred. Counsel for Ms. Prakash
Kaur, on the other hand, referred to the provisions of the Contract
Act and submitted that the letter denying existence of the contract
was received by Ms. Prakash Kaur at Delhi and, therefore, courts at
Delhi

have

jurisdiction

in

view of the limited prayer for

declaration as prayed for in the plaint. It

was

submitted

that

the buildings are yet to be constructed and, therefore, Ms.

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 10

Prakash Kaur cannot ask for relief of specific performance or
possession. Our attention was drawn to Section 50 of the Contract
Act and it was submitted that a suit for mere declaration that the
agreement subsists is maintainable. Reference was also made to
judgment of the Supreme Court in Adcon Electronics Private Limited
versus Daulat and Another, JT 2001 (7) SC 580. Our attention was
drawn to some other cases which are referred to in the conclusions
and the findings given by us.
Findings and Conclusions:9.

In the present appeals we are concerned with the preliminary

issue/objection raised by the appellant in FAO(OS) No. 213/1990
and the respondent in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998 whether courts in Delhi
have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the suits for declaration in view
of the averments made in the plaint. The first question which arises
for consideration is whether Section 16(d) or Section 20(c) of the
Code would apply. The relevant provisions read as under:“16. Suits to be instituted where subject
matter situate.- Subject to the pecuniary or
other limitations prescribed by any law, suits,
(a)
XXXXX
(b)

XXXXX

(c)

XXXXX

(d) for the determination of any other right to
or interest in immovable property,

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 11

20. Other suits to be instituted where
defendants reside or cause of action
arises.- Subject to the limitations aforesaid,
every suit shall be instituted in a Court within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction(a)

XXXXX

(b)

XXXXX

(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part,
arises.”
10.

Section 16(d) applies when a suit relates to interest or right in

an immovable property, other than interest or right in an immovable
property specified in clauses a, b and c of the said Section. It is now
well settled that if Section 16 applies, a suit can only be filed before
a court having territorial jurisdiction over the subject matter i.e. the
immovable property, irrespective of the fact that a part or even the
entire cause of action for filing of the suit has arisen outside the
territorial jurisdiction of the court where the immovable property is
located. Once Section 16 applies, recourse and reference to Section
20 of the Code for determining territorial jurisdiction is not required.
Section 20 of the Code can be relied upon only when Section 16 of
the Code is not applicable.
11.

We do not think that the suit as framed is one for right or

interest in an immovable property and, therefore, covered by Section
16 of the Code. At this stage, we are concerned with and should

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 12

refer only to the averments made in the plaint. The plaint relies upon
and is based upon agreement to sell purportedly entered into by Ms.
Prakash Kaur for purchase of two flats and the prayers made in the
two suits are to the effect that the said agreements continue to be
binding on the parties. An agreement to sell does not create any
right or interest in an immovable property. It only entitles the parties
to get a sale deed or document of transfer executed. No right, title or
interest in an immovable property is created by execution of a mere
agreement to sell.

Section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act

expressly states that an agreement to sell does not result in creation
of any interest in the immovable property.

Unlike the English Law,

where a contract for purchase of immovable property is regarded as
creating equitable interest, law in India is well settled

that an

agreement alone does not result in creation of any interest or right in
the immovable property made subject matter of the agreement.
(Refer Ram Baran Prasad versus Ram Mohit Hazra and Others, AIR
1967 SC 744 and Bai Dosabai versus Mathurdas Govinddas and
Others, AIR 1980 SC 1334). No doubt Section 54 of the Transfer of
Property Act states that an agreement to sell does not create any
interest in the immovable property and does not specifically use the
word “right”, whereas Section 16(d) of the Code uses both
expressions “interest or right”, we do not think that an agreement to

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

sell

by itself creates

Page 13

any right in an immovable property and,

therefore, Section 16(d) of the Code is not applicable to the cause of
action as stated in the plaint on the basis of which reliefs have been
prayed.
12.

By filing the present suits, Ms. Prakash Kaur seeks declaration

that there exists subsisting and a valid written contract between the
parties which has not been terminated or cancelled. The suit is not
for title or interest in an immovable property subject matter of the
agreement i.e. the flats are not the subject matter of the suit. It is
“the agreement” and the conduct of parties, which is the subject
matter of the suit. It may also be stated here that as per the case of
Ms. Prakash Kaur, the flats in respect of which agreement to sell
were executed, have not yet been constructed and
existence on the date when the suits were filed.

were not in

Therefore, Ms.

Prakash Kaur could not have filed a suit for specific relief and
possession.

The question of territorial jurisdiction of a court is

determined and decided on the basis of factual position as existing
on the date the plaint is presented. Subsequent events are not the
determining factors for deciding the issue of territorial jurisdiction.
13.

In Adcon Electronics Private Limited (supra), the Supreme

Court examined clause 12 of the Letters Patent as applicable to the
High Court of Adjudicator at Bombay with specific reference to the

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

expression “suit for land”.

Page 14

Reference was made to the decision of

the Federal Court in M/s Moolji Jaitha and Company versus The
Khandesh Spinning and Weaving Mills Company Limited, AIR
(37)1950 Federal Court 83, wherein the import of the said expression
was considered by a Bench of five Judges. Justice Fazal Ali held
that the said expression broadly speaking covers three classes of
suits viz. (i) suits for determination of title to land (ii) suits for
possession of land and (iii) suits in which reliefs claimed, if granted,
would directly affect title to or possession of land. Justice Patanjali
Shashtri observed that the said words were also apt to connote suits
which primarily and substantially seek adjudication upon title to an
immovable property or right or interest therein. Justice Mahajan felt
that a comprehensive definition may not be feasible and correct to
propound. The test is the nature of the suit and the substance of
the controversy, which is the determining factor. If the controversy
is about land or an immovable property and the court is called upon
to decide conflicting claims the suit is for land. The cause of action
and subject matter should be primarily relating to land or immovable
property and not merely incidentally relating to land or immovable
property. A suit when the above test is satisfied can be regarded as
one which falls within the four corners of the expression “suit for
land”.

The Federal Court made a distinction between a

suit for

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 15

specific performance simplicitor and a suit for specific performance
along with relief for possession.

In Adcon Electronics Private

Limited (supra), the Supreme Court noted the provisions of Section
22 of the Specific Relief Act

and held that in a suit for specific

performance, the plaintiff can also pray for a separate relief for
possession, partition or separate possession. It was held that no
court can grant relief for possession of land, partition etc. in a suit for
specific performance unless a prayer to that effect is specifically
made. A suit for specific performance, therefore, is not a “suit for
land” or a suit in which interest or right in a land is the primary
subject matter. A suit for specific performance is for enforcement of
the term of the contract and title of the land or right or interest in the
land is not the primary subject matter in a suit for specific
performance, with no further relief.
14.

The decision of the Supreme Court in Adcon Electronic Private

Limited has to be distinguished from the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Harshad Chiman Lal Modi (supra). In the said
case, the Supreme Court has held that Section 16(d) was applicable
as the suit in question was for specific performance and other reliefs
including possession and thus was a suit in respect of right or interest
in land. The prayer clause of the suit has been quoted in the judgment. In
the

case

of Harshad Chiman Lal

Modi in addition to decree for

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 16

specific performance, the plaintiff therein had also prayed for decree
of

delivery of possession. Therefore, Harshad Chiman Lal Modi's

case was not one of specific performance simplicitor but a suit
praying for decree of specific performance as well as possession
along with other reliefs.
15.

In the present cases Ms. Prakash Kaur has not prayed for

decree of specific performance or decree of possession. The suit as
framed is for declaration that there exists a binding and a valid
contract between the parties.
sought for and prayed.

A declaration to the said affect is

The Court is not required to go into the

question of right or interest in any immovable property. The only
question is whether there exists a contract as per dictum and
requirements of the Contract Act, whether a concluded and a binding
agreement exists and whether there was any termination/repudiation
of contract as pleaded in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998 by the respondent.
The Court in both the suits is not required to go into the question of
title in any immovable property or right or interest of the parties in
any immovable property.
16.

In view of the above factual position and the nature of suit as

filed, it has to be held that Section 16(d) of the Code is not
applicable. In view of the above factual position, we also hold that
the decision of Allahabad High Court in the case of Om Prakash

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 17

(supra) is not applicable. In the said case learned Single Judge of
Allahabad High Court had come to the conclusion that for granting
permanent injunction the question relating to right and interest in an
immovable property was required to be determined.
17.

The appellant with reference to the impugned order made

subject matter of FAO(OS) No. 213/1990, further submitted that no
part of cause of action, even as per the averments in the plaint has
arisen in Delhi and, therefore, even as per Section 20(c) of the Code,
courts in Delhi do not have any jurisdiction. He submitted that the
alleged agreement was entered into and signed at Mumbai, the socalled payments made by Ms. Prakash Kaur were made at Mumbai
and the immovable property to be constructed for which it is claimed
that there was an agreement is to be constructed at Mumbai. Our
attention was drawn to letters dated 24th/28th December, 1987 and
17th June, 1988 written by Ms. Prakash Kaur from Delhi calling upon
the appellant in FAO(OS)

No. 213/1990 to send written

communication/reply by registered post to the Delhi address of Ms.
Prakash Kaur.

It may be also stated here that the appellant in

FAO(OS) No. 213/1990 does not have any office in Delhi and works
for and resides for gain in Mumbai. Learned counsel referred to the
decisions in Dr. Annada Prasad Pattnaik, Unit Trust of India,
Commissioner of Income-Tax (supra) for the proposition that the post

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 18

office had acted as an agent of Ms. Prakash Kaur as she had herself
requested the appellant in FAO(OS) No. 213/1990 to send her all
communications by registered post. It was submitted that the letters
repudiating and or stating that there was no contract between the
parties were posted from Mumbai by giving it to the post-office, which
acted as the agent of Ms. Prakash Kaur.

The fact that the said

letters were received by Ms. Prakash Kaur in Delhi, will not confer
jurisdiction on courts in Delhi.
18.

The decisions relied upon by the appellant in FAO(OS) No.

213/1990 in this regard- law of agency and post office are not under
Section 20(c) of the Code. The issues and contentions raised before
the courts in the said cases were entirely different. In the case of Unit
Trust of India(supra), the dividend warrants sent by post were
fradulently misappropriated and a dispute arose whether Unit Trust
of India or the depositors were liable to suffer the loss on account of
misappropriation. In that context it was held that post office was
acting as an agent of Unit Trust of India and, therefore, as dividend
warrants were never received by the depositors, Unit Trust of India
was liable to make payments to the depositors.

In

Dr. Annada

Prasad's case (supra), the writ petitioner therein had submitted an
application for admission to an educational course by registered post
as was required by the prospectus and the guidelines issued by the

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 19

respondent therein. This letter was received late i.e. after the cut off
date. In that context it was held that the post office had acted as an
agent of the educational institution. In the case of Commissioner of
Income-Tax (supra), question arose about the situs or the place
where the assessee had received payments which were sent by
cheque through post, as per the terms of the contract. Question for
consideration was whether any income had arisen in British India.
19.

Cause of action as pleaded in the two plaints relates to

wrongful denial/termination of an agreement. Denial or termination
of an agreement is an essential and important part of the cause of
action leading to the filing of the suit. The courts located at the place
where

Ms.

Prakash

Kaur

was

informed

about

repudiation/termination/denial of the contract will have jurisdiction to
decide a suit filed by Ms. Prakash Kaur as part of cause of action for
filing of the suit has arisen within it's territorial jurisdiction. In cases
where cause of action consist of breach of contract, a suit can be
filed at the place where contract is made or to be performed and also
where breach occurs. The suit can also be filed where money is
expressly or impliedly payable. In case of A.B.C Laminart Private
Limited and Another versus A.P.Agencies, Salem AIR 1989 SC 1239
it has been held that when a contract is repudiated, the place where
repudiation is received is also a place where a part of cause of

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 20

action arises. Similarly in the case of Raja Brothers (supra), it has
been observed as under:“In Arthur Butler and Co. versus District
Board, Gaya1 which has been relied
upon by the learned counsel on both
sides, it has been held that the mere
making of an offer is not a part of the
cause of action for a suit based on a
contract and the suit cannot be brought
at the place where the offer originated
when the offer was accepted within the
jurisdiction of another Court.
The
respondents cannot derive any support
from this case because it is not the
petitioners' case that Delhi is a place
where the offer originated.
Even
according to this case, the place where
the offer was accepted is the relevant
place to determine the jurisdiction of a
Court. It has also been held in this case
that revocation of a contract is part of
the cause of action in a suit for breach
of contract and, therefore, the place
where the communication of revocation
of the contract was received may
determine the forum for the trial of the
suit. If the petitioners' case that the
revocation
is
contained
in
the
respondents' letter dated August 13,
1956 is correct, then the letter
containing the revocation having been
received by the petitioners in Delhi, the
Courts at Delhi would undoubtedly have
jurisdiction. To the same effect in the
case reported in Dhanraj Mills Limited
Liability Co. v. Narsingh Prasad Boobna
and others”2.
20.

General actions or personal actions are transitory because they

1 AIR 1947 Patna 134
2 AIR 1949 Patna 270

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 21

can occur any where. However, an action for or against a res or an
immovable property under Section 16 can be brought in the forum
res sitoe, i.e. the place where immovable property is situated.
21.

In FAO(OS) No. 4/1998 learned Single Judge while holding

that Section 16(d) is not applicable as the suit filed by Ms. Prakash
Kaur is not in respect of any right or interest in an immovable
property and Section 20(c) of the Code is applicable, has held that
no part of cause of action has arisen in Delhi and the whole of the
cause of action has arisen at Mumbai. Learned Single Judge in this
regard had relied upon decision of the Supreme Court in Oil and
Natural Gas Commission versus Utpal Kumar Basu and Others,
(1994) 4 SCC 711.

In the said case, the petitioner therein had

submitted a tender from Calcutta after reading an advertisement.
The tender was submitted at Dehradun but was not accepted. In
these circumstances, it was held that Calcutta High Court does not
have territorial jurisdiction. In State of Rajasthan versus M/s Sawika
Properties, AIR 1985 SC 1289, the Supreme Court held that the
question related to land at Jaipur which had been acquired and,
therefore, no cause of action had arisen at Calcutta. As stated
above, in cases of repudiation/cancellation of contracts or their
denial, the place where letter of repudiation/denial is received is also
one of the places where a suit for breach of contract or for

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 22

declaration that the contract exist is maintainable. The two decisions
are, therefore, distinguishable and the cause of action which was
made subject matter of challenge in the writ petitions related to
challenge to award of tender to a third party and challenge to the
land acquisition proceedings.

The cause of action for both the

proceedings had not arisen in the territorial jurisdiction of High Court
of Adjudicator at Calcutta.
22.

The last contention raised by the appellant in FAO(OS) No.

213/1990 was with reference to Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act.
Section 34 of the said Act reads as under:“34. Discretion of court as to declaration
of status or right.- Any person entitled to
any legal character, or to any right as to any
property, may institute a suit against any
person denying, or interested to deny, his
title to such character or right, and the court
may in its discretion make therein a
declaration that he is so entitled, and the
plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any
further relief:
Provided that no court shall make any
such declaration where the plaintiff, being
able to seek further relief than a mere
declaration of title, omits to do so.”
23.

It was submitted that the suit for declaration as filed is not

maintainable as Ms. Prakash Kaur has not prayed for further relief
for specific performance and possession.

The said contention is

liable to be rejected. On the date when the suit was filed, the flats in
question were not constructed. Ms. Prakash Kaur could not have

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 23

prayed for decree of possession or specific performance of

flats

before they are constructed. The question whether a suit is barred
and not maintainable for failure to ask for further reliefs under the
proviso of Section 34 has to be determined and decided on the basis
of the facts existing on the date when the suit was filed. To be fair to
the counsel for Ms. Prakash Kaur, it may be pointed out that she had
argued in the alternative that the present suit has not been filed
under Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act but under Section 9 and
Order VII Rule 7 of the Code. In this regard she had relied upon two
decisions of the Supreme Court viz. M/s Supreme General Films
Exchange Limited versus His Highness Maharaja Sir Brijnath Singhji
Deo of Maihar and others, AIR 1975 SC 1810 and Vemareddi
Ramaraghava Reddy and others versus Konduru Seshu Reddy and
others, AIR 1967 SC 436. We are, however, not examining these
aspects in detail as these do not directly pertain to the question
whether or not courts in Delhi have territorial jurisdiction to decide
the suit. The said questions arose incidentally before the learned
Single Judge in FAO(OS) No. 213/1990 while deciding and
examining the issue of territorial jurisdiction with reference to Section
16(d) of the Code.

While examining the question of territorial

jurisdiction, it was submitted that Ms. Prakash Kaur was required to
make prayers and seek relief for specific performance of contract

FAO(OS) NO. 4/1998 & FAO(OS) NO. 213/1990

Page 24

and possession. The argument of the appellant in FAO(OS) No.
213/1990 proceeded on the basis that if the said prayers had been
made, the courts in Delhi would not have territorial jurisdiction. We
make it clear that we have not examined and decided whether a
suit praying for declaration that there exists a valid and binding
contract, is maintainable under Section 34 of the Specific Relief Act
or under Section 9 and Order VII Rule 7 of the Code. The said
aspects are left open. It may be noted here that the appellant in
FAO(OS) No. 213/1990 has not urged and argued before us that a
declaratory decree, a valid and binding contract exists, cannot be
granted under the Specific Relief Act

or under Section 9 read with

Order VII Rule 7 of the Code.
24.

In view of the above, we dismiss the appeal in FAO(OS) No.

213/1990 and allow the appeal in FAO(OS) No. 4/1998 holding that
the courts in Delhi have territorial jurisdiction to adjudicate and
decide the aforesaid suits in view of nature of reliefs prayed for
therein. In the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no
order as to costs.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
JULY 20, 2007.
VKR

