FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) NO. 268 OF 2006

%

Date of Decision : 20th December, 2007.

BHAGWAN KRISHAN GUPTA

.... Appellant.

Through, Mr. Arun Khosla, Advocate.
VERSUS
PRABHA GUPTA & ORS.
Respondents.

....

Through Mr. Y.D. Nagar, Advocate for the
respondents 4 & 5.
Mr. M.L. Mahajan & Mr. Gaurav Mahajan,
Advocates for the respondents 7-8.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

The appellant herein is son of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta, who

expired in the year 1986. The respondents in the present appeal are
his brothers and sisters i.e. other children of

late Mr. Murari Lal

Gupta and children of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta. Mr. Girdhari Lal

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 2

Gupta was brother of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta, who expired in the
year 1966.
2.

Mr. Murari Lal Gupta had executed a will dated 30th November,

1984. The will is not disputed by any of the parties including the
appellant. What is subject matter of consideration in this appeal and
as adjudicated by the impugned order dated 23rd March, 2006
passed by the learned Single Judge, are paragraphs 3 and 8 of the
aforesaid will, which for the sake of convenience are reproduced
below:“3. That at present I am absolute legal
owner of immovable property consisting of a
residential house No. C-11, Green Park Ext.
New Delhi.16 which was got constructed by
me on a plot of land purchased by me out of
my own income and sources. I further
declare that half of the cost of the plot in this
land was paid to me by my deceased
younger brother Sh. Girdhari Lal Gupta. The
construction of the building on the ground
floor and the 1st floor and the barasati
thereon was got done by me out of my own
income and sources. However, the half of
the cost of construction was paid to me by
my deceased younger brother.
8.
I have also cash deposited in my
saving a/c in the State Bank of India, Green
Park, new Delhi and I declare that all my four
sons share the amount equally.
I have read the contents of my above
will and found the same to be correct and as
dictated by me. It is further stated that any
controversies which may arise later on may
be settled by the affected beneficiaries of this
Will by discussion among themselves & on

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

the principle
majority.”
3.

Page 3

of

a

decision

by simple

Learned Single Judge has held that the ground floor of the

property No. C-11, Green Park Extension, New Delhi-110016 stands
bequeathed to four sons of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta viz. Mr. Radha
Krishan Gupta, Mr. Bal Krishan Gupta, Mr. Ram Krishan Gupta & Mr.
Bhagwan Krishan Gupta. The first floor of the aforesaid property as
per the will belongs to and is owned by the legal representatives of
late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta. To this extent also, there is no dispute
between the appellant and the other respondents, though the
learned counsel for the appellant had submitted that paragraph 3 of
the will does not make a bequest of the first floor in favour of legal
representatives of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta but acknowledges their
right. It is, however, submitted that by a will, an immoveable property
could not have been transferred by Mr. Murari Lal Gupta in favour of
the legal representatives of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta and,
therefore, the children of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta cannot claim
any right in the property. It is further stated that as a gesture of
goodwill, the appellant is not claiming any right on the first floor of the
property against the children of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta but the
said respondents cannot claim any right, title or interest on the
second /barsati floor. In alternative, it is submitted that what has
been granted or bequeathed to children of late Mr. Girdhari Lal

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 4

Gupta is only the first floor and not any other portion of the aforesaid
property. The property was registered in the name of Mr. Murari Lal
Gupta and as per the provisions of Transfer of Property Act read with
the will, the entire property except the first floor stands bequeathed
to the four sons of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta to the exclusion of every
one.
4.

The respondents herein including the three brothers of the

appellant (other three sons of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta) have
opposed the present appeal. They have drawn our attention to the
will and it is submitted that the intention of the testator was to admit
that both he and his brother late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta were equal
owners of the property and as per the terms of oral family settlement,
ground floor had fallen in share of Mr. Murari Lal Gupta and the first
floor had fallen in share of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta. Accordingly,
the learned Single Judge had rightly interpreted the will and held that
the barsati floor should be equally divided between the two families
i.e. the four brothers of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta and the children of
late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta.
5.

We have considered the contentions raised. It may be relevant

to state here that the suit for partition was filed in the year 1998 by
Mr. Ram Krishan Gupta son of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta, one of the
respondents herein. He is opposing the appeal. As per averments

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 5

made in paragraph 3 of the plaint, the said plaintiff who is now
represented by his legal heirs viz. the respondent Nos. 1 to 3, late
Mr. Murari Lal Gupta had bequeathed first floor of the property to the
family members of his own brother late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta, while
rest of the property was bequeathed to the four sons of late Mr.
Murari Lal Gupta. The appellant who was defendant No. 3 before
the learned Single Judge in his written statement had admitted
execution of the will dated 30th November, 1984 by late Mr. Murari
Lal Gupta and has also stated that the said will makes a bequest of
the first floor of the aforesaid property in favour of family members of
late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta. Thus, the stand taken by the learned
counsel for the appellant that the will dated 30th November, 1984
does not make any bequest in favour of family members of late Mr.
Girdhari Lal Gupta is contrary to the pleadings and the averments
made in his written statement. We need not dwell further on this
aspect in view of the reasons given below.
6.

A will is interpreted by applying “Arm Chair Rule”. The said

principle has been succinctly explained by a Learned Single Judge of
this Court in the case of Shri Kuldip Mehta v. Shri Jagdip Mehta
CS(OS) No.1963/1997 in the following words:“Although a will speaks from the death of the
testator, in construing the will the court should
determine the facts and circumstances
respecting the testator's property and family

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 6

and things as at the date of the will in order to
put itself in the chair of the testator so that
effect to the words in the will and meaning to
be assigned to them could be ascertained
without taking into note the evidence or
circumstances which came into existence
after the will was written.”
7.

We refer here to Meggary and Wade “The Law of Real

Property” Sixth edition paragraph 11-65 page 613.
“Evidence of facts and circumstance existing
when the will was made is always admissible
in order to explain its terms. “you may place
yourself, so to speak in (the testator's)
armchair”thus,
extrinsic
evidence
is
admissible to show that certain words had a
peculiar meaning to the testator .... in which
case the true intention is carried;
falsademonstratio non nocet (a mistake in
description does no harm).”
8.

It would be permissible to supply words to give effect to the

intention of the testator. Though, this should be resorted to as a rule
of last instance, as held in Pramod Kumari Bhatia v. Om Prakash
Bhatia reported in AIR 1980 SC 446 the Supreme Court justified
exercise of curial draftsmanship and supply the specific words
missing from the will. In Jarman on Wills (8th edition, page 592) it
has been observed:“Where it is clear on the face of a will that the
testator has not accurately or completely
expressed his meaning by the words he used
and it is also clear what are the words which
he omitted, those words may be supplied in
order to effectuate the intention, as collected
from the context.”

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

9.

Page 7

Let us apply the Arm Chair Rule to para 3 of the will. Late Mr.

Murari Lal Gupta was the elder brother of Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta.
Mr. Murari Lal Gupta has admitted that late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta
had paid to him half of the price of the plot and had also paid to him
half of the total cost of construction made on the property, though the
said plot was registered in the name of Late Shri. Murari Lal Gupta.
Paragraph 3 of the will is an admission by late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta
that his brother late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta and subsequently his
children have equal share in the plot as well as the building. Both of
them were joint owners of the plot and it was mutually decided
between Mr. Murari Lal Gupta that he owns the ground floor and the
family members of Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta own the first floor. The
intention of the testator and the admission made by him in the will
dated 30th November, 1984 is apparent.

In plain and simple

language, late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta has categorically stated that the
family members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta have equal share in
the plot and the building constructed on the plot. Thus, both the
branches have equal share in the property.
10.

As per the stand taken by the appellant, in terms of the oral

settlement, ground floor belongs to Mr. Murari Lal Gupta and after
his death shall devolve on his four sons, whereas the first floor shall
devolve on the family members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta.

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 8

Normally, this would mean that the ground floor and below shall
belong to and will be owned by the four sons of late Mr. Murari Lal
Gupta and the first floor and anything above the first floor, will be
owned by family members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta, as per
judgment in Shri Kuldip Mehta versus Shri Jagdip Mehta (Supra).
However, we are not inclined to make any observation and examine
this aspect, as the same is not the subject matter of this appeal. The
respondents who are owners of first floor have not laid exclusive
claim on the terrace/barsati, on the contrary the claim of exclusive
ownership of the said floor is by one of the owners of the ground
floor. It is the case of the respondents that they are 50% owners of
the barsati floor.
11.

In the present case it is stated by the counsel for the

respondents that the roof on the first floor should be equally divided
amongst the four sons of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta on one side and
the family members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta on the other side.
The family members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta are not making
any claim in respect of the barsati floor to the exclusion of the four
sons of late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta.
12.

We do not find any merit in the contention of the appellant that

late Mr. Murari Lal Gupta could not have referred to and admitted
oral family settlement between him and his late brother Mr. Girdhari
Lal Gupta in the will. A family settlement can be oral and need not
be in writing. An oral family settlement is binding on the parties and need

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 9

not be registered. Law in this regard is well established and accepted.
In this connection, we

Court

in

Kale

and

may

refer to the judgment of the Supreme

Others

versus

Deputy

Director

of

Consolidation and Others, reported in AIR 1976 Supreme Court
807, wherein it has been held that a family arrangement can be oral
in which case no registration is required. Similarly, a memorandum
recording terms of family settlement which does not create or
extinguish any right in an immovable property, is not compulsorily
registrable.

However, a family settlement recording terms and

recitals of a family arrangement in praesenti and which is not merely
a memorandum, is required to be registered and stamped. In this
case it was further held that in case of a family settlement, an
antecedent title, claim or interest in the property can be assumed
and Courts normally strive to uphold family arrangements by taking
broadest view possible as this avoids litigation and prevents
destruction of family ties and unity.

Family arrangements are

governed by special equities and should be enforced when honestly
made to ensure that unity and solidarity of the family is protected and
to achieve equal distribution of wealth instead of concentration of
wealth in the hands of some family members. We may quote some
paragraphs from the said judgment.
“9. Before dealing with the respective
contentions put forward by the parties, we would

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 10

like to discuss in general the effect and value of
family arrangements entered into between the
parties with a view to resolving disputes once for
all. By virtue of a family settlement or
arrangement members of a family descending
from a common ancestor or a near relation seek
to sink their differences and disputes, settle and
resolve their conflicting claims or disputed titles
once for all in order to buy peace of mind and
bring about complete harmony and goodwill in
the family. The family arrangements are
governed by a special equity peculiar to
themselves and would be enforced if honestly
made. In this connection, Kerr in his valuable
treatise Kerr on Fraud at p. 364 makes the
following pertinent observations regarding the
nature of the family arrangement which may be
extracted thus:
“The principles which apply to the case of ordinary
compromise between strangers do not equally
apply to the case of compromises in the nature of
family arrangements. Family arrangements are
governed by a special equity peculiar to
themselves, and will be enforced if honestly
made, although they have not been meant as a
compromise, but have proceeded from an error of
all parties, originating in mistake or ignorance of
fact as to what their rights actually are, or of the
points on which their rights actually depend.”
The object of the arrangement is to protect the
family from long-drawn litigation or perpetual strifes
which mar the unity and solidarity of the family and
create hatred and bad blood between the various
members of the family. Today when we are striving
to build up an egalitarian society and are trying for
a complete reconstruction of the society, to
maintain .and uphold the unity and homogeneity of
the family which ultimately results in the unification
of the society and, therefore, of the entire country,
is the prime need of the hour. A family arrangement
by which the property is equitably divided between
the various contenders so as to achieve an equal
distribution of wealth instead of concentrating the
same in the hands of a few is undoubtedly a

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 11

milestone in the administration of social justice.
That is why the term “family” has to be understood
in a wider sense so as to include within its fold not
only close relations or legal heirs but even those
persons who may have some sort of antecedent
title, a semblance of a claim or even if they have a
spes successionis so that future disputes are
sealed for ever and the family instead of fighting
claims inter se and wasting time, money and
energy on such fruitless or futile litigation is able to
devote its attention to more constructive work in the
larger interest of the country. The courts have,
therefore, leaned in favour of upholding a family
arrangement instead of disturbing the same on
technical or trivial grounds. Where the courts find
that the family arrangement suffers from a legal
lacuna or a formal defect the rule of estoppel is
pressed into service and is applied to shut out plea
of the person who being a party to family
arrangement seeks to unsettle a settled dispute
and claims to revoke the family arrangement under
which he has himself enjoyed some material
benefits. The law in England on this point is almost
the same. In Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 17,
Third Edition, at pp. 215-216, the following apt
observations regarding the essentials of the family
settlement and the principles governing the
existence of the same are made:
“A family arrangement is an agreement
between members of the same family,
intended to be generally and reasonably for
the benefit of the family either by
compromising doubtful or disputed rights or
by preserving the family property or the
peace and security of the family by avoiding
litigation or by saving its honour.
The agreement may be implied from a long
course of dealing, but it is more usual to
embody or to effectuate the agreement in a
deed
to
which
the
term
“family
arrangement” is applied.
6. Family arrangements are governed by
principles which are not applicable to
dealings between strangers. The court,

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 12

when deciding the rights of parties under
family arrangements or claims to upset
such arrangements, considers what in
the broadest view of the matter is most
for the interest of families, and has
regard to considerations which, in dealing
with transactions between persons not
members of the same family, would not
be taken into account. Matters which
would be fatal to the validity of similar
transactions between strangers are not
objections to the binding effect of family
arrangements.”

13.

The above view has been reiterated in Roshan Singh and

Others versus Zile Singh and Others, reported in AIR 1988
Supreme Court 881 and Bakhtawar Singh versus Gurdev Singh
and Another, reported in (1996) 9 SCC 370.
14.

It may be relevant to state here that Mr. Murari Lal Gupta died

in the year 1986 and the suit for partition was filed in the year 1998.
It is admitted case of both the parties that the barsati floor has
always been in occupation of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta and his
family all along. It is only in the year 1998, when the present suit for
partition was filed by the predecessor interest of the respondents 1, 2
and 3 in the present appeal. A separate suit for mesne profits based
on half share of the barsati floor is also filed against the family
members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta. It is, therefore, clear that
even during the life time of Mr. Murari Lal Gupta and after his death,
all along parties have always accepted that family members of late

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 13

Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta have an equal share on the barsati/second
floor of the property. The oral family arrangement has been acted
upon.
15.

Initially in 1998 when the suit was filed, three sons of late Mr.

Murari Lal Gupta had claimed absolute right on the second floor on
the ground that only first floor stands bequeathed to the family
members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta but they have now changed
their stand and have accepted the position that family members of
late Mr. Girdhari Lal Gupta have equal share on the second/barsati
floor. It is only the appellant herein who is claiming that he along
with his three brothers are absolute owners of the barsati/second
floor to the exclusion of family members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal
Gupta.
16.

With reference to Clause 8 of the will dated 30th November,

1984 it was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that
as no bequest was made in favour of family members of late Mr.
Girdhari Lal Gupta, and therefore the aforesaid clause is not
applicable. Even if the above contention is presumed and accepted,
to our minds, it will not make any difference, for the three brothers of
the appellant are not supporting the appellant. Further to our minds,
the testator by incorporating the Clause 8 in the will, wanted to avoid
any litigation and disputes amongst the family members and,

FAO(OS) No. 268/2006

Page 14

therefore, had advised his children to resolve and decide all disputes
sitting across a table and, if required, on the principle of simple
majority. Even if we exclude the family members of late Mr. Girdhari
Lal Gupta, all beneficiaries under the will except the appellant have
admitted equal right of the family members of late Mr. Girdhari Lal
Gupta in the barsati/second floor.
17.

In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present

appeal and the same is dismissed with costs, which are assessed at
Rs.5,000/-.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
DECEMBER 20, 2007.
VKR/P

