W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 1

UNREPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 4621 OF 2005

%

Date of Decision : April
….

VANISHREE ENTERPRISES

22nd , 2008.

Petitioner.

Through Prof. Ram Prakash, petitioner in person.

VERSUS
BSES RAJDHANI POWER LIMITED

…

Respondent.

Through Mr. Rohit Aggarwal, Advocate for
respondent No. 1.
Mr. R.M. Bagai, Advocate for respondent No. 2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

NO

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

NO

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1.

The petitioner-Mr. Ram Prakash, who appears in person, states

that he has challenged by way of present writ petition arrears of

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 2

Rs.2,67,831.01 claimed by BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, the
respondent, in the electricity bill for the Month of June, 2003. The
said electricity bill pertains to premises No. D-9/4, Okhla Industrial
Area, Phase-I, New Delhi, a property owned by the petitioner. The
petitioner is also the registered consumer of the electricity meter
installed in the property for which the bill has been raised. The said
electricity bill consists of arrears on account of electricity consumed
during the period 4th June, 2001 to 5th October, 2001 of Rs.94,910/-.
For this amount, one M/s Absolut Apparels, the then tenant of the
petitioner, had issued a cheque to the erstwhile Delhi Vidyut Board
but the said cheque was received back dishonoured.

The

respondent-Distcom is also claiming late payment charges on
Rs.94,910/- i.e.; Rs. 1,29,272/-. In addition, the respondent-Distcom
has claimed Rs.1,38,558.66 on account of alleged sub-letting during
the period 4th December, 1998 to 3rd November, 2001.

The

aforesaid amounts add up to make the bill of Rs.2,67,831.01.
2.

Due to non-payment of the bill of Rs.2,67,831.01, the arrears

demanded by respondent-Distcom increased to Rs.3,57,910.75 as on
7th March, 2005. The increase is due to late payment surcharge.
3.

M/s Absolut Apparels was not made party to the present writ

petition, presumably because in the prayer clause challenge was
mainly made to the impugned demand of Rs.1,38,558.66, i.e. the
amount payable for alleged sub-letting during the period 4th

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 3

December, 1998 to 3rd November, 2001. The prayer clause of the
writ petition reads as under:“i)
An appropriate writ, order or direction to
quash the demand raised under notice dated
7.3.2005 including the impugned demand of
Rs.138,558.66ps and LPSC, if any, and to
return the interim payment of Rs.10,000/made by the petitioner under directions of the
PMT Lok Adalat;”
4.

I am not inclined to go into inter se disputes between the

petitioner and his erstwhile tenant M/s Absolut Apparels/Mr. Amitosh
Moitra.

There are several reasons for the same.

The petitioner

himself has filed a civil suit before Civil Judge being a suit for
mandatory and perpetual injunction in respect of bounced cheque of
Rs.94,910/-. Mr. Amitosh Moitra and the respondent Distcom are a
party to the said suit. The petitioner had also filed an application
under Order XII, Rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the
said suit for decree on admissions, which was dismissed by the Civil
Judge on 13th August, 2004. A civil revision petition was filed in this
Court against the said order dated 13th August, 2004, but was
dismissed by a Learned Single Judge of this Court on 24th May,
2005. M/s Absolut Apparels has also filed a civil suit for recovery of
Rs.7,35,000/- against the petitioner. M/s. Absolut Apparels claims
refund of Rs.3,41,000/- paid as a security deposit,

when the

premises was taken on lease/licence, and interest accrued thereon.
It is the case of M/s Absolut Apparels that on 3rd November, 2001

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 4

they were illegally evicted from the property by the petitioner, who
was accompanied by 4-5 strangers and police officers. It is claimed
by M/s Absolut Apparels that they wanted to vacate the premises but
the petitioner was not refunding the security deposit. The petitioner
has filed a counter claim in the said suit. The petitioner denies all
allegations and has stated that the property was damaged by the
tenant.
5.

It will not be appropriate for this Court to go into disputed

questions of fact and decide inter se disputes between the petitioner
and M/s Absolut Apparels, which are already subject matters of the
two civil proceedings. The bill of Rs.94,910/-, bouncing of cheque
given by Absolut Apparels, conduct of Delhi Vidyut Board etc. are
subject matter of a Civil Suit filed by the Petitioner for mandatory and
permanent injunction. As the parties have already invoked jurisdiction
of the civil court before the present writ petition was filed, I am of the
opinion that application CM No. 6481/2007 should be rejected. The
inter se disputes between the petitioner and M/s Absolut Apparels will
be decided in the civil proceedings.

It is also clarified that the

observations made by this Court in the earlier orders and in the
present order relating to inter se disputes between the petitioner and
M/s Absolut Apparels will not be binding on the civil courts, who will
decide the disputes independently and on the basis of evidence and
material placed before them.

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

6.

This brings us to the main issue raised in the writ petition, the

prayer clause of which has been quoted above. The misuse charges
have been claimed for the period 1998-2001. These were demanded for
the first time in June, 2003. It is claimed that letting out of the premises
by the petitioner to M/s Absolut Apparels amounted to subletting and
constitutes misuse.

7. It is not denied by the respondent Distcom that no show cause
notice was issued before the impugned bill for misuse charges was
raised. It is not stated by the respondent that any show cause notice
was issued to the petitioner. The levying of charges without issuing
show-cause notice would be violative of the principles of natural justice
(refer to Matsaya Metal Udyog Pvt. Ltd versus Municipal
Corporation of Delhi reported in 1991(144) DLT13 DB). In this regard

I may also refer to Circular dated 6th January, 2003, which is quoted
in order dated 28th November, 2006 and reads as under:“Instances of old cases have come to notice
where misuse charges have been livied(sic)
without service of show cause notice to the
consumer and the consumers have been
approaching various courts for withdrawal of
such charges on grounds of non-issuance of
show cause notice. Some of the judgments
have gone against us and the Honourable
Courts have passed orders to withdraw the
charges so levied and also imposed fines on
BYPL/BRPL for not following the course of
natural justice. In the circumstances the
cases of violation of tariff (misuse) shall be
dealt as follows:

Page 5

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Old cases where misuse has been
levied without service of show
cause notice shall be withdrawn by
the Executive Engineer (D) or next
higher authority from the date of
levy after due verification of record
within seven working days from the
receipt of the consumer’s objection.
However,
simultaneously
the
premises in question shall be
reinspected and if misuse is found
the case may be proceeded against
the consumer inspected and if
misuse is found the case may be
proceeded against the consumer
afresh, after service of show cause
notice in accordance with the DERC
(Performance Standard – Metering
&
Billing)
Regulations,
2002
(Regulation 32 to 35 & 37)”.

8. Thus principles of Natural Justice have been violated. Circular
mentioned above has also not been followed. Normally for violation of
Principles of Natural justice and the circular, respondent distcom
should be permitted and allowed to comply with the requirements of
law and pass an appropriate order. However, in the present case I
am not inclined to grant the said liberty for various reasons. These
have been discussed below.
9.

There is also no justification and reason why it took years for

the respondent-Distcom to raise the said bill in 2003 for the period
between 4th December, 1998 to 3rd November, 2001. It may also be
noted here that Delhi Vidyut Board was fully aware that M/s Absolut
Apparels was in occupation of the property and using the said

Page 6

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 7

electricity connection. This is clear from the order dated 4th April,
2000 passed by the Executive Engineer, Delhi ALN.

It is also

admitted that M/s Absolut Apparels or Mr. Amitosh Moitra were
issuing cheques for payment of the electricity dues.
10.

The petitioner by his letter dated 8.11.2001 had requested Delhi

Vidyut Board to issue

an updated bill for the electricity meter in

question, so as to enable him to settle the matter with his tenant.
Thereafter Delhi Vidyut Board had issued a final bill with due date
23.11.2001. In the said final bill no misuse charges were claimed. The
petitioner is right in his contention that after Delhi Vidyut Board had
raised the final bill; the respondent could not have made any further
claim for the period prior to the said bill. Full facts were in the knowledge
of Delhi Vidyut Board when the final bill was issued but misuse charges
were not levied and claimed. Reference in this regard can be made to
Regulation 14 of the Delhi Electricity Regulatory Commission
(Performance standards – Metering and Billing) Regulation, 2002. The
relevant portion of which reads as under :
“14. Change of occupancy/vacancy of premises: –
(i) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
connection to get a special reading done by the licencee
at the time of change of occupancy or on the premises
falling vacant.
(iv) Once the final bill is raised the licencee shall not have
any right to recover any charge (s), other than those in the
final bill, for any period prior to the date of such bill.”

11.

The above regulation may not be applicable as it was enacted

in 2002, but the object and principle behind the said regulation is

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 8

apparent and can be applied. There should be finality and certainty,
in absence of fraud and misrepresentation.
12. The tariff order for the year 2001 in Schedule or Clause 3.8.1
stipulates and defines what is misuse. These categories are as under :“i)
Use of electric load for category of use other than
that for which it was sanctioned for viz.
a)
Domestic connections used for nondomestic or industrial purpose.
b)
Non-domestic connection used for
industrial purpose.
c)
Agriculture connection used for
domestic, non-domestic, industrial or farm
house etc.
d)
Industrial connection used for nondomestic purposes.
e)
Use of electrical load for industrial
purposes without valid municipal licence.
ii)
Extension of electricity outside the premises by
any industrial consumer.
iii)
Feeding from any live connection to any premises
having connection lying disconnected due to any
reason.
iv)
Bringing three different single – phase connection
to one place to make three phase supply.”

13.

Schedule or Clause 3.9 reads as under: “The following shall not be treated as misuse of supply:
i)

In case of domestic/non-domestic connection(s),
extension of supply from live connection to other
portion of the building/plot including for servant
quarters,

garages

or

for

certain

activities

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 9

covering social requirements relating to religious
functions, sports etc.; in residential area so long
as the supply is not extended to any portion for
which connection has been disconnected due to
non-payment of dues and there is no change in
the category of use.
ii)

In industrial premises where the supply is used
by one or more persons where portion in
business takes place or division in family occurs.

iii)

User of connection changes due to succession

iv)

Change of firm from Private Limited to Public
Limited or vice versa.

v)

Supply to activities incidental to main activity for
example supply to chemist shop in nursing
homes

and

hospitals,

shop/canteen/employees’

tea

cooperative

store,

dispensaries, retail outlets of own products etc.;
provided that the load for such activities remains
within 10% of the sanctioned load or 10 KW
whichever is less.
vi)

Professionals

such

as

Doctors,

Engineers,

Lawyers, CA’s, Journalists and Consuntants
practising from their residence irrespective of
location provided that such use shall not exceed

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 10

25% of the area of the premises or 50 sq Meters
which is less.
vii)

For cottage industries operating in residence by
family members only where electricity is not used
for processing.

14.

Use of electricity connection by a tenant has not been designated

as misuse in the aforesaid Clause 3.8.1. Clause 3.8.1 defines misuse
and circumstances which constitute and are regarded as “misuse”. For
levy of “misuse charges” mentioned in the schedule, a case must fall
under one of the categories. Clause 3.8.1 is a complete code. Clause
3.9 on the other hand carves out exceptions, when no misuse charges
can be levied. Schedule 3.9 does not stipulate that if a case does not
fall under the exceptions, it will amount to misuse under Clause 3.8 and
misuse charges will be leviable. Clause 3.9 will apply where a case falls
under Clause 3.8.1 and in such cases no misuse charges are payable.
Clause 3.9 stipulates circumstances which would not be treated as a
“misuse”, even when conditions mentioned in Clause 3.8.1 are satisfied.
The respondent herein has relied upon Clause 3.9 (ii).

Clause 3.9.(ii)

stipulates that in industrial premises where supply is used by one or
more persons where partition in business takes place or division of
family occurs shall not be regarded as misuse. Similarly, change of the
consumer because of conversion of a private limited to public limited
company and vice versa is not regarded as misuse. These Clauses do
not apply when a property with an electricity connection is rented out to

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 11

a tenant. Moreover, I may note here that the aforesaid Clauses of Tariff
Schedule of 2001 may not have retrospective effect and do not relate to
the entire period for which misuse charges have been claimed. The
respondent has not produced and referred to any enactment or term of
supply under which misuse charges can be claimed because a property
is in use and occupation of a tenant.

15.

In

these

circumstances,

the

impugned

demand

of

Rs.1,38,558.66 towards misuse charges for the period 4th December,
1998 to 3rd November, 2001 is quashed. Learned counsel for the
respondent during the course of hearing had agreed that the
impugned demand of Rs.1,38,558.66 can be quashed provided the
petitioner pays Rs.94,910/- for which the cheque had been issued by
M/s Absolut Apparels but was not honoured.

As already stated

above, I am not examining this question as the parties are already
before the civil court.
16.

The other question which requires determination is whether the

respondent-Distcom should be asked to refund Rs.10,000/- which
was deposited by the petitioner pursuant to an interim order passed
by the Lok Adalat. The Lok Adalat in it’s order dated 4th March, 2005
has noted that the parties were unable to arrive at any settlement
and, therefore, the petitioner herein will be entitled to approach Delhi
High Court or any other court or forum for redressal of his grievance.
It is, however, unclear whether the amount demanded was paid on

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 12

account of dishonour of cheque of Rs.94,910/- or on account of
misuse charges. Perhaps it was paid on account of both claims but
this Court cannot speculate and divide the said payment. The
petitioner should have made an appropriate prayer before the Lok
Adalat, when the matter was discharged as un-settled. Refund or
adjustment of this payment of Rs.10,000/- will abide by the decision
in the civil suits. Similarly the question whether or not electricity
supply to the property should be disconnected for non payment of
Rs.94,910/- is for the civil court to decide. Parties will also have to
abide by interim order passed by the Civil Court in this regard.
17.

The petitioner had deposited Rs.40,000/- as per the interim

direction issued by this Court in its Order dated 15th March, 2005. As
this amount was deposited pursuant to interim directions issued by
this Court, it will not be adjusted against any other dues payable for
consumption of electricity in the property. To balance out equities and
as the claim of misuse charges is being quashed, it is directed that
the aforesaid amount Rs.40,000/- will be refunded by the respondentDistcom to the petitioner within a period of one month from today. In
case they do not refund the said amount to the petitioner within one
month, the petitioner will be entitled to interest on Rs.40,000/- @ 10%
per annum from the date of this judgement till the payment is made.
As held above on the question of payment of Rs.94,910/- and late
payment charges payable thereon, the parties will abide by the

W.P. (C) No. 4621/2005

Page 13

interim order and the final decision of the civil court and respondentdistcom is at liberty to recover the same as per law.
With the above directions, the writ petition is disposed of. No
costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
APRIL
VKR/P

22, 2008.

