*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 3768/2007 & CM No. 7090/2007

GOMATH MANDIR REGLIGIOUS TRUST ..... Petitioner
Through Mr. B.S. Mor, Advocate.

versus
N.C.T. OF DELHI & ORS. ..... Respondents
Through Ms. Ruchi Sindhwani, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
ORDER
% 21.02.2008
1. In the last order it is incorrectly recorded that the respondents should file
their counter affidavits. On the last date, the matter was adjourned for today to
enable the petitioner to argue the matter. Reference in this regard may be
made to the order dated 18th May, 2007 in which it has been recorded that the
writ petition seeks to challenge notification dated 2nd April, 1996 in the year
2007 and is clearly barred by laches.

2. The present writ petition has been filed challenging notification No. F1(29)/PA/DC/95 dated 2nd April, 1996 published in the Delhi Gazette of
National Capital Territory of Delhi stating that property/land comprising in
khata/khatoni No. 198 Min/194 situated in revenue estate of village
Maidangarhi, Tehsil Mehrauli, District Delhi, are handed over to the Forest
Department, Government of NCT of Delhi under Section 154 of the Delhi Land
Reforms Act, 1954.
3. The petitioner submits that a temple was constructed in the aforesaid land,
subject matter of notification dated 2nd April, 1996 and has been in existence
for about last five centuries. Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits
that a dharamshala, goshala and resident of mahant have also been
constructed near the said temple. It is submitted that these constructions and
land adjacent thereto is not covered by the said notification.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon alleged resolution dated 18 th
September, 1986 passed by Gram Panchayat, village Maidangarhi whereby a
decision was taken to handover 120 acres of Gaon Sabha land in khasra Nos.
529, 527, 633 and 635 to the said temple. He also relies upon entry made in
khasra girdawari for the year 1987-88. In the said document Gaon Sabha has
been shown to be the owner of the land but it has been mentioned that some
portion of the said land is in occupation of Gair Mumkin Johar Baba Gomath.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has also drawn my attention to alleged trust
deed executed by one Swami Karam Pal.
5. I have considered the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioner
but do not find any merit in the same.
6. The Supreme Court in it's order date 25th January, 1996 passed in the case
of M.C. Mehta versus Union of India & Others had directed as under:“We have heard learned counsel for NCT, Delhi

Administration regarding the Gaon Sabha area
forming part of the Ridge. Learned counsel states that
various proposals regarding handing over the Gaon
Sabha area (part of the Ridge) to the Forest
Department have been examined by a committee
appointed by the Administration. Finally, the
Committee has taken a decision that a Notification
under Section 35 of the Indian Forests Act, 1927 be
issued. We are of the view that the Notification under
Section 35 will not solve the problem which we are
facing. The learned counsel states that the Committee
was of the view that the provisions of Section 154 of
the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 are not attracted
because in view of the expression “on the
commencement of the Act” in Section 154, power
under the proviso to Section 154 could only be
exercised at the time of the commencement of the Act
and not thereafter. That may be one way of looking at
the Section but since it is for the first time that a
Committee has been appointed to examine this
aspect and it was never examined earlier by the Delhi
Administration at any point of time, we are prima facie
of the view that the provisions of Section 154 can
even now be invoked especially when it is crystal
clear that this area is of no utility to the Gaon Sabha
and in any case cannot be permitted to be used by

Gaon Sabha for any purpose. This is Ridge area
which has to be preserved. No cultivation or any type
of construction can be permitted on this area. In this
view of the matter, we request the committee to
reconsider the question of issuing the notification
under the proviso to Section 154 of the Act.”
7. I may also note here another order passed by the Supreme Court, reported
in 1996 (3) SCALE (SP) 20, wherein it has been recorded as under:“We do not agree with Mr. GS Patnaik. In view of the

order quoted above, nothing more remains to be done
by the NCT, Delhi Administration, except to issue the
necessary notification. We direct that the necessary
notification be issued within three weeks from today.
We further request the Lt. Governor, to have the
matter expedited. The land is part of the ridge area.
Even though it is not a reserved forest, it happens to
be a forest. This area cannot be utilised in any
manner in view of the prohibitions contained under
the Forest Conservation Act, 1980. In this view of the
matter, issuing of notification is a simple formality to
secure the area. We, therefore, reiterate and request
the Lt. Governor to have necessary notification issued
within time specified by us.”

8. In compliance with the said orders, notification dated 2nd April, 1996 was
issued transferring the land at Maidangarhi to the Forest Department.
9. Under the provisions of Rule 185 of The Delhi Panchayat Raj Rules, 1959,
no immovable property vested or belonging to a Gaon Sabha can be
transferred by way of sale, mortgage or exchange except on the resolution of

a Gaon Panchayat and with the sanction of the Chief Commissioner. The
petitioner has not placed any document on record to show that after the
alleged resolution dated 18th September, 1986, the same was sanctioned by
the Chief Commissioner or the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi. Gaon Sabha
land, therefore, could not have been transferred to a third person without
compliance of Rule 185 of The Delhi Panchayat Raj Rules, 1959
10. I may also note here that even as per the khasra girdwari for the year
1987-88, Gaon Sabha has been shown to be the owner of the land. The
petitioner has not been shown as the owner of the land.
11. On the question of Mandir, the matter was examined by the Religious
Committee and it was decided that all encroachments around the mandir will

be removed and barricaded to prevent any entry thereon. Access to the
mandir has not been denied in view of the order passed by the Religious
Committee. The mandir, therefore, as per the directions of the Religious
Committee remains protected and is not to be demolished. The Committee did
not consider it appropriate to encompass and give any direction for alleged
dharamshala, goshala or the residence of the mahant. Demarcation in terms
of the order passed by the Religious Committee has already been carried out
as is clear from public notice dated 23rd May, 2006 and it has been directed
that except for the old structure of gomath mandir, other constructions and

encroachments should be demolished by the petitioner, otherwise action in
accordance with law shall be taken to recover the encroached land from the
encroachers. The action of the respondents is in accordance with law and no
error can be found in the same.
12. In view of the findings given above, the writ petition has no merit and is
dismissed. No costs.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.

FEBRUARY 21, 2008
VKR

