CP No.359/2000

Page 1

UNREPORTABLE
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ CA (M) NO. 27/2006 AND CA.NO. 524/2006
in C.P. No.359/2000
% Date of Decision : 27th November, 2006.
In the matter of :
ARCHANA AIRWAYS LTD. (IN LIQUIDATION)
Through Mr. Dushyant Dave, Mr. Arun
Bhardwaj, Sr.Advocate with Mr.Aman Vachher,
Mr.Ashutosh Dubey & Ms.Poonam Nagpal,
Advocates for the propounders/applicant.
Mr.S.K. Luthra and Ms.Manisha Tyagi for the
Official Liquidator.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be No.
allowed to see the judgment?

CP No.359/2000

Page 2

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ? No.

3. Whether the judgment should be reported No.
in the Digest ?
SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. M/s Archana Airways Ltd. (hereinafter also referred to as company under
liquidation) was ordered to be wound up vide order dated 7.8.2002 in CP
No.359/2000.
2. The present application under Section 391 of the Act has been filed by M/s
Ascent Exim Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as propounders), a company
incorporated under the Act and having it's registered office at C-8, Lower
Ground Floor, Gulmohar Park, New Delhi-49.
3. It is stated in the application that the propounders plan to invest Rs.100
crores from their personal sources as working capital to ensure revival of the
company under liquidation.
4. Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation was/is one of
the main creditors of the company under liquidation. As on 31.3.2002,
Rs.493.88 lacs was due and payable to the said corporation by the company
under liquidation. Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation
has entered into one time settlement with the propounders. As per the said

CP No.359/2000

Page 3

settlement, Rs.2 crores has to be paid by the propounders to Madhya
Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation in full and final settlement
of its claims. It is admitted that payment of Rs.1 crore has already been made
by the propounders and for the balance amount, two post dated cheques have
been given to Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation.
5. It is also stated that the propounders have settled and paid the exemployees of the company under liquidation. It may be relevant to state here
that the petition for winding up was filed by ex-employees of the company
under liquidation on account of failure to pay their dues. The ex-employees
have filed affidavits in this Court admitting that full and final payment has been
made to them and no further amount is due and payable.
6. It is stated on behalf of the propounders that loan taken by the company
under liquidation from the ex-directors and shareholders of Rs.27.85 lacs
already stands settled and paid. The statutory dues of ESI Corporation of
Rs.1.80 lacs, as per the propounders also stands paid.
7. The Official Liquidator in his report No.78/2006 has stated that there
were/are 61 creditors to whom Rs.64,79,853.45 was payable. List of the said
creditors was furnished by the ex-directors of the company. As per the
propounders Rs.33,45,142/- has already been paid to the unsecured
creditors. The propounders have made statement before this Court, recorded

CP No.359/2000

Page 4

in order dated 22.8.2006, that they are ready and willing to pay all other
unsecured creditors after verification of their claims.

8. The matter was heard in detail on 20th September, 2006 and order was
being dictated in the Court when it came to my notice that the Official
Liquidator in his report No.78/2006 has also stated that M/s JVG Finance
Ltd.,another company under liquidation, had financed amount of Rs.3.50
crores to Archana Airways Ltd. against purchase of air crafts. Mr.V.K.Sharma,
ex-chairman, JVG Group of Companies in his letter dated 19.9.2005 had
stated that Rs.360 lacs was to be recovered from M/s Archana Airways Ltd.
This amount was paid as advance for the purchase of the aircrafts but the
same were not supplied. The matter was accordingly adjourned to 25th
September,2006.
9. On the said date, learned counsel for the Official Liquidator made a
statement that verification of records of JVG Finance Ltd. has confirmed that
two payments of Rs.1.30 Crore each, totalling Rs.2.60 Crores were made to
Archana Airways Ltd. These payments were treated as transferred to M/s.JVG
Airways.

CP No.359/2000

Page 5

10. Subsequently, on 7th November, 2006 the propounders filed an affidavit
enclosing various documents relating to the transaction between Archana
Airways Ltd and JVG Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd. The said documents
reveal that payment of Rs.2.6 crores was made to Archana Airways Ltd.
purportedly on behalf of JVG Airways. The propounders claim that the
aforesaid payment was towards the earnest money for purchase of aircrafts
and stands forfeited due to defaults made by JVG Airways. It is claimed that
Rs.2.6 crores was shown as income in the profit and loss account of Archana
Airways Ltd for the accounting year 1995-96. It is further claimed that any
claim against Archana Airways Ltd. is barred by limitation as per Section 458A
of the Companies Act, 1956.
11. During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the propounders could
not point out any forfeiture clause. It may also be noticed that the aircrafts
purchase agreement was between a Czech company and JVG Departmental
Stores Pvt. Ltd. Archana Airways Ltd had acted as a representative of the
Czech company. The memorandum of Understanding dated 13th January,
1996 between Archana Airways Ltd and JVG Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd.
has a specific clause that if JVG Airways fails to get the approval for import of
aircrafts and/or remittance of money the amount advanced shall be refunded.
The said Memorandum also has an arbitration Clause. It also appears that

CP No.359/2000

Page 6

legal notices were exchanged between Archana Airways Ltd and JVG
Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd. Allegations were made on behalf of JVG
Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd. that the aircrafts were not delivered within the
stipulated period and false promises were made.
12. During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the propounders agreed
to deposit 25% of Rs.2.6 crores or Rs.65 lakhs with the Official Liquidator
subject to adjudication of the disputes and the claim made by JVG Finance
Ltd/JVG Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd.
13. I accept the above proposal given on behalf of the propounders. It will be
open to the Official Liquidator to initiate steps for recovery of the amount, if
any, payable by Archana Airways Ltd. after thorough verification and
examination of records by JVG Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd./JVG Finance
Ltd. I have accepted this proposal for the simple reason that Archana Airways
Ltd. as such does not have any tangible assets which can be sold in the
market, and therefore even if some amount is due and payable by Archana
Airways Ltd to JVG Finance Ltd/JVG Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd., chances
of recovery are virtually nil. The propounders have agreed to pay Rs. 65 lacs
and if ultimately it is held that some amount is due and payable by Archana
Airways Ltd, the chances of recovery are much brighter. The propounders will
however file an undertaking before this court that they shall abide and pay the

CP No.359/2000

Page 7

amount, if any, found due and payable by the company under liquidation to
JVG Finance Ltd. or JVG Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd. Similarly, if nothing is
found due and payable by the company in liquidation Rs.65 lacs deposited by
the propounders will be refunded.
14. The propounders have filed an affidavit dated 18.8.2006 (filed in the Court
on 19.8.2006) setting out details of settlements arrived with the creditors and
the payments made. They have further stated that they have cleared and
made payments of more than Rs.94.65 lacs of the creditors. They have also
enclosed consent letters given by the said creditors for revival of the company
under liquidation under the scheme as propounded.
15. The company under liquidation was directed to be wound up vide order
dated 07.8.2002. The company under liquidation does not own any
immovable property. Tangible movable assets of the company under
liquidation have been sold and Rs.65,000/- has been realised. The only other
asset is the licence given by the Director General, Civil Aviation. The said
license is already suspended. It is doubtful whether the said licence can be
sold by this Court in any auction or substantial amount can be recovered. No
other person has come forward to revive the present company under
liquidation. The propounders have already made substantial payments to
Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation and other

CP No.359/2000

Page 8

creditors. I do not see any other way to pay of the creditors and there is no
hope that the company under liquidation can be otherwise revived or payment
can be made to the creditors.
16. It has been stated that the propounders have already acquired 71%
shares of the company under liquidation from Madhya Pradesh State
Industrial Development Corporation pursuant to one time settlement scheme.
In addition, the propounders have acquired 9% shares from the market. Thus
the propounders are holding 80% shares in the company under liquidation
and Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation is holding
14%

equity

shares.

Madhya

Pradesh

State

Industrial

Development

Corporation has consented and given its approval to the proposed scheme.
Thus the propounders have support of 94% shareholders of the company
under liquidation. Thus meeting of the shareholders of the company under
liquidation can be dispensed with.
17. During the course of hearing of this application, the Official Liquidator had
brought to the notice of this Court that the Income Tax Department had raised
demands against the company under liquidation. In these circumstances,
notice was issued to the Income Tax Department. In the affidavit dated
31.7.2006, Income Tax Department has stated that pursuant to an ex-parte
order dated 31.8.2004 for assessment year 2001-2002, penalty of

CP No.359/2000

Page 9

Rs.5,11,51,116/- was imposed. By another order dated 31.3.2005 another
penalty of Rs.9,20,200/- has also been imposed.
17A. In order dated 22.8.2006, it was recorded that the propounders are ready
and willing to give their personal undertaking for payment to the Income Tax
Department in case the penalty orders are upheld by ITAT. Income Tax
Department was also asked to clearly specify whether they are supporting or
objecting to the present scheme.
18. Income Tax Department has filed affidavit dated 4.9.2006 stating that they
have no objection to the proposed scheme for revival of the company under
liquidation, subject to recovery of it's arrears of tax. It is further stated in the
affidavit that the company under liquidation should be directed to pursue its
appeals before CIT(A) with prayer for early disposal without asking for
adjournments. In the affidavit, Income Tax Department has stated that the
company under liquidation or it's representatives should pay arrears of tax
within ten days of the order being passed by the CIT(A) and in the meanwhile
the Directors of the propounder company should be directed to furnish
security to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer. However, Income Tax
Department is not ready and willing to hold it's hand and not recover the
arrears till the disposal of appeals by ITAT. In the affidavit filed by the
propounders, they have undertaken to clear the dues of the income tax

CP No.359/2000

Page 10

department, if any, within ten days of the final disposal of the appeal by the
Appellate authorities. Learned counsel appearing for the propounders
company has clarified that the term “Appellate authorities” referred to in the
affidavit dated 05.9.2006 is with reference to ITAT and not any further appeal
under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961. It is also stated that the
income tax department is an outsider and not covered by the scheme.
19. The scheme is in respect of the unsecured creditors as mentioned in the
scheme itself and in no way effects the rights of the Income Tax Department
as a preferential creditor. It is also apparent that even if the income tax
department succeeds in the appellate proceedings there is hardly any chance
of recovery unless the propounders step in.
20.The situation has undergone one significant change, as CIT (Appeals) has
vide Order dated 15th September, 2006 allowed the appeal against the order
imposing penalty of Rs.5,11,51,116/-. However, Appeal against ex-parte
Order dated 31st March, 2005 imposing penalty of Rs.9,25,000/- is still
pending. The propounders have already filed an affidavit in this Court that
they shall clear dues of Income Tax Department within ten days from the date
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal disposes of the appeal.
21. However, I feel that at this stage no order dispensing with the requirement
to convene meeting of the creditors of Archana Airways Ltd. can be passed.

CP No.359/2000

Page 11

As per the ex-directors, Rs.64,79,853/- was payable to the unsecured
creditors. The propounders have paid Rs. 33,45,142/-. Balance amount of
Rs.31,34,711/- is still payable. This is an admitted amount as per the exdirectors. Some amount towards interest may also be payable. The normal
rule is that the scheme should have unanimous or support of at least threefourth of the creditors in the meeting summoned by the court under section
391 of the Act. In exceptional circumstances this court can dispense with the
requirement to convene and hold meeting under section 391 of the Act. This
can be done in cases where the creditors covered by the scheme by three
fourth majority or more have given their consent. Books of accounts of
Archana Airways Ltd. have not yet been thoroughly examined. Complete
details of the creditors and the amount payable to them requires detailed
scrutiny. The details given by the propounders with regard to the amount
payable to the creditors is based on the estimate given by the ex-directors to
the official Liquidator. This cannot be presumed to be an authentic figure.
Thus I do not think that a case for dispensing with the statutory requirement to
convene and hold meeting of the unsecured creditors is made out.
22. Examination of the books of accounts and taking out advertisements in the
newspapers inviting claims is bound to take time. It has been emphasised
before me that the propounders have entered into memorandum of

CP No.359/2000

Page 12

understanding with various financial institutions who are keen to make
investment. Any delay may result in the financial institutions backing out and
the propounders may suffer losses. Averments to this effect have also been
made in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the affidavit filed on 7th November, 2006.
The propounders themselves cannot be held responsible if full details of the
unsecured creditors, etc. are not available with the Official Liquidator. It will
not be fair to the propounders, if the matter is simply adjourned to await
complete details of creditors. In these circumstances, a pragmatic and
practical approach will have to be adopted, as the propounders have already
made substantial investments, entered into memorandum of understanding
and no other person has come forward for revival of the company. Keeping in
view the interest of the creditors, some orders are required to be passed
immediately so that the attempt to revive the company under liquidation does
not fail because of lack of proper and complete details with the official
liquidator.
23. In these circumstances, it is directed as under :-

I. The Official Liquidator will scrutinise and examine all the
records and books of accounts of Archana Airways Ltd. Mr.

CP No.359/2000

Page 13

Anil Bagai, Chartered Accountant will help the Official
Liquidator in examining the records and in getting full details
of the creditors of Archana Airways Ltd. and the amount due
and payable to them. Mr. Anil Bagai will be paid Rs.30,000/by the propounders.Payment will be made within two weeks.

II. The Official Liquidator will file status report within three
months. Meeting of the unsecured creditors, if required and
warranted, will be held after the report is received.

III. Original licence and other documents required by the
propounders will be handed over to them by the official
liquidator within two weeks. The Official Liquidator will keep
photocopies of the said documents duly authenticated and
signed by the propounders/their authorized representative.

IV. The propounders are permitted to apply for and get the
various licenses of Archana Airways Ltd. issued by DGS&D
and others, renewed/revalidated and take all steps for revival
of the company under liquidation including entering into
agreement(s) with third parties.

CP No.359/2000

Page 14

V. The propounders will be at liberty to arrange for funds by
giving personal guarantees but will not be entitled to create
any charge on the assets of the company under liquidation.

VI. The propounders will not sell, alienate, encumber or
transfer the assets of the company under liquidation without
permission of this Court.

VII. All expenditure incurred by the propounders will be at
their risk and cost. In case, the scheme fails or cannot be
implemented, the propounders and others will not be entitled
to recover the amount spend from the company under
liquidation unless all creditors prior in point of time are paid
off.

VIII. The propounders will deposit Rs.65,00,000/- with the
official liquidator within one month towards claim of JVG
Finance Ltd./JVG Departmental Stores Pvt. Ltd. This deposit
is subject to adjudication. Similarly, Rs.31,34,711/- payable
to the unsecured creditors will be deposited with the official
liquidator within two months.
IX. The Scheme as such is in respect of unsecured
creditors. Income Tax Department is a preferential creditor.
It is therefore open to the Income Tax Department to take

CP No.359/2000

Page 15

steps in accordance with law and the propounders to appear
and represent Archana Airways Ltd in the said proceedings.
However, the Official Liquidator will be kept informed by the
propounders. The propounders will file their personal
undertakings before the Income Tax Department agreeing to
be personally liable in case the matter is decided against
Archana Airways Ltd. by the ITAT.

X. The propounders will file bi-monthly reports with regard to
agreements entered into, amount invested and progress
made for renewal of license. The propounders will function
under the supervision and control of this court.

XI. The propounders are also given liberty to apply to this
Court for any further direction(s).

24. List on 5th March, 2007.

November 27, 2006
RN/P

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

