LPA No. 394/2004

Page 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LETTERS' PATENT APPEAL NO. 394 OF 2004

%

Date of Decision : 20th July, 2007.
S.L. SALUJA
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. Rakesh Munjal, Sr. Adv. with Mr.
S.S. Ray, Advocate.
VERSUS
STATE BANK OF INDIA & ANR. .... Respondents.
Through Mr. T.S. Doavia, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Rajiv
Kapur, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

The appellant, Mr. S.L. Saluja has filed the present appeal

against the judgment dated 9th February, 2004 dismissing the writ
petition filed by him for quashing disciplinary proceedings that
have been initiated against him.
2.

The appellant joined the State Bank of India in 1967 as a

clerk. He was promoted from time to time. He was working as an

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 2

officer in the senior management grade scale, when on 29th May,
1999 disciplinary proceedings were initiated against him.
3.

During the pendency of the disciplinary proceedings, the

appellant filed Civil Writ No. 2840/2000 challenging the same on
the ground that he had retired from service in terms of Rule 19 of
the State Bank of India Officers Service Rules after completing 30
years of pensionable service on 31st July, 1997 or at least after
attaining age of 58 years on 31st December, 1999.

The said

contention did not find merit with the learned Single Judge who
dismissed the writ petition, inter alia, holding that even after
completing 30 years of pensionable service in July, 1997, the
appellant had continued to be in employment and had drawn
regular salary till his suspension on 1st August, 1997. Thereafter,
he was paid suspension allowance. Learned Single Judge also
made reference to the relevant rules under which an employee
could continue in service till the age of 60 years. Learned Single
Judge upheld the contention of the respondent bank that they had
right to extend service of the appellant beyond 58 years as
departmental proceedings under relevant rules had been initiated
against him.

The learned Single Judge also rejected the

contention of the appellant that the order extending the service of
the appellant beyond 58 years was null and void as it was

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 3

communicated after 31st December, 1999 vide letter dated 24th
January, 2000 by relying upon judgment of the Supreme Court in
Collector of Central Excise, Madras versus M.M. Rubber and Co.
(1992) Supp. (1) SCC 471, inter alia, holding that an order or
decision of the authority becomes operative and comes into force
when it is signed or made. Thereafter, the said authority ceases to
have locus paetentiae and right to re-draft and tear of the earlier
order.

The purpose and object of communication of the order

passed is to make the party adversely affected, aware of the said
order passed and also for the purpose of calculating limitation
period.

The decision of the Supreme Court in the case of

Bachhittar Singh versus State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 395 was
distinguished.

Learned Single Judge also relied upon another

decision of the Supreme Court in State Bank of India versus C.B.
Dhull, (1998) 2 SCC 544 to uphold the right of the respondent
bank to continue with the disciplinary proceedings after retirement
of the appellant.
4.

The relevant State Bank of India Officers Service Rules read

as under:“19. (1) An officer shall retire from the service
of the Bank on attaining the age of fifty-eight
years or upon the completion of thirty years'
service or thirty years' pensionable service if
he is a member of the Pension Fund,
whichever occurs first.

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 4

Provided that the competent authority may, at
its discretion, extend the period of service of
an officer who has attained the age of fiftyeight years or has completed thirty years'
service or thirty years' pensionable service as
the case may be, should such extension be
deemed desirable in the interest of the Bank,
so however, that the service rendered by the
concerned officer beyond 58 years of age
except to the extent of the period of leave due
at that time will not count for purpose of
pension.
Provided further that an officer who had
joined the service of the Bank either as an
officer or otherwise on or after July 19, 1969
and attained the age of 58 years shall not be
granted any further extension in service.
Provided further that an officer may, at the
discretion of the Executive Committee, be
retired from the Bank's service after he has
attained 50 years of age or has completed 25
years' service or 25 years' pensionable
service as the case may be, by giving him
three months' notice in writing or pay in lieu
thereof.
Provided further that an officer who has
completed 20 years' service or 20 years'
pensionable service, at the case may be, may
be permitted by the competent authority to
retire from the Bank's service, subject to his
giving three months' notice in writing or pay in
lieu thereof unless this requirement is wholly
or partly waived by it.
19. (2) Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in these rules, no officer who has
ceased to be in the Bank's service by the
operation of, or by virtue of, any provision
shall be deemed to have retired from the
Bank's service for the purpose of the Imperial

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 5

Bank of India Employees' Pension and
Guarantee Fund Rules or the State Bank of
India Employees' Pension Fund Rules unless
such cessation of service has been
sanctioned as retirement for the purpose of
either of the said pension fund rules as may
be applicable to him.
19. (3) In case disciplinary proceedings under
the relevant rules of service have been
initiated against an officer before he ceases
to be in the Bank's service by the operation
of, or by virtue of, any of the said rules or the
provisions of these rules, the disciplinary
proceeding may, at the discretion of the
Managing Director, be continued and
concluded by the authority by which the
proceedings were initiated in the manner
provided for in the said rules as if the officer
continues to be in service, so however, that
he shall be deemed to be in service only for
the purpose of the continuance and
conclusion of such proceedings.”
5.

By circular dated 29th May, 1998, the retirement age of an

employee working in the State Bank of India was extended from
58 years to 60 years. The said circular was followed by another
circular dated 31st December, 1998, which reads as under:“Consequent upon the decision taken by the
Government of India to raise the retirement
age of employees of Banks to 60 years from
58 years as circulated vide our circular No.
CDOPER:27:98-99 dated 13.6.1998, the
extension in service of our officials may be
considered/reviewed by the bank as under:
First Stage
On completion of 30 years
of service/pensionable service or on attaining
55 years of age whichever occurs first, for
grant of extension/continuation upto 58 years

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 6

of age.
Second Stage On attaining 58 years of age
for grant of extension/continuation upto 60
years of age being the age of retirement”.

6.

The above circular states that on completing 30 years of

service or on attaining 55 years, the bank has the right to consider
and review whether or not to grant extension or continuation in
service upto 58 years. Thereafter, when a person attains age of
58 years, the bank has the right to examine and decide whether or
not to grant continuation or extension upto the age of 60 years.
7.

However, before the said circular was issued and retirement

age was increased to 60 years, under Rule 19(1) an employee
retired on attaining age of 58 years or on completion of 30 years of
service, whichever occurred first.

The appellant completed 30

years on 5th July, 1997 and therefore under Rule 19(1) would
have superannuated on 31st July, 1997. However, it is admitted
fact that the appellant did not actually superannuate on the said
date and continued to work and draw regular salary. The learned
Single Judge has also recorded that till 31st December, 1999, the
appellant who was under suspension w.e.f. 1st August, 1997 and
drawing subsistence allowance, did not raise any objection. The
respondent bank also treated the appellant to be in service. We
entirely agree with the reasoning given by the learned Single
Judge in this regard and hold that service of the appellant was

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 7

extended after completing 30 years of service after 31st July, 1977.
8.

Regarding extension of service of the appellant beyond 58

years or after 31st December, 1999 is concerned, the documents
placed on record clearly show that the competent authority before
the said date had decided to extend the services of the appellant
from 12th December, 1999 to 11th December, 2000 i.e. upto the
age of 59 years. The competent authority had processed the file
and had granted extension of time before the date of retirement of
the appellant on 31st December, 1999. We had also called for the
original records and find that the original note in this regard was
prepared and approved by General Manager (D & DB) on 3rd
December,

1999,

General

Manager

(Commercial)

on

6th

December, 1999 and Chief General Manager on 15th December,
1999. Thereafter vide another note dated 15th September, 2000
his services were extended from 11th December, 2000 upto 11th
December, 2001 i.e. upto the date he attains age of 60 years. The
said orders have been passed by competent authority after
recording the relevant facts including the fact that the appellant
had been charge sheeted for a major penalty in respect of
misconduct alleged.

It is also recorded that Central Bureau of

Investigation has registered a case against him, which is pending
investigation.

LPA No. 394/2004

9.

Page 8

We agree with the reasoning given by the learned Single

Judge that the order or decision of the competent authority
extending or directing continuation of service of an employee
becomes effective from the date the order is signed by the
competent authority.

After signing the order, the competent

authority loses its right or power to take a different decision. The
date of communication of the said order is not relevant for
determining whether the power/jurisdiction has been exercised
within the prescribed time.

The purpose of communicating an

order is to inform the party concerned about the decision taken,
bring the decision to the knowledge of the said person and for
calculating the period of limitation. The order in fact is made on
the date when it is signed and executed and not on the date when
it is communicated. In addition to the judgment of the Supreme
Court in the case of M.M. Rubber and Co. (supra), reference can
be made to CIT verus Balkrishna Malhotra, (1971) 81 ITR 759.
While examining provisions of Income-Tax Act, prescribing
limitation period for passing of assessment orders, it was held that
limitation period as prescribed is for passing of an assessment
order and it was not necessary that the order should also be
communicated to the assessee within the prescribed period.
10.

In this regard we may also refer to Rules 19(2) and 19(3).

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 9

Rule 19(2) is in pari materia with Rule 20A of the previous Rules.
The said Rule was considered by the Supreme Court in the case
of State Bank of India versus C.B. Dhull (supra). In this case, the
Supreme Court distinguished its earlier decision in the case of
State Bank of India versus A.N. Gupta, (1997) 8 SCC 60, wherein
Rule 11 of the Imperial Bank of India Pension and Guarantee
Fund and some other provisions were interpreted. The Supreme
Court noticed that under Rule 11 disciplinary proceedings could
not be proceeded with after an employee has ceased to be in
service of the bank but this was not the situation under Rule 20A,
after the same was enacted with effect from 1st April, 1977.
Under Rule 20A retirement under the relevant pension fund rules
had to be sanctioned by the competent authority. Rule 20B which
is pari materia with Rule 19(3) was also interpreted and it was
observed as under:“17. Under Rule 20-B disciplinary
proceedings if initiated against an
employee before he retires from service
could be continued and concluded even
after his retirement and for the purpose of
conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings,
the employee is deemed to have
continued in service but for no other
purpose.
After
the
disciplinary
proceedings were concluded, the State
Bank directed that (1) sanction of Dhall to
retire be withheld and (2) Bank's
contribution to his provident fund accounts
be forfeited.
Under Rule 10 of the

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 10

Pension Fund Rules, an employee
dismissed from the Bank service for wilful
neglect or fraud shall forfeit all claims
upon the fund for pension. Dhall has not
been dismissed from service though he
was charged with wilful neglect and fraud.
The question that arises for consideration
is what is the effect of the direction of the
State Bank that sanction to retire Shall be
withheld. Here cessation of service of
Dhall on retirement has not been
sanctioned and accordingly as per the last
portion of Rule 11 of the Pension Fund he
forfeits all claims upon the fund for
pension.”
11.

Under Rule 19(3) disciplinary proceedings initiated against

an officer can be continued even if he has ceased to be in service
by virtue of any Rules or provision at the discretion of the
Managing Director.

After the discretion is exercised, the

proceedings can be continued and concluded by the disciplinary
authority as provided in the Rules, as if the officer continues to be
in service but such continuation is for the purpose of continuance
and conclusion of the proceedings. The respondent bank had filed
an additional affidavit of Mr. P.C. Rathore dated November, 2003
which is on record in the appeal paper book from page 236
onwards. Along with this affidavit, the respondent bank had also
enclosed copy of letter dated 13th October, 2001 in which it has
been specifically mentioned that the Managing Director of the
respondent bank had accorded his approval for invocation of Rule

LPA No. 394/2004

Page 11

19(3) against Mr. S.L. Saluja for the limited purpose of continuing
and concluding the disciplinary proceedings initiated against him.
The said order was passed, after competent authority had already
vide two orders dated 15th December, 1999 and 15th September,
2000 extended services of the appellant upto 11th December, 2001
i.e. the date on which the appellant would have attained the age of
60 years. Thus, the respondent bank has invoked Rule 19 (3) of
the State Bank of India Officers Service Rules. The Managing
Director has given direction for continuation of the disciplinary
proceedings even after retirement of the appellant. In our opinion,
the decision of C.B. Dhull's (supra) case is clearly applicable to the
facts of the present case.

Rule 19(3) has been invoked.

Therefore, the disciplinary proceedings against the appellant can
continue.
12.

In view of the facts stated above, we do not find any merit in

the present appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be
no order as to costs.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
JULY 20, 2007.
VKR/P

