LPA No. 1092/2006

*
+
%

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
LPA NO. 1092 OF 2006
th

Date of Decision : 20 December, 2007.

NAVEEN SHARMA (DR.)
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. Rajesh Gupta, Advocate.
VERSUS
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA AND ANOTHER .... Respondents.
Through Mr. Maninder Singh, Mr. Kirtiman Singh &
Mr. T. Singhdev, Advocates for the respondent No.
1-MCI.
AND
LPA NO. 1226 OF 2006
DR. SUNITA KUMARI
..... Appellant
Through Mr. Vivek Singh, Advocate.
VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
.....Respondents
Through Mr. Maninder Singh, Mr. Kirtiman Singh &
Ms. Smruti Dutt, Advocates for the respondent No.
2.
Mr. Rakesh Gosain, Advocate for the respondent
No. 3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 2

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

The appellant in LPA No. 1092 of 2006, Mr. Naveen Sharma

after completing 10+2 has undergone six years of medical education
in a medical university in Bulgaria.

This includes five years of

academic and one year of clinical clerkship. He had joined the said
university in 1998 and on successful completion of the said course,
was awarded degree in medicine in the year 2004.
2.

The appellant, Mr. Naveen Sharma, applied for provisional

registration under Section 13(3) of the Indian Medical Council Act,
th

1956 on 12 April, 2005, but the registration was not granted and no
reason and ground for refusing registration was communicated. He
filed Writ Petition (Civil) No. 3221/2006 before this Court for issue of
writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant provisional

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 3

registration to the appellant under the Medical Council Act, 1956.
3.

The said writ petition was dismissed by the learned Single

Judge in view of the fact that the appellant, Mr. Naveen Sharma,
suffers from two disabilities viz. (i) that he has not obtained 50%
marks in aggregate in Physics, Chemistry and Biology in the +2
examination and (ii) he was was not 17 years old when he had joined
medical university in Bulgaria. Learned Single Judge in this regard
relied upon his earlier decision in W.P.(C) No. 18630/2005 titled Dr.
Sunita Kumari versus UOI & ORS., which was dismissed by the
th

learned Single Judge on 24 March, 2006.
4.

The controversy before us centers around the ratio and

directions given by the Supreme Court in the case of Medical
Council of India versus Indian Doctors from Russia Welfare
Associations and Others, reported in (2002) 3 SCC 696. The said
case dealt with problem of students who have undergone courses in
medicine in medical colleges in erstwhile U.S.S.R. Medical Council
of India had refused to grant recognition and register these students,

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 4

who had obtained degrees from the said colleges/universities.
Without registration the said graduates who have degree in Medicine
from abroad cannot practice as medical practitioners in India.
5.

Medical Council of India had filed a Special Leave Petition

against the judgment of this Court and interim orders passed by the
learned Allahabad High Court granting relief to students who had
undergone and studied Medicine and obtained degrees from medical
colleges in erstwhile USSR. The Delhi High Court in its judgment
had granted relief to the said students, while Allahabad High Court by
the interim orders had also passed certain directions in favour of the
students who had undergone the said courses. The Supreme Court
while hearing the matter made some observations in the interest of
all concerned that Government of India should formulate an
appropriate policy considering the history of the problem, need to
maintain standards and also bearing in mind the human problem of
students who had undergone training/studies and had spent years to
obtain degrees. The Supreme Court also noticed that Section 13 of

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 5

the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 had been amended to deal with
the situation that had arisen and w.e.f. 18

th

February, 2002 new

regulations had been sent for being published in the Gazette. The
new regulations dealt with a situation where a student has proceeded
outside India for study of Medicine and has successfully completed
and obtained decree in Medicine which entitles him to be enrolled
and practice as a medical practitioner. It prescribes requirement to
qualify and pass a screening test for the purpose of registration and
that a person will not be entitled to appear in the screening test if : (i)
Medical College situated abroad is not recognised by the country in
which an institution awarding the said qualification is situated and (ii)
Indian citizen who

is desirous of taking admission

in an

th

undergraduate medical course abroad on or after 15 March, 2002
should have obtained eligibility certificate from Medical Council of
India stating that the said student fulfills minimum eligibility criteria
laid down by the Medical Council of India for admission to MBBS
course in India.

LPA No. 1092/2006

6.

Page 6

The Supreme Court, however, was conscious of the

problem relating to students who have obtained degrees or had taken
admission before the publication of the Notification or prior to 15

th

March, 2002. The Government was also aware of the said problem
and in these circumstances placed guidelines before the Supreme
Court, which have been reproduced in para 6 of the judgment and
the Supreme Court exercising its power under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India held that these guidelines will be applicable to all
such students who are similarly situated whether they are parties
before the Supreme Court or not. The guidelines read as under :“6. In order to regulate the grant of
registration to such persons who have
completed their degree abroad prior to 15-32001, the following guidelines are placed
before this Court by the Government of India:
( A ) The case of all persons who applied for
registration to MCI prior to 15-3-2001 shall be
dealt with according to the provisions of the
Act as existing prior to the commencement of
the IMC (Amendment) Act, 2001 subject to the
following:
( i ) Those students who obtained degrees
where the total duration of study in recognised

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 7

institutions is less than six years (i.e. where a
part of the study has been in unrecognised
institutions, or the total length of study in a
recognised institution is short of six years),
shall be granted registration by MCI provided
that the period of shortfall is covered by them
by way of additional internship over and above
the regular internship of one year. In other
words, for such categories of students, the
total duration of study in a recognised
institution plus the internship, would be seven
years, which is the requirement even
otherwise.
( ii ) Where students who did not meet the
minimum admission norms of MCI for joining
undergraduate medical course, were admitted
to foreign institutes recognised by MCI, this
irregularity be condoned. In other words, the
degrees of such students be treated as
eligible for registration with MCI.
( B ) All students who have taken admission
abroad prior to 15-3-2002 and are required to
qualify the screening test for their registration
as per the provisions of the Screening Test
Regulations, 2002 shall be allowed to appear
in the screening test even if they also come in
the categories of circumstances contained in (
A )( ii ) above, as the relaxation contained
therein would also be applicable in their case.
In other words, any person at present
undergoing medical education abroad, who
did not conform to the minimum eligibility
requirements for joining an undergraduate
medical course in India laid down by MCI,

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 8

seeking provisional or permanent registration
on or after 15-3-2002 shall be permitted to
appear in the screening test in relaxation of
this requirement provided he had taken
admission in an institute recognised by MCI.
This relaxation shall be available to only those
students who had taken admission abroad
prior to 15-3-2002. From 15-3-2002 and
onwards all students are required to first
obtain an Eligibility Certificate from MCI before
proceeding abroad for studies in Medicine.
( C ) The categories of students not covered in
( A )( i ) and ( ii ) above and whose entire
period of study has been in a medical college
not recognised by MCI, will be allowed to
appear in the screening test for the purpose of
their registration provided they fulfil all the
conditions laid down in the IMC (Amendment)
Act, 2001. In other words, the qualification
obtained by them must be a qualification
recognised for enrolment as medical
practitioner in the country in which the
institution awarding the same is situated and
they must be fulfilling the minimum eligibility
qualification laid down by MCI for taking
admission in an undergraduate medical
course in India. They shall not be entitled to
any relaxation.”

7.

As is apparent from the facts stated above, the appellant,

Mr. Naveen Sharma, had taken admission in medical university-town
of Pleveen, Bulgaria (Europe) on 21

st

December, 1998 and had

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 9

successfully completed and obtained Master's Degree in Medicine on
st

1 October, 2004. The said medical university was recognised by
Medical Counsel of India.

He will, therefore, be covered by

paragraph 6 (B) of the aforesaid directions quoted above. Reading of
paragraph 6 (B) shows that all students who had taken admission
abroad

prior to 15

th

March, 2002 are allowed to appear in the

screening test, if they can be granted exemption in terms of
paragraph 6 (A) (ii). As is clear from the wordings of the paragraphs
6(A)(ii) and 6(B), students who do not meet “minimum admission
norms” of Medical Council of India for joining undergraduate course
in India, shall be permitted to appear in the screening test by
relaxation of the requirement of “minimum admission norms”. It is
also not difficult to appreciate the reason why aforesaid direction was
th

issued by the Supreme Court. With effect from 15 March, 2002
onwards all students going abroad for medical studies have to first
obtain eligibility certificate from Medical Council of India, but before
the said date there was no such requirement. Students who had

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 10

gone abroad before 15

th

March, 2002 were admitted in Medical

Colleges abroad as per their eligibility criteria which were different
from those prescribed in India.
8.

We may mention here that paragraph 6 (B) only grants

exemption in respect of “minimum admission norms” of Medical
Council of India as stipulated in paragraph 6(A) (ii). Exemption to
th

students who had obtained degrees prior to 15 March, 2001 under
paragraph 6 (A) (i) (i.e. students who had obtained degrees where
duration of the study in a recognised institution is less than six years),
is not available to students covered by paragraph 6(B).

Thus,

students covered by paragraph 6 (A) i.e. students who had obtained
th

degrees before 15 March, 2001 were granted exemption in terms of
paragraph 6 (A) (i) & (ii) and students who had taken admission
th

abroad prior to 15 March, 2002 but had not obtained degrees prior
to 15

th

March, 2001 were granted only one exemption i.e. under

paragraph 6 (A) (ii) i.e. with regard to minimum eligibility norms.
9.

As per the reply filed by the respondent-Medical Council of

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 11

India, the appellant Mr. Naveen Sharma suffers from two disabilities
and, therefore, the same are not condonable under paragraph 6 (A)
(ii) of the judgment of the Supreme Court. Two disabilities suffered
by the appellant as per the respondent-Medical Council of India are(i) that the appellant was 16 years and 7 months of age, his date of
th

birth being 24 May, 1982, on the date when he took admission in
the foreign university i.e. on 21

st

December, 1998.

objection raised is that at +2 stage

The second

of the Senior Secondary

Certificate Examination, the appellant had obtained 51, 50 and 48
marks in Physics, Chemistry and Biology, respectively.

The

aggregate obtained by the appellant in Physics, Chemistry and
Biology

is 49.66%, which is .33% less than the minimum marks

prescribed i.e. 50%. Thus, he had secured slightly less than 50%
aggregate marks in the aforesaid three subjects. It is stated that the
appellant, therefore, suffers from two disabilities and is not covered
by the relaxation granted by the Supreme Court in paragraph 6 (B)
read with 6 (A) (ii).

LPA No. 1092/2006

10.

Page 12

We may state here that the stand of the respondent-Medical

Council of India is somewhat inequitable and unjustified as the
appellant was permitted and allowed to sit in the screening test
conducted by the National Board of Examination, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare, Government of India in 2005 and has qualified
the same.
11.

The Supreme Court in the case of Indian Doctors from

Russia Welfare Associations (supra) has granted exemption to
students who do not meet “minimum admission norms”. Supreme
Court has not stated in the said directions that students who do not
meet one minimum eligibility norm prescribed by the Medical Council
of India, will be granted exemption and students who do not meet
more than one eligibility norm, will not be granted exemption.

A

perusal of the guidelines shows that as far as eligibility criteria is
concerned, under Clause 6(A)(ii) the expression used is “minimum
admission norms” in plural. Similarly, in Clause 6(B) the expression
used is “minimum eligibility requirements” in plural. The Government

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 13

of India while framing the guidelines was aware that a student may
not meet a single eligibility requirement or multiple eligibility
requirements and therefore had expressly used the terms “norms”
and “requirements” in plural. Nothing prevented the Government to
state in the guidelines that exemption from eligibility norms shall be
granted only in cases where a student does not meet a single or one
eligibility requirement and students who do not meet two or more
eligibility requirements shall be barred and are not entitled to appear
in the screening test. The intention of the Government and the
guidelines is clear, when it uses the two expressions in plural sense.
It is well settled that intention of the legislator and the meaning at the
first instance has to be gathered from the words used. When words
used are clear, un-ambiguous and bear only only one meaning, the
courts give effect to that meaning. Plain words explicitly used in the
guidelines supports the stand of the appellants and goes against the
interpretation put forward by the respondent Medical Council of India.
12.

Learned counsel for the Medical Council of India has also

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 14

not been able to point out any specific order passed by the Supreme
Court in which any direction or observation has been made holding
that failure to meet two or more eligibility requirements will not entitle
a student to benefit of Clause 6(B) read with clause 6(A)(ii) of the
guidelines. Learned counsel for the Medical Council of India has
referred to some orders passed by the Supreme Court dismissing the
contempt applications and other applications. The said orders do not
specifically state

reasons, grounds and ratio which the learned

counsel for the Medical Council of India, wants this court to accept. It
is not possible for this Court to hold and read into the non-speaking
orders dismissing the contempt applications or other applications
words or directions that has the effect of modifying or clarifying it's
earlier

directions in Indian

Associations (supra).

Doctors

from

Russia

Welfare

We are bound by the decision and the

directions given in the aforesaid case. We may refer here to the
decision of a Single Judge of this Court in the case of Jishalakshi
Embrandiri versus Medical Council of India, reported in 2006 (5)

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 15

AD (Delhi) 51, wherein the learned Single Judge has observed as
under:“It needs to be remembered that the
dismissal of a Contempt Petition does not
invariably and inexorably indicate that the
legal propositions on which such actions
were predicated were incorrect. The only
inference that can legitimately be drawn is
that the Court did not view the alleged
contemnors' decision or action as
contemptuous, possibly because two
understandings were permissible in the
circumstances of the case.”
13.

In this regard, we may refer to the two judgments of the

Supreme Court. In Govt. of India v. Workmen of State Trading
Corpn., (1997) 11 SCC 641, the Supreme Court has explained:“The decision of this Court is virtually a nonspeaking order which does not set out the
facts and the circumstances in which the
direction came to be issued against the
Government. It is not clear as to what was the
connection
between
the
respondentCorporation and the State Government. In the
present case the Government of India had
clearly averred that it had nothing to do with
the State Trading Corporation and there was
no relationship of master and servant
between the petitioners and the Government

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 16

of India and, therefore, the Government of
India was not in any manner concerned with
the closure of the Leather Garment unit of the
State
Trading
Corporation
and
the
consequences thereof. Mr Usgaocar rightly
emphasised that the decision on which the
High Court had relied could not be treated as
a precedent and in support of this contention
he drew our attention to a Constitution Bench
judgment in the case of Krishena Kumar v.
Union of India. In paras 18 and 19 the
question as to when a decision can have
binding effect has been dealt with. We need
say no more as it is obvious from the decision
relied on that it does not set out the facts or
the reason for the conclusion or direction
given. It can, therefore, not be treated as a
binding precedent.“
14.

Similarly in Krishena Kumar v. Union of India, (1990) 4 SCC

207 the effect of an non speaking order passed by the Supreme
Court was elucidated in the following words:“19. The doctrine of precedent, that is being
bound by a previous decision, is limited to the
decision itself and as to what is necessarily
involved in it. It does not mean that this Court
is bound by the various reasons given in
support of it, especially when they contain
'propositions wider than the case itself
required'. This was what Lord Selborne said in
Caledonian Railway Co. v. Walker's Trustees
and Lord Halsbury in Quinn v. Leathem. Sir

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 17

Frederick Pollock has also said : “Judicial
authority belongs not to the exact words used
in this or that judgment, nor even to all the
reasons given, but only to the principles
accepted and applied as necessary grounds
of the decision.”

20. In other words, the enunciation of the
reason or principle upon which a question
before a court has been decided is alone
binding as a precedent. The ratio decidendi is
the underlying principle, namely, the general
reasons or the general grounds upon which the
decision is based on the test or abstract from
the specific peculiarities of the particular case
which gives rise to the decision. The ratio
decidendi has to be ascertained by an analysis
of the facts of the case and the process of
reasoning involving the major premise
consisting of a pre-existing rule of law, either
statutory or judge-made, and a minor premise
consisting of the material facts of the case
under immediate consideration. If it is not
clear, it is not the duty of the court to spell it out
with difficulty in order to be bound by it. In the
words of Halsbury (4th edn., Vol. 26, para 573)
“The concrete decision alone is
binding between the parties to it but it is
the abstract ratio decidendi, as
ascertained on a consideration of the
judgment in relation to the subject matter
of the decision, which alone has the
force of law and which when it is clear it
is not part of a tribunal's duty to spell out

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 18

with difficulty a ratio decidendi in order to
bound by it, and it is always dangerous
to take one or two observations out of a
long judgment and treat them as if they
gave the ratio decidendi of the case. If
more reasons than one are given by a
tribunal for its judgment, all are taken as
forming the ratio decidendi.”
15.

A decision is only an authority that what it actually decides. An

enunciation of reason or principle on which the question before the
Court has been decided is alone binding as a precedent. (See,
Girnar Enterprises versus State of Maharashtra reported in (2007)
7 SCC 555) .
16.

We may also refer to the judgment of a Division Bench of

this Court in Brijesh Ranjan versus Medical Council of India in
th

LPA No. 181/2004 decided on 24 January, 2005. In the said case,
the candidate had merely studied for four years in a recognised
college and had also not secured 50% marks. Thus, disability both
under paragraphs 6(A) (i) and 6(A) (ii) had to be overcome.
Moreover, learned counsel for the Medical Council of India in the said
case had pointed out that the additional internship could have

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 19

covered shortfall of only one year and not for the entire period. The
student had not undergone five years academic studies in medicine.
Therefore the case was not covered by clause 6(B) as it grants
exemptions under clause 6(A)(ii) only and not from requirements of
Clause 6(A)(i) of the above guidelines.
17.

The learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Dr.

Namit Bhargava versus Medical Council of India, 109 (2004) DLT
404

dismissed the writ petition on the ground that there was

concealment of facts and incorrect statements were made before the
Medical Council of India. It was on account of false statement made
on oath by the petitioner that the petition was dismissed.
18.

The argument of the Counsel for the Respondent that the

Court should not disturb the technical and eligibility criteria fixed by
expert bodies, who seek to maintain professional excellence and
standards was also raised before the Supreme Court in the Indian
Doctors from Russia Welfare Associations case (supra) but after
consideration of all aspects, the guidelines issued by the Government

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 20

of India were accepted and thereafter
students similarly situated.

made applicable to all

We may again note here that the

appellant, Mr. Naveen Sharma has already passed the screening test
in 2005 conducted by the National Board of Examination, Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. Therefore, to this
extent it cannot be denied that the appellant has been able to obtain
and perfect his knowledge in medicine and has been able to achieve
proficiency in medicine.
19.

Learned counsel for the respondent-Medical Council of India

had also relied upon some decisions upholding the eligibility norms
prescribing

age

colleges/universities.

limit

of

17

years

for

admission

to

In the said cases, the petitioners had

challenged constitutional validity

prescribing minimum age for

admission to universities/colleges under the rules and regulations of
the said universities/colleges. Universities/colleges have the right to
fix the minimum age requirement for admission and the requirement
that the students should be 17 years of age at the time of admission

LPA No. 1092/2006

has been upheld.

Page 21

But in the present case, the minimum age

requirement fixed and prescribed by the University in Bulgaria was
satisfied by the appellant.

The decisions referred by the learned

counsel for the respondent do not state that the university or college
cannot frame a rule or regulation and allow admission to students
less than 17 years of age. The issues and contentions raised in
these writ petitions are entirely different and are not relevant for
deciding the present controversy. It may be pointed out here that in
the case of Jishalakshi Embrandiri (supra) the petitioner therein
was less than 17 years of age at the time of admission in the foreign
university and was allowed registration by the decision of this Court.
It appears that the said decision has been upheld or accepted by the
Medical Council of India.
20.

In the case of Ms. Sunita Kumari, the appellant in LPA

1226/2006,

it is stated that she did not meet the eligibility

requirement as in 1995, when she had cleared 10+2 examination,
she had scored 42.6% marks in aggregate as an Arts student. The

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 22

eligibility requirements of the Medical Council of India require that a
student at +2 stage must have studied Physics, Chemistry and
Biology and should have obtained 50% marks in aggregate.
However, it may be noted that before being enrolled for Study of
Medicine in Russia, Ms. Sunita Kumari underwent and had studied
Physics,

Chemistry

Subsequently, on 1

and
st

Biology

in

a

preparatory

course.

September, 1996 after completing the

preparatory course, she appeared in the eligibility test conducted by
Russia Student Medical University and had qualified. The said
medical college was recognised by the Medical Council of India,
when she was admitted and had cleared the course in July, 2002.
Thereafter in 2004 the appellant, Ms. Sunita Kumari, had appeared in
the screening test organised by the National Board of Examination
but failed to qualify. Medical Council of India did not at that time raise
any objection. She was allowed to appear in the said screening test
twice thereafter pursuant to interim orders passed by this Court but
has failed to qualify. We were inclined to dismiss the Appeal filed by

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 23

Ms.Sunita Kumari as she has failed to clear the screening test on
three occasions. However, learned counsel for the Medical Council of
India has informed us that the earlier restriction of maximum of three
attempts by a student/graduate in the screening test has been done
away with. There is now, no restriction on the number of attempts
that students/graduates in Medicine can have to qualify in the
screening test. As this aspect is not the subject matter of the present
Appeal, we do not want to comment on the amendment but observe
that there appears to be a contradiction in the stand of the
respondents. On one hand, fear
incompetent

and

and consequences of having

under-qualified

doctors

and

maintaining

professional excellence is projected, but the restriction on number of
attempts has been done away with. Common sense dictates that an
effective and comprehensive screening test can be an effective tool
and mechanism to filter out un-desirable, under- qualified and incompetent candidates from the medical profession. Unlimited
attempts seems to undermine the said objective.

LPA No. 1092/2006

21.

Page 24

In view of the findings given above, we allow the present

appeal and it is held that Dr. Naveen Sharma is covered by Clause
6(B) of the guidelines. In the case of Ms. Sunita Kumari, she is held
to be entitled to benefit under Clause 6(B) read with 6(A) (ii), but
must comply with the guidelines/regulations as applicable including
the screening test. In the facts and circumstances of the case there
will be no order as to costs.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
DECEMBER 20, 2007.
VKR/P

LPA No. 1092/2006

Page 25

