* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ W.P.(C) 7301/2007 & CM No. 13871/2007

AMAR SINGH

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. R.K. Saini & Mr. Nikhil Bhalla,
Advocates.

versus

MCD & ANR

..... Respondents
Through Ms. Smita Shankar, Advocate for MCD.
Mr. Mahip Datta, Advocate for respondent No. 2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

ORDER
% 25.03.2008

1. Petitioner herein has entered into an agreement to purchase a shop
measuring 4x18 feet, which is part of shop No. 27, Municipal Market,
Mandelia Road, Kamla Nagar, Delhi.
2. Mr. Hansraj had originally purchased entire shop on 4th August, 1968 in a
public auction and a lease deed dated 18th May, 1971 was executed in his
favour. Subsequently, the shop in question was sold to one Smt. Shanti Devi
except for the portion, which was agreed to be sold to the petitioner vide
agreement to sell dated 29th August, 1967. The petitioner had filed a suit for
specific performance against Smt. Shanti Devi and has a decree for specific
performance dated 24th September, 1994 in his favour.
3. MCD has, however, refused to accept the said decree and acknowledge
the petitioner as owner of shop measuring 4x18 feet and has refused to give
permission to Smt. Shanti Devi to execute the sale deed for part or portion of
the shop in favour of the petitioner.
4. MCD in their counter affidavit has relied upon Clauses 2 and 6 of the lease
deed dated 18th May, 1971, which for the sake of convenience are reproduced
below:-

“ The lessee shall not deviate in any manner from the

plan nor alter the size of the plot whether by sub-

division, amalgamation or otherwise, without prior
approval of the lesser(sic).
Whenever, the title of the lessee is transferred in any
manner, whatsoever, the transfer(sic) and the
transferee shall, within three months of the transfer,
give notice of such transfer in writing to the lesser
(sic).”

5. The contention of MCD is that sub-division of the plot is permissible under
Clause 2 but sub-division of the building or the super structure on the plot is
not permissible. The second contention of the MCD is that no prior permission
was obtained or information regarding transfer was given to MCD.
6. The stand taken by the MCD cannot be accepted. What was sold to Mr.
Hansraj was a built up shop and Clause 2 of the lease deed permits subdivision and amalgamation of the plot with prior permission. The lease
nowhere stipulates that sub-division or amalgamation of the super structure or
the building is not permissible or requires prior permission. For sub-division of
the plot, prior permission is required but there is no restriction as far as super
structures are concerned. There is no bar in the lease deed for division of the
super structure. In case the original lessee was not entitled to sub divide or
amalgamate the super structure, then such restriction should have been
incorporated in the lease deed itself.

7. A better and more reasonable manner of reading Clause 2 would be that
plot includes super structure and building. Therefore, sub-division or
amalgamation of super structure is permitted with permission of MCD. It may
be relevant to state here that what was sold to Mr. Hansraj was the shop
including the plot. Thus, the stand of MCD that plot can be sub-divided but the
superstructure cannot be sub-divided cannot be accepted.
8. The second contention of the MCD that no prior permission was obtained,
cannot be sustained. Permission can be granted retrospectively. In our case
transfer of immovable property in law requires execution of a registered
document of title and the said event has not happened. The stand taken by
the MCD, therefore, cannot be accepted.
9. It is accordingly directed that the MCD will re-examine the claim made by
the petitioner for sub-division of the shop for the purpose of execution of the
sale deed for the portion measuring 4x18 feet in favour of the petitioner by the
respondent No. 2 within a period of six weeks from today.
The writ petition is disposed of.

SANJIV KHANNA, J.

MARCH 25, 2008
VKR/vld

