LPA No. 410/2002

*

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA NO. 410 of 2002

%

Date of Decision : 28

th

February, 2007.

VIPIN KALIA & ORS.
.... Appellants.
Through Mr. Chetan Sharma, Sr. Adv. with Mr.
Ashok Bhalla, Adv.
VERSUS
STATE BANK OF INDIA & ORS.
.... Respondents.
Through Mr. Rajiv Shakdhar, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Rajiv
Kapur & Mr. Ashish Garg, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. The appellants are erstwhile employees' of State Bank of India.

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 2

They opted for voluntary retirement under the State Bank of
India Voluntary Retirement Scheme, which was valid during the
th

st

period 15 January, 2001 to 31 January, 2001. The option
exercised by them was accepted by the respondent on 31

st

March, 2001.
2. All the appellants have either completed 15 years of service or
were of 40 years of age as on 31

st

December, 2000.

Accordingly, as per the provisions of the State Bank of India
Employees' Pension and Provident Fund Rules, they are not
eligible for pension. Rule 22(1) of the aforesaid Rule reads as
under:“A member shall be entitled to a pension under
these rules on retiring from the Bank's servicea)after having completed twenty years'
pensionable service provided that he has
attained the age of fifty years, or if he is in the
service of the Bank on or after 1.11.1993, after
having completed ten years pensionable
service provided that he has attained the age
of fifty eight years; of if he is in the service of
nd
the Bank on or after 22 May, 1998, after
having completed 10 years pensionable
service period that he has attained the age of

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 3

sixty years.
b)after having completed twenty years'
pensionable service irrespective of the age he
shall have attained, if he shall satisfy the
authority competent to sanction his retirement
by approved medical certificate or otherwise
that he is incapacitated for further active
service;
c)after having completed twenty years'
pensionable service, irrespective of the age he
shall have attained at his request in writing;
d)after twenty-five years' pensionable service.”
3. The

appellants,

however,

contend

Association in their letter dated 11

th

that

Indian

Bank's

December, 2000 had

recommended and given approval for amendment of pension
regulations enabling payment of pension to employees who
seek voluntary retirement after 15 years of service on pro rata
basis. The appellants claim that in terms of the said letter they
should be paid pension, as they have completed 15 years of
service, though they were yet to complete 20 years of service.
The relevant letter is reproduced below:-

“INDIAN BANK'S ASSOCIATION STADIUM

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 4
th

HOUSE 6 FLOOR, BLOCK 2 VEER
NARIMAN ROAD MUMBAI-400020

PD/CIR/76/G2/G4/
December 11,2000
Designated officers of all Public Sector
Banks.
Dear Sirs,
VOLUNTARY
RETIREMENT
SCHEME IN PUBLIC SECTOR BANKSAMENDMENTS TO BANK, (EMPLOYEES')
PENSION REGULATIONS, 1995.
Please refer to our circular letter
st
No.PD/CIR/76/G4/933 dated 31 August 2000
convening the 'No Objection' of the
Government in banks adopting and
implementing a voluntary retirement scheme
for employees on the lines of what was
contained in the Annexure to the circular.
As per the scheme, an employee
who is eligible and applies for voluntary
retirement is entitled for the benefit of CPF,
Pension, Gratuity and encashment of
accumulated privilege leave, as per rules.
Bank
(Employees')
Pension
Regulations, 1955 do not have provisions
enabling payment of pension to an employee
who retires before attaining the age of super
annuation except under circumstances as in
Regulations 29, 30, 32 and 33. We had,

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 5

therefore, taken up with the Government the
need to incorporate necessary provisions in
the Pension Regulations by way of
amendments to Regulation 28 so that
employees who retire as above under
special/ad hoc schemes formulated by the
banks, after serving for a prescribed minimum
period would be eligible for pro rata pension.
Government of India has after
examining the proposal conveyed its approval
and desired that IBA advise banks to make
necessary amendments to their Pension
Regulations as in the Annexure. We request
banks to take note accordingly.
Please note that with the above
amendments, employees who apply for
voluntary retirement after having rendered a
minimum of 15 years of service under a
special/ad hoc scheme formulated with the
specific approval of the Government and the
Board of Directors will be eligible for pro rata
pension for the period of service rendered as
they are to retire on attaining the age of
superannuation on that date.”
Yours faithfully,
sd/(Allen C A Pereira)
PERSONNEL ADVISER”
4. The similar contention was raised before the learned single
Judge also but was rejected on the ground that the aforesaid

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 6

letter is not a binding circular under Section 18 of the State
Bank of India Act, 1955 and, therefore, is not applicable. It was
further held that Voluntary Retirement Scheme was a package
by itself

and it was not open to the appellants to ask for

modification of the scheme. Learned Single Judge held that if
the appellants wanted to avail benefit of pension, they need not
have opted under the scheme and after completing requisite
years of service, would have been entitled to pension.
5. Learned counsel for the appellants did not dispute the above
facts but submitted that the aforesaid letter/circular dated 11

th

December, 2000 was binding on the respondent-Bank and it will
be inequitable and unjust to deny benefit of pension to the
appellants. It was further submitted that pension is not a bounty
but an obligation of an employer and a right of an employee. It
being a socio-economic measure, the appeal should be
allowed.
6. We have examined the State Bank of India Voluntary

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 7

Retirement Scheme dated 30

th

December, 2000.

The said

scheme was an invitation to the employees to make their offer
and opt for voluntary retirement. The scheme specifically
stipulated that the employees who were eligible and the period
during which an offer for voluntary retirement could be made.
Clause 5 and 6 of the scheme provides for ex-gratia payment to
the officers who had opted for voluntary retirement. Clause 6
clearly specifically endows the other benefits, which an
employee was entitled to. Employees were entitled to gratuity,
provident fund contribution as per the State Bank of India
Employees Provident Fund Rules and pension in terms of the
State Bank of India Employees Pension Fund Rules on the
relevant date. Some other benefits were also payable. Pension
was payable only in terms of the State Bank of India Employees
Pension Fund Rules and not otherwise or contrary to the said
Rules.
7. On 11

th

January, 2001, the respondent-bank also issued a

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 8

clarification on the question whether employees who had
completed 15 years of service but had less than twenty years
of service would be entitled to pension on voluntary retirement
under the scheme. The respondent-bank clarified that payment
of pension to an employee retiring under the Voluntary
Retirement Scheme would be governed by the relevant pension
regulations and as per the existing rules and an employee who
had not completed 20 years of pensionable service would not
be eligible for pension.
8. Thus, the appellants had opted under the Voluntary Retirement
Scheme and were fully conscious and aware of the fact that
they would not be entitled to pension under the scheme as they
had not completed 20 years of pensionable service. Pension
was payable only to those employees who were eligible for
pension under the State Bank of India Employees' Pension
Fund Rules as applicable on the relevant date.
9. It is now well settled that a voluntary retirement scheme can be

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 9

a contractual or a statutory scheme. A contractual scheme is
purely voluntary.

An employee has option to accept or not

apply under the scheme. An employee who opts under the
scheme makes an offer, which upon acceptance, constitutes a
binding contract.

The provisions of Contract Act, 1872 are

applicable. (See in this regard observations of the Supreme
Court in State Bank of India versus O.P. Swarankar, (2003) 2
SCC 721).

The appellants, therefore, cannot be allowed to

wriggle out of the terms and conditions accepted and agreed
upon by the two parties viz. the appellants and the respondentbank. The appellants had entered into the said contract with
open eyes and fully conscious and aware of what benefits they
would be entitled to by opting under the Voluntary Retirement
Scheme. They were conscious and aware and in fact
specifically informed by way of clarification by the respondent
that the employees who had not completed 20 years of service,
would not be eligible for pension under the relevant rules. The

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 10

appellants by way of appeal are seeking modification of the
terms of the concluded contract which in equity is not just and
fair. Recently the Supreme Court in HEC Voluntary Retired
Employees Welfare Society versus Heavy Engineering Corpn.
Ltd., (2006) 3 SCC 708 has held as under:“11. An offer for voluntary retirement in terms
of a scheme, when accepted, leads to a
concluded contract between the employer
and the employee. In terms of such a
scheme, an employee has an option either to
accept or not to opt therefor. The scheme is
purely voluntary, in terms whereof the tenure
of service is curtailed, which is permissible in
law. Such a scheme is ordinarily floated with
a purpose of downsizing the employees. It is
beneficial both to the employees as well as to
the employer. Such a scheme is issued for
effective functioning of the industrial
undertakings. Although the Company is
“State” within the meaning of Article 12 of the
Constitution, the terms and conditions of
service would be governed by the contract of
employment. Thus, unless the terms and
conditions of such a contract are governed by
a statute or statutory rules, the provisions of
the Contract Act would be applicable both at
the formulation of the contract as also the
determination thereof. By reason of such a
scheme only is an invitation of offer floated.

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 11

When pursuant to or in furtherance of such a
Voluntary Retirement Scheme an employee
opts therefor, he makes an offer which upon
acceptance by the employer gives rise to a
contract. Thus, as the matter relating to
voluntary retirement is not governed by any
statute, the provisions of the Contract Act,
1872, therefore, would be applicable too.
(See Bank of India v. O.P. Swarnakar (2003)
2 SCC 721 .
22. Financial considerations are, thus, a
relevant factor both for floating a scheme of
voluntary retirement as well as for revision of
pay. Those employees who opted for
voluntary retirement, make a planning for the
future. At the time of giving option, they know
where they stand. At that point of time they
did not anticipate that they would get the
benefit of revision in the scales of pay. They
prepared themselves to contract out of the
jural relationship by resorting to “golden
handshake”. They are bound by their own act.
The parties are bound by the terms of
contract of voluntary retirement. We have
noticed hereinbefore that unless a statute or
statutory provision interdicts, the relationship
between the parties to act pursuant to or in
furtherance of the Voluntary Retirement
Scheme is governed by contract. By such
contract, they can opt out of such other terms
and conditions as may be agreed upon. In
this case the terms and conditions of the
contract are not governed by a statute or
statutory rules.

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 12

18. The Voluntary Retirement Scheme
speaks of a package. One either takes it or
rejects it. While offering to opt for the same,
presumably the employee takes into
consideration the future implication also.
19. It is not in dispute that the effect of such
Voluntary Retirement Scheme is cessation of
jural relationship between the employer and
the employee. Once an employee opts to
retire voluntarily, in terms of the contract he
cannot raise a claim for a higher salary unless
by reason of a statute he becomes entitled
thereto. He may also become entitled thereto
even if a policy in that behalf is formulated by
the Company.”
10.In view of the above, we agree with the findings of the learned
single Judge that Voluntary Retirement Scheme was a package
by itself and it is not open to the appellants to ask for
modification of the said package and this Court cannot direct
amendments to the terms and conditions of the concluded
contract.
11.

We also agree with the findings of the learned Single Judge

that the letter/circular dated 11

th

December, 2000 cannot be

regarded as a guideline or direction issued by the Central

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 13

Government under Section 18 of the State Bank of India Act,
1955. The said Section reads as under:“Central Board to be guided by directions of
Central Government.-(1) In the discharge of its
functions (including those relating to a
subsidiary bank), the State Bank shall be
guided by such directions in matters of policy
involving public interest as the Central
Government may, in consultations with the
Governor of the Reserve Bank and the
Chairman of the State Bank, give to it.”
12.

Section 18 stipulates that the respondent-bank shall be

guided by directions, in the matter of policy involving public
interest, as the Central Government in consultation with the
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and the Chairman of
the Bank may give to it.

The letter/circular dated 11

th

December, 2000 is not a direction in respect of policy involving
public interest issued by the Central Government. The said
letter in fact has not been issued by the Central Government
nor can it be regarded as a matter of policy involving public
interest, which had been issued in consultation with the

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 14

Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and the Chairman of
the State Bank.
13. The State Bank of India, as already stated, has its own pension
regulations.

The employees of the State Bank of India are

bound by the same. Letter/circular dated 11th December, 2000
refers to amendment to Bank (Employees') Pension Regulations,
1995. The said regulations are not applicable to the employees

of State Bank of India. The Pension regulations applicable to the
State Bank of India employees are different. As far as employees of
State Bank of India are concerned, the Bank Employees'

Pension Regulations, 1995 are not applicable. The amendment
suggested by letter/circular dated 11

th

December, 2000 by

Indian Bank's Association was not applicable to the appellants
and the employees of the State Bank of India. We may also
point out here that State Bank of India in the counter affidavit has
explained that its Voluntary Retirement Scheme was a special and
a distinct scheme offering a handsome package for the

employees who were ready and willing to opt for retirement. It is

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 15

also pointed out that the State Bank of India's employees
unlike employees belonging to other public sector banks were
entitled to both contributory provident fund and membership of
a pension fund.

It is stated that employees of other public

sector bank are eligible either for contributory provident fund or
membership of pension fund.
14.

Learned counsel for the appellants, however, also relied on

the judgment of a single Judge of this Court in the case of Punjab
and Sind Bank Officers Association and Others versus Union of
th

India and Another on 11 May, 2006. In the said case, learned
single Judge was examining regulations 28 and 29 of the Bank
(Employees') Pension Regulations, 1995. The issue was which of
the two regulations would apply. It was held that Regulation 29

would apply to employees who had taken voluntary retirement
whether under normal circumstances or under a special
scheme. It was further held that the scheme or package cannot be
altered unilaterally. The said decision does not support the

contention of the appellants. The terms and conditions of the

LPA No. 410/2002

Page 16

Voluntary Retirement Scheme were clear and specific. The terms

were not ambiguous. The employees including the appellants
were fully

conscious of the decision taken by them and the

benefits they would be entitled

to. The appellants voluntarily,

with open eyes entered into an agreement and after having
retired and enjoyed the benefits, they cannot go behind the
concluded contract and claim further benefits.
remembered

that

a

Voluntary

Retirement

formulated and conceived in public interest.

It must be
Scheme

is

Interest of the

respondent bank is also to be taken into consideration.
15.

In these circumstances, we do not find any merit in the

present appeal and the same is dismissed. However, there
will be no order as to costs.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
FEBRUARY 28, 2007
VKR/P

