*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 17515/2006

LOCAL SHOPPING COMPLEX
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Mayank Kumar, Adv.
versus
UOI AND ORS

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Devendra Nautiyal, Adv. for Mr. Anoop
Bagai, Adv. for respondents no.3 and 4
Mr. Jaggi with Ms. P S Shukla and Mr. Neeraj
Shamra, Adv. for respondent no.5

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

%

ORDER
31.03.2008
1. The Local Shopping Complex Welfare Association near Samachar
Apartments has filed the present writ petition for direction to
respondents to remove the taxi stand of the respondent no.5, Mr. Amrik
Singh. The stand taken by the petitioner is that respondent no.5 has
unauthorisedly encroached upon government land and is using the land
next to the shopping complex as a general taxi stand.
2. Respondent no.5 in his counter affidavit has stated that the said plot
was allotted to him for a taxi stand in accordance with the existing rules.
Respondent no.5 has relied upon letters dated 23/25.5.1990 and
29.11.1991. I have examined these letters which were written to the

Deputy Commissioner of Police (Traffic) indicating that under the layout
plan of the local shopping centre, Mayur Vihar, Phase-II, the area in
question is earmarked for a general taxi stand and allotment would be
made on purely temporary basis or no permanent structure would be
erected. Subsequently, by another letter dated 12.1.1994 it was decided
that a general taxi stand/free taxi parking site for parking 5 taxis had
been notified on temporary basis. These letters do not indicate that Mr.
Amrik Singh has been allotted the said taxi stand and can set up any
temporary or permanent structure and decide who can park his taxis on
the said land. On the other hand letter dated 12.1.1994 specifically
stipulates that on the recommendation of DDA, Deputy Commissioner of
Police (Traffic), Delhi has issued notification vide which the area in
question is earmarked for general taxi stand/free parking site for 5 taxis.
No specific individual or person can claim any right to park his taxis. No
one can object to any other person parking his taxis at the said site. The
Deputy Commissioner of Police in his counter affidavit has pointed out
that pursuant to letter dated 13.1.1992 the said respondents had issued
notifications for running of general taxi stand on temporary basis.
3. DDA in their counter affidavit has stated that the taxi stand in question
being operated by respondent no.5 is unauthorized and no allotment
has been made by DDA in favour of the said respondent. It is also

stated that DDA vide letter dated 29.11.1991 had issued NOC for
notification for general taxi stand.
4. It is clear from the above that respondent no.5 has not allotted the said
taxi stand. The taxi stand in question is a general taxi stand or free taxi
parking site for parking of 5 taxis which can be used by any taxi
driver/owner. No person has exclusive right to use the taxi stand.
Respondent no.5 cannot claim that the taxi stand belongs to him or
impose any condition or prevent a third person from using the said taxi
stand. All temporary structures constructed by respondent no.5 will be
removed. He will not be permitted to put up any structure. DDA, MCD
and Delhi Police will ensure that the taxi stand is open for parking and
can be utilized by any taxi driver who wants to use the same. A board
will be installed, clearly indicating that the site is a general or free
parking site.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner states that additional parking place is
required due to construction of an electric sub-station. The petitioner
can make a representation to the DDA in this regard. If found necessary
and feasible, DDA can take action.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Dasti.

SANJIV KHANNA,J
MARCH
vld

31, 2008

