LPA No. 2131/2006

Page 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA NO. 2131 OF 2006
th

%

Date of Decision : 30 November, 2007.

NEENA SINHA

.... Appellant.
Through Ms. Geeta Luthra & Mr. Jai
Bansal,Advocates.

VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS

.... Respondents.

Through Mr. Suresh Kait, Central Government
Standing Counsel for respondent Nos. 1 & 2.
Ms. Malvika Rajkotia, Advocate for the respondent
No. 3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ? YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?
YES

LPA No. 2131/2006

Page 2

SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1.

The appellant-Ms. Neena Sinha is wife of Mr. Jyoti Kalash.

She impugns order dated 23rd May, 2006 passed by the learned
Single Judge dismissing her writ petition W.P. (C) No.
8868/2006 seeking initiation of departmental proceedings
against Ms. Pramila Sharan, the respondent No. 3 on the ground
that she is having an extra marital affair with her husband.
2.

Learned

counsel

for

the

appellant

submitted

that

respondent No. 3 has violated Rule 3(1) (iii) of the Central Civil
Service (Conduct) Rules, 1964, which requires that every
Government servant shall not act in a manner which is
unbecoming of a Government servant.

She also relies upon

MHA letter No. 43/56/54-AVD dated 22nd October, 1964 issued
by the Government of India, which provides for suspension of a

LPA No. 2131/2006

Page 3

Government servant involved in acts or conduct involving moral
turpitude. Learned counsel for the appellant has also drawn our
attention to the judgment of Madras High Court in the case of
State of Tamil Nadu versus P.M. Belliappa, reported in 1984
(3) SLR 534.
3.

We may mention here that learned counsel for the

respondent No. 3 has denied allegations made by the appellant
against the respondent No. 3.

Learned counsel for the

respondent No. 3 has also drawn our attention to order dated
2nd August, 2007 passed by Civil Judge, Delhi dismissing the
suit filed by the appellant herein against respondent No. 3 on
similar allegations holding that the plaint did not disclose any
cause of action.
4.

We may note here that the present appeal is barred by

limitation and an application for condonation of delay of 129
days has been filed. The only ground given in the application is

LPA No. 2131/2006

Page 4

mentioned in paragraph 3, which is reproduced below:“That the appellant has been under
depression for crisis being faced by her in
marital life. Besides, the appellant went
out of Delhi along with her children during
summer vacation so to come out from her
depression. It took time for the appellant
to come out of the depression and think
coherently and that is why, there is delay
in filing the instant appeal.”

5.

Courts are very liberal in condoning delay and the term

"sufficient cause" has been interpreted capaciously to take into
account disabilities and disadvantages, which a party suffers
from. However, the reasons stated above are bereft of grounds
and particulars. The mere fact that the appellant had gone out of
Delhi and was facing marital problems, does not justify and
constitute sufficient cause to explain delay of 129 days in filing
the appeal. The impugned order was passed on 23rd May, 2006
and the present appeal was filed only on 29th September, 2006,
though intra court appeal is to be filed within 30 days.

LPA No. 2131/2006

6.

Page 5

On merits also, we agree with the Ld. Single Judge, who

refused and was not inclined to exercise extraordinary
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The
appellant has alleged extra marital affair between her husband
and respondent No. 3, both of them are Government servants
but the appellant wants initiation of departmental proceedings
only against respondent No. 3 and not against her own husband.
In fact, when the writ petition W.P. (C) No. 8868/2006 had come
up for hearing before the learned Single Judge, he had
expressed his view that the husband of the appellant should be
impleaded as a party. Despite opportunity granted for the said
purpose, the husband of the appellant was not impleaded as a
party by the appellant. In the grounds of appeal, it is submitted
by the appellant that she does not want any departmental action
against her husband but she wants action to be taken against
respondent No. 3 only, even though it is her allegation that her

LPA No. 2131/2006

Page 6

husband and respondent No. 3 have a adulterous relationship.
We do not think it is possible to segregate and treat the husband
of the appellant and respondent No. 3 separately, if we treat the
allegations made by the appellant as correct.

Two different

yardsticks cannot be applied. In these circumstances, learned
Single Judge was justified in refusing to entertain writ petition on
the ground that the appellant has given a mala fide colour to the
petition by seeking initiation of departmental action against the
respondent No. 3 and leaving her husband out of the same.
7.

It may also be noted that divorce proceedings are already

pending between the appellant and her husband and the
respondent No. 3 and her husband on various grounds.
Husband of respondent No. 3 has also initiated criminal
proceedings against respondent No. 3 and the husband of the
appellant. The said matter is pending consideration before a
criminal court.

The appellant had filed a civil suit against

LPA No. 2131/2006

Page 7

respondent No. 3 again making allegations of adultery, which
were categorically denied by respondent No. 3. The said civil
suit has been dismissed as not disclosing any cause of action
vide order dated 2nd August, 2007 passed by the Civil Judge . It
is, therefore, apparent that the alleged allegations of adultery
and extra marital affair are already subject matter of the
matrimonial proceedings as well as a criminal case. Disputed
questions of fact are involved.

The appellant had made

representations to the Government for initiation of departmental
proceedings against respondent No. 3.

Inspite of the

representations, the Government has not taken any action and it
is apparent that they are satisfied and convinced that no
departmental proceedings should be initiated. In the present
case departmental proceedings have not been initiated and we
are

not

examining

the

question

whether

departmental

proceeding should be quashed. Judicial parameters and scope

LPA No. 2131/2006

Page 8

for intervention in both cases will be different.

In these

circumstances, we are not inclined to exercise our power under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India and issue specific
direction to the Government of India to initiate departmental
proceeding against respondent No. 3.
8.

The case of P.M. Belliappa (supra) relied upon by the

appellant is distinguishable. In the said case, the respondent
therein had used his official position to appoint wife of the
complainant in a job with REC and the allegations made were
that the said respondent had enticed the complainant's wife, who
had developed deep sentiment of gratitude on account of
employment she had procured through the help of the
respondent therein.
9.

In view of the above factual background and the already

pending litigations between the parties, we agree with the
findings recorded by the learned Single Judge, who refused to
exercise his discretion in entertaining the writ petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. We find no merit in this
appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.

We, however,

make it clear that no part or observation and views expressed

LPA No. 2131/2006

Page 9

herein would be read as views expressed on the merit of any
other case. These findings are recorded only for the purpose of
deciding this appeal. No Costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE

NOVEMBER
VKR/P

30, 2007.

