WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 1

REPORTABLE
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3881 OF 1996
% Date of Decision : 30th May, 2008.
K.V. CHANDRASEKHARAN

..........Petitioner

Through Ms. Mahalakshmi Pavani and Mr.
G. Balaji, Advocates.
Versus
UOI & ORS.

........Respondents.
Through Mr. R.V. Sinha, Advocate for R-1.
Mr. Pawan Upadhyay and Ms. Anisha
Upadhyay, Advocates for R.2-3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1.

The petitioner, Mr. K.V. Chandrashekharan has filed

the present Writ Petition against Wasco India Limited (hereinafter

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 2

referred to as the WAPCOS, for short) a Government of India
Undertaking claiming payment of Bhutan Deputation Allowance as
per the scales fixed by the Ministry of External Affairs, Government
of India.
2.

The petitioner was an employee in the Ministry of

Water Resources, Government of India and was posted with the
Central Water Commission (hereinafter referred to as the CWC,
for short). During the period 30th October, 1985 to 30th April,
1991,

he

was

posted

on

deputation

as

Assistant

Engineer/Assistant Executive Engineer in Chukha Hydel Power
Project, Bhutan. In this period, he was paid Bhutan Compensatory
Allowance (hereinafter referred as BCA, for short) as per the scale
fixed by the Ministry of External Affairs (hereinafter referred to as
MEA, for short).
3.

WAPCOS was awarded work for survey and investigation for

preparation of detailed project report for Chukha Hydel Power
Project-stage II. For the said work, WAPCOS wanted to engage
services of surplus staff who had earlier worked in Chukha Hydel
Power Project. A letter of request dated 6th April, 1991 was written
by WAPCOS to the General Manager, Chukha Hydel Power
Project stating that they would like to appoint a Liaison Officer
(Technical) and others on deputation. The letter also stated that

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 3

the existing allowance drawn shall be protected. However, no
appointment was made in terms of the said letter.
4.

After completing his deputation at Bhutan, on 30th April, 1991

the petitioner joined his parent Department, i.e. CWC and
thereafter

he applied for selection to the post of Liaison Officer

(Technical) on deputation in WAPCOS. On 9th September, 1991,
the petitioner was selected and offered appointment to the said
post. Letter dated 9th September, 1991 stipulated that the
petitioner would be governed by the usual terms and conditions of
deputation of the Central Government issued by the Ministry of
Water Resources and the detailed terms and conditions would be
issued at an early date. By Office Order dated 21st October, 1991,
the petitioner was posted at Bhutan as Liaison Officer (Technical).
The Office Order also stipulated that during his posting at Bhutan,
the petitioner would be governed by the terms and conditions as
per the Annexure to the said letter. The relevant terms and
conditions contained in the Annexure are as under:-

―Terms and conditions governing assignment
of Experts deputed to Bhutan in connection
with Investigation and Preparation of Detailed
Projects Reports (DPRS) for Tala Hydro
Electric Projects and Wangchu Reservoir
Scheme – Bhutan.
The terms and conditions of appointment for
the above said project for the officers and staff
proceeding to Bhutan shall be the same as

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 4

admissible to the officers/staff of the similar
grade deputed to Bhutan under the Ministry of
External Affairs Orders issued from time to
time. A copy of each enumerated circular
number related to the said terms and
conditions is attached.
1. Q/FD/6910/10/86 dated 15.7.87
The terms and conditions are however subject
to amendments by the Ministry of External
Affairs from time to time.
MAIN FEATURES ARE AS UNDER:
a) x x x x
b) FOR SERVICES IN BHUTAN

BASIC PAY plus (BCA) as admissible.
The (BCA) of Group ‗A‘, ‗B‘, ‗C‘ & ‗D‘ Officers
Staff whose pay has been refixed in the
revised pay scales under Central Civil
Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1986/Central
Civil Services (Revised Pay) Amendment
Rules, 1987 shall be reduced as follows.
Deputationist will not be entitled to any
deputation allowance during service in
Bhutan.
x x

x

x

x

BHUTAN COMPENSATORY ALLOWANCE
(SEE ANNEXURE-I) ATTACHED

The minimum Compensatory allowance is
Rs.1945/- and maximum B.C.A. is Rs.6090/at Bhutan for different categories. This B.C.A.
includes remuneration of two part time
servants (domestic) which the Officers can
engage on the standard rates of wages
subject to entitlement and certification viz :-

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 5

Rs.
TLE

:

366*

SLE

:

305*

MLE

:

244*
* subject to certification‖

5.

Annexure

I

referred

to

under

the

heading

‗Bhutan

Compensatory Allowance‘ was also enclosed with the terms and
conditions. Annexure 1 quantified the BCA admissible to each
category of post w.e.f. 1st December, 1987 as per which
Executive Engineer who was drawing a pay exceeding Rs.3500/was to be paid

Rs.6090/- as BCA and

Assistant Executive

Engineer drawing a pay not exceeding Rs.3000/-, was to be paid
Rs.5410/- as BCA. It is clear from Annexure 1 governing the terms
and conditions of appointment that the amount payable towards
BCA was specifically quantified and mentioned therein.
6.

It is an admitted case of the parties that the BCA fixed by the

MEA was much higher than BCA mentioned in Annexure 1 to the
terms and conditions and as mentioned in the Office Order dated
21st October, 1991 by which the petitioner was posted as Liaison
Officer (Technical) at Bhutan.
7.

The petitioner claims that there is violation of the terms and

conditions of employment and he is entitled to BCA of Rs.15,280/-

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 6

w.e.f. 1st December, 1991 as fixed by MEA. This enhancement
was made by MEA by letter dated 18th March, 1993 with
retrospective effect from 1st December, 1991. The petitioner claims
that he has written letters to the respondent-Company against the
payment of BCA on lower scale. The petitioner has enclosed letter
dated 8th January, 1992 with the Writ Petition. It is stated in this
letter that the petitioner while working on deputation with the
Chukha Hydel Power Project till 30th April, 1991, was getting 25%
more BCA than what was being paid to him. He protested and
submitted that the emoluments drawn by him while working with
Chukha Hydel Power Project should be protected and accordingly
requested that he shall be paid arrears w.e.f. 25th October, 1991
onwards. In the next letter dated 18th June, 1992 written by the
petitioner, it was stated that MEA had accorded grant of 25%
adhoc increase in BCA w.e.f. 1st December, 1991. The respondent
- company was requested to look into the matter and sanction
higher BCA. The third letter written by the petitioner is dated 6th
January, 1993. In this letter, it was stated that the petitioner had
agreed to be governed by the terms and conditions of deputation
as was mentioned and enclosed with the Office Order dated 21st
October, 1991. It appears that thereafter the MEA, by its letter
dated 18th March, 1993, increased BCA to Rs.15,280/- for the post
of Executive Engineer drawing pay exceeding Rs.3500/- p.m. This

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 7

Office Order was made effective from 1st December, 1990. The
petitioner claimed benefit of this Office Order.
7.

The petitioner thereafter on 1st May, 1993 wrote a letter in

which he raised the issue of BCA as under :―There was an ad-hoc increase
of 25% in the B.C.A. w.e.f. 1.12.1990
and a further hike from 1.12.1991. A
copy of the latest order on B.C.A.
issued by M.E.A. vide their letter
No.E-IV/235/3/93 dated 18.3.93 is
enclosed for ready reference. As
against these hikes, I am being paid
an additional 33% B.C.A. (on 1987
rates) that too, from 1.4.1992
onwards, which is far less than the
actual B.C.A. The total amount of
B.C.A. being paid to me, at present is
not even half of my actual entitlement.
As such, I request your goodself to
kindly arrange to pay full B.C.A. to me
along with the arrears accrued so far,
at an early date.‖

8.

Some other letters were also written by the petitioner

thereafter. On 28th February, 1995, the petitioner was repatriated
to his parent Department. He then again raised this issue with
WAPCOS and claimed alleged arrears of BCA for the period
between 25th October, 1991 to 28th February, 1995.
9.

WAPCOS denied its liability to pay the said amount on the

ground that payment of BCA was regulated by the provisions of
Office Order dated 21st October, 1991 and the amount paid to the
petitioner was in terms of the said Order. It is further stated that

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 8

WAPCOS though being a Government of India Undertaking is
distinct from Government of India and is managed and run on
commercial lines. It is stated that the rates of BCA prescribed by
the Government of India or the MEA are not applicable to
WAPCOS. It is also stated that WAPCOS revised BCA for its
employees @ Rs.33% on 1st April, 1992 and 20% w.e.f. 1st April,
1994 after reviewing the working estimates. It is also pointed out
that the petitioner has been paid similar allowance as was paid to
other employees of WAPCOS working at Bhutan.
10.

The respondents have also relied upon the letter dated 21st

October, 1992 written by Deputy Finance Advisor, WAPCOS to the
petititoner. It is stated in this letter that the letter dated 2 nd
September, 1992 written by the petitioner regarding pay protection
was referred to and examined but the petitioners claim cannot be
accepted. It was stated that pay protection could be granted for
the last pay drawn by the petitioner in the parent office and not the
last pay drawn by the petitioner in Chukha Hydel Power Project.
With regard to BCA, it was stated that the same was regulated as
per the provisions made in the working cost estimate of the project
and the allowance payable to the employees of the Government of
India posted at Bhutan does not apply to WAPCOS. The petitioner
disputes receipt of the said letter and states that the same was
never served on him and he did not have knowledge about the

WP(C) No.3881/1996

same.

Page No. 9

It will be difficult for this Court to decide this

controversy without recording evidence. This is a disputed
question of fact.
11.

The petitioner was admittedly originally appointed in

WAPCOS on deputation for a period of two years w.e.f. 21st
October, 1991. He was regularly paid salary including BCA. It is
not the case of the petitioner that he has been paid a lower
amount towards BCA compared to other employees of WAPCOS.
The petitioner was, therefore, throughout aware and had
knowledge of the fact that he was being paid BCA as per
WAPCOS policy and decision and not as per the scale fixed by the
MEA. This position continued from 21st October, 1991 onwards till
the first term of deputation expired after two years. The term
thereafter was extended by letter dated 6th January, 1993 on the
same terms and conditions as were mentioned in the Office Order
dated 21st October, 1991. The term was once again extended by
letter dated 16th June, 1993 upto 31st May, 1994. As already stated
above, the petitioner was repatriated to his parent Department on
31st May, 1995. The petitioner accepted the said extensions
granted by WAPCOS. He did not protest and ask for his
repatriation because he was not being paid BCA as per the scales
provided by the MEA. The petitioner may have written some letters
but as per his own case, he did not receive any response in writing

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 10

from WAPCOS. The BCA paid to the petitioner was as per the
scales prescribed by WAPCOS. Preponderance predicates
therefore that the petitioner was fully aware and had knowledge of
the fact that BCA payable by MEA instructions was not
implemented and applied by WAPCOS. They had their own policy
for payment of BCA. The petitioner also agreed to extension of his
deputation period inspite of BCA being paid to him at a lower
scale than what he had demanded and what was payable by MEA.
He never asked for his repatriation on the ground that the BCA
being paid to him was not acceptable.
12.

Pay protection mentioned in the earlier letter dated 6th April,

1991 is not applicable to the petitioner. The petitioner had applied
for appointment after he was relieved and had rejoined his parent
Department-CWC on 30th April, 1991. The appointment was not in
terms of the letter dated 6th April, 1991. The petitioner has
mentioned in the Writ Petition that the Managing Director,
WAPCOS had written letter dated 7th May, 1991 to the Chairman,
CWC asking him to spare the services of the petitioner for a period
of two years. Thereafter, the petitioner applied for and was
selected and appointed on 15th October, 1991 and terms and
conditions of his appointment at Bhutan were issued to him on 21st
October, 1991.

WP(C) No.3881/1996

13.

Page No. 11

I have quoted the terms and conditions of appointment

mentioned in the Order dated 21st October, 1991. The first portion
of the said terms and conditions states that officers and staff
proceeding to Bhutan shall be the same as is admissible to the
officers and staff of the similar grade under the Orders that may be
issued

by MEA from time to time. The first part therefore,

stipulates that an officer would be entitled to the same pay and
allowance as was paid to officers working under the MEA and
orders issued by the said Ministry from time to time would apply.
This clause is general in nature as also indicated by the placement
under the heading ―terms and conditions‖. It is well established
that when operative part of the deed is clear it cannot be controlled
by the recital or other parts of the deed. If the operative part is
ambiguous or goes beyond the recitals or is general it may be
controlled by the recitals and other parts of the deed.
14.

With regard to BCA there was a separate clause mentioned

in the terms and conditions. The said clause as quoted above
stipulates the minimum and the maximum BCA that shall be paid
for different categories. There was also an annexure to the terms
and conditions quantifying and specifically stipulating the BCA that
was payable for each category of post depending upon the pay
scale. The maximum amount payable towards BCA was Rs.6090/.
Therefore, the petitioner was fully aware of the BCA which was

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 12

payable to him as the amount was fixed and quantified in
Annexure 1. An express covenant overrides a general clause. A
deed/document has to be read as a whole to ascertain the
intention of the parties and the meaning. Every word and clause
must be given effect to. It is only when conflict between two
clauses is irreconcilable that the earlier clause overrides the later.
However when a later clause does not destroy but qualifies the
earlier clause, then the two have to be read together.
15.

The amount payable towards BCA was the subject matter of

a specific clause in the terms and conditions of appointment. The
said clause will override any general recital made below the
heading. In the case of U.P. SEB versus Hari Shankar Jain,
reported in (1978) 4 SCC 16, the Supreme Court while dealing
with the question of applicability of the Industrial Employment
(Standing Orders) Act, with matters related to the employment
conditions of the employees of the UP State Electricity Board,
overriding the provisions of Section 79 of the Electricity Supply
Act, has held that the Standing Orders Act would apply to all
matters specifically dealt with notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 79 of the Electricity Supply Act. The Court in the said case
observed as under:
8. The maxim ―Generalia specialibus non
derogant‖ is quite well-known. The rule flowing from
the maxim has been explained in Mary Seward v.
Owner of the “Vera Cruz‖ as follows:

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 13

―Now if anything be certain it is this, that where
there are general words in a later Act capable of
reasonable and sensible application without extending
them to subjects specially dealt with by earlier
legislation, you are not to hold that earlier and special
legislation indirectly repealed, altered, or derogated
from merely by force of such general words, without
any indication of a particular intention to do so.‖
The question in Seward v. Owner of the ―Vera
Cruz‖ was whether Section 7 of the Admiralty Court
Act of 1861, which gave jurisdiction to that Court over
―any claim for damage done by any ship‖ also gave
jurisdiction over claims for loss of life which would
otherwise come under the Fatal Accidents Act. It was
held that the general words of Section 7 of the
Admiralty Court Act did not exclude the applicability of
the Fatal Accidents Act and therefore, the Admiralty
Court had no jurisdiction to entertain a claim for
damages for loss of life.
9. The reason for the rule that a general
provision should yield to a specific provision is this: In
passing a special Act, Parliament devotes its entire
consideration to a particular subject. When a general
Act is subsequently passed, it is logical to presume
that Parliament has not repealed or modified the
former Special Act unless it appears that the Special
Act again received consideration from Parliament. Vide
London and Blackwall Railway v. Limehouse District
Board of Works, and Thorpe v. Adams. In J&K. Cotton
Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P.,
this Court observed (at p. 1174):
―The rule that general provisions should yield to
specific provisions is not an arbitrary principle made by
lawyers and Judges but springs from the common
understanding of men and women that when the same
person gives two directions, one covering a large
number of matters in general and another to only some
of them his intention is that these latter directions
should prevail as regards these while as regards all the
rest the earlier direction should have effect.‖

WP(C) No.3881/1996

16.

Page No. 14

The above observations dealing with interpretation of

statutes is apposite and are equally applicable for interpreting the
terms and conditions of appointment. Terms and conditions of
appointment of the petitioner were contractual in nature. It was
open to the parties to agree or to not accept the terms and
conditions. It is difficult to accept the contention of the petitioner
that he was entitled to BCA at a rate higher than the figures
mentioned in the terms and conditions of appointment on the basis
of the general clause which stipulates that staff and officers posted
at Bhutan would be given the same grade as payable to
employees under the MEA. This will make the clause relating to
BCA fixing the maximum and the minimum otiose and redundant.
It will make the clause relating to BCA nugatory. However, it is
possible to harmoniously read both the clauses. Therefore it is not
possible to accept the contention raised by the petitioner.
17.

I may also note that the present Writ Petition has been filed

for recovery of money under a contract. Normally in respect of
contractual disputes a Writ Petition is not an appropriate remedy.
When allegations of breach of contract are made a party should
file a civil suit for adjudication of the disputes. I also find that past
claims made by the petitioner in the present Writ Petition which
was filed on 4th October, 1996 are barred by limitation in respect of
the period prior to 7th October, 1993.

WP(C) No.3881/1996

18.

Page No. 15

Learned counsel for the respondent had also raised

preliminary objection about the maintainability of the petition
against WAPCOS on the ground that it is not a State under Article
12 of the Constitution of India. I may note here that the Writ
Petition was originally dismissed by this Court vide Order dated
27th May, 1998 holding that a writ petition against WAPCOS was
not maintainable as it was not a State. A Division Bench of this
Court in LPA No304 of 1998 had set aside the said Order and had
held that the petitioner was a State and therefore writ petition was
maintainable. The Supreme Court by Order dated 22nd June, 1999
granted the Special Leave Petition and the Order passed by the
Division Bench was set aside and the matter was remanded back
to the Single Judge to decide afresh the question whether
WAPCOS is a State without being influenced by any observation
made by the Division Bench.
19.

The admitted position is that the WAPCOS is a Government

of India Undertaking. It is a company registered under the
Companies Act, 1956 but the majority shares are held by the
Government of India. Memorandum and Articles of Association of
WAPCOS placed on record shows that it was incorporated on 26th
June, 1969 and the President of India was one of the subscribers.
The other subscribers were Chairman, Vice Chairman of the
Central Water and Power Commission under Ministry of Irrigation

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 16

and the Joint Secretary, MEA. The only plea taken by the
respondent-WAPCOS in the counter affidavit is that WAPCOS is
a Company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 and
therefore it is not a State and no other ground or plea is taken.
However, in support of the said plea, during arguments reliance
was placed upon the judgment of the Rajasthan High Court in the
case of WAPCOS Karamchari Sangh versus Union of India
and others (Writ Petition Civil No. 2335/1992). In the said case
Rajasthan High Court had relied upon the decision in the case of
Mohan Khanna versus National Council of Education,
Research and Training and others reported in (1991) 4 SCC 578
and held that a company being a juristic personality is not a State.
It was also observed that the respondent-Company is not strictly
performing governmental functions and its primary objects were to
establish, provide and perform engineering and related technical
and consultancy services for development of water resources,
irrigation and drainage, electric power, flood control and water
supply projects. I may note here that a Constitutional Bench of the
Supreme Court in the case of Pradeep Kumar Biswas versus
Indian Institute of Chemical Biology and others reported in
(2002) 5 SCC 111 has examined this issue in depth and detail.
Judgment in the case of Mohan Khanna (supra) was also
considered and it was held that the said decision strikes a note of

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 17

caution that tests as formulated in the earlier decisions in the
cases of Ajay Haisa versus Khalid Mujib Serhrawardi reported
in (AIR) 1981 SC 487, Sukhdev Singh versus Bhagat Ram
reported in (1975) 1 SCC 421, Ramanna Dayaram Shetty versus
International Airport Authority reported in (1979) 3 SCC 489,
Som Prakash Rekhi versus Union of India reported in (1981) 1
SCC 449, should not be regarded as conclusive or clinching but
merely indicative. It was held that NCERT was an autonomous
body whose activities were not related to governmental function
and the government control was confined only to proper utilization
of grant and since its funding was not entirely from Government,
NCERT did not satisfy the requirements of a State. The tests as
formulated in Ajay Hasia’s case are as under:(1) One thing is clear that if the entire
share capital of the corporation is held by
Government, it would go a long way towards
indicating that the corporation is an
instrumentality or agency of Government.
(SCC p.
507, para 14)
(2) Where the financial assistance of the State
is so much as to meet almost entire
expenditure of the corporation, it would afford
some indication of the corporation being
impregnated with governmental character.
(SCC p. 508, para 15)
(3) It may also be a relevant factor … whether
the corporation enjoys monopoly status which
is State-conferred or State-protected. (SCC p.
508, para 15)
(4) Existence of deep and pervasive State
control may afford an indication that the
corporation
is
a
State
agency
or
instrumentality. (SCC p.
508, para 15)
(5) If the functions of the corporation are of
public importance and closely related to

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 18

governmental functions, it would be a relevant
factor in classifying the corporation as an
instrumentality or agency of Government.
(SCC p.
509, para 16)
(6) ‗Specifically, if a department of
Government is transferred to a corporation, it
would be a strong factor supportive of this
inference‘ of the corporation being an
instrumentality or agency of Government‖
20.

In the case of Air India Statutory Corporation and others

versus United Labour Union and others reported in (1997) 9
SCC 377, it was held as under :―26. (1) The constitution of the corporation or
instrumentality or agency or corporation
aggregate or corporation sole is not of sole
material relevance to decide whether it is by or
under the control of the appropriate Government
under the Act.
(2) If it is a statutory corporation, it is an
instrumentality or agency of the State. If it is a
company owned wholly or partially by a share
capital, floated from public exchequer, it gives
indicia that it is controlled by or under the
authority of the appropriate Government.
(3) In commercial activities carried on by a
corporation established by or under the control of
the appropriate Government having protection
under Articles 14 and 19(2), it is an
instrumentality or agency of the State.
(4) The State is a service corporation. It acts
through its instrumentalities, agencies or persons
— natural or juridical.
(5) The governing power, wherever located,
must be subject to the fundamental constitutional
limitations and abide by the principles laid in the
directive principles.
(6) The framework of service regulations
made in the appropriate rules or regulations
should be consistent with and subject to the
same public law, principles and limitations.
(7) Though the instrumentality, agency or
person conducts commercial activities according
to business principles and are separately
accountable under their appropriate bye-laws or

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 19

memorandum of association, they become the
arm of the Government.
(8) The existence of deep and pervasive State
control
depends
upon
the
facts
and
circumstances in a given situation and in the
altered situation it is not the sole criterion to
decide whether the agency or instrumentality or
persons is by or under the control of the
appropriate Government.
(9) Functions of an instrumentality, agency or
person are of public importance following public
interest element.
21. These tests are not rigid principles and in each case it has to
be examined whether the body can be considered to be a State
within the meaning of Article 12. In the case of Pradeep Kumar
Biswas (supra), it was observe as under :40. The picture that ultimately emerges is that
the tests formulated in Ajay Hasia are not a rigid set of
principles so that if a body falls within any one of them
it must, ex hypothesi, be considered to be a State
within the meaning of Article 12. The question in each
case would be — whether in the light of the cumulative
facts as established, the body is financially, functionally
and administratively dominated by or under the control
of the Government. Such control must be particular to
the body in question and must be pervasive. If this is
found then the body is a State within Article 12. On the
other hand, when the control is merely regulatory
whether under statute or otherwise, it would not serve
to make the body a State.

22.

The test which is to be applied is whether functional

administrative and financial control of the Government was deep
and pervasive. In the case of Federal Bank Limited versus

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 20

Sagar Thomas and Others reported in AIR 2003 SC 4325, it was
observed :
― From the decisions referred to above, the
position that emerges is that a writ petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India may be
maintainable against (i) the State (Government); (ii)
an authority; (iii) a statutory body; (iv) an
instrumentality or agency of the State; (v) a
company which is financed and owned by the State;
(vi) a private body run substantially on State
funding; (vii) a private body discharging public duty
or positive obligation of public nature; and (viii) a
person or a body under liability to discharge any
function under any statute, to compel it to perform
such a statutory function.
23.

In the present case, the plea taken by the respondent-

WAPCOS is that it is a Company and therefore not a State. The
said broad plea is obviously contrary to and cannot be accepted in
view of the judgment in the case of Pradeep Kumar Biswas
(supra). The decision of the Rajasthan High Court

requires

consideration in view of the subsequent decision of the
Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Pradeep
Kumar Biswas (supra). The respondent-WAPCOS has not denied
that the majority shares in the said Company are held by the
Government of India. It is also not denied that the petitioner was a
government servant who was sent on deputation to a governmentCompany.
State.

These indicate that the respondent-WAPCOS is a

However, I wish to clarify that the above findings should

not be treated as binding and as a precedent in other cases as the

WP(C) No.3881/1996

Page No. 21

relevant materials have not been made available and are not on
record.
24.

In view of the findings given above, the Writ Petition is

dismissed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no
order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
MAY 30, 2008.
P

