WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.13441 OF 2004

%

Date of Decision : April 30, 2008.

VINOD KUMAR JAIN

.... Petitioner.
Through Mr. Arvind Sah, Advocate.
VERSUS

BSES RAJDHANI POWER LTD.

.... Respondent.

Through Mr. Amit Kapur, Mr.Apoorva
Misra and Mr. Mohit Jolly, Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. The petitioner, Mr. Vinod Kumar Jain is owner and occupant of
property bearing no. 47/3, Jonapur, Vindhyachal Farms,
Mehrauli which is energized by an electricity connection

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 2

through licensee BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. (hereinafter
referred to as respondent-distcom, for short).
2. Petitioner claims that after installation of the electronic meter,
he started receiving exorbitant bills w.e.f. 28th February, 2003.
He relies upon consumption pattern from 30th December, 2001
onwards. As per the said consumption pattern, the maximum
consumption was of 1930 units in February, 2002 but w.e.f. 28th
February, 2003 the consumption for each billing circle was
between 6596-10638 units.

The petitioner, however, paid

these bills. On 18th February, 2004 he received an electricity bill
of Rs.79,370/- on the basis of consumption of 19832 units
between the period October, 2003 to February, 2004.
Subsequently,

he

also

received

another

bill

showing

consumption of 9517 units for the period February-April, 2004.
On 20th March, 2004 he wrote to respondent-distcom to change
the electricity meter. In this letter he gave details of the earlier
billing pattern and stated that the electricity meter was running
fast and not recording correct reading as per actual
consumption.
3. On 24th April, 2004 the electricity meter was inspected and
tested by the respondent-distcom and was found to be running
fast by 5.07%. I need not in this case examine the question
whether the electricity meter was faulty and defective as both

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 3

the parties admit that the error of +5.07% recorded and found at
the time of inspection is beyond permissible limits.
4. It is stated in the writ petition that the respondent-distcom did
not correct the bill and thereafter issued a disconnection notice
dated 5th August, 2004, which prompted the petitioner to
approach this Court. It is the case of the petitioner that he is not
liable to pay the electricity bill in question because it was raised
on the basis of a faulty meter. The respondent-distcom on the
other hand, have stated that the petitioner is liable to pay the
electricity bill for the period in question after reducing the
consumption as recorded by 5.07% i.e. for 18225 units.
5. Both the parties have relied upon The Delhi Electricity
Regulatory Commission (Performance Standards-Metering and
Billing) Regulations, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the
Regulations, for short) as the said Regulations were applicable
at the given point of time. Relevant Regulations being nos. 19,
20 and 21 (excluding the portion which is not relevant), read as
under :19. Testing of meters.- (i) The licensee shall conduct
periodical inspection/testing and calibration of the meters
as per rule 57 of Electricity Rules, in the following
manner:(a) Periodicity of meter tests
The licensee shall observe following time schedule for
regular meter testing:-

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 4

Category

Interval of testing

NDMC, MES, Railways

6 months

Bulk supply meters (HT)

1 year

LT meters (11kW-100kW)

3 years

LT meters (upto 11 kW)

6 years

Wherever applicable, CT and PT shall also be tested
along with meters.
(b) When the meter is found to be fast beyond limits
specified in rule 57(1) of the Electricity Rules, the
licensee/consumer, as the case may be, shall
replace/rectify the defective meter within 30 days of
testing. The licensee shall adjust/refund the excess
amount collected on account of the said defect, based on
percentage error, for a period not more than 6 months
from the date of test and charge the cost of
replacement/repair of the meter in the next bill sent to the
consumer.
(c)
When the meter is found to be slow beyond
permissible limits, as specified in rule 57(1) of the
Electricity Rules and the consumer does not dispute the
accuracy of the test, the licensee/consumer, as the case
may be, shall replace/rectify the defective meter within
30 days of testing. The consumer shall pay the difference
due to the defect in the meter at normal rates, based on
percentage error, for a period of not more than 6 months
prior to date of test with due regard being paid to
conditions of working, occupancy, etc., of the premises
during this period and up to the date on which defective
meter is replaced/recitified.
(d) If the consumer or his representative refuses to
sign the test report and pay due billing charges, the
defective meter shall not be replaced/rectified and the
licensee shall approach the designated electrical
inspector, who shall test the correctness of the meter and
give results within one month. The decision of the
Inspector shall be final and binding on the licensee as as
well as the consumer.

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 5

(ii) The licensee shall keep record of all such meter
tests and submit to the Commission exception report
every six months.
20.

Meter complaints.- (i) Correctness of meter-

(a) Should the consumer dispute the accuracy of the
meter, he may, upon giving notice/complaint to that
effect and paying prescribed testing fee, have the meter
tested by the licensee.
(b) The licensee shall, within 15 working days of
receiving the complaint, carry out testing of the meter
and shall furnish duly authenticated test results to the
consumer.
(c) If the meter is found to have error beyond the limits
of accuracy as specified in rule 57 of Electricity Rules,
and the meter has not been tested within the meter testing
schedule as prescribed in regulation 19, the amount of
past energy bill shall be adjusted in accordance with the
result of test with respect to the meter readings of the 3
billing cycles prior to the billing cycle in which dispute
has arisen and upto the date of replacement of meter.
(d) The consumer shall not be liable to pay any demand
violation charges if the demand computed on the basis of
test results of the meter exceeds his contract demand.
(ii)

Meter not recording-

(a)

If the meter is not recording/stuck as reported by
the consumer, the licensee shall check the meter and if
found stuck, the meter shall be replaced by the
licensee/consumer, as the case may be, within 30 days of
receipt of complaint.
(b)
If the meter is not recording/stuck as noticed by
the licensee, the licensee shall notify the consumer.
Thereafter, the licensee shall check the meter and if
found stuck, the meter shall be replaced within 30 days.
(c)
The consumer shall then be billed on provisional
basis on average consumption of last three billing cycles
for a period between the date of last reading and the date
of replacement/repair of the stuck meter.
(iii) Burnt meter –
(a) x x x x

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 6

(b) x x x x
(c) x x x x
(d) x x x x
21. Billing during the period defective/burnt meter
remained at site.- (i) The consumer shall be billed (for
the period meter remained defective) based on the
estimated energy consumption by taking the consumption
pattern of the consumer for the 6 months prior to and 6
months after the period, during which the meter remained
defective. The amount already paid by the consumer by
way of provisional bills for the period meter remained
non-functional or defective, shall be adjusted in this bill.
(ii) In cases where the recorded consumption of past six
months prior to the date meter became defective, is either
not available or partially available, the consumption
pattern as obtained from such lesser period along with the
above mentioned subsequent six months’ pattern shall be
deemed sufficient for estimation of consumption.
(iii) In case, the Maximum Demand Indicator (MDI) of
the meter at the consumer’s installation is found to be
faulty or not recording at all (unless tampered), the
demand charges shall be calculated based on billing
demand during corresponding months/billing cycle of
previous year, when the meter was functional and
recording correctly. In case the recorded MDI of
corresponding month/billing cycle of past year is also not
available, the highest of the billing demand during 6
months succeeding meter replacement shall be
considered.”
6.

The above Regulations are not self evident and clear but

somewhat

confusing

and

at

the

first

blush

overlapping

and

contradictory. It is the case of the respondent-distcom that Regulation
19 will apply to the present case as the meter was found to be defective
and Regulation 20 will not apply as it is not the case of the petitioner
that the meter in question was not tested within the time schedule
prescribed in Regulation 19. It is stated that Regulation 21, which is for

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 7

computation of demand/consumption, applies only when meter is
defective and also when meter was not tested within the testing
schedule under Regulation 19. Both the conditions of Regulation 20(1)
(c) should be satisfied for Regulation 21 to apply. On the other hand,
the petitioner claims that Regulation 19 applies only in case of suo moto
testing by respondent-distcom pursuant to the schedule fixed in
Regulations 19 and Regulation 20 applies when consumer makes a
complaint and on testing the meter is found to be defective or running
fast.
7.

Regulation 19, as per the heading, deals with testing of meter.

Normally, heading given to a Section does not determine and is not
used as a tool to interpret the Section but the heading of the Section is
certainly useful and can give insight into the scope and ambit of the
provision, if the language employed in the Section is ambiguous.
Reference in this regard can be made to the case of Uttam Das Chela
Sunder Das versus Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee
reported in (1996) 5 SCC 71 wherein it has been observed as under:“18. We have strong reservations to such
unpurposive view of the High Court for more
than one reason. The marginal note/caption to
Section 16 is the foremost pointer that the issue
whether the institution in question is a Sikh
Gurdwara or not, has to be decided first and
other questions later. The marginal notes or
captions are, undoubtedly, part and parcel of
legislative exercise and the language employed
therein provides the key to the legislative intent.
The words so employed are not mere
surplusage.”
8.

Similarly, in the case of Iqbal Singh Marwah versus Meenakshi

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 8

Marwah reported in (2005) 4 SCC 370, it has been held as under:“…. Though, as a general rule, the language
employed in a heading cannot be used to give a
different effect to clear words of the section where
there cannot be any doubt as to their ordinary
meaning, but they are not to be treated as if they
were marginal notes or were introduced into the
Act merely for the purpose of classifying the
enactments. They constitute an important part of
the Act itself, and may be read not only as
explaining the sections which immediately follow
them, as a preamble to a statute may be looked to
explain its enactments, but as affording a better
key to the constructions of the sections which
follow them than might be afforded by a mere
preamble. (See Craies on Statute Law, 7th Edn.,
pp. 207, 209)”

9.

A heading of a section therefore provides an insight into the

factors to be considered. In case of ambiguity and doubt these can be
always referred to as a key or as an opening into the mind of the
draftsman and the clauses arranged thereunder. Where however the
language is clear and discernible, normally the heading or the title
should not be referred to and cannot form the basis for interpreting the
subject matter dealt with in the relevant clause. Thus it is permissible to
assign a limited role to a heading or title of a section. (See,
Raichurmatham Prabhakar versus Rawatmal Dugar reported in
(2004) 4 SCC 766).
10.

Heading of Section 19 states that the said provision deals with

testing of meters as per Rule 57 of the Electricity Rules, 1956. Subclause (a) of Clause (i) stipulates that periodicity of testing and intervals
during which a meter must be tested. Sub-clause (b) of Clause (i)

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 9

stipulates that in case a meter is found to be beyond limits (it should be
excessive) as specified in Rule 57 (1) of the Electricity Rules, 1956, the
defective meter will be replaced within 30 days and the licensee will
adjust or refund the excess amount collected on account of defective
meter based upon percentage of error. The period for correction will not
be more than six months from the date of testing. The consumer will
bear the cost of replacement. The said Clause does not permit the
distcom to collect any additional amount in case the meter was running
slow. In such cases, when the consumer admits that the meter is slow,
clause (c) applies but when there is a dispute, the matter has to be
referred to an electrical inspector as stipulated in clause (d). Thus,
under Regulation 19 when on inspection, a meter is found to be fast,
two results will follow. Firstly, the meter must be replaced by the
Distcom within 30 days and secondly the bills paid by the consumer till
the date of inspection will be corrected and the excess amount paid,
depending upon the percentage of error, will be refunded to the
consumer or adjusted in future bills to be paid by the consumer. This
correction will be for a period of six months from the date of the test.
Thus the meter is presumed to be defective and recording excess
energy charge for a period of six months. No penalty is imposed upon
the distcom and the adjustment is as per the percentage of error in the
testing. Only benefit which the consumer gets is retrospective benefit for
a period of six months. This may not be of any advantage as the meter
may have been defective for a longer time, but the consumer cannot

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 10

claim benefit beyond six months.
11.

Regulation 20, on the other hand, begins with the heading “meter

complaints”. Clause (i)(a) relates to complaints made by a consumer
about the accuracy of a meter. Sub-clause (b) requires meter to be
tested within 15 days of the complaint and sub-clause (c) deals with a
situation where a meter is found to be defective. Sub-clause (d)
however states that in such cases the consumer will not be liable to pay
any demand violation charges if the demand computed on the basis of
the test results of the meter exceeds the contract demand.
12.

We are concerned with Regulation 19(i)(b) and 20(1)(c) and have

to decide, which one of the two regulations will apply in the present
case. It is an admitted case of the parties that the meter was found to
be defective on the testing done on 24th April, 2004. It is the case of the
respondent-distcom that Sub-clause 20(1)(c) will not apply as the
second condition, namely, “meter was not tested within the meter
testing schedule as prescribed in Regulation 19” is not satisfied. I have
given my consideration to the said contention but I am unable to agree
with the respondent-distcom. At the outset I may state that the
Regulation 20(1)(c) is rather loosely worded and could have been more
certain. Regulation 20(i) deals with complaints made by consumer and
the effect thereof in case the meter is found to be defective to the
disadvantage of the consumer. If the interpretation given by the
respondent-distcom is accepted then neither Regulation 19(i)(b) or
20(i)(c) will apply. Regulation 19(i)(b) as interpreted above applies only

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 11

to cases where on self-testing by the respondent-distcom, a meter is
found to be recording excess consumption. Clause (b) of Regulation
19(i)

applies

to

suo moto inspection and testing by the Distcom.

The said Regulation does not apply when a consumer makes a
complaint. A more plausible and reasonable interpretation will be to
read the word “and” used in Regulation 20(i)(c) as “or”. Normally, the
use of the word “and” is in cumulative sense, that is, requiring fulfillment
of conditions that are adjoined, but sometimes by force of the context
“and” is read as “or”. This is required to carry out the intention of the
legislature and only in such cases where it is found necessary, the plain
natural meaning of the word “and” is given go bye to and the word
“and” is read as “or” as in a disjunctive fashion. This is done to prevent
the provision from becoming unintelligible, unworkable or totally
irreconcilable to the rest of the statute. (See, in this regard the
observations of the Supreme Court in Faqir Mohd. Versus Sita Ram
reported in (2002) 1 SCC 741 and Ishwar Singh Bindra versus State
of U.P. reported in (1969) 1 SCR 219.)
13.

In other words, if on a complaint made by a consumer, a meter is

tested and found beyond the limit of accuracy or the meter has not been
tested within the time schedule fixed in Regulation 19(i)(a) and is found
to be defective, then in either case Regulation 20(i)(c) will be applicable.
Cases of complaints covered by Regulation 20(i)(a), Clause (c) will
apply. Thus, when a complaint is made by a consumer and the meter is
found to be defective, Clause (c) of Regulation 20(i)(a) will apply.

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 12

Refund or adjustment under Regulation 19(i)(b) is not applicable as the
said Regulation relates to suo moto testing of meters by Dictcom.
Similarly, Sub-Clause (c) of Regulation 20(i) will apply where a meter
has not been tested within the prescribed schedule fixed under
Regulation 19 and the meter is found to be fast. In such cases also
Regulation 19(i)(b) will not apply and Regulation 20(i)(c) will apply. In
such cases Clause 19(i)(c) or (d) will also not apply.
14.

Regulation 20(i)(c) stipulates that the meter reading for the past

three billing cycles prior to the billing cycle in which dispute has arisen
and upto the date of replacement of the meter will be adjusted in
accordance with the test. Thus, for the last three billing cycles prior to
the billing cycle when test was conducted, are required to be adjusted
and the petitioner given benefit and refund of the excessive charges
claimed from him. Regulation 20(i)(c) also stipulates that “the
adjustment” will be “in accordance with” the result of the testing. The
adjustment, therefore, to be made is limited to the result of the test i.e.
the defect or the percentage by which the meter was found to be
running faster. Thus, Regulation 20(i)(c) also stipulates the calculation
or adjustment to be made if the meter is found to be running faster. The
consumer gets the benefit of adjustment in accordance with the test
report and for the period of the billing cycle in which the complaint is
made and retrospectively for the last three billing cycles and thereafter
till the date the meter is replaced. Regulation 20(i) does not have a
similar provision as Regulation 19(i)(c) or (d) i.e. when meter is found to
be running slow. Thus, where a meter is found to be running slow on a
complaint made by the consumer or has not been tested within the time
schedule, no past arrears can be claimed by the Distcom. The reason is
obvious. The calibration of the meter is done by the distcom. It is the
responsibility of the distcom to ensure that the meter is properly
calibrated and tested within the time schedule. The consumer or

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 13

licensee has hardly any say in the matter and neither does he possess
the necessary technical expertise. Public utility service must meet the
exacting standards.
15.

I may note here that Regulation 20(i)(c) does not in fact levy any

penalty on the distcom in case the meters are defective or records
excessive consumption. Regulation 20(i)(a) and (c) can hardly be
regarded a penal provision against any wrong calibration resulting in
meters being faster. As already stated above, it is the duty of the
distcom to calibrate the meters and ensure that the same are within
prescribed limits. It is for the regulators and authorities to examine this
aspect and take corrective steps, if required.
16.

Regulation 21 will apply when a meter is burnt. The said

Regulation also stipulates that it will apply when a meter is defective.
Learned counsel for the petitioner had submitted that Regulation 21 will
apply to cases where on a complaint made by a consumer under
Regulation 20(i)(a), a meter is found to be defective and beyond the
limit of accuracy. An incorrect meter can be also regarded as a
defective meter but I do not think Regulation 21 will apply to cases
where a consumer has raised a dispute about accuracy of a meter
under Regulation 20(i)(a) and the same is found to be incorrect. In such
cases, Regulation 20(i) is a complete Code and also stipulates how
adjustment is to be made as provided in sub-Clause (c). A specific
Regulation i.e. 20(i)(c) will prevail and apply over a general Regulation
21. In cases covered by Regulation 20(i) calculation will have to be
done in terms of Sub-clause (c). In such cases adjustment in favour of

WP(C) No.13441/2005

Page No. 14

the consumer for the period specified on the basis of the test will have
to be made as stipulated in Clause (c). Regulation 21 will apply when a
meter is not recording any consumption as stipulated in Regulation
20(ii). In other words Regulation 21 applies when a meter is defective in
the sense that it is dead or stuck. This becomes clear if we examine the
language of Regulation 20(ii)(c) which provides for provisional billing.
The term “provisional billing” also finds mention in Regulation 21(i). SubClause (ii) of Regulation 21 is also an indicator that the said Regulation
applies when a meter is defective in the manner it does not record
electricity consumption or is stuck and not to cases covered by
Regulation 20(i).
17.

The Writ Petition is accordingly partly allowed to the extent

indicated above. It is directed that the respondent-distcom shall
calculate and grant benefit to the petitioner under Regulation 20(i)(c) for
the past three billing cycles and the billing cycle in dispute shall be
adjusted according to the test report. A fresh bill will be issued to the
petitioner within a period of three weeks from today. No late
payment/surcharge will be charged in the said bill. In case the petitioner
is entitled to any refund, the same shall also be paid to him within three
weeks.
In the facts and circumstances of the case there will be no order
as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

WP(C) No.13441/2005

APRIL
P/VKR

30 , 2008.

Page No. 15

