WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.1

REPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 24041/ 2005

%

April 30th , 2008.

Date of Decision :
….

VINOD KUMAR JAIN

Petitioner.

Through Mr. Arvind Sah, Advocate.
VERSUS
BSES RAJDHANI POWER LIMITED

….

Respondent.

Through Mr. Amit Kapur, Mr. Apoorva Misra and Mr.
Mohit Jolly, Advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?
SANJIV KHANNA, J:

1.

The petitioner Mr. Vinod Kumar Jain has filed this writ petition,

which involves interpretation of Rule 57 of the Electricity Rules, 1956
as to when an electricity meter can be regarded as defective.
2.

The respondents in their counter affidavit to the writ petition did

not raise any objection as to maintainability of the writ petition on the

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.2

ground of alternative remedy under Section 42(5) of the Electricity
Act, 2003, being available to the petitioner but during the course of
arguments an objection to this effect was raised. However, I am not
inclined to entertain the said objection at this belated stage as the writ
petition was filed in 2005. Moreover, alternative remedy is not an
absolute bar and a Writ Court has discretion, whether or not to
entertain the Writ or relegate the parties to take recourse to
alternative remedy. As legal interpretation of Rule 57 of the Electricity
Rules, 1956 arises for consideration, I do not think it will be
appropriate to dismiss the writ petitions on the ground of alternative
remedy and at this belated stage relegate the parties and force them
to go before the Grievance Forum and Ombudsman and thereafter
approach this Court.
3.

Rule 57 of the Indian Electricity Rules 1956, reads as under:“57. Meters, maximum demand indicators
and other apparatus on consumer’s
premises.- (1) Any meter or maximum
demand indicator or other apparatus placed
upon a consumer’s premises in accordance
with section 26 shall be of appropriate
capacity and shall be deemed to be correct if
its limits of error are within the limits specified
in the relevant Indian Standard Specification
and where no such specification exists, the
limits of error do not exceed 3 per cent above
or below absolute accuracy at all loads in
excess of one tenth of full load and up to full
load:
[Provided that for extra high voltage
consumers the limit of error shall be + 1 per
cent.]

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.3

(2) No meter shall register at no load.
(3) Every supplier shall provide and maintain
in proper condition such suitable apparatus as
may be prescribed or approved by the
Inspector for the examination, testing and
regulation of meters used or intended to be
used in connection with the supply of energy:
Provided that the supplier may with the
approval of the Inspector and shall, if required
by the Inspector, enter into a joint
arrangement with any other supplier for the
purpose aforesaid.
(4) Every supplier shall examine, test and
regulate all meters, maximum demand
indicators
and
other
apparatus
for
ascertaining the amount of energy supplied
before their first installation at the consumer’s
premises and at such other intervals as may
be directed by the State Government in this
behalf.
(5) Every supplier shall maintain a register of
meters showing the date of the last test, the
error recorded at the time of the test, the limit
of accuracy after adjustment and final test, the
date of installation, withdrawal, reinstallation,
etc., for the examination of the Inspector or his
authorized representative.
[(6) Where the supplier has failed to examine,
test and regulate the meters and keep records
thereof as aforesaid, the Inspector may cause
such meters to be tested and sealed at the
cost of the owner of the meters in case these
are found defective.]”

4.

Rule 57(1) stipulates in plain and simple words that a meter

shall be placed upon a consumer’s premises for recording
consumption of electricity and shall be deemed to be correct, if the
limit of error is within the limits as specified under the relevant Indian

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.4

Standard Specification and if no such specification exists, the limits of
error should not exceed 3% (or 1% in case of high voltage
consumers) above or below absolute accuracy at all loads in excess
of 1/10th of the full load. The first part of the aforesaid Rule states
that a meter would be deemed to be correct, if the errors are within
the specified limits as are fixed by Indian Standard Specifications.
Where Indian Standard Specifications have not fixed limits of error,
then the error should not exceed 3% or 1% above or below absolute
accuracy. 3% or 1% error formula does not apply, when limits of
error are fixed and specified under the relevant Indian Standard
Specification.
5.

The petitioner submits that at his request the meter installed at

his premises at 47/3, Jonapur, Vindhyachal Farms, Mehrauli, Delhi
was inspected on 9th November, 2005 and the inspection showed that
the meter was running fast by 2.82%. This is obviously within 3%
limit as stipulated in second part of Rule 57. It is the case of the
petitioner that first part of Rule 57 is applicable as Indian Standard
Specifications have fixed limits of error for electricity meters recording
consumption. Per contra, the case of the respondent is that Indian
Standard Specifications fixed by Bureau of Indian Standards under
ET 13 and subsequent amendments are not applicable. ET 13 or IS
13779/1999 is not applicable as the said specifications and limits of
error cannot be applied to actual field conditions and as they do not

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.5

take into consideration reference values at site which may be
different from the parameters on the basis of which limit of error has
been fixed by Bureau of Indian Standards.
6.

Rule 57(1) as quoted above does not draw any distinction

between field standards or standards fixed under ideal testing
conditions. Rule 57(1) stipulates that where Indian Standard
Specifications have been fixed, a meter will be deemed to be correct
if it is within the limits of error fixed by Indian Standard Specifications.
It is not for the Court to modify, amend or rewrite the relevant Rule.
The Rule is plain, clear and unequivocal. There is no ambiguity which
requires any other interpretation to be given. Once Indian Standard
Specifications are fixed, a meter will be deemed to be correct if it
meets the parameters fixed. Error beyond the parameters fixed will
mean that the meter is defective. 3% or 1% Rule will apply only if no
parameters

or

Specifications.

specifications

are

fixed

by

Indian

Standard

The second part of Rule 57, therefore, does not

apply, when specifications, error limits are fixed by Bureau of Indian
Standards. It is, therefore, not possible to accept the contention of
the respondent-Distcom that even if Bureau of Indian Standards has
fixed specifications-error limits, 3% or 1% formula will continue to
apply.
7.

I have also examined the contention of the respondent that IS

13779, which was introduced in the year 1999, and standards fixed

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.6

therein cannot be applied to the actual field conditions and is
applicable in case of laboratory tests. The respondent-Distcom relies
upon minutes of the meeting held on 1st September, 2005 in which
members of the respondent-Distcom and the other private Distcoms
including meter manufacturers were present. The Additional Director
General requested discussion on the following three points:
a. The applicable limits of errors for meters in field condition.
b. The validity of calibration of a meter
c. Guidelines on calibration of meters once the meter is calibrated.

8.

The stand taken by the respondent-distcom was that the

behavior of the meters in the field depends upon varying conditions of
influenced quantities acting together including neutral, proper
connections of the phases etc. BSES had taken a stand that the
meters when tested in the field tend to have positive errors because
of factors such as voltage and frequency being lower than the
reference values and temperature being higher than the reference
temperature. This admission made by the BSES is recorded in the
minute dated 1st September, 2005. The relevant portion of the minute
reads as under:
“It was informed by member from BSES that
meters which are tested in field tend to have
positive errors because of factors such as
voltage and frequency being lower than the
reference values and temperature being
higher than the reference temperature.”

WPC 24041 of 2005

9.

Page No.7

There is clear admission in the said statement that meters in

field conditions show positive errors. This is also fortified by the report
submitted by Public Grievance Cell dated 21st August, 2007 in which
it was pointed out that out of 243 meters tested by them, 218 meters
were found showing excess consumption and only 25 meters were
found showing less consumption. It appears that the Chairman
presiding over the meeting dated 1st September, 2005 agreed with
the views expressed by BSES by stating that the limits of error
specified in the Indian Standards are valid under ideal conditions and
do not give true picture of the effect of several influence quantities on
the meters at a given time, which is the case when

meters are

installed and tested in the field. It was, in fact, stated by him that no
international standard has been specified for testing of meters in field
conditions.

The said observation recorded by the Chairman is

contrary to the statement made on behalf of North Delhi Power
Limited, who had opined that testing of energy meters in field
conditions is already covered by the existing Indian standards. He
made specific reference to table 17 of IS 13779. It would be pertinent
to quote the relevant portion of the minutes of the meeting for the
sake of clarity; the said portion runs as under:
“Shri S.P. Naphade of NDPL opined that
accuracy of energy meters in field conditions is
already covered in the existing Indian
Standards. He quoted Table 17 of IS 13779
which gives limit of variation of error under
different influence quantities and also specifies

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.8

the positive limits of error below 0.7 of
reference voltage. The Chairman clarified that
the limits of errors specified in the Indian
Standards are valid under reference conditions
and do not give the true picture of the effect of
several influence quantities on the meter at a
given time, which is the case when meters are
installed and tested in field. He clarified the
distinction between error and uncertainty and
emphasized that no international standard has
specified errors for testing in field conditions.”
10.

I have made reference to the various viewpoints expressed by

the different participants representing stakeholders, as they appear in
the minutes of the meeting dated 1st September 2005. However, the
minutes of the meeting dated 1st September, 2005 cannot be a
determining factor as far as Rule 57(1) is concerned. Rule 57(1) in
simple words stipulates that once the limits of error are specified
under the Indian Standards Specifications, the same will be used as a
bench mark for determining whether a meter is correct or defective.
Opinions expressed cannot be used for interpreting a Rule or even
the specification fixed, for which the specification itself has to be
referred to. Minutes of meeting dated 1st September, 2005 is an
internal document incorporating views expressed by different and
divergent persons.
11.

I have examined IS 13779/1999, a copy of which has been

placed on record by the respondent-Distcom. The foreword to the
said Rules states that the draft was finalized by the Equipment for
Electrical Measurement and Load Control Sectional Committee and

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.9

the same was approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.
The standard was first published in 1993 and had been updated
when it was adopted in 1999. Thus, the standards approved by IS
13779 were laid down after proper scrutiny and examination by a
qualified committee which finalized the draft and it was approved by a
Division Council. It had undergone detailed scrutiny and examination
at the hands of experts before it was accepted. The specifications
cannot be altered, amended or changed without following the
prescribed procedure and examination by experts. The fourth
paragraph of the foreword to IS 13779 reads as under:“The test levels as specified in this standard
are regarded as minimum values to guarantee
the proper function of the meter under normal
working conditions. For special applications
other test levels might be necessary and have
to be fixed between the user and the
manufacturer.”
12.

Thus, the Expert Committee and the Division Council had

finalized and formulated the standards. The test levels were specified
to ensure that the minimum prescribed parameters are met under the
normal working conditions. The Expert Committee and the Council
was aware of the normal conditions including the relevant factors
which influence and affect performance. The values fixed were corelatable to proper functioning of a meter under normal working
conditions. Clause 3.5.5 fixes the Class Index and stipulates that
meter is to be tested under reference conditions including permitted

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.10

tolerance on reference values as defined in the standard itself.
Clause 3.6 defines influence quantities and the term reference
conditions. The Bureau was conscious of the fact that there may be
variation of errors due to influence quantities and operating
conditions.

The requirements specify that the meter shall be

designed and constructed in a way to avoid error beyond prescribed
limits in use under normal conditions and to ensure protection against
solid objects, dust and water. “Normal conditions”, obviously has
reference to actual field conditions and not to “ideal” or “laboratory
conditions”. A meter casing should be such that any non-permanent
deformation cannot affect the satisfactory operation of the meter
(Clause 6.2).

A meter is also required to be insulated to have

resistance against penetration of dust and water and have resistance
to heat and fire. Clause 9.4 stipulates that under normal conditions of
use, electrical circuits and insulation should not reach a temperature
which might adversely affect the operation of the meter. Temperature
rise at any point on the external surface of the meter should not
exceed 20K with an ambient temperature of 45 degree Celsius.
Table 15 specifies percentage of error limits.

Clause 12.10

prescribes test for accuracy requirements. Tables 23 and 24 deal
with voltage and current balance and the percentage of error which
are acceptable. The said tables read as under:-

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.11

“Table 23 Voltage and Current Balance
(Clauses 12.10.1 and 12.11)
Sl. No.

Polyphase Meters

(1)

(2)

i)

Class of Meters
(3)

Each of voltages between line and + 1%
neutral or between any two lines
shall not differ from the average
corresponding voltage by more than
Each of the currents in the current + 2%
circuit shall not differ from the
average current by more than

ii)

iii)

The phase displacements of each of 2 deg
these
currents
from
the
corresponding
line-to-neutral
voltage, irrespective of the power
factor, shall not differ from each
other by more than

(4)
+ 1%

+ 2%

2 deg

Table 24 Reference Conditions
(Clause 12.10.1)
Sl. No.
(1)
i)

Influence
Quantity
(2)

ii)

Ambient
temperature
(see Note I)
Voltage

iii)

Frequency

iv)

Waveform

Reference Value
(3)

Permissible
Tolerances
(4)

Reference temperature
+ 2 Degree
or in its absence 27
Celsius
Degree Celsius
Reference voltage (see
+ 1 percent
Note 3)
Reference frequency
+ 0.3 percent
(see Note 3)
Sinusoidal voltage and Distortion
current
factor less
than 2

WPC 24041 of 2005

percent
Magnetic
Magnetic induction
Induction
induction
of equal to zero (see Note value which
external origin 4)
causes a
at
the
variation of
reference
error not
frequency
greater than
0.2 per cent
(class I) and
0.3 per cent
(class 2) but
in any case
should not be
greater than
0.05mT (see
Note 2)

v)

13.

Page No.12

A bare perusal of table 24 shows that while fixing specifications,

the bureau was conscious that ambient temperature, voltage
frequency wherefrom magnetic induction can vary and, therefore,
permissible tolerances have been indicated in column 4. In these
circumstances, it cannot be held that the specifications fixed in IS
13779 are not for field specifications. The specifications fixed are for
normal working conditions with permissible tolerances as indicated in
table 24.

Clauses 12.11 and 12.16 of IS 13779 provide for

parameters to be taken into consideration and the variation that may
be caused by one influence quantity. Adjustments can also be made.
The relevant clauses are as under:“12.16 Limits of Error and Interpretation of
Test Results
a) Limits of error as specified in 11.1 shall be
verified.

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.13

b) Certain test results may fall outside the limits
indicted in Tables 15 and 16. Owing to
uncertainties of measurements and other
parameters capable of influencing the
measurements.
However, if by one
displacement of the zero line parallel to itself
by no more than the limits indicated in Table
25, all the test result are brought within the
limits indicated in Tables 15 and 16, the meter
type shall be considered acceptable.
c) If the tests are made at a temperature other
than the reference temperature, including
permissible tolerances, the results shall be
corrected by applying the appropriate
temperature coefficient of the meter.”
14. The test of accuracy is also required to be carried out by meter
testing equipment of requisite accuracy clause as laid down in
IS12346.

I may notice here that the respondents in their counter

affidavit have pointed out that another test was done on 27th
December, 2005. The said test report indicated that the same meter
which was earlier inspected on 3rd October, 2005 and had shown
inaccuracy level of +2.81% had jumped to inaccuracy level of
+25.64%. The said test on 27th December, 2005 was done by officers
of the Respondent-Distcom. There is huge variation between the two
test reports, which is a cause of concern.
15.

In view of the findings given above, the Writ Petition is partly

allowed to the limited extent that it is held that the IS 13779/1999 as
amended up-to-date is applicable for determining whether a meter is
defective under Rule 57 of the Electricity Rules, 1956.The said
specification forms the

benchmark

to

decide

whether

WPC 24041 of 2005

Page No.14

or not a meter is defective. It appears that the test report dated 3rd
October, 2005, did not take the said parameters into consideration
and is accordingly contrary to the Rules. However, it is not possible
for this Court to give any specific finding whether parameters and
specifications as fixed by IS 13779/1999 were met and the meter was
defective or was not defective, at the time of the inspection on 3rd
October, 2005. I may also notice here that on 27th December, 2005
as per the meter testing report, the meter in question was found to be
running fast by 25.64%, which is admittedly excessive and beyond
the prescribed limit. The said meter was thereafter replaced. To do
substantial justice between the parties, it is directed that the
respondents will pass a speaking order after hearing the petitioner on
the basis of new meter, which was installed after 27th December 2005
for the period 16th July, 2004 onwards till the new meter was fixed.
The question whether the petitioner is entitled to any benefit in view
of inspection report dated 27th December, 2005 is left open as this is
not a subject matter of the cause mentioned in the petition and was
not urged by the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of. No costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE
APRIL
VKR/P

30, 2008

