LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.1

UNREPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

LPA NO. 21 OF 1996
th

%

Date of Decision :30 November, 2007.

SHRI JIT RAM (DECD.) THR. LRs.
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. V.P. Singh, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Virendra Singh, Advocate.
VERSUS
SMT. SAMEY KAUR (DECD. THR. LRs) & ORS. ....Respondents.
Through Mr. Anand Yadav, Advocate for
respondents 1-2.
Mr. Atul Kumar for respondent no.4.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA

1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1. The present Letters Patent Appeal is directed against the

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.2
th

Order dated 15 January, 1996 passed by the learned Single
Judge in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 302/1978 titled Smt. Samey
Kaur versus Shri Jit Ram and others.
Background facts.
2. Late Mr. Shadi Ram had three sons, Mr. Ram Mehar, Mr. Jit
Ram and Mr. Sukh Ram.

These three brothers were in

occupation of 77 bighas and 6 biswas of agricultural land in
Khasra nos. 66, 133/1, 133/2 and 518 situated in Village
Bharthal, Delhi.
3. Mr. Ram Mehar died in 1944. He left behind his widow
Mrs.Samey Kaur and a daughter, Ms. Dhanpati.
4. In 1954, Delhi Land Reform Act (hereinafter referred to as
the Act, for short) was enacted and it appears that vide Order
dated 26

th

April, 1958 passed by the Revenue Assistant,

Mrs.Samey Kaur, Mr. Jit Ram and Mr.Sukh Ram were
rd

declared as Bhumidars with 1/3 share each in the aforesaid
land. Mrs. Samey Kaur was treated as having inherited 1/3

rd

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.3

share of the land from her deceased husband, Mr.Ram
Mehar.
Civil Litigation
5. Mr. Jit Ram filed a Civil Suit in the year 1964 claiming that the
land measuring 77 bighas and 6 biswas in Vill. Bharthal
belongs to him and his brother, Mr.Sukh Ram with both
having 50% share. It was alleged that Mrs.Samey Kaur in
1945-46 had got married to Mr.Sukh Ram under customary
law by performing Kareva marriage and therefore was
wrongly described and regarded as a bhumidar in the
revenue records. The Suit was dismissed vide judgment
st

dated 1 May, 1965 by Sub-Judge, First Class, holding, inter
alia, that the alleged Kareva marriage between Mrs.Samey
Kaur and Mr.Sukh Ram was not proved and established.
6. First appeal filed against the said judgment was also
dismissed. Mr. Jit Ram thereafter filed a second appeal
before this Court, which was admitted. The said Appeal was

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.4

disposed of, inter alia, holding that the civil courts do not have
jurisdiction to examine the question of bhumidari rights in view
of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Hatti versus
Sunder Singh reported in (1970) 2 SCC 841.
Litigation before the Revenue Authorities.
7. The second round of litigation thereafter assumed importance
with Mr. Jit Ram filing an application before the Sub-Divisional
Magistrate under Section 11 of the Act for declaration that
Mrs. Samey Kaur had been wrongly recorded as 1/3

rd

shareholder of the Bhumidari rights in the said land and the
said land belongs exclusively to Mr.Sukh Ram and Mr. Jit
Ram. It was observed by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate that
the question of re-marriage between Mrs. Samey Kaur and
Mr. Sukh Ram was not a revenue matter and vide Order
dated 22

nd

November, 1974, the Additional Collector had

earlier remanded the matter back to the Sub-Divisional
Magistrate/Revenue Assistant for re-trial after framing issues

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.5

and giving opportunity to the parties to led evidence.
Evidence was recorded by Sub-Divisional Magistrate and
after discussing the evidence on record he rejected the
application holding that Mrs. Samey Kaur had not re-married
rd

Mr.Sukh Ram and was entitled to 1/3 share of the land being
a Bhumidar and a legal heir of her deceased husband, late
Mr.Ram Mehar.
8. On appeal, the Additional Collector upheld the aforesaid
th

Order vide his decision dated 28 September, 1976.
9. The matter was taken up in Second Appeal before the
Financial

Commissioner

by

Mr.

Jit

Ram.

Financial

rd

Commissioner vide his Order dated 23 February, 1978 held
that the two authorities below had erred in referring to and
relying upon the decisions of the Civil Courts as they lacked
jurisdiction and the matter had to be decided on the basis of
evidence produced and led by the parties before the revenue
authorities. Learned Financial Commissioner further held that

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.6

if Mrs. Samey Kaur had got married to Mr. Sukh Ram her
right to inheritance to the estate of her late husband would
stand

extinguished

and

therefore

declaration

of

1/3

rd

Bhumidari rights in her name would be wrong and illegal and
Mr. Jit Ram and Mr. Sukh Ram would be Bhumidars of ½
share each. The Financial Commissioner thereafter went on
to examine the question of alleged Kareva marriage between
Mrs. Samey Kaur and Mr.Sukh Ram. He noticed that the
parties had led oral evidence in support of their rival
contentions but Mrs. Samey Kaur had not produced any
documentary evidence, whereas Mr. Jit Ram had produced a
ration card and voters list, wherein Mrs. Samey Kaur had
been described as wife of Mr.Sukh Ram. He observed that
Mrs. Samey Kaur had not taken any steps and protested
against the entries in the two records recording that she was
a wife of Mr. Sukh Ram. He held that the two documents were
reliable and prepared by Government functionaries in

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.7

discharge of their official duties and, therefore, it was
established that Mrs. Samey Kaur had married Mr.Sukh Ram.
Accordingly her rights in the property inherited from her
husband, late Mr.Ram Mehar stood extinguished and she was
rd

wrongly declared as Bhumidar having 1/3 share.
WRIT PETITION
10.Mrs. Samey Kaur thereupon filed a writ petition in this Court
th

and vide judgment dated 15 January, 1996 passed by the
learned

Single

Judge,

the

Order

of

the

Financial

Commissioner was set aside and the Order passed by the
Sub-Divisional Magistrate was restored, inter alia, holding that
Mrs. Samey Kaur is 1/3

rd

Bhumidar of the land.

Learned

Single Judge referred to the evidence produced by the parties
before the revenue authorities and held that the Financial
Commissioner had wrongly assumed and regarded as proved
the factum of Kareva marriage only on the basis of electoral
rolls and ration card, without there being any clear and direct

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.8

evidence of marriage. Learned Single Judge further held that
to take away a woman's right to property inherited from her
husband was extremely harsh.
THE PRESENT APPEAL AND CONTENTIONS OF THE
PARTIES.
11. Now it was the turn of Mr. Jit Ram to file this intra-court
Appeal, which was admitted for hearing.

During the

pendency of this appeal, Mr. Jit Ram, Mr. Sukh Ram and Mrs.
Samey Kaur have expired and their legal representatives
have been brought on record.
12.Learned counsel appearing for the legal representatives of
Mr.Jit Ram initially relied upon the provisions of the Act and
submitted that upon re-marriage a widow loses her right in the
property inherited from her husband. Learned counsel
however, gave up reliance on the said provisions, when it was
brought to his notice that succession on the death of Mr.Ram
Mehar had opened up in the year 1944 and as per the case of
the appellant, Mrs. Samey Kaur had married Mr. Sukh Ram in

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.9

the year 1945-46 i.e. before the Act had come into force.
Learned counsel for the appellant thereafter sought to rely
upon the judgment of the Lahore High Court in Parji versus
Mangta reported in 29 IC 1931, wherein it was observed as
under:“With regard to the question of custom I
must assume for the purposes of this
case, because I am not competent to
disturb that finding, that the widow
Musammat Parji contracted a marriage
with Dewa by way of kerawa. In my
opinion that leads to the inevitable
conclusion that the parties are governed
by custom with regard to marriage. It
was, therefore, not for the plaintiff to
establish a custom that the widow lost her
rights on marriage in the present case
even that the parties were governed by
custom. It was on the other hand for the
defendant to prove a special custom that
she did not lose her right to succeed to
the property in dispute, but she did not
plead the existence of such a special
custom. It is not contested before me that
among the parties governed by custom remarriage has the effect of divesting a
widow of all rights of inheritance in her
husband's
estate.
Under
these
circumstances in my opinion Act XV of

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.10

1856 has no application to the present
case, and the conclusion of the learned
District Judge that Musammat Parji,
having contracted a karewa marriage lost
her rights according to the general custom
of the province which conclusion appears
to be supported by the Customary Law of
the Ambala District, is correct.”
FINDINGS
13.In the light of the contentions raised by the appellant, we
have examined and gone through the paper book.
14. As stated above, the learned Financial Commissioner had
relied upon the ration card and the voters list stating, inter
alia, that these documents were prepared by Government
functionaries and establish that Mrs. Samey Kaur had married
Mr.Sukh Ram. We have examined both the documents copies
of which have been placed on record. The ration card upon
which reliance is placed by the appellant was issued on 17

th

March, 1975, much after disputes arose between Mrs. Samey
Kaur on the one side and Mr. Jit Ram and Mr. Sukh Ram on
the other side. The core dispute was whether Mrs.Samey

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.11

Kaur had got married with Mr.Sukh Ram. It may be mentioned
here that the first Civil Suit was filed by Mr. Jit Ram in 1964
claiming that Mrs. Samey Kaur had a Kareva marriage with
Mr.Sukh Ram in the year 1945-46. Mr. Sukh Ram had
supported Mr. Jit Ram in the said Civil Suit. This document,
i.e. ration card of 1975, therefore, is a self-serving document
prepared on the statement of Mr. Sukh Ram, as the head of
his family, claiming that Mrs. Samey Kaur was his wife. This
document does not establish that Mrs. Samey Kaur had
admitted that she had got re-married to Mr.Sukh Ram. What
document and papers were relied upon by Mr. Sukh Ram for
this ration card to be made and issued were not brought on
record.

It may be interesting to note here that the age of

Mrs.Samey Kaur in the ration card has been mentioned as 60
years and the age of Mr.Sukh Ram has been mentioned as
32 years. The other document is electoral roll for the year
1971, in which Mrs. Samey Kaur has been described as wife

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.12

of Mr.Sukh Ram, aged 36 years. This document again was
prepared seven years after disputes had arisen between Mrs.
Samey Kaur and Mr. Jit Ram/Mr. Sukh Ram. On the other
hand, we have the revenue records dated 27

th

December,

1961 in form of copy of the register of mutation relating to Vill.
Bharthal. In this document, Mrs. Samey Kaur has been
described as widow of Mr. Ram Mehar who is entitled to 1/3
share with the remaining 2/3

rd

rd

share being owned in equal

share by Mr.Jit Ram and Mr. Sukh Ram, sons of late Mr.
Shadi Ram. This revenue record further indicates that the
mutation in favour of Mrs. Samey Kaur had been made about
8 years back and Mr. Jit Ram had filed an application for
mutation of 1/2

nd

portion of land in his name in place of Mrs.

Samey Kaur.
15. Having examined the documentary evidence on record, we
agree with the findings of the learned Single Judge that the
Financial Commissioner had erred in solely relying upon the

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.13

documentary evidence in the form of electoral roll of 1971 and
ration card prepared in 1975 to hold and decide that Mrs.
Samey Kaur had performed Kareva marriage with Mr.Sukh
Ram in 1945-46.

These documents though admissible in

evidence have to be viewed with suspicion and the
evidentiary value has to be considered and examined keeping
in mind the fact that disputes and differences had arisen
between the parties long back in 1961 and even civil litigation
was started by Mr. Jit Ram in 1964. No document whatsoever
has been placed on record by Mr. Jit Ram and Mr. Sukh Ram
for the period between 1945-46 till 1971 to show and
establish that Mrs.Samey Kaur was recorded as wife of Mr.
Sukh Ram in the official records. On the other hand, in the
revenue records all along Mrs. Samey Kaur had been
rd

described as widow of Mr. Ram Mehar, who had 1/3 share in
rd

the land with 2/3 share being owned by Mr. Sukh Ram and
Mr. Jit Ram. The Financial Commissioner, therefore, erred in

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.14

relying upon material and documents on which substantial
reliance should not have been placed and in ignoring other
evidence which was relevant.
16. The Financial Commissioner has completely ignored the oral
evidence produced by the parties. However, the revenue
authorities while rejecting the application under Section 11 of
the Act had referred to the oral evidence. Evidence on record
shows that Mr. Ram Mehar was the eldest son of late Mr.
Shadi Ram. Mr. Sukh Ram was much younger than
Mrs.Samey Kaur and was born after the marriage of
Mrs.Samey Kaur with Mr.Ram Mehar. The age difference
between the two, is not denied and is apparent from the
documents itself. Mrs. Samey Kaur was about 15-16 years
older than Mr. Jit Ram. There is also evidence on record to
show that Mr. Sukh Ram had got married to a girl from Vill.
Kerwale before 1945-46 and thereafter had got married to Ms.
Shamo. If the claim of Mr. Jit Ram is accepted, the marriage

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.15

of Mrs.Samey Kaur with Mr. Sukh Ram would be his second
marriage, with third one with Ms. Shamo, later on. Mr. Sukh
Ram also has 5-6 children. Legal heirs of Mr. Sukh Ram have
now stated that there was no Kareva marriage between Mrs.
Samey Kaur and Mr. Sukh Ram. It is also admitted that Mrs.
Samey Kaur has one child from Mr. Ram Mehar namely, Ms.
Dhanpati.
17. Witnesses, Mr. Ram Har and Mr. Ram Swaroop no doubt
have orally stated that there was Kareva marriage between
Mr. Sukh Ram and Mrs. Samey Kaur but while examining
their statements one has to keep in mind that they were
villagers and it was natural for them to support Mr. Jit Ram
and object to inheritance by Mrs. Samey Kaur, a widow. Mr.Jit
Ram and Mr. Sukh Ram had to gain in case Mrs.Samey Kaur
was dis-inherited and her share was to be equally distributed
between Mr.Jit Ram and Mr.Sukh Ram. Mrs. Samey Kaur, on
the other hand, in her oral statement had denied any such

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.16

marriage between her and Mr. Sukh Ram. She had further
stated that when she got married to Mr. Ram Mehar, Mr.Sukh
Ram was not even born. She had further narrated how she
used to cultivate her land and after the said land was
acquired, disputes had arisen on account of compensation
payable on acquisition. Mr. Jit Ram and Mr. Sukh Ram had
received their share of compensation but had objected to
compensation payable to Mrs. Samey Kaur. She had
expressly stated that marriage of her daughter, Ms. Dhanpati
was performed by her from her personal funds.

She had

denied that any daughter was born to her after her marriage
with Mr. Sukh Ram. We, therefore, uphold the findings of the
learned Single Judge that the appellant has not been able to
establish kareva marriage with Mr. Sukh Ram. In these
circumstances, we need not examine the ratio of the decision
in Parji case (supra).
18. The Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the Additional Collector

LPA NO. 21/1996

Page No.17

while dismissing the application under Section 11 of the Act
filed by Mr. Jit Ram had referred to the oral evidence and
reached the conclusion that the allegation that Mrs.Samey
Kaur had remarried Mr. Sukh Ram lacked conviction and had
been made at the behest of two interested persons and the
said evidence cannot be regarded as independent and
unbiased. Mr.Sukh Ram had admitted that he was living with
his wife and Mrs.Samey Kaur was not living with him.
19. In view of the above, we do not find any merit in the present
Appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed. In the facts
and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to
costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
NOVEMBER
P/RN

30, 2007.

