LPA NO. 2033/2006

*

Page 1

REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA NO. 2033 of 2006

%

Date of Decision :

31st May , 2007.

RAGHUKUL TILAK
.... Appellant.
Through Mr. R.C. Malhotra, Advocate.
VERSUS
UOI & ANR
.... Respondents.
Through Mr. Maninder Singh, Ms. Pratibha M.
Singh & Mr. Gaurav Sharma, Advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SANJIV KHANNA, J:
1.

Learned Single Judge while dismissing the writ petition filed

by the appellant by the impugned judgment dated 29th September,
2006 has aptly pointed out the paradox faced by the Court while
deciding the matter by describing the appellant as 'Eklavya' of

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 2

Mahabharat, who was equal in skill and prowess if not even better
than legendary 'Arjuna'. On “merits” of the appellant there cannot be
any doubt but the question raised is that of eligibility and whether the
appellant meets the minimum eligibility criteria fixed for admission to
MBBS course.
2.

The appellant had appeared in common All-India Pre-

Medical/Dental Entrance Examination held in the year 2006 and
secured ranking of 1600 in the merit list of 2400 selected candidates
under the 15% quota.

The appellant would have been entitled to

admission in a medical college on the basis of ranking secured.

The

appellant, who was otherwise eligible on merit for admission to a
medical college, has been denied admission on account of eligibility
criteria prescribed by the Medical Council of India. The said eligibility
criteria was also specified in the bulletin issued by Central Board of
Secondary Education in 2006, the relevant extract of which reads as
under:“(iii)

Qualifications

and

Qualifying

examination Codes:
CODE : 01
The Higher/Senior Secondary Examination or
the Indian School Certificate Examination which
is equivalent to 10+2 Higher/ Senior Secondary
Examination after a period of 12 years study,

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 3

the last two years of such study comprising
Physics, Chemistry, Biology (which shall include
practical tests in these subjects) and
Mathematics or any other elective subject with
English at a level not less than the core course
for English as prescribed by the National
Council of Educational Research and Training
after introduction of the 10+2+3 educational
structure as recommended by the National
Committee on Education.”
CODE : 02
XXXXX
CODE : 03
XXXXX
CODE : 04
XXXXX
CODE : 05
XXXXX
CODE : 06
Any other examination which in scope and
standard is found to be equivalent to the
Intermediate Science Examination of an Indian
University/Board, taking Physics, Chemistry and
Biology including practical tests in each of these
subjects and English. Provided that to be
eligible for competitive entrance examination,
candidate must have passed any of the
qualifying examinations as enumerated above.
Provided also that to be eligible for competitive
entrance examination the candidate must have
passed in the subjects of Physics, Chemistry,
Biology and English individually and must have

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 4

obtained a minimum of 50% marks taken
together in Physics, Chemistry and Biology at
the qualifying examination. In respect of the
candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes
the marks obtained in Physics, Chemistry and
Biology taken together in qualifying examination
be 40% instead of 50% for General Candidates.
Provided further that the students of
Indian nationality educated abroad seeking
admission into medical colleges in India must
have passed in the subjects of Physics,
Chemistry Biology and English upto the 12th
Standard level with 50% marks and their
equivalency determined as per regulations of
the Medical Council of India and the concerned
University. If a candidate does not fall within the
qualifications prescribed as per Code number
01-06 he/she should furnish complete details to
determine eligibility.”
3.

The appellant has not challenged and questioned the legality

and vires of the Regulations or the eligibility criteria prescribed in Code
1 on the ground of discrimination, Article 14 etc. The appellant claims
that he is eligible and is entitled to admission as he fulfills the eligibility
criteria prescribed in Code 6. The case of Medical Council of India
and the Union of India is that Code 1 applies to the case of the
appellant and he does not meet the prescribed eligibility criteria fixed
under the said Code.

We may again reiterate that we are not

examining whether Code 1 and the eligibility criteria fixed therein is
bad or ultra vires, but the limited controversy before us is whether
Code 1 or Code 6 will apply. In case Code 1 applies, the appellant is

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 5

not entitled to admission as will be clear from the said facts stated
below and in case Code 6 applies, the appellant will be entitled to
admission.
4.
scheme.

The appellant has passed class XII exam under the 10+2
The said exam was conducted by Board of Secondary

Education, Rajasthan in the year 2002 with Physics, Chemistry,
Mathematics as his elective subjects in addition to Hindi and English.
Computer Science was an additional subject. This is clear from the
certificate issued by the said Board. He did not study Biology for two
years as a subject in class XI and XII. However, Rajasthan Board
permits and allows students to appear in Biology examination of class
XII as an optional subject in a supplementary examination after
attending some classes of practicals spread over 60 periods, as per
averments made in the appeal. After having cleared class XII with
Physics, Chemistry and mathematics as elective subjects and Hindi
and English as compulsory subjects, the appellant appeared in the
Biology examination and has cleared the same. It is the case of the
appellant that having cleared the Biology examination at the Senior
Secondary level in class 10+2, he is entitled to admission and his
case falls under Code

6.

Central Board of Secondary Education

supports the claim of the appellant but the Union of India and Medical

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 6

Council of India are opposing the present appeal.
5.

Codes 1 and 6 have been quoted above.

Code 1 is

applicable to a student, who has cleared Senior Secondary
Examination equivalent to 10+2. Code 6, on the other hand, applies to
any other examination, which is not Senior Secondary Examination
equal to 10+2 recommended by National Committee on Education.
The exam cleared by the appellant in 2002 was Senior Secondary
Examination under the 10+2 scheme conducted by Board of
Secondary Education Rajasthan. Therefore, he will fall under Code 1
and not under Code 6. Code 6 only applies when a student has not
cleared Senior Secondary Examination under the 10+2 scheme, but
any other examination of scope and standard equivalent to
Intermediate Science Examination of an Indian University/Board.
Code 6 cannot apply in the present case as it is a residuary clause
which applies when Code 1 or other codes do not apply. If Code 1 or
Codes 2 to 5 apply, then Code 6 is not applicable. Possibly Code 6
would apply to School Leaving Examinations, which are conducted
abroad and other cases where examinations are not conducted as per
10+2 pattern as prescribed. In the present case, the appellant had
appeared in the XIIth class exam conducted by the Board of
Secondary Education, Rajasthan under the 10+2+3 educational

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 7

structure as recommended by the National Committee on Education.
6.

In view of the above, we have to hold that in the case of the

appellant Code 1 applies and not Code 6. The appellant does not
fulfill the eligibility criteria mentioned in Code 1, which requires that the
student should have studied Biology in last two years before he gives
the Senior Secondary Examination or Indian School Certificate
Examination. Admittedly, the appellant has not studied Biology for two
years and, therefore, does not meet the eligibility criteria.

Merely

passing Biology exam in class XII, does not satisfy the eligibility
requirement of Code 1.
7.

The learned Single Judge has also referred to several

judgments of the Supreme Court in cases of State of Tamil Nadu and
Another versus Adhiyaman Educational & Research Institute 1995
(4) SCC 104, State of Kerala versus T.P. Roshana, (1979) 1 SCC
572, Preeti Srivastava versus State of M.P. 1999 (7) SCC 120 and
Sanjeev Gupta versus Union of India, 2005 (1) SCC 45 that criteria
fixed for admission to technical education, where norms, standards
and requirements are fixed by technical bodies having expertise,
courts should not interfere and permit deviation and strict adherence
to the standards and norms should be the norm and not an exception.
However, we would like to state that certainty and clarity in fixing the

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 8

said standards and eligibility criteria cannot be over-emphasized. It is
equally duty and obligation of all the statutory bodies and authorities to
inform the students and their parents, when they select their subjects
for

class

XI

and

XII. In

Secondary Education

has

the present case, Central Board of
taken a

different stand on

the

eligibility criteria prescribed viz. than the stand taken by the Union of
India and the Medical Council of India. This should not happen as
these organisations/authorities are supposed to work in tandem and
uniformly, otherwise career of several students can be marred and will
suffer.
8.

However, it may be stated that the stand of the Union of India

and Medical Council of India is that

Central Board of Secondary

Education is only conducting examination on behalf of the Union of
India and Medical Council of India. It was submitted that

Central

Board of Secondary Education cannot prescribe eligibility criteria and
Medical Council of India being the statutory authority is entitled to
prescribe eligibility criteria for admission to medical colleges and
maintain standards of medical education. Reference in this regard was
made to the case of Medical Council of India versus State of
Karnataka and others

reported in (1998) 6 SCC 131. It was,

therefore, submitted that fixing of eligibility criteria is the exclusive

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 9

function of the Medical Council of India and the regulations framed by
the said Council have statutory force. There is merit in the said
submission.
9.

Learned counsel for the appellant had also submitted that in

the case of Dr. R.C. Dhaka and Mr. M.C. Kaushik, admission was
given though the said persons had not studied Biology as an elective
subject for two years at +2 stage. There seems to be some dispute
about the factual position and whether the said two students had been
granted admission under the 15% All-India quota.

Even if it is

presumed that the two persons mentioned above were granted
admission under the All-India quota, we do not think that the appellant
is entitled to relief and direction for admitting the appellant can be
issued. A wrong done or a mistake made in other cases, would not
justify a wrong direction by this Court to admit the appellant contrary to
the eligibility criteria. Article 14, it is well recognised is positive in
operation and ensures equality and abhors discrimination but the said
Article does not permit multiplication of wrong decisions taken earlier.
Courts correct wrongs and do not by applying Article 14 perpetuate
and give a stamp of approval to illegal and wrong acts.
10.

In view of the findings given above, we do not find any merit

in the present appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed. In the

LPA NO. 2033/2006

Page 10

facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.

(SANJIV KHANNA)
JUDGE

(DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
CHIEF JUSTICE
MAY 31, 2007.
VKR/P

