HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP (Crl.) No. 1919/2005
Date of Decision:- May 1,2008
Dr. Ashoka Mohan Dwarkadas …

Petitioner

Through:Petitioner in person.
Versus
STATE & Others

...
Respondents
Through:Ms.Mukta Gupta, Standing Counsel.
Mr. Puneet Bhalla for R-6
Mr. A.B. Pandey for R-10

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1.

Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be referred in
the Digest?

S. L. BHAYANA, J.
This petition has been filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India read with section 482 Cr. P.C with a prayer to
direct the respondent Nos. 1 to 4 to act in accordance with law and
to carry out an action in accordance with law against respondent
Nos. 5 to 7 and to take appropriate action against respondent Nos.
1 to 4 and 8 for willful inaction to save the petitioner and his
1

family members from the harassment of the Bank officials and
their associates.
2.

The Status Report has been filed. The brief facts of the case

are that the petitioner took a personal loan for the sum of Rs.
12,50,000/- from the ICICI Bank and in discharge of his part of
agreement he issued 36 post dated cheques of Rs. 43,638/- each.
The petitioner has further stated that he did not avail the complete
loan and requested the officials of ICICI Bank to return the
remaining cheques but the same were not returned by the Bank
officials on the pretext that the same would be returned to him on
a later date. However, the Bank presented some of those cheques
for encashment. The petitioner on coming to know about the same
had the payment of the remaining cheques stopped upon which
the Bank filed a case under section 138 N.I. Act against him. The
petitioner filed a complaint case before the State Consumer
Dispute Redressal Forum and after hearing the arguments the
learned Forum directed that the said complaint be sent to that
concerned Police Station in order that necessary action be taken in
the matter. On the basis of his statement/ complaint a case under
section 420/406/506 IPC was registered at P.S. Sarojini Nagar,
2

New Delhi, vide FIR No. 475/2005.

Before registration of the

above noted FIR, the petitioner filed a writ petition before this
Court being Crl. Writ No. 651/2005 wherein he sought direction to
the respondents for registration of the FIR against the ICICI Bank
officials. The said writ petition was disposed of on the same day as
it was brought to the notice of this Court that the FIR had already
been registered. During the investigation it transpired that initially
the petitioner agreed to take the loan of Rs.12,50,000/- and in
discharge of his part of agreement he issued 36 cheques of Rs.
43,638/- each, however, later on, the loan amount was reduced to
Rs.8,23,882/- and a fresh agreement was executed between the
petitioner and the Bank and in discharge of his part of the
agreement the petitioner issued fresh 29 cheques of Rs. 33,301/each. It was also agreed that the cheques issued by the petitioner
in terms of the earlier agreement will be returned back to the
petitioner but inadvertently one of the earlier cheques was
presented by the Bank for encashment but the payment of the said
cheque was got stopped by the petitioner and thereafter the Bank
filed a case under section 138 N.I. Act and during the course of the
hearing of the said case it was transpired that the said cheque was

3

inadvertently presented for encashment and as such the said case
was withdrawn by the Bank and that the Bank has also tendered
unconditional apology but despite that the petitioner instituted the
aforesaid complaint before the Consumer Dispute Redressal
Forum.
3.

Learned counsel for the State submits that in this case

investigation has already been completed and the charge sheet has
been filed.
4.

Learned counsel for the State submits that since the Police

has already taken action against the erring officials of ICICI Bank,
hence, no cause of action survives in the matter and the writ
petition may be dismissed as having become infructuous.
5.

Keeping in view the above facts and circumstances, I am of

the considered opinion that nothing survives in this writ petition.
Accordingly the same is hereby dismissed as infructuous.

S. L. BHAYANA, J.
May 1 , 2008
kb

4

