*IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

RFA 147/2001
Date of Decision – 10th January, 2008

SHAKUNTALA DEVI

.....Appellant
Through: Mr. M.N. Dutt, Adv.

versus
N.S.MOHAN CHIT FUND & FINANCE CO. (PVT.) LTD
...... Respondent
Through: None
%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local paper may be
allowed to see the judgment? No
To be referred to the reporter or not? Yes
Whether the judgment should be referred
in the Digest? Yes

MUKUL MUDGAL, J. (Oral)
There is no appearance on behalf of the respondent.
2.

This appeal challenges the judgment dated 12th January,

2001 rendered by the Learned Additional District Judge in Suit
No. 55/1997 filed by the appellant/plaintiff which was dismissed
on the following grounds:(a)

The suit was beyond limitation; and

(b)

The suit was not filed by an authorized person; and

(c)

The power of attorney of the appellant namely Shri R.L.

RFA 147/2001

page 1 of 7

Aggarwal, husband of the appellant did not have locus standi to
file the present suit.
3.

The relevant facts of the case are as follows:-

4.

The appellant being a member of the chit fund was paid a

sum of Rs. 1,90,000/- by the respondent/defendant by issuing a
cheque dated 2.10.93 drawn on Bank of Baroda.

The cheque

was revalidated on 4.10.1994 as the defendant, according to the
appellant/plaintiff, had pleaded that it should not be presented
till then as there was shortage of funds. On 4.10.1994, the said
cheque was revalidated and the suit for recovery of the amount
was filed on 3.10.1997.
5.

The issues framed by the trial court are as follows:“(i)Whether the suit is barred by limitation?
(ii)Whether the plaintiff has locus standi to file the
present suit?
(iii)Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action?OPD
(iv)Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the suit
amount? OPP
(v)Whether the plaintiff is entitled for interest, if so at
what rate?OPP
vi)Relief.”

6.

On the question of limitation (issue no. 1), the Learned

Additional District Judge has recorded the following findings:“9.The acknowledgment has been defined in Section
18 of “The Limitation Act”, 1963.
The relevant
portion of it is reproduced for convenience which
reads as follows:
“Where, before the expiration of the
RFA 147/2001

page 2 of 7

prescribed period for a suit of
application in respect of any property or
right, an acknowledgment of liability in
respect of such property or right has
been made in writing signed by the party
against whom such property or right is
claimed, or by any person through whom
he derives his title or liability, a fresh
period of limitation shall be computed
form the time when the acknowledgment
was so signed.”
10.The cause of action having arisen to the plaintiff in
Sept, 1992 and the suit having been filed on 3.10.97
was barred by limitation.
Issue, thus, is decided against the plaintiff and
in favour of the defendant.”
7.

In our view, the Learned Additional District Judge has

completely misread the explanation given in Section 18 of the
Limitation Act, 1963.

The above Section stipulates that an

acknowledgment of a liability renews the cause of action. In
our view, a revalidation of a cheque is nothing except an
acknowledgment of the liability which renewed the cause of
action as on the date of revalidation i.e. 4.10.1994. In fact, the
evidence of the defendant shows that in fact he admitted that
the date of the cheque was changed.
8.

The finding of the Learned Additional District Judge is

particularly unsustainable in view of the defendant's evidence to
the following effect:-

RFA 147/2001

page 3 of 7

“...........The cheque for Rs.1,90,000/- was signed on
02,10.1993 and thereafter the date of cheque was
changed at 04.10.1994. The cheque in question was
issued as a security because the Co. had no funds.
The cheque was re-validated on 04.10.1994 by me
because we had no funds. After revalidating the
cheque, we requested the Co.M/s. Indian Transfers
Products not to present the cheque for encashment
because we have no funds in our account........”
(emphasis supplied)
9.

In the above testimony, the defendant has clearly admitted

that the cheque's date was changed to 4.10.1994. This clearly
shows that the cheque was in fact revalidated on 4.10.1994 as
the company did not have sufficient funds prior to that date. In
view of the above evidence, we are surprised that how the
Learned Additional District Judge could have arrived at the
finding that the suit was not within limitation. In our view, both
on facts of the present case and the law applicable, the suit was
within limitation.
10.

On the question of locus standi, it has been held by the

Learned Additional District Judge that the appellant was not a
competent person to file the suit as no power of attorney or any
other document was filed to show that she was the proprietor of
M/s. Indian Transfer Products in whose name the cheque was
issued.
11.

Learned counsel for the appellant has brought to our

RFA 147/2001

page 4 of 7

notice the plea of counsel for the defendant before the Learned
Additional District Judge who noted the same as under:“As contended by Shri Daulat Ram Gupta, the Ld.
Counsel for the deft, number of documents like
account books, income tax return, income tax
Assessment, sales tax record, bank account etc. could
have been produced on record to prove that the
plaintiff was proprietor of M/s. Indian Transfers
Products. On the other hand, Shri S.K. Sharma, the
Ld. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that to
disprove the contention of the plaintiff, the deft
should have brought on record the documents of
chit.”
12.

Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that

indeed such documents were available on record but they were
ignored by the Learned Additional District Judge.

He has

pointed out for instance the intimation given under Section 143
(1) (A) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 by the Income Tax
Department to the appellant wherein she was described as the
proprietor of M/s. Indian Transfer Products. We have perused
the said document.

This document also appears to have

escaped the attention of the Learned Trial Judge. Even on the
defendant's counsel's own plea, it is apparent that the finding of
the Learned Additional District Judge could not stand as the
appellant

had

clearly

filed

contemporaneous

documents

evidencing the proprietorship of M/s. Indian Transfer Products
by the appellant. Besides the above, the appellant had also filed
RFA 147/2001

page 5 of 7

a bank certificate to the same effect. During the course of
evidence, a special power of attorney dated 18.12.1999 was
filed authorizing Shri Ram Lal Aggarwal to represent the
appellant/plaintiff in the suit and do all acts in this behalf and it
also ratified all actions taken in the suit. We cannot lose sight
of the fact that Sh. Ram Lal Aggarwal was the husband of the
appellant/plaintiff and, therefore, in any case, defects, if any,
were fully ratified by the subsequent special power of attorney.
Consequently, we are unable to uphold the judgment of the
Learned Additional District Judge dated 12th January, 2001 and
the same is reversed and set aside.
13.

We have already decided issues No. 1 and 2 in favour of the

plaintiff/appellant.

In so far as issue No. 3 is concerned, the

defendant's own evidence demonstrates that cheque was issued to the
plaintiff on 2nd October, 1993.

In so far as issue No. 4 is concerned,

the defendant has admitted the issuance of the cheque and in
fact admitted the date of the cheque was changed to 4th October,
1994. Thus the appellant/plaintiff has proved that he has a cause of
action.

The respondent himself in the evidence admitted that the

cheque had been revalidated for 4th October, 1994 because the

respondent did not have funds prior to that date. There is no
denial in the evidence of the respondent/defendant that the

RFA 147/2001

page 6 of 7

money was not payable to the appellant/plaintiff. Thus based on
the above reasoning, we are satisfied that the plaintiff is
entitled to the suit amount and the issue Nos. 4 and 5 deserve
to be decided in favour of the appellant/plaintiff.
14.

Accordingly, the Registry is directed to draw up a decree

for Rs. 1,90,000/- in favour of the appellant/plaintiff along with
interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum from the date of
filing of the suit till realisation.
15.

The appeal along with the pending applications stands

disposed of in the above terms.

MUKUL MUDGAL, J

JANUARY 10, 2008
NG

RFA 147/2001

S.L. BHAYANA,J

page 7 of 7

