*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA 104/2006 & CM No. 5381/2008
Date of Decision:
Bua Singh

May 26, 2008

..... Appellant
Mr. Ravinder Sethi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Lalit Gupta, Ms. Vandana
Bhatia, Advocates

Through:

versus
Dalip Singh Cheema & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Jagat Rana & Mr. Akhilesh
Arora, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L.BHAYANA
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
JUDGMENT

S.L. Bhayana, J.
This appeal has been filed by defendant no. 2 arising
out of a suit for possession which was decreed in favour of
the plaintiff-respondent No. 1. The facts giving rise to the
filing of the suit may be summarized as under:

2.

The suit property bearing plot no. 11 measuring 250

sq. yds.

situated at C-51, Vijay Vihar, Phase-II , Village

RFA 104-2006

1

Rithala, Delhi, originally belonged to Vijay Singh,PW-1 as a
part of his ancestral property.

3.

Briefly stated the plaintiff’s case is that his wife

Amarjit Kaur purchased the suit property on 23.01.1984
vide a registered sale deed from Vijay Singh for Rs. 6000/-.
The

plaintiff

further

stated

that

a

boundary

wall

demarcated the suit property and three rooms were
constructed on the said plot. In the year 1989, defendant
No.1 Gurdeep Kaur filed a suit for permanent injunction
against the plaintiff stating that the plaintiff had illegally
and in an unauthorized manner occupied the suit property.
Subsequently the suit for permanent injunction against the
plaintiff was dismissed yet the defendants continued to
occupy the suit property.

4.

In the original suit no. 197/2002 filed by the plaintiff

against the defendants, a claim for the payment of mense
profit/ damages and for the possession of the suit property
was made.

5.

The

defendant

no. 2-appellent

filed his written

statement in the suit in which he alleged that the property

RFA 104-2006

2

in respect of which the plaintiff intends to exercise his
rights is different from the defendants’ property.

6.

On the pleadings of the parties the trial court framed

the following issues:
I.

Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file
the present suit? OPD

II. Whether the suit is not valued properly for the
purpose of court fee and jurisdiction? OPD
III. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the decree of
possession, as so prayed in the plaint? OPP
IV. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to mense profits, if so,
then at what rate and to what extent? OPP
V. Whether

the

plaintiff

is entitled for

permanent

injunction, as so prayed in the suit? OPP
VI. Relief.

7.

In support of his case, the plaintiff appeared as his

own witness apart from examining Vijay Singh, the original
owner of the suit property. On the other hand, defendant
no.2 besides recording his own deposition, examined three
witnesses Manjit Singh, Patwari, DW-1, Smt. Krishna Devi,
DW-3 and Dinesh Kumar, DW-4. Krishna Devi, DW-3 is the
neighbor and her statement is not of much help. The
RFA 104-2006

3

statement of DW-4 is also not of much help to the
appellant-defendant no.2, Bua Singh.

8.

Vijay Singh the original owner of the suit

property filed an affidavit Ex. PW1/A corroborating the
case

of

the

respondent-plaintiff.

He

in

his

cross-

examination has stated that he sold the suit property to
Amarjit Kaur, wife of the respondent-plaintiff vide a
registered sale deed dated 23.01.1984, Ex PW1/1 and the
possession of the property was also delivered to Amarjit
Kaur. He also stated that he was unaware of Gurdeep Kaur
from whom the defendant no. 2 has alleged to have
purchased the suit property. Vijay Singh has also denied
having

executed

the

documents

produced

by

the

defendant-appellant as evidence including the G.P.A and
the agreement to sell. In his cross-examination, he has
admitted that before selling the property, he got the
property identified by the Tehsildar and the Patwari in
order to determine the Khasra number. He admits that he
had sold entire five kilas of land to a property dealer by the
name of Sh. Ramesh Chand Jain who sold the property to
different people, and used to take him to the office of the
Sub-Registrar for the execution and registration of the sale
deeds. He has also admitted to have gone to the spot to
RFA 104-2006

4

verify the plot which was being sold and the properties sold
by him were sold by virtue of a sale deed and not a G.P.A.

9.

Dalip Singh Cheema, PW-2 is the husband of the

Amarjit Kaur to whom the suit property was sold by Vijay
Singh, PW-1. He has filed his affidavit, Ex.PW2/A. He has
admitted that he had not made any complaints regarding
the forcible dispossession of the suit property till the filing
of the suit.

10.

Manjit Singh,DW-1 the Patwari affirms that the

nishandehi report bears his signatures and that the same
was prepared by him after visiting the location at the
behest of Bua Singh, defendant no.2 – appellant. He has
also admitted that the name of the appellant, Bua Singh
was not entered in the revenue records. He has admitted
that officially measurement is done only at the request of
those persons whose names are entered in the revenue
record, however, in this case the same was done at the
request of defendant no.2 –appellant as he was told that a
dispute in relation to the property was going on in Court.
He has also stated that the corner of Khasra no. 93/3
touches one corner of 93/9/1. In the cross-examination, he
further admitted that he was unaware in which musavi or
RFA 104-2006

5

khasra number the fixed points were located. He also
stated that he did not know if a notice was given to the
owners of the adjoining Khasra numbers and the same was
not necessary. He also stated that he did not know through
which Khasra number, a 44 feet and 20 feet roads
respectively pass. No plotted sizra was prepared by the
revenue authority as the same was to be prepared by the
Coloniser. As the sizra was deposited in the Court, the
measurement was done through a Musavi and the same is
available with the Girdawar. He further stated that only a
photocopied portion of the musavi is available with the
Girdawar. He has also admitted that he has not seen the
musavi, and an order of measurement can be passed only
by the SDM. He was also unaware whether any such order
was passed by the SDM.

11.

Bua Singh, DW-2 the appellant in the present appeal

deposed that, Sardar Kapoor and he purchased a plot
measuring 250 sq. yards bearing no. C-51 out of Khasara
no. 93/3, Vijay Vihar, Rithala, Delhi from Gurdev Singh and
Harinder Singh. He further stated that Vijay Singh sold the
above stated plot to Gurdeep Kaur who later transferred
the said property to her husband Gurdarsdan Singh. It was
sold by Gurdarshan Singh to Gurdev Singh and Harinder
RFA 104-2006

6

Singh from whom the appellant, Bua Singh purchased the
property. He further stated that he had purchased a plot
out of Khasra no. 93/9/1 whereas the plaintiff-respondent
has purchased a plot out of khasra no. 93/3.

12.

The main premise of the submissions of learned

counsel for the appellant is that the property of the
appellant is entirely different from that of the plaintiffrespondent. He has submitted that the appellant had
purchased 500 sq.yds of land which was situated in Khasra
no. 93/3. Further the plot of the respondent- plaintiff is
situated in Khasra no. 93/9/1. He has also submitted that
all the documents produced by him, i.e., the agreement to
sell and the G.P.A dated 15.06.1983 clearly bear the
Khasra number of the land measuring 500 sq.yds as Khasra
No. 93/3.

13.

Learned

counsel

for

the

appellant

has

also

contended that the land in his possession was demarcated
by Manjit Singh, Patwari, DW-1.

DW-1 has stated that

Khasra No. 93/9/1 is below Khasra no. 93/2 and Khasra no.
93/3 is above khasra no. 93/8. He further argued that the
learned Trial Court erroneously ignored the fact of the

RFA 104-2006

7

plots having different Khasra numbers and separate
boundaries.

14.

The appellant has further contended that the learned

Trial Court has ignored the fact there is no evidence to
prove that the construction over the plot was raised by the
plaintiff-respondent. It is also submitted by the appellant
that a prudent man would have lodged a complaint with the
police for unauthorized occupation of his property by the
appellant however, the respondent – plaintiff kept silent till
the filing of the suit in January 2001. It is submitted that
the suit was dismissed only on the basis of statement of
Vijay Singh, PW-1 who was in collusion with respondent
no.1, who had fabricated false documents in favour of
respondent No.1.

15.

Learned Counsel for the respondent-plaintiff has

argued that the appeal is not maintainable, as the appellant
has no right or title in the suit property. He further argued
that the documents adduced by the appellant in support of
his case, i.e., the agreement to sell, G.P.A etc are
fabricated. Vijay Singh, the original owner of the plot has
appeared as a witness in the suit and has specifically
denied having executed any documents in favour of
RFA 104-2006

8

Gurdeep Kaur from whom the appellant purchased the suit
property.

16.

It is further argued by the respondent-plaintiff that

the plot purchased by Amarjeet Kaur had been well
described in the sale deed Ex.PW-1/2. Vijay Singh has also
categorically denied having sold the land or executed any
documents in favour of Gurdeep Kaur. He further argued
that the demarcation report provided by Manjit Singh DW1 has no evidentiary value as firstly there was no office
order of the SDM to carry out the demarcation. Secondly it
is not based on the Mausavi or aks sizra of the revenue
department nor does it say anything in respect to the
existence of the fixed point for the purpose of demarcation.
It is contended by the respondent-plaintiff that there is no
ambiguity in the Khasra number as the appellant has
derived his right from Gurdeep Kaur who had filed suit no.
450/1989 for permanent injunction against the appellant
with respect to Khasra no. 93/3.

17.

The respondent-plaintiff has further rebutted the

contention of the appellant by submitting that keeping a

Chowkidar after the purchase of the suit property is not a
criteria for possession or title. The real criteria for that is
RFA 104-2006

9

the registered sale deed which had been executed by Vijay
Singh in favour of Amarjeet Kaur.

18.

If the appellant-defendant’s case is to be judged on

the basis of the above averments made by him then in our
considered opinion there are no clear assertions made by
the appellant either in the written statement or in the
depositions.

19.

The appellant has further raised an issue with

respect to the location of the property, i.e, whether the suit
property is situated in khasra no. 93/9/1 as claimed by the
respondent-plaintiff or whether it is in khasra no. 93/3 as
claimed by the appellant.

20.

The argument of the appellant that the property has

been demarcated by the Patwari, Manjit Singh DW-1, in
order to show that the suit property falls in Khasra no. 93/3
is not supported by the deposition of Manjit Singh. Manjit
Singh has clearly stated in his testimony that the revenue
records do not reflect the name of Sh. Bua Singh,
appellant, and the land could not be demarcated at his
behest, as such can only be done by those whose name is
entered in the revenue record. The witness has also
RFA 104-2006

10

admitted that he does not know in which musavi and
khasra number the fixed points of the nishandehi were
fixed. He has further stated in his deposition that after the
consolidation in 1975-76, musavi was deposited and
without the musavi, no measurements could have been
made. Further there was no order of the SDM for
measurements without which no official measurement
could be made. Hence, we concur with the opinion of the
trial court on this point. The demarcation report Ex. DW1/A has no evidentiary value as there was never any office
order to carry out the demarcations and secondly it is not
based on a mausavi or aks sijra of the revenue department.
Also the demarcation is silent about the existence of fixed
points.

21.

Both parties concur that Vijay Singh PW-1 was the

original owner of the property, and Vijay Singh in his
deposition supported the case of the respondent-plaintiff.
He in his deposition has clearly denied having sold any plot
of land to Gurdeep Kaur and having executed any
document in her favour. He has denied his signatures on
the G.P.A, agreement to sell, receipts and affidavits which
are placed on record as Ex. DW2/PA. Vijay Singh has also
volunteered that the entire sale of land was effected by him
RFA 104-2006

11

through registered sale deeds and not by way of G.P.A and
no sale in respect of any plot was ever made by him to
Gurdeep Kaur. The present appellant hence cannot derive
any right on the basis of forged documents.
finds

substance

in

the

argument

The court

advanced

by

the

respondent-plaintiff that there is no ambiguity with respect
to the Khasra numbers. The appellant has derived his right
in the suit property from Gurdeep Kaur, who had filed Suit
no. 450/1989 regarding Khasra no. 93/3. Hence, there is no
dispute as regards the description or numbering of the
property. The Patwari’s report has no evidentiary value on
account of it being an unofficial measurement and in light
of the fact that the original owner Vijay Singh has denied
having sold any land to Gurdeep Kaur. Since Vijay Singh
did not sell any land to Gurdeep Kaur, therefore the
contention of the appellant regarding the explanation of 83
sq. yds. is a frivolous exercise by the appellant. Defendant
no.1 Gurdeep Kaur had already filed a civil suit claiming
that the suit land was bearing Kharsa no. 93/3 and she was
the owner of the land on the basis of this claim. This suit
was dismissed and the said decision has become final.

22.

It is evident from a plain reading of the above that the

defendant –appellant’s entire case rests on the fact that the
RFA 104-2006

12

suit property is situated in khasra no. 93/3 and not in
khasra no, 93/9/1 as claimed by the respondent-plaintiff.
23.

Keeping in view the deposition of Shri Vijay Singh

PW-1 along with the registered sale deed he executed in
favour of the respondent-plaintiff we feel that the suit
property falling in khasra no. 93/9/1, belongs to the
respondent-plaintiff and the appellant has no right over the
same. The appellant-defendant has not been successful in
proving that the suit property is different from the property
which is claimed by the respondent-plaintiff. The appellantdefendant has further been unable to prove himself to be
the owner of property in khasra no. 93/3. Vijay Singh PW-1
has categorically denied having sold any property to
Gurdeep Kaur from whom the appellant is alleged to have
purchased the property in dispute.
24.

In the result, the present appeal has no merits and is

dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 10,000/- payable not
later than four weeks from today failing which the amount
shall carry simple interest at 6% per annum.

(S.L.BHAYANA)
JUDGE
(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE
MAY 26 , 2008
ES
RFA 104-2006

13

