*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

RFA 102-03/2006 & CM No. 5380/2008
Date of Decision:

May 26 , 2008

Surinder Kumar & Anr
..... Appellants
Through: Mr. Ravinder Sethi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Lalit Gupta, Ms. Vandana
Bhatia, Advocates
versus
Madhu Bala & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Jagat Rana & Mr. Akhilesh
Arora, Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MUKUL MUDGAL
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L.BHAYANA
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes
JUDGMENT

S.L. Bhayana, J.

This appeal has been filed by defendant no. 2 arising
out of a suit for possession which was decreed in favour of
the plaintiff-respondent No. 1. The facts giving rise to the
filing of the suit may be summarized as under:

RFA 102-03/2006

1

2.

The suit property bearing plot no. 10 measuring 333

sq. yds. situated in Khasra no. 93/9/1 at C-51, Vijay Vihar,
Phase-II , Village Rithala, Delhi, originally belonged to Vijay
Singh,PW-1 as a part of his ancestral property.

3.

Briefly stated the plaintiff’s case is that she had

purchased

the

suit

property

on

23.01.1984

vide

a

registered sale deed from Vijay Singh for Rs. 6000/-. The
plaintiff further stated that a boundary wall demarcated
the suit property and five rooms were constructed on the
plot. It was further stated that she along with her husband
regularly visited the suit property for the purpose of
looking after the property.
No.1-respodnentNo.4

In the year 1989, defendant

Gurdeep

Kaur

filed

a

suit

for

permanent injunction against the plaintiff stating that the
plaintiff had illegally and in an unauthorized manner,
occupied the suit property. Subsequently the suit for
permanent injunction against the plaintiff was dismissed
yet the Defendants continued to occupy the suit property.

4.

In the original suit no. 196/2002 filed by the plaintiff

against the defendants, a claim for the payment of mense

RFA 102-03/2006

2

profit/ damages amounting to Rs. 69,000/- and for the
possession of the suit property was made.

5.

The defendant

no. 2-appellent

filed his written

statement in the suit in which he alleged that the property
in respect of which the plaintiff intends to exercise his
rights is different from the defendants’ property.

6.

On the pleadings of the parties the trial court framed

the following issues:
I.

Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file
the present suit? OPD

II. Whether the suit is not valued properly for the
purpose of court fee and jurisdiction? OPD
III. Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi to file the
present suit? OPD
IV. Whether this court has no jurisdiction to try and
entertain the present suit?OPD
V. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the decree of
possession, as so prayed in the plaint? OPP
VI. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to mense profits, if so,
then at what rate and to what extent? OPP
VII. Whether

the

plaintiff is entitled for

permanent

injunction, as so prayed in the suit? OPP

RFA 102-03/2006

3

VIII. Relief.

7.

In support of his case, the plaintiff examined two

witnesses, Vijay Singh, the original owner of the suit
property and Ashok Kumar Bhargava, PW-2, husband and
special attorney of the plaintiff and respondent no. 1. On
the other hand, defendant no.2 besides recording his own
deposition, examined four witnesses Manjit Singh, Patwari,
DW-1, Smt. Krishna Devi, DW-3, and Dinesh Kumar,DW-4.
Krishna Devi, DW-3 is the neighbor and her statement is
not of much help. The statement of DW-4 is also not of
much help to the appellant.

8.

Vijay Singh the original owner of the suit

property filed an affidavit Ex. PW1/A corroborating the
case

of

the

respondent-plaintiff.

He

in

his

cross-

examination has stated that he sold the suit property to
Madhu Bala respondent-plaintiff vide a registered sale
deed dated 23.01.1984, Ex PW1/1 and the possession of the
property was also delivered to respondent no.1. He also
stated that he was unaware of Gurdeep Kaur from whom
the defendant no. 2 has alleged to have purchased the suit
property. Vijay Singh has also denied having executed the
documents

produced

RFA 102-03/2006

by

the

defendant-appellant

as
4

evidence including the G.P.A and the agreement to sell. In
his cross-examination, he has admitted that before selling
the property, he got the property identified by the
Tehsildar and the Patwari in order to determine the Khasra
number. He admits that he had sold entire five kilas of land
to a property dealer by the name of Sh. Ramesh Chand Jain
who sold the property to different people and used to take
him to the office of the Sub-Registrar for the execution and
registration of the sale deeds. He has also admitted to have
gone to the spot to verify the plot which was being sold and
the properties sold by him were sold by virtue of a sale
deed and not a G.P.A.

9.

Ashok Kumar Bhargava, PW-2 is the husband of

the plaintiff, to whom the suit property was sold by Vijay
Singh, PW-1. He has filed his affidavit, Ex.PW2/A. He has
stated that after the purchase of the suit property, the suit
property was demarcated and boundary wall was raised.
He also stated that in 1989 defendant no.1 filed a suit for
permanent injunction against them which was dismissed,
however the defendants continued to occupy the property.
He has admitted in his cross examination that he has not
made any complaints regarding the forcible possession by
the defendants of the suit property. He has also denied in

RFA 102-03/2006

5

his cross examination that defendant no.2 has a plot in
khasra no. 93/3 which is quite far from the plaintiffs
property.

10.

Manjit Singh,DW-1 the Patwari in his cross-

examination, has admitted that he was unaware in which
musavi or khasra number the fixed points were located. He
also stated that he did not know if a notice was given to the
owners of the adjoining Khasra numbers and the same was
not necessary. No plotted sizra was prepared by the
revenue authority as the same was to be prepared by the
Coloniser. As the sizra was deposited in the Court, the
measurement was done through a Musavi and the same is
available with the Girdawar. He further stated that only a
photocopied portion of the musavi is available with the
Girdawar. He has also admitted that he has not seen the
musavi, and an order of measurement can be passed only
by the SDM. He was also unaware whether any such order
was passed by the SDM.

11.

Surender Kumar, DW-2 the appellant in the present

appeal deposed that, Sardar Kapoor and Bua Singh are in
possession of the plot bearing no. 93/3, village Rithala,
Delhi. He further states that he has purchased a part

RFA 102-03/2006

6

measuring 125 sq. yards out of the said plot on 18.12.1998.
He states that he constructed one room on the plot and has
been residing there since the purchase of the property. In
his cross examination Surender Kumar has admitted to be
in possession of a plot in 93/3/1. He admits to have
purchased a plot measuring 250 sq. yards bearing no. C-51
out of Khasara no. 93/3, Vijay Vihar, Rithala, Delhi from
Bua Singh. He further states that he had purchased a plot
out of Khasra no. 93/9/1 whereas the plaintiff-respondent
has purchased a plot out of khasra no. 93/3.

12.

The main premise of the submissions of learned

counsel for the appellant is that the property of the
appellant is entirely different from that of the plaintiffrespondent. He has submitted that the appellant had
purchased 125 sq.yds of land which was situated in Khasra
no. 93/3. This was sold to Gurdeep Kaur, wife of Shri
Gurdarshan Singh prior to the execution of the sale deeds
in favour of the plaintiff-respondent, i.e. 15.06.1983, from
whom the appellant-defendant eventually purchased the
property. Further the plot of the respondent- plaintiff is
situated in Khasra no. 93/9/1.
that

all

the

documents

He has further submitted

produced

by

him,

i.e.,

the

agreement to sell and the G.P.A dated 15.061983 clearly

RFA 102-03/2006

7

bear the Khasra number of the land measuring 500 sq.yds
as 93/3.

13.

Learned

counsel

for

the

appellant

has

also

contended that the land in his possession was demarcated
by Manjit Singh, Patwari, DW-1.

DW-1 has stated that

Khasra No. 93/9/1 is below Khasra no. 93/2 and Khasra no.
93/3 is above khasra no. 93/8. He further argued that the
learned Trial Court erroneously ignored the fact of the
plots are having different Khasra numbers and separate
boundaries. The appellant has argued that the demarcation
is done on the basis of the Musavi which was available with
the Girdawar and the sizra is prepared on the basis of the
Musavi.

The

appellant

has

further

argued

that

the

demarcation report has been exhibited and proved as Ex.
Dw-1/A by them, however despite specific directions of the
Ld. ADJ when evidence of plaintiff- respondent no.1 was
continuing, no steps were taken by the respondent no.1 to
have the demarcation done for identifying the suit property
and the property of the appellant.

14.

The appellant has further contended that the learned

Trial Court has ignored the fact there is no evidence to
prove that the construction over the plot was raised by the

RFA 102-03/2006

8

plaintiff-respondent. It is also submitted by the appellant
that a prudent man would have lodged a complaint with the
police for unauthorized occupation of his property by the
appellant however, the respondent – plaintiff kept silent till
the filing of the suit in January 2001. It is submitted that
the suit was dismissed only on the basis of statement of
Vijay Singh, PW-1 who was in collusion with respondent
no.1, and had fabricated false documents in favour of
respondent No.1.

15.

Learned Counsel for the respondent-plaintiff has

argued that the appeal is not maintainable, as the appellant
has no right or title in the suit property. He further argued
that the documents adduced by the appellant in support of
his case, i.e., the agreement to sell, G.P.A etc are
fabricated. Vijay Singh, the original owner of the plot has
appeared as a witness in the suit and has specifically
denied having executed any documents in favour of
Gurdeep Kaur from whom the appellant purchased the suit
property.

16.

It is further argued by the respondent-plaintiff that

the plot purchased by the plaintiff had been well described
in

the

sale

deed

RFA 102-03/2006

Ex.PW-1/2.

Vijay

Singh

has

also
9

categorically denied having sold the land or executed any
documents in favour of Gurdeep Kaur. He further argued
that the demarcation report proved by Manjit Singh DW-1
has no evidentiary value as firstly there was no office order
of the SDM to carry out the demarcation. Secondly it is not
based on the Mausavi or aks sizra of the revenue
department nor does it say anything in respect of the
existence of the fixed point for the purpose of demarcation.
It is contended by the respondent-plaintiff that there is no
ambiguity in the Khasra number as the appellant has
derived his right from Gurdeep Kaur who had filed suit no.
450/1989 for permanent injunction against the appellant
with respect to Khasra no. 93/3.

17.

The respondent-plaintiff has further rebutted the

contention of the appellant by submitting that keeping a

Chowkidar after the purchase of the suit property is not a
criteria for possession or title. The real criteria for that is
the registered sale deed which had been executed by Vijay
Singh in favour of the plaintiff-respondent no.1.

18.

If the appellant-defendant’s case is to be judged on

the basis of the above averments made by him then in our
considered opinion there are no clear assertions made by

RFA 102-03/2006

10

the appellant either in the written statement or in the
depositions.

19.

The appellant has further raised an issue as with

respect to the location of the property, i.e, whether the suit
property is situated in khasra no. 93/9/1 as claimed by the
respondent-plaintiff or whether it is in khasra no. 93/3 as
claimed by the appellant.

20.

The argument of the appellant that the property has

been demarcated by the Patwari, Manjit Singh DW-1, in
order to show that the suit property falls in Khasra no. 93/3
is not supported by the deposition of Manjit Singh. The
witness has also admitted that he does not know in which
musavi and khasra number the fixed points of the
nishandehi were fixed. He has further stated in his
deposition that after the consolidation in 1975-76, musavi
was deposited and without the musavi, no measurements
could have been made. Further there was no order of the
SDM

for

measurements

without

which

no

official

measurement could be made. Hence, we concur with the
opinion of the trial court on this point. The demarcation
report Ex. DW-1/A has no evidentiary value as there was
never any office order to carry out the demarcations and

RFA 102-03/2006

11

secondly it is not based on a mausavi or aks sijra of the
revenue department. Also the demarcation is silent about
the existence of fixed points.

21.

Both parties concur that Vijay Singh PW-1 was the

original owner of the property, and Vijay Singh in his
deposition supported the case of the respondent-plaintiff.
He in his deposition has clearly denied having sold any plot
of land to Gurdeep Kaur and having executed any
document in her favour. He has denied his signatures on
the G.P.A, agreement to sell, receipts and affidavits which
are placed on record as Ex. DW2/PA. Vijay Singh has also
volunteered that the entire sale of land was effected by him
through registered sale deeds and not by way of G.P.A and
no sale with respect of any plot was ever made by him to
Gurdeep Kaur. The present appellant hence cannot derive
any right on the basis of forged documents.
finds

substance

in

the

argument

The court

advanced

by

the

respondent-plaintiff that there is no ambiguity with respect
to the Khasra numbers. The appellant has derived his right
in the suit property from Gurdeep Kaur, who had filed Suit
no. 450/1989 regarding Khasra no. 93/3. Hence, there is no
dispute as regards the description or numbering of the
property. The Patwari’s report has no evidentiary value on

RFA 102-03/2006

12

account of it being an unofficial measurement and in light
of the fact that the original owner Vijay Singh has denied
having sold any land to Gurdeep Kaur. Defendant no.1
Gurdeep Kaur had already filed a civil suit claiming that
the suit land was bearing Kharsa no. 93/3 and she was the
owner of the land on the basis of this claim. This suit was
dismissed and the said decision has become final.

22.

It is evident from a plain reading of the above that the

defendant –appellant’s entire case rests on the fact that the
suit property is situated in khasra no. 93/3 and not in
khasra no, 93/9/1 as claimed by the respondent-plaintiff.

23.

Keeping in view the deposition of Shri Vijay Singh

PW-1 along with the registered sale deed he executed in
favour of the respondent-plaintiff we feel that the suit
property falling in khasra no. 93/9/1, belongs to the
respondent-plaintiff and the appellant has no right over the
same. The appellant-defendant has not been successful in
proving that the suit property is different from the property
which is claimed by the respondent-plaintiff. The appellantdefendant has further been unable to prove himself to be
the owner of property in khasra no. 93/3. Vijay Singh PW-1
has categorically denied having sold any property to

RFA 102-03/2006

13

Gurdeep Kaur from whom the appellant is alleged to have
purchased the property in dispute.

24.

In the result, the present appeal has no merits and is

dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 10,000/- payable not
later than four weeks from today failing which the amount
shall carry simple interest at 6% per annum.

(S.L.BHAYANA)
JUDGE
(MUKUL MUDGAL)
JUDGE
May 26 , 2008
ES

RFA 102-03/2006

14

