*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) No.4925/2001
Date of Decision: January 25, 2008
RAJINDER SINGH
………….Petitioner
Through Mr. Anil Panwar &
Mr. Sripal Singh, Advs.
Versus
UNION OF INDIA & Ors. ………Respondents
Through Mr.Dalip Mehra &
Mr. Siddhartha Singh, Advs.
for Respondent No.1.
CORAM:
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Vikramajit Sen
Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.L. Bhayana

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
Yes
in the digest or not?
S.L. BHAYANA, J.

The

Petitioner

has

invoked

the

extraordinary

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying for issuance of an appropriate writ or order
directing the Respondents to promote the Petitioner to the post of
Inspector with effect from 24.08.1998 with all consequential
benefits.

W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 1 of 10

2.

The facts giving rise to the filing of the present writ

petition may be summarized as under:
3.

The Petitioner was a Sub-Inspector in the Border

Security Force (for short “the BSF”). At the time of undergoing
Platoon Commander (Tactics) Course (hereinafter referred to as
“PC(TAC)”) held between

13.01.1997 to 22.03.1997, the

petitioner was informed by the Directorate of Training that the
Junior Leader Course (for short “JLC”), a pre-promotion course,
was scheduled to be held from 17.02.1997, on the completion of
which the Departmental Promotion Committee meeting was to be
held. The eligible Sub-Inspectors, who were detailed to undergo
PC(TAC) course were allowed to appear directly before the
Departmental Promotion Committee meeting provided they
qualified JLC within one year of the DPC. This concession was in
view of Rule 5 of the BSF (SOs & UOs) Promotion and Seniority
Rules, 1975, which reads as under:
“Subject to the provisions of Rule 21, every
such member of the Force, shall before any
promotion, be required to pass a prepromotion course referred to in Sub-rule (3) or
such other examinations as may be specified
by the Director General, from time to time.
Provided that if the competent authority is
satisfied that due to exigencies of services or
other reasons, any such member is not able to
pass the pre-promotion course, he may, with
the prior approval of the next superior
authority, be promoted but he shall be
W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 2 of 10

required to pass the next available prepromotion course failing which he may be
reverted.”
4.

The Petitioner appeared before the DPC and qualified

the same. In December 1997, the BSF commenced the selection of
candidates for deputation to United Nation’s Mission in Bosnia &
Herzegovina. The Petitioner was selected for the U.N. Mission on
1st May 1998 and was ordered to leave for Bosnia in the month of
July, 1998.
5.

On receiving the information about his selection, the

Petitioner joined the JLC on 6th May 1998, as he was required to
clear JLC within a period of one year from the date of the DPC. On
joining the JLC at Tekanpur on 06.05.1998, the Petitioner on
09.05.1998 received information that he would be required to join
the U.N. Mission immediately. On 11.05.1998 the Petitioner wrote
to the respondent that as he was deputed for U.N. Mission, he is
unable to complete the JLC. The relevant portion of the
application filed by the Petitioner in this regard is as under:
“I received a message copy from FHQ, My
name has been nominated in UN Mission vide
FHQ sig no. R 3281 DTD 08.05.1996.
According to the msg. All off/JO’s are
directed to report STS II T/ camp forthwith. I
am unwilling to do JLC.
In view of above please I may please be RT W
so that I join the Indian Contingent for UN
peace keeping Force in due time”

W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 3 of 10

6.

The Petitioner was given a movement order dated

11.05.1998 and on receiving the same, he left the Tekanpur
station.
7.

It appears that while the Petitioner was on deputation

to Bosnia, Respondent No. 3 issued a promotion order wherein
the Petitioner’s name was mentioned but the same was not
communicated to the Petitioner. The Petitioner, however,
received this information, through his friend vide letter dated
27.08.1998. The Petitioner vide letter dated 15.02.1999 requested
the Respondents to supply him a copy of the promotion letter.
However, a letter disclosing the reasons for the non-promotion of
the Petitioner was received. The relevant portion of the said letter
is reproduced below:
“a)It is correct that your promotion order to the
rank of Subedar was issued vide Pers Dte Sig
No. R-3264 of 24 Aug’98 subject to the condition
of having qualified JLC.
XXX XXX XXX
d)While undergoing JLC at BSF, STC, Tekanpur
you, on your own, after having submitted your
unwillingness to continue on the JLC returned to
this Institution on 12.05.1999, even without a
movement order, which was against the normal
procedure and discipline.
e)It is correct that a message was sent to BSF
STC, Tekanpur, vide No. A-6001 of 10.05.1998
informing them about your selection and the
date of reporting at Delhi for onward move.
However, before any action could be taken by
W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 4 of 10

STC in this regard you had already left
voluntarily
after
furnishing
the
said
unwillingness certificate on your own; knowing
fully well the consequences thereof and even
without obtaining a movement order. Adjutant
BSF CSWT did contact Adjutant BSF Academy to
request him to forward your movement order so
as to regularize the move and not for effecting
and for making changes in your movement
order, as alleged by you. As you had moved
back without one.
f) This Institution had not given
direction to opt out from the JLC by
your unwillingness to complete the
proceed for the said UN deputation
the Indian contingent.”
8.

you any
tendering
same and
as part of

On his return from Bosnia on 04.06.1999, the Petitioner

made a number of representations to the authorities for the
issuance of a formal promotion order. Thereafter, the Petitioner
cleared the JLC course on 22.08.1999 and though the Petitioner
had previously qualified the DPC, he was directed to attend the
DPC on 15.11.1999. On qualifying the DPC, the Petitioner was
promoted to the rank of Inspector on 06.06.2000 on the basis of
the DPC held on 15.12.1999.
9.

The Respondents have filed a counter affidavit in which

they have tried to justify the decision taken by the Force
Headquarters. According to the Respondents, the Petitioner failed
to fulfill the requirement of qualifying the pre-promotion course
under the Rules. Learned counsel for the Respondent has
submitted that the Petitioner was detailed to undergo the JLC,
W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 5 of 10

which commenced on 4th May 98 at STC BSF Tekanpur and, the
Petitioner was given sufficient opportunity to qualify the JLC
within one year of qualifying the DPC. The Petitioner had at his
own behest not availed the opportunity to complete the JLC within
the period of one year from the DPC and had also tendered his
unwillingness to undergo the said course. The Respondents are of
the view that the Petitioner’s claim for protection of seniority is
rightly rejected, as the Petitioner had made a choice and
declined to undergo the course much before he was sent for the
U.N. Mission in Bosnia.
10.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner has argued that in

the unwillingness letter submitted by the Petitioner, the
Petitioner’s inability to continue with the JLC was not due to
personal reasons but due to the administrative reason of the
Petitioner joining the U.N. contingent to Bosnia. The Petitioner has
further argued that he wrote the unwillingness letter forcibly on
dictated terms. Learned counsel for the Petitioner has contended
that the Petitioner’s refusal to join the U.N Mission on the ground
that he is undergoing training at the JLC, would have lead to his
punishment for disobedience of orders and hence, the Petitioner
had no choice but to leave the JLC and report for the U.N. Mission.
Thus, the Petitioner is entitled to the protection of his seniority.

W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 6 of 10

11.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner has further

contended that the concerned authorities have misrepresented
the fact that the Petitioner left the institution without a movement
order. The movement order in respect of the Petitioner was
issued on 11.05.1998. It is further submitted that the Petitioner’s
name was shown in the combined seniority list maintained by the
Directorate General Border Security Force (Personal), where he
was shown as promoted on 24.08.1998.
12.

We have given our anxious consideration to the

submissions made at the Bar. It is not in dispute that the Petitioner
had submitted his unwillingness to attend the JLC conducted in
May 1998 in order to be part of the U.N. Mission to Bosnia. The
fact that the Petitioner was attending the JLC at the time when he
received an intimation to join the U.N. contingent in Delhi is also
not in dispute before us.
13.

A careful reading of the above shows that the

Petitioner had not expressed his unwillingness or reluctance to
attend the JLC held on 04.05.1998 on account of any reason
personal to him. The Respondent’s contention that the Petitioner
was personally not willing and opted out of his conditional
promotion by tendering a written consent in the form of
unwillingness letter is also without any substance. The only
reason the Petitioner was unable to continue with the JLC was his
W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 7 of 10

selection and the immediate requirement to join the U.N.
contingent to Bosnia. The unwillingness letter as submitted by the
Petitioner specifically states that the Petitioner would be unable to
continue the JLC course as he was required to report for the U.N.
Mission, and as such he was unable to complete the JLC.
14.

A similar issue came up for consideration before this

Court in R.K. Gupta V Union of India, 143 (2007) DLT 795,
wherein it was held as under:
“The only reason why he could not immediately
attend to the said course was his selection for the
U.N. Mission in Bosnia. That apart, the Petitioner
was very specific in seeking protection of his
seniority on account of his being a part of the
peacekeeping force. Far from informing the
Petitioner that he would lose his seniority if he
chose to give up the course in preference of the
foreign assignment, the Respondent passed two
orders one dated 24.061997 and the other dated
03.03.1999, extracted earlier by which the
Respondents in
specific
terms granted
protection to the seniority of the Petitioner.
XXX XXX XXX
It is in this light of the said Order difficult to
appreciate how the Respondents can at this
belated stage shift the burden of loss of seniority
on the Petitioner or allege that the Petitioner
could not attend the course on account of his
unwillingness and not because of any
administrative reasons as mentioned in Order
dated 24.06.1997.”
15.

It can be seen from Annexure P-4 that authorities

concerned directed the Petitioner to join the U.N. Mission. Further

W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 8 of 10

it was due to the lack of option given to the Petitioner to choose
between the continuation of the JLC and the U.N. Mission, the
Petitioner choose to join the U.N. Mission. Disobedience of orders
of the Force Headquarter, would have lead the Respondent’s to
issue disciplinary proceedings against the Petitioner under
Section 21 Border Security Act, 1968, which reads as under:
21. Disobedience to superior officer. – (1) Any
person subject to this ACT who disobeys in such
manner as to show a willful defiance of authority
of any lawful command given personally by his
superior officer in the execution of his officer
whether the same is given orally, or in writing or
by signal or otherwise, shall, on conviction by a
Security Force Court, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
fourteen years or such less punishment as is in
this Act mentioned.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobey
any lawful command given by his superior
officer shall, on conviction by a Security Force
Court,(a) if he commits such offence when on active
duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend to fourteen years or
such less imprisonment as is in this Act
mentioned; and
(b) if he committed such offence when not on
active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years or
such less punishment as is in the Act
mentioned.

W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

Page 9 of 10

16.

The Petitioner choose to join the U.N. Mission as he

had been left with no option and the disobedience of this order
would have attracted disciplinary action against the Petitioner.
17.

The Respondent’s contention that the Petitioner

because of his personal interest in order to reap the benefits of
the deputation willingly did not complete the JLC is also without
any force. It is clear that the actions of the Petitioner were justified
that the non-compliance of the order to join the U.N. contingent
would have lead to disciplinary action against him and if given
the option the Petitioner may not have proceeded on the foreign
assignment if he was aware that his promotion and seniority were
at stake.
18.

In view of the above and taking into consideration the

ratio laid down in R.K. Gupta’s case (supra), the writ petition is
allowed. The impugned order dated 27.03.1998 is quashed and
by a writ of mandamus the Respondents are directed to give to the
Petitioner the benefit of seniority by placing him at the bottom of
the seniority list. The Petitioner shall on that basis be entitled to
all consequential benefits. The parties are left to bear their own
costs.
S.L. BHAYANA, J.
January 25, 2008
ektas
W.P.(C) No.4925/2001

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.

Page 10 of 10

