*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

Date of Decision :

February 06, 2007

+

W.P. (C) 17945/2004

RAMKRISHAN SHASTRI
..... PETITIONER
Through : Ms. Maldeep Sidhu, Advocate

versus

D.D.A.

.... RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. Pawan Mathur, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
Digest?

Yes
Yes

Yes

ORDER
: Dr. S. Muralidhar, J.(Oral)

1.

Petitioner no.1 is described as General Secretary of the Harijan

Adarsh Kalyan Samiti.

Petitioners no. 2 to 13 claim to be the

members of the said Samiti. They have come together to file this writ

W.P. (C) 17945/2004

1 of 6

petition seeking, inter alia, the following relief:“i) This Hon'ble Court may issue orders calling
for

the

entire

record

available

with

the

respondent in respect of the acquisition and
allotment of plots of 50 sq yds. each, to the
petitioner members (12-13 families) who are
residents of Village Madipur, Delhi for the last
more than 25 years, before their homes were
acquired., including the site plan and such
other documents as may be deemed fit by this
Hon'ble Court for ensuring the protection of
the rights of the petitioner.”

2.

It is the case of the petitioners that by a notification dated

13.11.1959, land measuring 2632 bighas and 18 biswas situated in
Village Madipur, Delhi was notified for acquisition under the Land
Acquisition Act 1894.

This culminated in an award No. 1691/1974.

The petitioners do not dispute the fact that they were not the land
owners or owners of any structures thereon and, therefore, their
names did not figure as claimants in the said land acquisition award.

3.

It is stated that considering the plight of persons like the

petitioners, a meeting of the Gram Panchayat was held in Village
Madipur, Delhi on 28.6.1962 where it was unanimously decided that
some land would be allotted to the harijans of said village. It is stated
W.P. (C) 17945/2004

2 of 6

that a communication dated 30.10.19963 was received from the
Secretary Harijan Welfare Board, Development Department, Delhi
that the proposal for release of land to the harijans was under the
active consideration of the Housing Commissioner, Delhi. Thereafter,
the petitioners claim to have made several representations. A letter
was received on 10.4.1970 from the Land & Building Department,
Delhi Administration asking them to produce the revenue record. It is
claimed that a further communication was received on 23.7.1980 from
the DDA asking for site plan and location plan for the purpose of
scrutinizing the case of the petitioners.

4.

On 24.3.1982, the respondents allotted 50 sq. yds. of land each

to five Harijans of Village Madipur but the petitioners were not
allotted any land. They claim to have made several representations
thereafter.

The documents show that some recommendations were

made by one agency to the other for favourable consideration of the
petitioners' request.

5.

The response of the DDA to this writ petition is that the

petitioners do not figure in the survey originally conducted in the year
1963 at the time of acquisition of the land.

It is submitted that

allotment of alternative land was only given to such persons whose

W.P. (C) 17945/2004

3 of 6

names figured in the survey. It is further stated as under:“It is stated that as per the Survey carried
out, there were 62 persons who were affected
and out of those persons, 52 persons were
allotted

plot

at

Mangol

Puri

in

Rohini

Residential Scheme, while the remaining 10
families did not want to go out of Madipur
area. It is stated that on the recommendation
of the Lt. Governor, Delhi they were made
offers for allotment in Madipur area itself. It
is further stated that the plots were offered
but only 8 plots could be allotted, since Gian
Chand could not be allotted a plot since his
father Shri Kundan Lal had been allotted and
further Shri Surat Singh was not an SC/ST. It
is further stated that Shri Kundan Lal to
whom the plot had been offered did not take
the possession of the same since he wanted
another plot be allotted in favour of his son
Shri Gian Chand.

Further the case of Shri

Gian Chand was not considered since the
Head of the family written statement entitled
to one plot only.

It is therefore, stated that

only 7 persons accepted the allotment of the
land in Madipur area itself.”

6.

Ms. Maldeep Sidhu, learned counsel for the petitioner states

that petitioners have been knocking at the doors of the respondent

W.P. (C) 17945/2004

4 of 6

authorities for several years and their request should receive a
favourable consideration at the hands of the authorities. She further
questions the allotment made to five persons who, according to her,
were not residents of Village Madipur at all and have therefore
wrongly been allotted alternate land. On the other hand, Mr. Pawan
Mathur, learned counsel for the DDA submits that the case is clearly
barred by laches and in any event since the petitioners do not figure
in the Survey, there is no question of their being eligible for allotment
of alternate land.

7.

On

consideration

of

the

documents

on

record

and

the

submissions of the counsel, the Court is of the view that the
petitioners have failed to make out a case for grant to them of the
relief sought for in this writ petition. Admittedly, the petitioners do
not figure in the land acquisition award. Their names are not to be
found in the Survey said to have been conducted by the DDA way back
in 1963. It is not open to the petitioners to question the allotment of
alternate land to only five persons when in the first place the
petitioners have not been able to prima facie establish that each of
them is entitled to allotment of alternate land. No factual foundation
has been laid to enable the Court to come to the conclusion that the
petitioners have a lawful right to allotment of alternate land

W.P. (C) 17945/2004

5 of 6

consequent upon the acquisition made by way of the land acquisition
notification issued in 1959.

There is also considerable merit in the

submission of the respondent that the case is barred by laches.

8.

For all the above reasons, there is no merit in the writ petition

and it is dismissed as such.

S.MURALIDHAR, J
February 06, 2007
raj

W.P. (C) 17945/2004

6 of 6

