IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on: October 25, 2007
Date of Decision: November 5, 2007

CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003 & CMs 3818/2004, 5503/2005
THE COUNCIL OF THE INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED
ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA
..... Petitioner.
Through Mr. K.K.Jain with Mr. Rakesh Aggarwal,
Advocates.
Versus
LOKESH DHAWAN F.C.A.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. U.Hazarika with Mr. S.S.Chaudhary,
Advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the order?
Yes
To be referred to the reporter or not?
Yes
Whether the order should be reported in the
Digest?
Yes

DR. S. MURALIDHAR,J.

1.

This is a reference by the Council of The Institute of Chartered

Accountants of India („Council of the ICAI‟) under Section 21(5) of the
Chartered Accountants India Act, 1949 ('Act') with a recommendation that
the name of Respondent No.1 herein, who has been held to be guilty of
„other misconduct‟ in terms of the Act, should be removed from the Register
of Members for a period of three months.

Background Facts
2. The facts leading to this reference are that the Respondent No.1 is a
partner of a firm of Chartered Accountants by the name of Dhawan &
Gulati ('D&G') who were appointed as statutory auditors for the State Bank
of Hyderabad by a letter dated 9th March, 1996. Enclosed to the letter of
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 1 of 14

appointment was a copy of the Reserve Bank of India ('RBI') guidelines
regarding the eligibility of the auditors to audit fees, lodging and travelling
allowances.

3.

After their appointment as statutory auditors, D&G drew an advance

of Rs.1,50,000/- from the SBH towards expenses. Of this a sum of
Rs.70,450/- was spent and the balance Rs.79,550/- remained with the firm.
This was later adjusted by the SBH against the audit fees payable to D&G.
Upon completion of the audit, D&G forwarded to the SBH the statement of
expenses and accounts along with copies of bills. According to D&G, the
SBH was liable to pay it a sum of Rs.29,145/- after adjusting advances.

4.

The SBH in turn wrote a letter on 12th September, 2006 to D&G

calling upon it to pay, after making adjustments, a sum of Rs.90,666.55
being the amount spent by D&G expenses towards lodging and boarding in
excess of the permissible limits stipulated by the RBI in its guidelines. This
was contested by the D&G and a series of correspondence ensued. By a
letter dated 11th February, 1997, the SBH informed D&G that “an amount of
Rs.70,808.64 is due from you to the Bank after accounting for all admissible
expenses according to the directives of RBI.” D&G was called upon to
refund the said amount “immediately and settle the matter without further
delay.” However by its letter dated 11th March, 1997, the D&G declined to
accede to this demand and reiterated that “since bank had made all
arrangements for due boarding and lodging and no specific request had been
made from our side the bank had to bear the extra expenses incurred.”

5.

On 1st August, 1997 a complaint was lodged by the SBH with the

CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 2 of 14

ICAI against D&G in which it was contended, inter alia, that the firm was
guilty of misconduct on three counts. The first was that D&G had not repaid
the sum of Rs.70,808.64 being the excess amount of advance availed for
conducting a statutory audit. Second, the firm canvassed for procuring from
SBH computer business for their sister concern. Third, the firm utilised the
service of one Shri Chabbra, Chartered Accountant who was neither a
partner nor an employee of the firm. A copy of the complaint was then sent
by the ICAI to D&G on 11th December, 1997 for its comments.

6.

After receiving the complaint, D&G repaid to the SBH the sum of

Rs.70,808.64 by demand draft on 18th December, 1997. On 29th December
1997, D&G replied to the SBH pointing out that they had already refunded
the said sum “to the bank for the excess money spent on our boarding and
lodging during the audit period vide bank draft No.025623 dated. 18th
December 1997.” D&G further stated: “We have always been keen to settle
this issue and has been in constant touch with the Finance and Accounts
departments for details and clarifications but perhaps due to the lack of a
personal meeting between us and the bank officials, the matter dragged on
for such a long time.” In the last paragraph of this letter, D&G stated as
under:
“We do hope we have clarified our position with regard to the
issues raised in the complaint satisfactorily and still are willing
to provide any other clarification that you may so desire. In
light of our submissions above we hope your office shall be
kind enough to withdraw the complaints filed with the Institute
of Chartered Accountants as well as the Reserve Bank of
India.”

This letter was signed by Respondent No.1 on behalf of D&G.
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 3 of 14

7.

The SBH, by its letter of the same date addressed to D&G, forwarded

the TDS certificate in the sum of Rs.5,721/- on account of the tax deducted
at source towards settlement of balance amount of audit fee (Rs.1,14,416/-)
for the year 1995-96.

8.

By their letter dated 10th February 1998, D&G informed the ICAI that

the Respondent No.1 herein, a partner of the firm, would be answerable to
the charge of misconduct against D&G. Consequently, Respondent No.1
submitted his written statement duly verified on 21 st February, 1998 to the
ICAI. The comments in reply to the complainant‟s rejoinder were submitted
by Respondent No.1 on 11th June, 1998. After the pleadings were completed
the Council of the ICAI formed a prima facie opinion that the Respondent
No.1 was guilty of professional and/or other misconduct and a reference was
made by it to the Disciplinary Committee ('DC') for the further steps.

9. The recording of evidence before the DC took place on 8th July, 1999.
Before the DC, the following three charges were read out to Respondent
No.1:
“1.

The Respondent demanded and received large sums of

money towards advance payment and claimed expenses beyond
the eligibility/entitlement as per RBI guidelines and failed to
refund the unspent amount.
2.

The Respondent canvassed for procuring computer

business for his sister concern from the client-bank by using his
position as its statutory central auditor.
3.

The Respondent hired the services of Shri Chabbra,

Chartered Accountant, who was neither his partner nor
employee, to do the work.”

CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 4 of 14

10.

Before the DC, as regards charge No.1, the Respondent No.1 herein

pleaded guilty. By its report dated 17th January, 2000, the DC formed the
opinion that “the Respondent is guilty of having made excess claim towards
TA/DA and other expenses and retaining the outstanding balance with him
for nearly 21 months. In the opinion of the Committee, this charge would
squarely fall under „other misconduct‟ as defined in the Code of Conduct.”
The Respondent No.1 was, however, exonerated of charge Nos. 2 and 3.
Therefore, the present proceedings are confined to examining the correctness
of the report of the DC and the findings and recommendations of the Council
of the ICAI as regards charge No.1.

11.

After the response of the D&G to the report of the DC was obtained,

the matter was considered by the Council of the ICAI. By its resolution
dated 26th March 2001, the Council recommended the punishment of
removal of the name of Respondent No.1 from the Register of Members for
a period of three months. This was communicated to Respondent No.1 on
28th September, 2001. The present reference was thereafter made to this
Court.

Submissions of Counsel
12.

Mr.K.K.Jain learned counsel for the petitioner took us through the

record and submitted that the recommendation of the Council for the ICAI
should be accepted. In response, Mr. Upamanyu Hazarika, learned Advocate
appearing for Respondent No.1 submitted as under:
(a) The scope of the jurisdiction of this Court under Section 21(5) read
with Section 21(6) of the Act is wide enough to set aside the report of
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 5 of 14

the DC and dismiss the complaint if it found that the complaint was
wholly unsubstantiated.
(b)Notwithstanding the fact that the record of the proceedings of the
DC showed that the Respondent No.1 pleaded guilty to charge No.1,
that recording was erroneous. A review petition had been filed by
Respondent No.1 before the Council which came to be rejected on the
ground that the Council lacked the power to review its own order. It
was urged that the Respondent No.1 never really intended to plead
guilty to charge No.1. It is claimed that it was only in response to a
suggestion of a Member of the DC whether the amount refunded by
D&G to the SBH was under dispute/protest that Respondent No.1
admitted to not having followed the manner suggested and stated that
“I plead guilty. It has been paid without protest.” It is claimed that
this was the limited extent of admission of guilt and that Respondent
No.1 never intended to plead guilty of charge No.1.
(c) There was no individual misconduct by the Respondent No.1 since
he was acting on behalf of the firm D&G. The complaint was also
against the firm. Therefore the Respondent No.1 alone cannot be held
responsible for the acts of the firm.
(d) The complaint itself was motivated since it was by way of reprisal
against certain observations made by the D&G regarding the nature of
the security accepted against a loan/advance made by SBH to M/s.
Noble Tele Systems and that a major part of the security to the extent
of Rs.53 crores was calculated on the basis of software packages not
approved for valuation by RBI guidelines.
(e) Finally it is stated that the recommendation of the Council had
been circulated to every one even prior to its communication to
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 6 of 14

Respondent No.1 and this had damaged the reputation of Respondent
No.1 irreparably.

Whether the plea of guilt was correctly recorded?
13. The jurisdiction of this Court in the present proceedings as explained by
the Supreme Court in Institute of Chartered Accountants v. B. Mukherjea
AIR 1958 SC 72 is indeed wide enough to include the quashing of the
findings of the DC and the Council and consequently the complaint itself.
However, as far as the present case is concerned, the facts themselves are not
in dispute. After the plea of guilt by the Respondent No.1 in relation to
charge No.1, it was unnecessary for the Council to return any finding on
merits in that regard. If indeed the plea has been correctly recorded, it would
be unnecessary for this Court to re-examine the issue on merits.

14.

For considering the plea of the Respondent No.1 that the proceedings

before the DC, attributing statements to him admitting to the guilt of Charge
No.1, were not correctly drawn up it is necessary to examine the relevant
portions of the full transcript of the proceedings before the DC which read as
under:
“President: Mr. Dhawan, kindly go through Regulation 15(2).
It says, if the Respondent pleads guilty, the Disciplinary
Committee shall record the plea and submit its report to the
Council. Do you plead guilty or not?
Respondent (Mr. Lokesh Dhawan): No Sir.
President: When did you paid? (sic)
Respondent (Mr. Lokesh Dhawan): 1st January, 1998.

CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 7 of 14

President: Audit was in 1996?
Respondent (Mr. Lokesh Dhawan): Yes Sir but we were in the
correspondence with them till April, 1997. We were not given
an opportunity to sit across the table for setting the matter.
There were lot of discrepancies in their statements which we
wanted to clarify.
President: So, excess advance Rs.70,000/- was wrong. How
much you have paid them on settlement?
Respondent (Mr. Lokesh Dhawan): Rs. 70,000.
President: Then, how do you say that there was a discrepancy?
Respondent (Mr. Lokesh Dhawan): They were claiming
Rs.99,000/-.
President: This amount was not disputed?
Respondent (Mr. Lokesh Dhawan): We also disputed this
amount.
President: So, still you have paid this amount?
Respondent (Mr. Lokesh Dhawan): Yes Sir, because, it is the
dignity of our profession.
Shri Amarjit Chopra: Once you have re-paid. I do not know
what is the covering letter which has been attached therewith.
Whether it was said, the amount was paid under dispute. The
claim of the bank was wrong, still you have paid for the dignity
but if there is no dispute and there is no protest and there is no
correspondence subsequent thereto for claiming the refund in
respect thereof. Then, I think the position stands clear.
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 8 of 14

Complainant (Mr. Deshpande): For your benefit, I will read out
the covering letter of the Respondent. It says, we are enclosing
the demand draft for Rs.70,808.64 payable at Hyderabad
towards outstanding balance. Kindly acknowledge the receipt.
Respondent (Mr.Lokesh Dhawan): Can I say something. The
hotel bill in Bombay, where the four partners have stayed in
two rooms. They are refusing to our two persons. That hotel
bill, if you take four partners that comes within the limit. There
is no excess amount.
President: Please go charge by charge?
Respondent (Mr. Lokesh Dhawan): I plead guilty, it has been
paid without protest. I plead guilty to charge no.1. Charge no.2
and 3, I am not pleading guilty.”

15.

Further, the transcript of the record of proceedings before the DC

shows that in the final submission made in regard to Charge No.1, the
submission on behalf of Respondent No.1 was as under:
“In so far as charge no.1 is concerned, we have said we have
admitted today to the guilt that Rs.70,000, we have
refunded was an amount which was found in excess with us.
That amount, we have refunded. I would only add that it is the
mistake which has been committed Sir and it is felt from you
Sir that it should not have been done, the manner in which it
has been done that the advance was taken or anything was
adjusted. That we apologise for such behavior. It will not
happen in future Sir. We would expect leniency on your
part in your report.

We sincerely apologise for this.”

(emphasis supplied)

16.

Despite the contention of Respondent No.1 that his pleas have not

CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 9 of 14

been correctly recorded, upon examining the above transcript forming part
of the record we are unable to come to the conclusion that the statements
have either been incorrectly recorded or are untrue. Initially, the Respondent
No.1 seems to have simply said “No Sir” to the question whether he was
pleading guilty to the charges. However, later on, during the course of the
same examination, the Respondent No.1 unambiguously stated as under:
“I plead guilty, it has been paid without protest. I plead guilty to
charge no.1. Charge no.2 and 3, I am not pleading guilty.”

17.

It is therefore not as if the Respondent No.1 was unaware, as he

claims to be, that he was pleading guilty to charge No.1 and that he pleaded
guilty only to the statement that he refunded the excess amount without
protest. The record speaks for itself and there can be no manner of doubt
that in order to buy peace, the Respondent No.1 in fact pleaded guilty to
charge No.1. This Court finds that no case has been made out by the
Petitioner to enable it to come to a conclusion that the statements made by
him were incorrectly recorded by the DC. He also seems to have been fully
conscious of the consequences thereof. Once the Respondent No.1 had
pleaded guilty, further investigation of the charge by the DC was
unnecessary.

18. At this stage we may mention that the Review petition was rightly
dismissed by the Council since it had no power under the Act to entertain
such a petition. On a perusal of the Review Petition this Court finds that the
Respondent No.1 did not plead therein that that the statements attributed to
him or his counsel in the course of the proceedings before the DC were
incorrectly recorded.
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

He also does not appear to have retracted those
page 10 of 14

statements. He only attempted to place a different interpretation on them.
This Court is of the considered view that the statements that were recorded,
as extracted above, cannot admit of two interpretations. Far from pleading
innocence, Respondent No.1 in fact pleaded guilty and followed this up with
a repeated apology. The submission of Respondent No.1 that his plea of
guilt in regard to Charge No.1 was either incorrectly recorded or interpreted
by the DC and the Council of the ICAI respectively is accordingly rejected.

Is Respondent No.1 guilty of ‘other misconduct’?
19.

An attempt was made to show that it is only for an act of professional

and other misconduct that an enquiry under the Act is contemplated and that
in the instant case since the claim of excess advance was made in the course
of official duty, it cannot be said to be „other misconduct‟. In other words, it
is submitted that even if the plea of guilt were held to be correctly recorded,
the acts complained of do not constitute „other misconduct‟ within the
meaning of the Act.

20.

This Court is unable to agree with this contention that the claim of

excess advance contrary to the RBI guidelines was in the course of official
work and therefore could not be brought under „other misconduct‟. Given
the fact that there is no definition of „other misconduct‟ in the Act, those
words must be construed as admitting of a wide interpretation encompassing
acts falling outside the definition of „professional misconduct‟ under Section
22 of the Act. In the circumstances, the Court is of the view that the decision
as to what constitutes „other misconduct‟ by a member should be best left to
the Council of the ICAI which is the disciplinary body comprised of peers,
that is chartered accountants with several years of experience. The Council
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 11 of 14

of the ICAI is best equipped to arrive at such a decision keeping in view the
need to maintain the highest standards of professional rectitude. It is in that
expectation that the Parliament has vested the Council of the ICAI with the
power of making such a determination. The High Court should not lightly
substitute its view for that of the Council of the ICAI as to what constitutes
„other misconduct‟. A person aggrieved by such determination and seeking
judicial review and consequent reversal by the High Court would have to
show either that it is procedurally flawed, or that on merits it is vitiated by
perversity or malafides.

21. As far as the present case is concerned, the Respondent No.1 has been
unable to demonstrate that the impugned decision of the Council of the ICAI
that he is guilty of „other misconduct‟ or its recommendation as to the
punishment is either procedurally flawed or that on merits it is perverse or
malafide. The view taken by the Council of the ICAI that the attempt by
D&G represented by the Respondent No.1 at claiming excess beyond
entitlement attracts the charge of other misconduct in terms of the Act
suffers from no infirmity warranting interference by this Court.

22.

The decision of the Bombay High Court in Institute of Chartered

Accountants of India v. H.S.Ghia is not helpful to Respondent No.1 since
the said case seems to have turned on its own facts.

In that case, no

evidence was led on behalf of the complainant to prove the case against the
Respondent. It was in those circumstances that the disciplinary proceedings
were quashed by the Bombay High Court. As far as the present case is
concerned, this Court is of the view that there is no infirmity in the decision
of the Council of the ICAI to the effect that claiming extra expenses and
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 12 of 14

advances beyond the entitlement stipulated by the RBI guidelines is
sufficient to attract the charge of other misconduct against the Respondent
No.1. The rationale for the decision is obviously this: that members of the
ICAI are expected to display an exemplary conduct in their dealings with
clients and act in a thoroughly professional manner in all their work-related
actions. The plea that the acts with which D&G represented by Respondent
No.1 have been charged do not constitute „other misconduct‟ is hereby
rejected.

Individual vs. Collective liability
23.

As regards the question of the individual liability of Respondent No.1,

there is no merit in the contention that it is the firm that should be held
answerable. Having answered the charge against the firm, after

being

authorized in that behalf by the firm, it is not open to Respondent No.1 at
this point in time to disown liability even if it was in the capacity of a
partner of the firm D&G. The entire correspondence with the ICAI at all
times and the pleadings before the ICAI were signed by Respondent No.1
and it is he who participated in the enquiry and made the pleas as already
noticed. At the time when D&G wrote to the ICAI informing it that it is
Respondent No.1 who would be answerable for the charges, no objection
was raised by Respondent No.1. In fact he participated in the enquiry
without demur. At no stage of the entire enquiry was such an objection
raised. This plea of disowning individual liability after the conclusion of the
enquiry can only be viewed as an abuse of process aimed at frustrating the
entire exercise. Accordingly the objection raised on the ground that the case
is one of collective responsibility of the entire firm is without merit and is
rejected as such.
CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 13 of 14

Other pleas
24.

There is also nothing to show that the complaint against Respondent

No.1 was brought about for collateral reasons in order to satisfy the SBH.
No convincing material has been brought forth to substantiate such a wild
allegation.

25.

Learned counsel for the Respondent No.1 also took objection to the

fact that the decision of the Council dated 28th September, 2001 was already
disseminated to others before being communicated to the Respondent No.1.
We have gone through the records and find no force in this contention. In
any event this does not impinge on the validity of the order passed by the
Council.

26.

For all of the above reasons we confirm the findings of the DC and the

Council of the ICAI that Respondent No.1 is guilty of “other misconduct‟
and accept the recommendation made by the Council of the ICAI that the
name of Respondent No.1 be removed from the Register of Members for a
period of three months. Further steps will now be taken in accordance with
the law. The reference and all the pending applications stand disposed of.

S. MURALIDHAR, J

MADAN B. LOKUR, J
November 5, 2007
dn

CHAT.A.REF. 2 of 2003

page 14 of 14

