*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%
2007
9
+

#
!

Date of decision : February 8,

W.P.(C) 1308/1989

DHANWANTI DEVI
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. S.K. Bahaduri Advocate with
Ms. Indrani Ghosh Advocate
versus

$
^

THE SECY.ALTERNATE(NORTH ZONE) & ORS ...... Respondent
Through Ms.Zubeda Begum & Ms.Iram Mazid
Advocates
CORAM :HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes
ORDER

:Dr. S. Muralidhar, J. (ORAL)
1.

This writ petition has been filed seeking a writ of mandamus of

allotment of an alternative plot in lieu of the land of the petitioner
which was acquired pursuant to a notification dated 29.8.1967issued
under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, (‘Act’).

2.

The petitioner purchased the land in question on 28.7.1971 from

M/s Laxmi Land & Trading Corporation.

The land acquisition

proceedings culminated in an award being made and compensation
being disbursed. Pursuant to the applications under Sections 30 – 31
of the Act, an order was made by the learned Additional District Judge
on 4.10.1986 directing disbursement of compensation to different
land owners which included the petitioner herein.

3.

By a letter dated 29.5.1978, the respondent Delhi Development

WP(C) 1308/1989

page no 1 of 6

Authority (DDA) informed the petitioner that she should first claim
compensation from the Land Acquisition Collector, thereafter “apply
to the Secretary (Land and Building), Delhi Administration........... for
allotment of alternative plot.” The petitioner states that she did make
such application in the requisite form on 17.7.1978.

Thereafter on

11.4.1983, another letter was sent to her by Delhi Administration,
Land and Building Department with reference to her application dated
3.3.1983 asking her to apply for allotment of alternative plot. As
regards the said application, by letter dated 1.8.1988, the petitioner
was informed that she was “not entitled to any alternative allotment,
as per the existing policy decision in this behalf”. This led to the
petitioner filing the present petition.

5.

In reply to the writ petition, it has been stated on behalf of

respondent nos. 1 and 3 that “as per the scheme, only, the land
owners at the time of notification under Section 4 are entitled for an
alternative plot in lieu of acquired land and the case of the petitioner
was not covered under the policy, her claim as such rightfully
rejected.”

6.

A copy of the notification dated 2.5.1961 issued by the Ministry

of Home Affairs, Govt. of India, has been enclosed where in para 10
certain stipulations are set out for “allotment of land whether by
auction or otherwise to individuals (including those whose, land has
been acquired).” It is the case of the respondents that since on the
date of notification under Section 4, the petitioner was not a land
owner, she is not entitled to an alternative plot.

7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the ground on

which the claim for alternative plot was rejected is not sustainable in
WP(C) 1308/1989

page no 2 of 6

law in view of the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in Smt.

Shiv Devi Virlley vs. Lt. Governor of Delhi AIR 1987 Delhi 46. In
particular, he places reliance on para 18 of the said judgment which
reads as under:“18. It is quite clear that any one whose land
has

been

acquired

as

a

result

of

the

Notification mentioned in Cl. 8 of the Scheme
is entitled to apply.

By anyone is meant the

owner of the land at the time of acquisition
and not the owner at the time of the issue of
the Notification under S. 4. In fact, there is no
impediment in law at all either today or earlier
regarding transfers, after the Notification has
been

issued

under

S.4.

There

is

an

impediment after the acquisition notice is
issued under S.6, but that too applies after
1972. We have not yet come across a case in
which the acquisitions of planned development
were made after 1972. We would not like to
comment upon them.”

8.

The respondents in their counter affidavit point out that the

ratio in Shiv Devi is not applicable in the present case “as the land
was purchased in that case before the invocation of the scheme of
alternative plot.” The respondents are right in pointing out that the
judgment of the Full Bench of this Court in Shiv Devi makes a
distinction between persons who had purchased lands in respect of
which Section 4 notification had been issued but before the date of
the scheme for rehabilitation and those persons who had purchased
land after the date of both the notification, and the scheme. This is
clear from para 19 of the said judgment which reads as under:“19. There is another side of this picture,
which must be mentioned for completing the
discussion. It is just possible that persons may
acquire
WP(C) 1308/1989

some

land

concerning

which

a
page no 3 of 6

Notification has been issued under S. 4 or S.
6, merely for the sake of taking advantage
under the Scheme promulgated in 1961.

Of

course, that could not happen in the present
case because the petitioner acquired the land
in 1959, which was long before the scheme
was promulgated. It is, however, possible that
someone might buy land which the object of
getting an alternative plot under the Scheme.
This means that there may be a person who
seeing that there is a Notification under S. 4,
buy some land at a relatively low price, merely
to get a plot under the Scheme. If such a case
comes up, it may well be said that it is a
fraudulent use of the Scheme for the purpose
of

acquiring

a

inexpensive rate.

residential

plot

at

an

Considering the value of

land at the present time, it is possible for
somebody

to

buy

up

land

scheduled

or

intended to be equipped by the government
merely to get an alternative residential plot.
However, the chances of this being done are
very small, for one thing, only on plot can be
bought by one person.
scheme.

That is the whole

No allottee can get land under the

Scheme if he already owns a house or plot.
So, only a non-owner of a plot or a non-owner
of a house can get an allotment. Hence, the
chances of the misuse of the Scheme are very
much reduced.”

It is clear, therefore, that in Shiv Devi although the applicant for
alternative land there had purchased the land after the date of
notification under Section 4, such purchase was before the scheme
was announced. In these circumstances, the applicant there was held
to still be eligible for alternative land.

WP(C) 1308/1989

page no 4 of 6

9.

In the present case the respondents state that the case of the

petitioner for alternative land was processed under the 1961 Scheme
and they have accordingly annexed the copy of the said notification
with their reply. Counsel for the petitioner on the other hand states
that the ostensible ground on which the claim was rejected, was only
that the petitioner was not the owner of the land on the date of the
Section 4 notification, and therefore, in the light of the judgment of
the Full Bench that ground cannot be invoked to reject the claim of
the petitioner.

10.

This Court is bound by the Judgment of the Full Bench in Shiv

Devi which unambiguously states that where the purchase of land is
made after announcement of the Scheme then such purchase would
be viewed as being speculative and would disentitle such purchaser
from being allotted an alternative land.

By the judgment dated

24.8.1990 in Kulwant Kaur vs. Union of India 1990 (42) DLT 33
Division Bench of this Court had occasion to discuss the entitlement of
persons whose lands had been acquired.

In the said judgment a

reference has been made to the schemes of 1961, 1967 and 1989.
The Division Bench in Kulwant Kaur explained that in Shiv Devi the
“Full Bench was interpreting the scheme of 1961” which was
materially different from the scheme in 1989.

This much is clear

from the decision in Kulwant Kaur that the scheme under which the
claim in Shiv Devi was being considered was the 1961 scheme, which
is the scheme under which the present claim of the petitioner has also
been processed.

Even if one were to apply the 1967 scheme the

petitioner here cannot seek benefit there under since admittedly the
petitioner purchased the land in question on 28.7.1971 long after the
1967 scheme was announced. In that view of the matter, the claim of
the petitioner here for allotment of alternative land is not sustainable
WP(C) 1308/1989

page no 5 of 6

in law.

11.

Counsel for the petitioner makes a fervent plea for the grant of

the alternative prayer in the petition that the petitioner should be
awarded higher compensation.

This Court cannot entertain such a

request since such a claim should have been made in terms of the Act,
which contains specific provisions providing a remedy for such a
grievance.

12.

In that view of the matter the writ petition is without merit and

is accordingly dismissed.

sd/S. MURALIDHAR, J
FEBRUARY 08, 2007
raj

WP(C) 1308/1989

page no 6 of 6

