*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

Date of decision: February 8, 2007
12
+

W.P.(C) 2406/2004 & CM No 2244/2004

M/S SMITA INDUSTRIES
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, Senior Advocate
with Mr. Maneesh Goyal and Ms. Swati,
Advocates

versus

D.D.A.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. J.M. Sabharwal, Senior Advocate
with Ms. Sangeeta Chandra and Mr.
Kumar Jha and Mr. S.K. Sabharwal,

Ranjeet
Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
Digest?
ORDER

Yes

: Dr. S. Muralidhar, J. (open court)

1.

This writ petition is directed against the order dated 27.5.2002

passed by the Deputy Director (Industrial), Delhi Development
Authority ('DDA') cancelling the sub-lease in favour of the petitioner
here in respect of plot No. B-II/8, Mohan Cooperative Industrial
Estate, New Delhi.

2.

On 8.4.1981 a tri-partite perpetual sub-lease was executed

between the President of India ('Lessor') of the first part, the Mohan
Cooperative Industrial Estate Limited ('Lessee') of the second part,

WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 1 of 10

and the petitioner here ('Sub lease') of the third part in respect of the
property in question. The relevant clauses of the said deed of
perpetual sub-lease reads as under:

“6 (a) The sub Lessee shall not sell, transfer,
assign or otherwise part with the possession
of the whole or any part of the industrial plot
in any form or manner, benami or otherwise,
to a person who is not a member of the
lessee.

(b) The sub-lessee shall not sell, transfer,
assign or otherwise part with the possession
of the whole or any part of the industrial plot
to any other member of the lessee except with
the previous consent in writing of the lessor
which he shall be entitled to refuse in his
absolute discretion.
Provided that, in the event of the
consent being given, the Lessor may impose
such terms and conditions as he thinks fit and
the Lessor shall be entitled to claim and
recover a portion of the unearned increase in
the value (i.e. the difference between the
premium paid and the market value) of the
industrial plot at the time of sale, transfer,
assignment, or parting with the possession,
the amount to be recovered being fifty per
cent of the unearned increase and the
decision of the Lessor in respect of the
market value shall be final and binding.
Provided that the Lt. Governor reserves
the right to resume any plot or part thereof
on payment of reasonable compensation
which may be required for the development of
the area like laying of sewerage, Trunk
services, electric and telephone wires and
water supply lines etc. or such by such other
purposes, which may be deemed to public and
general utility.
Provided that, in the event of the sale or
fore closure of the mortgaged or charged
property, the lessor shall be entitled to claim
and recover the fifty per cent of the unearned
increase shall be a first charges, having
priority over the said mortgage or change.
The decision of the lessor in respect of the
market value of the said industrial plot shall
be final and binding on all parties concerned.

WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 2 of 10

Provided further that the lessor shall
have the preemptive right to purchase the
mortgaged shall have the preemptive right to
purchase the mortgaged or changed property
after deducting fifty per cent of the unearned
increase as aforesaid.
……………………….
14. The sub lessee shall not without the
written consent of the lessor use or permit to
be used the industrial plot or any building
thereon for residence or for carrying on any
trade or business whatsoever or use the same
or permit the same to be used for any purpose
other than that of carrying on the
manufacturing process or running the
industry of or such other manufacturing
process or running the industry of Item As
per
Master
Plan
or
such
other
manufacturing process or industry as may be
approved from time to time by the Chief
Commissioner or do or suffer to be done
therein any act or thing whatsoever which in
the opinion of the lessor may be a nuisance,
annoyance or disturbance to the lessor, lessee
and other sub-lessees and persons in the
neighbourhood.
Or any unforeseen expenditure to be
made hereinafter by the lessee on any item of
development to be carried out in terms of
clause III of the Agreement or the instructions
issued by the Lt. Governor or the directions
given by the local bodies in this behalf.
Provided that, notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, the Lessor
in his absolute discretion or the Lessee with
the prior consent in writing of the lessor,
may, without prejudice to the right of re-entry
as aforesaid, waive or condone breaches,
temporarily or otherwise, on receipt of such
amount by the lessor or by the lessee on
behalf of the lessor and on such terms and
conditions as may be determined by the lessor
and the lessor or the lessee whoever may be
entitled may also accept the payment of the
said sum or sums or the rent which shall be in
arrear as aforesaid together with interest at
the rate of six percent per annum.
The
amounts for waiver or condonation received
by the Lessee from the sub-lessee shall be
paid forthwith by the lessee to the lessor
subject to such deductions as the lessor may,
in his absolute discretion allow to be retained
by the lessee.”

WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 3 of 10

3.

On 26.8.1998, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner

by the DDA stating that a site inspection had been carried out which
had revealed the following:

“1. You have sold out the plot to Sh. Sanjay
Jain.
2. You have sub-letted the premises to M/s LG
unauthorisedly.
3. Premises is being misused by M/s. LG as
godown of electronic items. No industrial
activities were ....during inspection.
which is/are contrary to the terms and
conditions of auction/allotment and thereby
you have committed the breach of the clause
(s) II (5-a) (6a)(b) and (14) of the
auction/allotment.”
4.

The last portion of the said show cause notice reads as under:
“Now, therefore, take notice that in case of
your failure to remove the above said
breach(s) within 15 days from the issue of
this notice, action for cancellation of Auction
bid/allotment in respect of the plot referred
to above will be initiated without further
notice to you.”

5.

The petitioner replied to the show cause notice dated 26.6.1998

denying the allegation that it had committed breach of clauses 6(a)
and (b) and asserted that it was still “in possession and control of the
above mentioned plot as contemplated in clause 6 (a) and (b).” As
regards the allegations of breach of clause 14, the petitioner's reply
was:
“The
premises
are
being
used
for
warehousing/storage of electronic goods
along with their repair and related assembly,
loading/unloading, and dispatch by Road
Transport which do not constitute any breach
of clause 14 of the sub-lease deed and are
integral part of any service industry. In fact
the above activity is perfectly legal and is
allowed as per Master Plan of Delhi notified
WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 4 of 10

by
Ministry
of
Urban
Development
notification S.0.606 (E) dated 1.8.1990.
Also M.C.I.E. is allotted M status which
clearly sates that storage, godown and
warehousing are permissible and given as
S.No. 020 in sub-clause 8(2) of Delhi Master
Plan (Photocopy attached).
In view of the above the plot in question is
being used as per Master Plan of Delhi and
there is no breach of any terms of the sublease. In fact as per letter of Master Plan
department letter no. F3(29)/63-MP dated
3.10.69 written (photocopy attached) from the
office of Additional Secretary DDA to the
society Mohan Cooperative it was clearly
clarified that “Warehousing for the purposes
of land use which includes industrial use”.
Therefore, both warehousing and industrial
use are synonymous to each other and would
include each other was decided by the DDA
way back in 1960's.”
6.

Another letter was issued on 11.9.1998 by the DDA to the

petitioner seeking attested copies of income tax and sales tax returns,
assessment orders for the last three years, M.C.D. Licence, water bill
and latest electricity bill. The petitioner replied to this on 30.9.1998.

7.

Thereafter, on 27.5.2002 the impugned order was passed by the

DDA cancelling the sub-lease. The relevant portion of the said order
reads as under:
“And whereas show cause notice on account
of the aforesaid breaches under clause II (5)
(II), (6) (a & b) & II 14 were issued to you on
30.3.1998,
26.6.1998
and
23.12.1999.
Neither your reply dated 27.7.1998 to the
show cause notice dated 23.6.1998 was found
to be satisfactory nor you have removed the
aforesaid breaches in spite of the opportunity
given to you.
Now, therefore, the sub lease of the aforesaid
plot has been determined by the lesser/Lt.
Governor, Delhi vide his order dated 9.5.2002
for violation of the aforesaid clauses of the
lease deed.
Your occupation over the
aforesaid premises has become unauthorized.
You are, therefore, requested to hand over
WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 5 of 10

the possession of the said premises along
with superstructure standing thereon tour Jr.
Engineer on 2.6.2002 at 11.00 A.M. failing
which proceedings under the provisions of
Public Premises (Unauthorized Occupant Act,
1971) shall be initiated against you and all
other occupants for eviction from the
aforesaid public premises.”

8.

By an order dated 24.2.2004 while directing the notice to issue

to the writ petition, this Court stayed the operation of the order dated
27.5.2002. In reply to the writ petition, the DDA has stated that the
inspection of the premises taken place on 13.6.1996 and 11.2.1998 by
the Field Staff which had discovered the breach referred to in the
show cause notice. As regards the breach of clause 14 it is averred by
DDA in its reply affidavit that “at the time of inspection it is noticed
that no industrial activities have been carried out and the premises
has been sub letted (sic) to M/s. LG Electronic.

No industrial

activities have been carried out by the sub-lessee. The petitioner has
violated the terms and conditions of perpetual lease deed and the plot
has been sold to Sh.Sanjay Jain.”

9.

Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, learned senior counsel appearing for the

petitioner submits that the impugned order gives no reasons at all for
the conclusion it records to the effect that the petitioner had violated
the terms and conditions of the sub-lease.

He points out that the

reference in the impugned order to the violation of clause II (5) of the
sub lease, which requires the petitioner to construct an industrial
building, did not form part of the original show cause notice. In any
event, it was not the case of the DDA that the said clause had been
violated. The impugned order, according to him does not deal with
the petitioner’s reply to the show cause notice where the petitioner
had specifically denied any breach of clauses 6 (a & b) as well as 14 of

WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 6 of 10

the sub lease. Further, the impugned order makes a reference to an
order dated 9.5.2002 passed by the Hon'ble Lieutenant Governor (LG)
which the latter had determined that there was a violation of the sublease. A copy of the said order had not been enclosed to the impugned
order or given to the petitioner till date. Mr. Chandiok submits that
the impugned order suffers non-application of mind and being a nonreasoned order is in violation of the principles of natural justice. Mr.
Chandhiok, also refers to the relevant provisions of the Master Plan
foe Delhi (MPD) where the use Zone M-1 which covers the case of the
petitioner, contemplates the use of the premises for storage purposes.
He urges that since this use of the premises is not in violation of the
Master Plan there was no violation of clause 14 of sub lease.

10.

Mr. J.M. Sabharwal, learned senior counsel appearing for the

DDA states that the impugned order dated 27.5.2002 is selfexplanatory and contains the reasons why the respondent DDA sought
to cancel the sub-lease.

He further states that there is no

requirement of enclosing a copy of the order dated 9.5.2002 passed
by the LG and that in any event the petitioner made no request for
being supplied a copy of the said order. According to him, it was for
the petitioner to show that it had either not sold the premises in
question or sub-let the premises. Since the petitioner failed to do so,
the violation of clauses 6 (a) and (b) of sub-lease stood established.
The violation of clause 14, according to Mr. Sabharwal, was admitted
in the reply of the petitioner to the show cause notice. Mr. Sabharwal
submits that the provisions of Master Plan only postulates a
permissive user and it is not automatic that premises falling within
the use Zone can put to the use indicated thereunder in the MPD. The
petitioner would have to apply for such permission and if such

WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 7 of 10

permission is granted then the petitioner could possibly have a
defence to the breach of clause 14.

11.

After considering the materials on record and submissions of the

counsel, this Court is of the view that the impugned order dated
27.5.2002,

does

not

contain

any

reasons

whatsoever

for

the

conclusion arrived at therein that there has been a violation of the
clauses of the sub-lease by the petitioner.

Apart from making a

reference to the contents of the show cause notice, and the fact that a
reply was sent to the show cause notice, the explanation offered by
the petitioner in reply to the show cause notice has neither been
discussed nor dealt with. Although the impugned order refers to the
LG’s order dated 9.5.2002, no copy of such order is enclosed either
with the impugned order or even the counter affidavit filed by the
respondent.

Therefore, the Court is handicapped in knowing the

reasons that weighed with the LG while passing the order dated
9.5.2002 which has resulted in the cancellation of the sub-lease. On
this ground itself, the impugned order dated 27.5.2002, being a nonspeaking order having adverse civil consequences for the petitioner,
cannot be sustained in law.

12.

The grounds on which the impugned order of cancellation of the

sub-lease is posited, viz. that there was a sub-lease of the premises in
question to one party and there has been a transfer by way of sale to
another, are mutually inconsistent and contradictory.

Neither has

been sought to be established by any material placed on record by the
respondent DDA apart from stating that the site inspection carried out
by its Field Staff revealed that the property has been sold by the
petitioner to Shri Sanjay Jain and the same property has also been

WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 8 of 10

sub-let by the petitioner to M/s. LG Electronics. The reasons in this
regard that may have prevailed with the respondent DDA, should be
self evident from the impugned order cancelling the sub-lease.
Unfortunately such reasons are not to be found to be in the impugned
order at all.

13.

As regards the breach of clause 14 of the sub-lease in regard to

use the premises for storage purposes, reliance has been placed by
Mr. Chandhiok, learned senior counsel on the decision of Darshan

Lal v. Delhi Development Authority 119 (2005) DLT 440 which in
turn to a earlier decision of this Court in Rajandheer (India) Pvt.

Ltd. v. Delhi Development Authority 109 (2004) DLT 442. Both
these decisions refer to provisions of the MPD that stipulate storage,
godown and warehousing as permissible uses in the Use Zones,
including M-I, where the petitioner here is located. Be that as it may,
where the clause 14 of the sub-lease itself incorporates by way of a
reference, the MPD and where the petitioner in its reply had
specifically denied the contention of the respondents and asserted
that certain clauses of the MPD permit the user of the premises for
warehousing and storage, it was incumbent on the respondent to deal
with the said explanation and give reasons why such explanation
cannot be accepted. The impugned order is completely silent on this
aspect.

Even the counter affidavit filed before this Court does not

advert to it, although it is settled law that a counter affidavit cannot
substitute the reasons for a decision which have to be found in the
order communicating such decision. Also, it appears that even if there
was such breach, it could have been compounded by either requiring
the petitioner to remove such breach or apply for permission, and
consider that application in accordance with law. Instead, the DDA

WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 9 of 10

has taken the extreme step of cancelling the sub-lease without giving
any reasons for its decision. Lastly, the Court is constrained to note
that the decision was taken nearly four years after the show cause
notice was issued. No reasons are forthcoming for this delay. All these
are factors that contribute to the arbitrariness of not only the decision
making process but the decision itself.

15.

For all the above reasons, the impugned order dated 27.5.2002

is unsustainable in law and is hereby quashed. The writ petition is
allowed with costs of Rs.5,000/- which shall be paid by the DDA to the
petitioner within a period of four weeks from today.

Dasti.

S. MURALIDHAR, J
FEBRUARY 08, 2007
rk

WP(C) 2406/2004

page no 10 of 10

