*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : September 3, 2007

R-1
+

ITR 553 of 1983
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. J.R. Goel, Advocate
versus
M/S KWALITY ICE CREAM
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Ajay Vohra with Ms. Kavita Jha and Mr.
Rahul Yadavi, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S.MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
YES
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
YES
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

YES
ORDER

In this reference, relevant to the Assessment Year 1976-77, the
following question of law has been referred for our opinion under Section
256 (1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961('Act'):
“Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of
the case, the liability to pay the sales tax of
Rs.4,24,029/- made up of Rs.3,22,482/- being
refund of sales tax received by the assessee during
the relevant year and Rs.1,01,507/- being provision
for sales tax made in the accounting period
relevant to the assessment year 1976-77, was
chargeable to tax to the total income of the
assessee?”
In so far as the first part of the question is concerned, whether the
liability to pay sales tax of Rs.3,22,482/- being refund of sales tax received
by the assessee during the relevant year was chargeable to tax, learned

ITR 553 of 1983

page 1 of 4

counsel for the parties are agreed that in view of the decision in Polyflex
(India) Pvt. Limited v. Commissioner of Income Tax [2002] 257 ITR 343
(SC) this part of the question is required to be answered in the affirmative,
that is in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee.
The second part of the question is whether the liability to pay sales
tax on the amount of Rs.1,01,507/- being provision for sales tax made in the
accounting period relevant to the assessment year 1976-77 is chargeable to
tax. The admitted position is that the assessee is following the mercantile
system of accounting. Initially there was some dispute whether the ice
cream sold by the assessee was exigible to tax or not. This Court in its
judgment dated 27th March, 1974 held that the ice cream manufactured and
sold by the assessee was not exigible to sales tax.
The Revenue was not satisfied with the decision rendered by this
Court and preferred an appeal which remained pending before the Supreme
Court. Ultimately it was decided by the Supreme Court on 6 th September,
1995. It is common ground that the decision of the Supreme Court affirmed
the decision of this Court that the assessee was not liable to pay sales tax on
the ice cream sold by it.
During the pendency of the the appeal preferred by the Revenue in
the Supreme Court, the assessee made a provision of Rs.1,01,507/- for sales
tax in the previous year relevant to the assessment year 1976-77. According
to learned counsel for the Revenue, this provision was not required to be
made since this Court had declared that no sales tax was payable on the sale
of ice cream and further the Supreme Court also did not grant a stay of the
operation of the judgment of this Court. Learned counsel for the Revenue
submitted that since the assessee did not in fact pay any sales tax on the sale

ITR 553 of 1983

page 2 of 4

of ice cream in the relevant previous year, there was no question of any
provision for sales tax being made.
Learned counsel for the Assessee has drawn our attention to the
decision of the Supreme Court in Kedarnath Jute Manufacturing Co.
Limited v. Commissioner of Income Tax [1971] 82 ITR 363 wherein it has
been held that the moment a dealer makes either a purchase or sale of any
commodity subject to sales tax, the obligation to pay the tax arises.
Although that liability could not be enforced till quantification was effected
by assessment proceedings, the liability for payment of tax was independent
of the assessment. Since the assessee was following the mercantile system
of accounting, it was entitled to make a provision for and therefore deduct
from the profits and gains of its business the liability to pay sales tax. The
liability did not cease to be a liability merely because the assessee had
disputed it. So long as the appeal filed by the Revenue was pending before
the Supreme Court, the liability had accrued in so far as the assessee was
concerned.
The Allahabad High Court in J.K. Synthetics Limited v. O.S. Bajpai,
ITO, Central Circle-V, Kanpur [1976] 105 ITR 864 has held that an
assessee is entitled to claim deduction in respect of the liability of excise
duty for which it had made a provision in its account books. This view was
upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India v. J.K. Synthetics
Limited [1993] 199 ITR 14. The Supreme Court held that since under
Section 41 of the Act the liability to tax would depend on the outcome of
the appeal, there would be no prejudice to the department if the provision is
made and the assessment is made on that basis.
Section 41 (1) Act envisages that where the assessee has obtained

ITR 553 of 1983

page 3 of 4

some benefit in respect of a trading liability by way of remission or
cessation thereof, the amount obtained by the assessee or the value of
benefit accruing to him shall be deemed to be profits and gains of business
for that year in which such remission or cessation occurs and would
accordingly be chargeable to income tax as the income of that relevant
previous year. There would be no loss of tax in so far as the Revenue is
concerned. It can now tax in the Assessment Year 1996-97, the entire
amount provided for by the assessee towards sales tax liability.
Under the circumstances, we answer the second part of the question
in the negative that is in favour of the assessee and against the revenue.
The reference is disposed of accordingly.

MADAN B. LOKUR,J

S.MURALIDHAR, J
SEPTEMBER 03, 2007
rk

ITR 553 of 1983

page 4 of 4

