*
76
%

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of order : 14.2.2007

+

CONT.CAS(C) 43/2006
BHOOP SINGH

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. S.N. Bhardwaj, Advocate

versus
SEES PAL & ANR.
..... Respondents
Through Mr. H.P. Singh with
Mr. Vivek Kr. Singh, Mr. R.C. Bhadoria,
Mr. M.K. Tiwari, Advocate
Mr. Aditya Madan, Advocate for
CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes
ORDER
S.Muralidhar, J. (open court)
1.

This contempt petition was filed on 7.12.2005 complaining of

willful disobedience by the Respondents 1 and 2, Head Constable Sees
Pal and Sub Inspector Balbir Singh respectively, of an order dated
31.8.2005 passed by this Court in the petitioner's Writ Petition
(Criminal) No. 1470 of 2005 (Bhoop Singh v. State). By the said
order, this Court had recorded the statement of the learned counsel
for the respondents that “the petitioner will not be harassed and will

be dealt with in accordance with law in the event he is required in any
proceedings.”

2. In the said writ petition in which the above order was passed, the
petitioner had expressed an apprehension regarding the safety and
security of his son and himself in the following paras:

“7. That the petitioner's son was married on
15.4.2001 and one son was born out of the
wedlock on Ist May, 2002. Another child is
also expected in about 2-3 months and the
whereabouts of the son of the petitioner is not
known to the petitioner and the police is
conducting raids in day in and day out in order
to arrest him and to implicate him in false
cases. The petitioner's son is not in a position
to live in the house of the petitioner due to
terror and threats of the police to him. Even on
dates of hearings in the cases before the
Patiala House Courts. Petitioner's son is
finding difficult to produce himself in the Court
and the Police creates Nakabandi in order
petitioner's son and to disallow him to attend
the Court and further involve him in false
criminal cases. Police is also planning to kill
petitioner's son is in danger and he can at any
time breath his last and police may kill him or
may detain him in large number of false cases
in order to make him bad character and to
obtain order to extern him from Delhi in order
to create false evidence and to keep him in
Tihar Jail in false cases by misleading the
Courts also.
8. That the petitioner is a Government Servant,
aged about 51 years and has no criminal
record.
9. The petitioner has sent large number of

representations
to
various
authorities
including D.C.P. (South West) but no action
was taken.
Even respondent no.2 did not
protect the life of the petitioner or his son Jai
Prakash. The erring police officials were not
taken to task and petitioner's life is also in
danger and threats are being given to him that
he will also be arrested in false cases with the
result that he will be dismissed from the
services of Delhi Transport Corporation to
deprive him to take benefits of his retirement,
which is still nine years away.”
3.

The Petitioner, who is working with the Delhi Transport

Corporation (`DTC'), says in this contempt petition that despite the
above order, he was picked up by Respondents 1 and 2 on 4.10.2005
from his residence at about 7.45 PM and illegally detained for more
than 24 hours at the R.K. Puram Police Station, Sector 8.

In the

present contempt petition, notice was first directed to issue on
16.1.2006 and fresh notice was ordered on 3.3.2006.

4.

It appears that on 7.3.2006 the petitioner's son Jai Prakash was

killed in a police encounter at Gurgaon Sagar Apartments.

The

petitioner then sent a telegram on 26.4.2006 to the Commissioner of
Police, Delhi as well as the Chief Justice of this Court and Lieutenant
Governor in which he made a reference to the pendency of the
present contempt petition, to the order dated 31.8.2005 of this Court
granting police protection and the fact in the earlier writ petition he
had expressed an apprehension regarding “encounter of my son”.

A

serious allegation made in this Telegram was that “contemner Head
Constable Sheesh Pal, Police Station, R.K. Puram, Crime Branch,
Sector 8 threatened me on 15/4/2006 to withdraw contempt petition
fixed for 31st May 2006 before Justice Nandrajog.......”.

5. When this matter was listed before this Court on 31.7.2006, the
Court’s attention was drawn to the aforesaid telegram of the
petitioner. Thereupon the Court passed the following order:
“The DCP shall ensure the presence of the
respondents/ alleged contemners on the next
date of hearing. The DCP concerned shall
also look into the complaint of the petitioner
and file a brief status report on the next date
of hearing.”
The matter was thereafter listed for hearing on 5.10.2006.
6.

The status report as directed was not filed by the next date of

hearing. The Court then issued the following direction on 5.10.2006:

“Mr. Ashish Gupta appears on behalf of the
DCP and submits that the report would be
furnished to the court in compliance with the
previous directions dated 31.7.2006. Let the
report be filed along with an affidavit and
copies of the proceedings conducted by
the DCP within four weeks.”
7.

Pursuant to the above order a status report has been filed by

Mr. A.S. Cheema, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crime & Railways)
on 8.2.2007 enclosing therewith a communication dated 12.7.2006

whereby the ACP in the office of the DCP (South West) forwarded the
complaint of the petitioner. The endorsement on the copy of the
petitioner’s telegram dated 26.4.2006 shows that it was received in
the police headquarters on 27.4.2006.

The status report in para 3

states:
“That an enquiry was conducted by the
Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crime &
Railways) Delhi Police, deponent herein,
about the allegations of the petitioner and SI
Sahdev Kumar Rana was made the
Enquiry Officer.”
8.

From the above statement it is clear that although the Court had

in its order dated 5.10.2006 required these proceedings to be
conducted by the DCP, the concerned DCP entrusted a task to Sub
Inspector.

The said Sub Inspector recorded the statement of the

petitioner and of the Head Constable Sees Pal and did little else. The
report of the SI states that “enquiry was also made in the
neighbourhood of the petitioner at Saraswati Enclave, Gopal Nagar
but nobody came forward to give any statement or proof the
allegations made against the HC Shispal. Moreover Bhoop Singh
could not produce any independent witness to prove his allegations
against HC Shispal.” After narrating the version of HC Shishpal the
conclusion arrived at by the SI reads as under:
“It seems that due to killing of his son Jai
Prakash and to take revenge from the police,
he is making such complaints to pressurize the
police. Presently, Bhoop Singh is not residing
at above mentioned address.”

9.

The DCP in his status report has virtually reproduced the above

paragraphs of the report of the SI and has filed it in this Court as his
(DCP’s) status report.

10.

This Court finds that the conduct of the DCP in not complying

with the directions contained in the order dated 5.10.2006 requiring
him to conduct proceedings himself, is wholly unjustified and
unacceptable.

Moreover, considering the fact that the present

contempt petition is against the HC Sees Pal and SI Balbir Singh, it is
incomprehensible how the enquiry could be entrusted by the DCP to a
subordinate officer of the rank of SI. The inquiry conducted by the SI
does not inspire any confidence and reveals a casual approach
adopted by the respondents to get to the truth. If at all the DCP was
not able to conduct the proceedings himself as directed by this Court
on 5.10.2006 he should have entrusted it to another senior officer of
equal rank and the enquiry itself should have been conducted with the
degree of seriousness that was merited considering the events that
had transpired during the pendency of the present contempt petition.

11. The status report filed by the DCP also does not acknowledge the
previous proceedings in WP(Crl) No. 1470 of 2005 in which the order
dated 31.8.2005 was passed by this Court. The Court is unable to
know from the status report know what steps were taken by the police

pursuant to the order dated 31.8.2005. The Court is also unable to
appreciate how the telegram dated 26.4.2006 was not forwarded for
action till 12.7.2006 even within the offices of the Delhi Police.

12. The facts of the case speak for themselves and the respondents
hardly need be reminded that they raise serious questions of
answerability and the accountability of the police. When this Court
entrusted the task to a senior level police officer to conduct an
enquiry, that order should have been acted upon with the seriousness
it deserved. The Court is constrained to observe that its order dated
5.10.2006 has not been complied with by the respondents in the
manner that was expected of them.

13. In these circumstances, the Court finds it necessary to require the
Commissioner of Police to look into the matter himself and entrust the
enquiry to some senior level officer in the Delhi Police not below the
rank of Deputy Commissioner of Police.

The enquiry be conducted

and completed within a period of six weeks and the report be filed by
the concerned inquiry officer in this Court within one week after the
conclusion of the inquiry. As a result of the inquiry, if respondents find
that any disciplinary action is required to be taken against any of their
officers, they can proceed in accordance with law without waiting for

further orders of this Court.

14. List on 17.4.2007.

15. A copy of order be given Dasti to the parties under the signature
of the Court Master.

16.

A certified copy of order be sent by the Registry to the

Commissioner of Police, Delhi within three days.

Sd/S. MURALIDHAR,
J
FEBRUARY 14, 2007
rk

