*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Orders reserved: 4th October, 2007
Date of decision: 12th October, 2007

+

ITA No. 84 of 2005
M/S KASHMIR ARTS
..... Appellant
Through Mr. Gyan Prakash, Advocate.
Versus
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX VII
..... Respondent
Through Ms. P.L. Bansal, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes

: Dr. S. Muralidhar, J.

1.1

This appeal under Section 260 A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ('Act') is

directed against the order dated 7th October, 2004 passed by the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal ('Tribunal'), Delhi Bench “G”, New Delhi in M.A.
No.159/Del/2004 in ITA No.3523/Del/1997. By the said impugned order the
Tribunal dismissed the application filed by the Appellant before it under
Section 254(2) of the Act seeking rectification of its order dated 30 th
September, 2003 by which it dismissed the Assessee’s appeal.
1.2 It requires to be noticed that the Appellant had challenged the main order
dated 30th September, 2003 passed by the Tribunal dismissing ITA No.
3523/Del/1997, in ITA No.34 of 2005. However, on 18th February, 2005 the

ITA No. 84 of 2005

page 1 of 8

appellant withdrew the ITA No. 34 of 2005 and accordingly this Court
dismissed the said appeal as withdrawn on that date. Further this Court framed
the following question of law for consideration in the present appeal :
“Whether the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was
correct in law in holding that the assessee is entitled to
reduce interest paid by it from the interest received by it,
while calculating deduction under Section 80-HHC (3A)
read with Explanation (baa) of the Income Tax Act,
1961?”
Upon perusing the orders in the present matter and hearing submissions of
counsel, we find that the question ought to be re-formulated in the following
manner:
“Whether the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was
justified in declining to entertain the rectification
application and consequently the Assessee's contention
that it is entitled to reduce the interest paid by it from the
interest received by it, while calculating deduction under
Section 80-HHC (3A) read with Explanation (baa) of the
Income Tax Act, 1961?”
2.

The facts relevant for the present appeal are that for the Assessment Year

1993-94 the Assessee, which is in the business of exporting carpets, filed a
return on 12th October, 1993 showing an income of Rs.12,04,030/-. Later on 3rd
September, 1995 the Assessee filed a revised return disclosing an income of
Rs.12,82,976/-. The case was processed by the Assessing Officer ('AO') under
Section 143 (1) (a) of the Act.

3.

While the assessment proceedings were in progress, the Assessee by its

letter dated 19th September, 1995 claimed deduction of Rs.3,62,76,246/(revised) under Section 80HHC of the Act. In addition, the Appellant furnished
an explanation that it had deducted 10% of the receipts amounting to

ITA No. 84 of 2005

page 2 of 8

Rs.50,48,648/- from the total indirect cost while calculating the said deduction.

4.

The AO held that the Assessee's claim for a deduction of 10% of the

receipts from the total indirect cost was not correct and disallowed the same.
The AO further took the view that the Assessee had debited a sum of
Rs.4,03,422/- to the Profit & Loss Account ('P&L Account') as interest on
Fixed Deposit Receipts ('FDRs'). The details produced revealed that the
Assessee had paid a sum of Rs.12,54,280/- as interest to the bank on the credit
facilities enjoyed by it and received a sum of Rs.8,50,858/- as interest on FDRs
kept as margin money with the bank. After ‘netting’ the interest earned against
the interest paid, the difference was debited by the Assessee to the P&L
account. The AO held that that the interest paid and the interest received were
two separate transactions. Since the Assessee had utilised the loans from the
bank for business purpose and the same not having used for making fixed
deposits, there was no correlation between the loan taken by the Assessee from
the bank and the fixed deposits kept with the bank. Accordingly the AO
directed that the amount of Rs.8,50,858/- constituting the interest received on
FDRs should be deducted from the profits and gains of the business in terms of
Explanation (baa) (1) to sub Section (4A) of Section 80HHC.

5.

Aggrieved by the order of the AO, the Assessee filed an appeal before

the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) ['CIT(A)']. The CIT(A) by his
order dated 18th March, 1997 held that “since interest was paid and received
from the same bank, the net amount of the two transactions has to be
considered while computing business income under Section 28 to 44.”

ITA No. 84 of 2005

page 3 of 8

6.

The Revenue then filed an appeal to the Tribunal. By an order dated

30th September, 2003 the Tribunal followed the dictum of the Kerala High
Court in K.Ravindranathan Nair v. CIT 262 ITR 669 where in similar
circumstances it was found that “the interest from short-term deposits received
by the appellant was not the direct result of any export of any goods or
merchandise” and that “the interest income received on the short term deposit
though it could be attributed to the export business could not be treated as
income derived from the export business.” Accordingly the appeal filed by the
Revenue was allowed.

7.

After the decision of the Special Bench of the Tribunal in Lalsons

Enterprises v. Deputy CIT (2004) 89 ITD 25 (Del) [SB], the assessee filed an
application before the Tribunal under Section 254 (2) of the Act for
rectification stating that it was entitled to netting of interest in terms of that
decision. By its order dated 7th October, 2004 the Tribunal dismissed the
application on the ground that the judgment in Lalsons Enterprises had been
rendered after the decision dated 30th September 2003 of the Tribunal in the
Assessee’s appeal and that therefore this did not constitute a ground for
rectification.

8.

The learned counsel for the Assessee submitted that in view of the

judgments of this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Shri Ram Honda
Power Equip [2007] 289 ITR 475 (Del) and CIT v. Punjab Stainless Steel
Ind. [2007] 162 Taxman 9 (Del) the Assessee is bound to succeed. Since
according to him the AO had held that the interest income was business
ITA No. 84 of 2005

page 4 of 8

income, netting had to follow.

9.

We are unable to accept the submission made on behalf of the Assessee.

We find that the decision of the Special Bench of the Tribunal in Lalsons
Enterprises as explained and modified by this Court in Shri Ram Honda
Power Equip does not help the Assessee at all. We may recall what was said in
the said decision (ITR, p.506):
“....we entirely agree with the following formulation of the Special
Bench of the Tribunal in Lalsons (ITD, p. 62):
“If the interest received is found to have a nexus with the
business, still it remains to be excluded from the profits of
the business by virtue of Explanation (baa) (1), but the
claim is that the quantum of such interest income to be
excluded must be determined in accordance with the
computation provisions relating to business by allowing
expenditure by way of interest which bears a nexus with
the interest receipt. The computation provisions include
Section 37 (1) under which any expenditure incurred or
laid wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the
business is to be allowed as a deduction. Therefore, any
expenditure incurred which has a connection or nexus
with the interest receipt has to be allowed as a deduction
and only the balance can be excluded from business
profits.”
To the above, we may add a few lines by way of clarification. It will
bear examination whether obtaining the loan and paying interest
thereon (laying out the expenditure by way of interest) was “wholly
and exclusively” for the purpose of earning the interest on the fixed
deposit, to draw an analogy from Section 37. This nexus will have
to be shown by the assessee for application of the netting

ITA No. 84 of 2005

page 5 of 8

principle.” (emphasis supplied)
This Court in Shriram Honda Power Equip further concluded (ITR, p.509):
“(i) to (iii) xxxxxxxx
(iv) Where surplus funds are parked with the bank and interest is
earned thereon it can only be categorised as income from other
sources. This receipt merits separate treatment under section 56 of
the Act which is outside the singe of profits and gains from business
and profession.

It goes entirely out of the reckoning for the

purposes of section 80HHC.
(v) Interest earned on fixed deposits for the purposes of availing of
credit facilities from the bank, does not have an immediate nexus
with the export business and therefore has to necessarily be treated
as income from other sources and not business income.
(vi) and (vii)xxxxxxx
(viii) The word ‘interest’ in clause (baa) of the Explanation connotes
‘net interest’ and not ‘gross interest’. Therefore, in deducting such
interest, the AO will take into account the net interest i.e. gross
interest as reduced by expenditure incurred for earning such interest.
The decision of the Special Bench of the ITAT in Lalsons to this
effect is affirmed. In holding as above, we differ from the judgments
of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Rani Paliwal and the
Madras High Court in Chinnapandi and affirm the ruling of the
Special Bench of the ITAT in Lalsons.
(ix) Where, as a result of the computation of profits and gains of
business and profession, the AO treats the interest receipt as
business income, then deduction should be permissible, in terms of
Explanation (baa) of the net interest i.e. the gross interest less the
expenditure incurred for the purposes of earning such interest. The
nexus between obtaining the loan and paying interest thereon
(laying out the expenditure by way of interest) for the purpose of
earning the interest on the fixed deposit, to draw an analogy from
Section 37, will require to be shown by the assessee for application
ITA No. 84 of 2005

page 6 of 8

of the netting principle.”

It may be recalled that this Court in fact followed the line of reasoning adopted
by the Kerala High Court in K.Ravindranathan Nair.

10.

Turning to the case on hand, the first question is whether the interest

earned by the Assessee on FDRs kept with the Bank for the purpose of margin
money as a condition for availing credit facilities could be termed as business
income? If the answer to this is in the affirmative the second question is
whether netting is to be permitted? For the second question to be answered in
the affirmative, the assessee will have to show that there is a nexus between the
interest paid on the credit facilities availed from the Bank and the interest
earned on the FDRs kept with the Bank. Nowhere in the Assessment Order has
the AO found that the interest earned by the Assessee was business income.
Therefore the first question stands answered against the Assessee in view of the
categorical pronouncement in Shriram Honda Power Equip that interest
earned on FDRs kept for availing credit facilities is not business income but
‘income from other sources.’ The decision in Punjab Stainless Steel Ind.
where the AO had held the interest income to be business income and which
finding was not challenged is therefore of no assistance to the Assessee. Also,
in view of the finding by the AO in the instant case that there is no nexus
between the interest paid and the interest earned by the Assessee, the second
question will also have to be answered against the Assessee.

11.

In view of the above discussion, the question of law as re-framed by us

ITA No. 84 of 2005

page 7 of 8

in Para 1.2 above is answered in the affirmative, that is, against the Assessee
and in favour of the Revenue.

12.

The appeal is dismissed.

S. MURALIDHAR, J

MADAN B. LOKUR, J
OCTOBER 12, 2007
dn

ITA No. 84 of 2005

page 8 of 8

