*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

Reserved on
Date of Decision

: February 1, 2007.
: February 12, 2007.

+

FAO No. 121/1984

#
!

NARINDER SINGH
..... Appellant.
Through Mr. P.K. Bhardwaj, Advocate.
versus

$
^

REKHA @ PUSHPA
..... Respondent.
Through Mr. Puneet Aggarwal, Advocate.
CORAM :HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

:Dr. S. Muralidhar, J.
1.

This appeal by the appellant is directed against the judgment

dated 7.4.1984, passed by the learned Additional District Judge,
dismissing the appellant/husband's

petition, HMA. No. 274/83,

seeking dissolution of his marriage with the Respondent/wife on the
ground of cruelty under Section 13(I)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955(`Act').

2.

The parties were married on February 12, 1980 in Agra

according to Hindu religious rites and lived for 8 days thereafter in
the first instance.

They again lived together for a very brief while

between April 21 and April 23 of 1980.

3.

In support of his plea that he had been treated cruelly by the

Respondent, the Appellant husband cited three specific instances.
FAO No. 121/1984

1 of 7

The first was that the “respondent's behaviour was arrogant,
irritating, insulting and nagging and she created scenes in the house
and refused to serve even tea to the friends and visitors of the
appellant”. The second was that on April 21, 1980 “the respondent
quarrelled with the wife of the maternal aunt of the petitioner Shri
Ami Chand at his house without any justification”. The third was that
“on April 5, 1981 in order to pressurise the petitioner to succumb to
her unreasonable demand she sent a gang of 17 persons to his father
when he was attending Pooja at a temple of Sri Krishan Mandir,
Patparganj Road, Khureji, Delhi.

They insulted and intimidated his

father openly with dire consequences and also threatened not to allow
the brother and sister of the petitioner to be married in the
brotherhood if the petitioner failed to act as to whims and pleasure of
the respondent”.

4.

The

appellant

examined

himself

as

PW-1.

In

his

cross-

examination he admitted that although he was working in the Cabinet
Secretariat, he was mostly posted on the borders at non-family
stations. He also stated that at the time of marriage, he had been
posted in Srinagar and that before he was again transferred to Delhi
in 1981, he never visited Agra, where the Respondent was staying.
Therefore, he came to know of the misbehaviour of the Respondent
during this period from his parents, brother and sister.

5.

Two other witnesses were examined on the side of the appellant.

The first was PW-2, Jai Singh who deposed about the incident of April
5, 1981 when the father of the Respondent had come for a meeting
and discussion about the dispute between the parties. The next
witness, Shri Madho Singh, PW-3 also spoke of the meeting of April 5,

FAO No. 121/1984

2 of 7

1981.

6.

The Respondent examined herself as RW-1 and maintained that

it was she who had

been ill-treated at her husband's house.

She

denied that her father had threatened the appellant in the manner
alleged or that she ever misbehaved with the appellant. RW-2,
Purshotam Singh, RW-3, Dhiraj Singh and RW-4, Moti Lal, father of
the Respondent, have all supported the version of the Respondent.

7.

After analyzing the evidence, the Trial Court in a detailed

judgment has returned the following findings:

(a) The total number of days when the petitioner
and his wife were living together were 11 and the
total number of days the respondent lived at the
house of the petitioner were 18.

(b) The allegations made by the appellant against
the respondent to show that she had treated him
cruelly were of a general nature. The Trial Court
found: “Except that she had refused to serve tea to
friends and visitors and that she had quarrelled
with the wife of the maternal uncle of the petitioner
Shri Ami Chand on April 21, 1980, no mis-conduct
or

mis-demeanour

has

been

specified

by

the

petitioner”.

(c) The non-production of Shri Ami Chand or his
wife, with whom the Respondent is alleged to have

FAO No. 121/1984

3 of 7

quarrelled “gives rise to an adverse presumption
against the petitioner's case”.

(d)

Although in the petition it was alleged that on

April 5, 1981, the Respondent sent a gang of 17
persons to Delhi to threaten him and his family, the
appellant did not allege “that the father of the
respondent with 16 persons had come. It was also
not mentioned that they came to coerce him to
succumb to the demand of the respondent that he
should severe his connection from his parents.....”
“Thus

the

testimony

of

the

petitioner

is

an

improvement upon the case pleaded in the petition
and there are material omissions also”.

(e)

The statements of the witnesses on behalf of

the appellant PW-2 and PW-3 did not substantiate
the case that the father of the respondent and
others had threatened or intimidated the appellant.
On the contrary they showed that the father of the
respondent had come with the object of resolving
the dispute between the parties.

(f) “The evidence on the record shows that the
petitioner and other members of his family deserted
the respondent and not vice-versa”.

8.

After examining the records of the case, the evidence and

considering the submission of the counsel for the parties, this Court

FAO No. 121/1984

4 of 7

does not find any infirmity in the judgment of the Trial Court that
warrants interference in appeal. This Court concurs with the findings
of the Trial Court extracted hereinabove that the appellant has
miserably failed to establish the case that respondent treated him
cruelly.

It is indeed extraordinary that the only ground substantially

urged to show that the respondent treated him cruelly was that she
refused to serve tea to the appellant's friends and family members.
Far from this being sufficient to demonstrate cruelty, it is also
frivolous considering that the parties lived together for as little as 11
days and that all this is supposed to have happened very soon after
the marriage.

The foundation for a case of cruelty in a marriage,

cannot certainly be built on such frivolous pleas.

9.

Further, considering that the appellant himself was posted

outside Delhi for most of the time, his entire case of cruelty is
founded upon hearsay evidence of his family members. For the
reasons best known to him, he has chosen not to examine them as
witnesses. This completely weakens the case of the appellant. The
Trial Court is right in concluding that the other witnesses cited by the
appellant do not establish the allegations of rude behaviour of the
father of the respondent wife at the meeting stated to have taken
place on April 5, 1981.

10.

For all of the above reasons, this Court finds no ground to

interfere with the judgment of the Trial Court.

11.

Towards the ends of his submissions, counsel for the appellant

sought to place reliance on a recent judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Naveen Kohli v. Neelu Kohli JT 2006 (3) SC 491

FAO No. 121/1984

5 of 7

to contend that where parties have lived separately for a long number
of years, the Court was bound to take note of that fact and grant
divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. It
appears that the observations in Naveen Kohli were made in the
facts of that case and cannot be uniformly applied in all cases
irrespective of facts particularly where the estrangement, as in this
case was on account of one of the parties. Here it is the appellant
husband who, as rightly so found by the Trial Court, has deserted his
wife.

He cannot be allowed to take advantage of his own act of

desertion and thereafter contend after several years that he should
now be granted divorce on the ground of long years of separation.
That would be putting a premium on the erring party who has failed
to make out a case of cruelty alleged against the wife.

In this

context, a reference may also be made to the judgment of the
Supreme Court itself in Shyam Sunder Kohli v. Sushma Kohli
2004(2) HLR 513 where the Court observed as under:
“12. On the ground of irretrievable break down of
marriage, the Court must not lightly dissolve a
marriage. It is only in extreme circumstances that
the Court may use this ground for dissolving a
marriage. In this case, the Respondent, at all
stages and even before us, has been ready to go
back to the Appellant. It is the Appellant who has
refused to take the Respondent back.
The
Appellant has made baseless allegations against the
Respondent. He even went to the extent of filing a
complaint of bigamy, under Section 494, IPC,
against the Respondent. That complaint came to be
dismissed.
As stated above, the evidence shows
that the Respondent was forced to leave the
matrimonial home. It is the Appellant who has
been at fault. It can hardly lie in the mouth of
a party who has been at fault and who has not
allowed the marriage to work to claim that the
marriage should be dissolved on the ground
of irretrievable break down. We, thus, see no
substance in this contention.” (emphasis supplied)
12.

For all of the above reasons, the appeal is without merit and is

dismissed with costs quantified at Rs. 10,000/- which will be paid by
FAO No. 121/1984

6 of 7

the appellant to the respondent within a period of four weeks from
today.

February 12, 2007
Muralidhar)
ak

(S.
Judge

FAO No. 121/1984

7 of 7

