*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : February 14, 2007

+

W.P.(C) 1148/2007
MOHAN LAL VOHRA
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Amar Khera, Advocate
versus
D.D..A

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Deepak Khadaria and
Ms. Sangeeta Chandra Advocates for DDA

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest? Yes
ORDER
S.Muralidhar, J. (open court)
The prayer in this writ petition is that the petitioner should be
restored “possession of plot bearing no.13, Tahirpur Warehousing
Area, G T Road, Shahdara, Delhi – 110 032 by issuing original letter of
allotment dated 21.2.1969 bearing file No. F-8(6)/69 LSB as also the
demand letter or in the alternate to return/re-store to the Petitioner
the possession of his original 1,100 sq. yds. plot located at 863, G T
Road, Shahdara, Delhi – 110 032.”

The central plank of the petitioner’s claim is the allotment letter dated
21.2.1969 bearing file No. F-8(6)/69 LSB which the petitioner claims,
was handed over to him by the officials of the respondent. No copy of
such letter has been produced by the petitioner with this petition.
Counsel for the petitioner states that the said copy has been
misplaced by the petitioner.
In relation to a similar prayer when the petitioner earlier filed Writ

W.P.(C) 1148/2007

1 of 5

Petition No. 17285/2005, this Court passed the following order on
7.9.2005:“Learned counsel for the petitioner seeks to
withdraw the writ petition as he states that
the petitioner is desirous of availing either of
the remedy by way of a second appeal or to
approach the Lok Adalat. Liberty granted.
Dismissed as not pressed.”

Pursuant to the above order, the petitioner approached the Permanent
Lok Adalat, Delhi Development Authority (DDA), presided over by
Justice P.N. Nag. The proceedings dated 21.11.2006 of the PLA have
been annexed as Annexure P-3 to this writ petition. The said order
which is self explanatory, reads as under:“The case set up by the petitioner is that he is
eligible evictee from non-conforming area and
was being shifted to conforming area. He has
been allotted Plot No. A-13 Jhilmil Industrial
Area temporarily and he should be allotted this
plot permanently in accordance with the policy
of the DDA.
The stand taken by the DDA, however, is
completely denial.

According to the DDA the

petitioner has not been allotted any Plot No. A13 Jhilmil Industrial Area by the DDA and he is
not

even

an

eligible

evictee

from

non-

conforming area to conforming area. He is not
entitled to any plot under the scheme of the
DDA. The petitioner is only an encroacher and
the DDA is owner of this property and the right,
title and interest vests in the DDA and they are
being owner of the plot can auction the plot.

Both the parties have relied upon the
reply filed in paragraph 2 of the written
statement filed by the DDA in Civil Court of Shri

W.P.(C) 1148/2007

2 of 5

P.D. Jarwal, Sub-Judge, Ist class in which the
DDA has taken a stand that the firm M/s Parma
Nand Kundan Lal were allowed temporary to
occupy the plot No. 13 Jhilmil Tahirpur with the
condition

that

the

site

at

non-conforming

location at G T Road will have to be vacated
immediately. Three days time was given to shift
from G.T. Road site, but they failed to shift.
Subsequently, the petitioner was asked to
vacate the site of temporarily allotted plot vide
defendant's letter dated 26.12.1973 but no
response had ever been shown by the plaintiff.
It may be noticed here that the petitioner claims
to be the proprietor of the firm M/s Parma Nand
Kundan Lal.

According to the DDA this reply

helps the DDA as the petitioner has failed to
vacate the site, in accordance with the terms
and conditions of temporary allotment.

The

petitioner has brought my attention to interim
application filed by the petitioner in the Court
of Civil Judge in the case alleging that this plot
in dispute was allotted to the petitioner which
would be evident from the contents of letter
dated 21.2.69 bearing file

No. F.8(6)/69 LSB

(I).

I asked the DDA to produce this file NO.
F.8 (6) 69/LSB (I) but Deputy Director Shri
Budh Ram, however, categorically denies that
in spite of the thorough search they have not
been able to lay down their hand on the file and
it appears that this file is non-existent.

Without going into the merits of the case,
suffice it to say, there is no meeting ground
between the parties.
unsettled.
liberty

The case is closed as

However, the petitioner shall be at
to

approach

the

appropriate

Forum/Court for redressal of his grievance, if he
W.P.(C) 1148/2007

3 of 5

is so advised.”

Thereafter, the present petition has been filed. In support of the writ
petition, the learned counsel for the petitioner seeks to rely upon the
statements made in the written statement filed by the DDA in the civil
suit filed by the petitioner herein in the Court of the Sub Judge, First
Class, Delhi.

In particular, reference is made to paragraphs 1 and 2

of the written statement, which read as under:“1. Para 1 of the plaint as stated is wrong and
is denied.

It is submitted that M/s Parma

Nand Kundan Lal were allowed temporarily to
occupy a plot measuring 600 sq. yds. Bearing
No. 13, Jhilmit Tahirpur Warehousing Area, in
lieu of the vacation of the premises in their
occupation at G.T. Road.

The defendant

craves leave of this Hon'ble court to refer to
the contents of the letter dated 21.2.1969,
bearing No. F 3(6)/69/LSB.

2. Para 2 of the plaint is wrong and is denied.
It is denied that the plaintiff vacated the plot
at G.T. Road before the receipt of letter dated
21.2.1969

for

the

representatives

of

the

defendant took possession at the plot at G.T.
Road on 21.2.1969. As submitted above M/s
Parma

Nand

Kundan

Lal

were

allowed

temporarily to occupy the plot No.13 at Jhilmil
Tahirpur with the condition that the site at
non-confirming location at G.T. Road will have
to be vacated immediately.

Three days time

was given to shift from G.T. Road site, but
they failed to shift. Subsequently the plaintiff
was asked to vacate the site of temporarily
allotted

plot vide defendant' letter dated

26.12.1973 but no response had ever been
shown by the plaintiff.”

W.P.(C) 1148/2007

4 of 5

Far from supporting the case of the petitioner, the above paragraphs
in fact show that the proprietary firm was allowed only a temporary
occupation of the aforementioned property and that the said
permission was also conditional upon the said proprietary firm
vacating the site at G T Road. It also appears that the suit in which
the said written statement was filed was dismissed in default and was
never restored. Therefore, the petitioner cannot seek to derive any
benefit from the above paragraphs in support of his plea.

It also appears that the petitioner had filed a further Suit No. 88/2002
which was also dismissed on 15.2.2005. It is stated that in the
meanwhile, the respondent DDA took possession of the plot in
question sometime in February 2004. It is indeed incredible that the
petitioner managed to stay on in the plot in question till 2004 when
what was purportedly allotted on 21.2.1969 was a conditional
temporary occupation of the said plot.

The facts of the case reveal that the petitioner has not been able to
demonstrate any right to the plot in question. The prayers in the writ
petition cannot be granted. The writ petition is dismissed. The
applications also stand dismissed.
Sd/S. MURALIDHAR,
J
FEBRUARY 14, 2007
raj

W.P.(C) 1148/2007

5 of 5

