*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on
Date of Decision

%
+

: February 1, 2007.
: February 20, 2007.

FAO No. 93/2002

#
!

SHEO NATH SINGH
..... Appellant
Through Mr. Chandra Shekhar with
Mr. Sanjay Kumar Tyagi, Advocate
versus

$
^

SUJATA

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Vinay M.Sharma, Advocate

CORAM :HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

:Dr. S. Muralidhar, J.
1.

This appeal is directed against the judgment/order dated

6.2.2002 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi in
HMA. No.383 of 1999 by which the Appellant's petition seeking
dissolution of his marriage with the Respondent on the ground of
cruelty and desertion, was dismissed.

2.

The Appellant and Respondent were married on 31.10.1995 and

resided in Delhi upto 4.6.1996. The Appellant is an employee of the
Central Government and the wife was employed as a Nursing Officer
in an Army hospital.

3.

The husband cited as many as 8 instances in support of his case

that the Respondent has treated him cruelly during the time they
stayed together. The Appellant, however, examined only himself as
the sole witnesss.

In his cross-examination, the Appellant admitted

that the parties had shifted their residence from Pushpa Vihar, where
FAO No. 93/2002

1 of 11

they were residing

soon after the marriage, to the Government

accommodation allotted to the Respondent at Lawrence Road in
February, 1996. It was his case that the Respondent had agreed that
she would leave her job after marriage, but later refused to do so, that
the Respondent had not allowed the sister of the Appellant to stay
with them and that he was forced to leave the matrimonial home
because of the misbehaviour of the Respondent.

In the cross-

examination, it transpired that the only contribution that the
Appellant

made

to

the

matrimonial

home

was

a

rented

accommodation at Dakshinpuri, where the parties did not reside even
for a single day.

Therefore, it was the Respondent who made the

arrangement for residing

at Pushpa Vihar and later when they

resided together at Lawrence Road, it was on account of her
employment that the said premises were available for their residence.
He also admitted that the Respondent's parents, brother and sister
had in fact come to stay later on in the matrimonial home.
particular, he admitted that his sister

In

had stayed at the Lawrence

Road for a few days.

4.

In addition to the above allegations, Appellant contended that by

making a false accusation in the written statement of an extramarital
affair of the appellant with another person, the Respondent had
compounded the cruelty meted out to the Appellant.

5.

The precise statement in the written statement, objected to by

the Appellant reads as under:
“It is submitted that the brother-in-law of the
Petitioner was living at Dakshinpuri which is very
near to Pushp Vihar and the said brother in law of
the Petitioner used to meet the parties quite often
FAO No. 93/2002

2 of 11

after the morning walk and on all such occasions,
the Respondent has treated the brother in law of
the Petitioner with hospitality and she used to
prepare tea, breakfast etc. for him.

But, it was

strange that the Petitioner himself used to avoid
the Respondent meeting his friends and relatives.
It later revealed that the Petitioner did not have
clean background and he did so out of the fear that
his relatives and friends who know about his
background and the past may not reveal the same
to the Respondent.

It is only in the first week of

March, 1996, it revealed that the Petitioner has
kept a woman, named, Meera at Calcutta. The said
Lady was the sister of the son in law of the
Petitioner's maternal uncle. At this occasion, the
Petitioner proudly told the Respondent that he
would keep the said woman as she loves him and
even tried to commit suicide after knowing about
the marriage between the parties.
shamelessly

informed

the

He further

Respondent

in

the

presence of his sister and maternal aunt that he has
married the Respondent as his parents did not
approve of the Petitioner keeping the said woman
Meera which he did stealthily without informing his
family and further that his parents wanted him to
get

rid

of

the

said

woman,

therefore,

they

pressurised him to marry the Respondent.

The

Respondent had the shock of his life when the
Petitioner told him that he did not intend to have
any child from the Respondent as he is already
fathering the child from the said woman.”

6.

When the Respondent examined herself as a witness, she gave

details of the cruel treatment suffered by her at the hands of the
appellant. According to her, the appellant had physically abused her
in the first few days which resulted in dislocation of her shoulder.
However, she did not report it to the police as she hoped that the
FAO No. 93/2002

3 of 11

relations would improve. She further stated that the Appellant would
pick up a quarrel on trivial matters and stay away from the
respondent.

7.

The Trial Court upon an examination of the evidence and the

pleadings came to the conclusion that the Appellant had not been able
to establish the ground of cruelty against the Respondent even on a
preponderance of probabilities.

The Trial Court took into account the

fact that the Respondent had filed a criminal case against the
Appellant and the in-laws on the ground of cruelty under Serction
498-A of IPC and that the Appellant and the family members had been
discharged by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate by judgment dated
11.1.1999. The Trial Court accepted the version of the Respondent
that she had been subjected to cruel behaviour by the Appellant. On
the question of the alleged false averment in the written statement
about his having an extramarital relationship with the person named
`Meera', the Trial Court returned the following findings:
“Civil litigation is always based on preponderance
of probabilities.

I am inclined to accept the

testimony of the respondent as her version appears
to be more honest and truthful. From the evidence
on record it is borne out that the parties were not
enjoying

good

relations and

it was primarily

because of the indifferent attitude of the petitioner.
He did not want to keep the matrimonial ties with
the respondent as he was interested in some other
person namely Meera.

There appears to be little

explanation for his behaviour otherwise.

PW1

could not explain to the court in his version on oath
in the court as to what was the wrong attitude of
the respondent;

his contention that the main

dispute between both the parties was because the
respondent had refused to leave her job finds little
FAO No. 93/2002

4 of 11

force; a permanent commissioned army officer who
was admittedly working at the time when the
parties

got married and the petitioner again

giving contrary version as to who had agreed on
behalf of the respondent to leave the job; whether
it was her parents or whether it was respondent
herself having remained unanswered, this version
of the petitioner

is false.

It is clear that the

petitioner wanted to bring the matrimonial ties to
an

end

for

some

other

reason.

In

these

circumstances it cannot be said that the contention
of the respondent that the petitioner was probably
interested in Meera amount to cruelty to the
petitioner.”

8.

Ultimately the Trial Court came to the following conclusion :
“In the instant case no details having been spelt out
about the nature of the cruelties meted out by the
respondent to the petitioner and keeping in view
the provisions of Section 23(1) of the Act which
postulates that no party should be allowed to take
advantage of his own wrong, in my view the
evidence of the petitioner does not establish his
case for cruelty. Ordinary wear and tear of family
life cannot be termed as cruelty entitling the party
for relief under section 13(1)(ia) of the Hindu
Marriage Act.
61. On the other hand it is the respondent who has
suffered at the callous hands of the petitioner; not
only is this a case of physical abuse but the
petitioner not maintaining sexual contacts with the
respondent, not agreeing to have a child from the
respondent, nor making any efforts to set up the
matrimonial home clearly make out a case of
cruelty by the petitioner to the respondent.”

FAO No. 93/2002

5 of 11

9.

On the second ground of desertion, the Trial Court, on the facts

of the case, found that the Appellant had failed to establish that it was
the Respondent who had the intention of deserting the matrimonial
home. It was found that the Appellant had made no efforts to bring
back the Respondent. On the contrary, the version of the Respondent
that she had made several efforts to dialogue with the Appellant in
order to resume the matrimonial relationship had been corroborated
by the witnesses produced by her.

Therefore, on the ground of

desertion, the Trial Court found that the Appellant had failed to
establish the case against the Respondent.

10.

The learned counsel for the Appellant has, while reiterating

grounds on which the Appellant seeks divorce, laid emphasis on the
fact that the Trial Court had failed to return any categorical findings
on the contention of the Appellant herein that the cruelty had been
compounded by the false allegation made by the Respondent in her
written statement.

Learned counsel, in support of this submission

relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in V. Bhagat

v. D. Bhagat AIR 1994 SC 710 and in particular para 22 thereof.
Since the principal ground urged by the appellant here concerns the
allegation made by the respondent in the written statement, the law in
this regard may be briefly noticed. In V. Bhagat vs. D. Bhagat, the
Court did not merely rely on averments made in the written statement
of the wife, but the fact that she had filed an additional written
statement repeating these allegations. Further, questions were put to
the husband while he was in the witness box to suggest that “the
petitioner has lost his normal mental health, that he is a mental
patient requiring expert psychological treatment and above all to

FAO No. 93/2002

6 of 11

brand him and all the members of his family including his grandfather
as lunatics”. The Court concluded that the wife was “going far beyond
the reasonable limits of her defence” and that “these assertions
cannot but constitute mental cruelty”. In Vijay Kumar Bhate vs.

Neela Bhate (2003) 6 SCC 534 again the allegation of unchastity and
indecent familiarity with the person outside wedlock made against the
wife, and suggested in the course of examination and crossexamination was held to be of “such quality, magnitude and
consequence” as amounting to “the reformulated concept of cruelty in
matrimonial law.” On the facts of that case it was found that the
husband had been persisting with such accusations “for a sufficiently
long time”.

11.

Turning to the case on hand, the relevant portion of the written

statement, which according to the Appellant, constitutes a false
allegation has been already extracted hereinabove. A reading of the
said extract reveals that according to the Respondent, her source for
this information was the Appellant himself. This portion of the written
statement occurs in a paragraph where the Respondent has narrated
all other instances of cruel treatment of her by the Appellant. Since
the written statement was already available to the appellant during
the trial it should not have been difficult for the Appellant to crossexamine the Respondent on this aspect of the matter.

12.

In para 50 of the Trial Court's judgment, it is noticed that the

Appellant was cross-examined on this aspect and he denied having
any affair with the person named Meera or that on account of his
parents not agreeing to his marriage with the said person, Meera, he
had been forced to marry the Respondent.

FAO No. 93/2002

The Respondent was

7 of 11

examined as a witness and if it was the case of the Appellant that her
allegation in the written statement constituted yet another instance of
cruel treatment of him by the Respondent, there is no reason why she
should not have been cross-examined by him to test the veracity of
her statements on this aspect. Counsel for the Appellant very fairly
stated that there was no cross-examination of the Respondent on this
aspect by the Appellant. Therefore, the stage of testing the veracity
or otherwise of these statements made in the written statement
having been crossed, and the Appellant having failed to establish
cruelty on that basis, the Appellant cannot now be heard to contend
that those statements would nevertheless constitute cruelty.

13.

On the facts of the present case, it cannot be said that the

allegations in the written statement of the respondent would
constitute cruelty by the Respondent of the Appellant warranting the
dissolution of the marriage.

14.

On the other instances of cruelty, the Appellant has not been

able to show that the findings returned by the Trial Court based on
the pleadings and the evidence in the present case suffer from any
infirmity warranting interference by this Court. A reference may
usefully be made to the observations of Hon’ble Supreme Court in

Shobha Rani vs. Madhukar Reddi (1988) 1 SCC 105 where the
court observed in para 5 as under:
“…when a spouse makes complaint about the treatment of
cruelty by the partner in life or relations, the Court should
not search for standard in life. A set of facts stigmatised
as cruelty in one case may not be so in another case. The
cruelty alleged may largely depend upon the type of life
the parties are accustomed to or their economic and
social conditions. It may also depend upon their culture
FAO No. 93/2002

8 of 11

and human values to which they attach importance. We,
the Judges and lawyers, therefore, should not import our
own notions of life. We may not go in parallel with them.
There may be a generation gap between us and the
parties. It would be better if we keep aside our customs
and manners. It would be also better if we less depend
upon precedents.”

Here one of the grounds urged in support of the ground of cruelty was
that the wife had filed a criminal case which ultimately ended in the
acquittal of the petitioner and his family members. However as
observed in Gajjala Shankar vs. Anuradha AIR 2006 A.P. 65 this
cannot itself constitute cruelty unless coupled with other instances.
The facts of the other cases cited by the petitioner also turn on their
own facts. In Naveen Kohli vs. Neelu Kohli 2006 (3) Scale 252, the
Supreme Court noticed in para 84 of its judgment that the Respondent
there had got more than 10 criminal cases registered against the
appellant in that case. This was seen along with all other attendant
circumstances to draw the conclusion that “the respondent had
resolved to live in agony only to make a life miserable hell for the
appellant as well.”

15.

In the present case the criminal case against the appellant and

his family members by the respondent no doubt ended in a
discharge/acquittal but given the evidence that has come on record it
cannot be said that this institution of a criminal case by itself
constitutes cruelty. It must also be recalled that the standard of proof
in criminal cases being much higher, and the failure of criminal cases
that do not end in conviction being attributable to many factors, the
conclusion that such criminal case was instituted without basis and
with the sole purpose of meting out a cruel treatment to the spouse
FAO No. 93/2002

9 of 11

ought not to be lightly inferred. On the facts of the present case, and
upon examining the evidence, this court agrees with the trial court
that the respondent's version of the cruel treatment suffered by her at
the hands of the appellant appears believable and probable.

16.

No argument was advanced by counsel for the appellant on the

other ground of desertion by the respondent. Nevertheless, this court
after examining the records agrees with the Trial Court that the
appellant has failed to make out a case of desertion by the
respondent.

17.

Finally, it was urged that since the parties have been living

separately for many years, this by itself constituted an irretrievable
break-down of marriage and in view of the recent pronouncement by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Naveen Kohli v. Neelu Kohli

JT

2006 (3) SC 491, this Court should grant a dissolution of marriage.
This submission cannot be accepted in the facts and circumstances of
the case where far from accepting, even on a preponderance of
probabilities that the Respondent had treated him cruelly, it appears
that the Appellant was the one who had stayed away from the
matrimonial home, making no effort to take back the wife.

The

Appellant cannot be permitted to take advantage of a situation
brought about by the Appellant himself. The observations of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Shyam Sunder Kohli v. Sushma Kohli
2004(2) HLR 513 supports this conclusion.

18.

For all of the above reasons, there is no merit in this appeal and

it is dismissed with costs of Rs. 10,000/- which will be paid by the
appellant to the respondent within a period of four weeks.

FAO No. 93/2002

10 of 11

February 20, 2007
ak

FAO No. 93/2002

Sd/(S. Muralidhar)
Judge

11 of 11

