*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on :
October 22, 2007
Date of decision : October 25, 2007

+

ITA No. 995/2007

HONDA SIEL POWER PRODUCTS LTD.
..... Appellant
Through Mr. Ajay Vohra with Ms. Kavita Jha, Advocate

versus

COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
..... Respondent
Through Ms. Prem Lata Bansal with Mr. Vishnu Sharma,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S.MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

Dr. S. MURALIDHAR, J.

1.

Aggrieved by a decision dated 21st April, 2006 passed by the Income Tax

Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench “G”, New Delhi ('Tribunal') in ITA Nos.
2852/Del/99 and 3144/Del/99 for the Assessment Year 1995-96, the Assessee
has filed an appeal under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ('the
Act').
2.

The Assessee has urged that the following questions of law arise for

consideration by this Court:
“(a) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of
ITA 995/2007

page no 1 of 7

the case, the Tribunal erred in law in upholding the
order of the Assessing Officer in reducing the profit
earned on sale of spare parts and imported gensets
from the income of the eligible undertaking(s) for the
purpose of computing deductions under Section 80HH and 80-I of the Act?
(b) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of
the case, the Tribunal erred in law in holding that the
profit from the sale of spare parts and imported
gensets could not be regarded as income derived from
the eligible undertaking(s) for the purpose of
computing deductions under Section 80-HH and 80-I
of the Act?
(c) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of
the case, the Tribunal erred in law in segregating after
sale service from the activity of manufacturing of
products by the Appellate company for the purpose of
deductions under Section 80-HH and 80-I of the
Act?”
3.

The Appellant is engaged in the manufacture and sale of portable gensets

and water pumps. In the return of income for the Assessment Year 1995-96,
filed on 30th November, 1995, the Assessee disclosed a business income of
Rs.4,48,18,770/-. The Assessee claimed a deduction under Section 80-HH of
the Act at Rs.2,56,76,813/- and under Section 80-I of the Act at
Rs.3,20,96,017/- respectively. The Assessee imported certain spare parts and
components which were used in the manufacturing of gensets as well as for
providing after-sales service to customers. Additionally, the Assessee imported
gensets of a certain capacity which were not being manufactured in India to
complement its product profile and present to the customers a choice from a
complete range of gensets.
4.

The Assessing Officer ('AO')

denied the claim of deduction under

Section 80-HH and 80-I of the Act in respect of the profits earned from both the

ITA 995/2007

page no 2 of 7

sale of spare parts and components as well as the sale of imported gensets on
the ground that the profits therefrom could not be considered to be income
“derived” from the industrial undertaking.
5.

In the appeal filed by the Assessee, the Commissioner of Income Tax

(Appeals) ['CIT(A)'], by an order dated 22nd April, 1999 held that the profits
arising from the sale of spare parts was integral to the manufacturing activity
and therefore, the deduction in respect of such profits under Section 80-HH and
80-I of the Act was admissible. The CIT(A) however upheld the order of the
AO disallowing the deduction under Sections 80-HH and 80-I of the Act in
respect of profits derived from the sale of imported gensets.
6.

Aggrieved by the order of the CIT(A), both the Revenue and the Assessee

filed appeals. The Assessee contended before the Tribunal that deduction under
Sections 80-HH and 80-I of the Act should have been allowed in respect of the
profits arising from the sale of imported gensets whereas the Revenue
contended that no such deduction should have been allowed in respect of the
profits earned from the sale of spare parts. Since both the questions were
connected, the Tribunal considered the appeals together.

The Tribunal

concluded that the import and sale of gensets could not be said to have any
nexus with any industrial activity of the Assessee in India.

The Tribunal

rejected the Assessee's appeal on the ground that since the very purpose of
Section 80-HH of the Act was to give a boost to industrial activity in India
profit earned from sale of imported goods would be ineligible for deduction
under the said provision.

As far as the Revenue's appeal was concerned, the

Tribunal relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court in Commissioner of
Income Tax v. Sterling Foods Limited [1999] 237 ITR 579 (SC) and Pandian
ITA 995/2007

page no 3 of 7

Chemicals Limited v. Commissioner of Income Tax [2003] 262 ITR 278 (SC)
to hold that profits from the sale of spare parts was not the immediate source of
the business profits of the industrial undertaking, but one step was removed
from it. Although such profits from the sale of spare parts or rendering after sale
service could be “attributable” to the industrial undertaking, it could not be
considered as profits “derived” from the industrial undertaking. Accordingly,
the Tribunal allowed the Revenue's appeal.
7.

Appearing for the Assessee, Mr. Ajay Vohra, learned counsel submits

that the activity of import of gensets was integral to the business activity of the
Assessee. He sought to draw a distinction between the expression “profits and
gains derived from an industrial undertaking” in Section 80-HH (1) of the Act
and the conditions subject to which an undertaking could be considered to be an
industrial undertaking for the purpose of Section 80-HH (2) of the Act. His
submission was that an industrial undertaking which satisfies the requirement of
Section 80-HH(2) could derive its profits from activities not confined to those
mentioned in sub-section 80-HH(2) and therefore, a broad meaning had to be
given to the expression used in Section 80-HH(1) of the Act. He submits that it
is possible, as in the Assessee's case, for an industrial undertaking to also
undertake trading activity which in turn could include import of articles in order
to complete the company's product profile so that the customers are offered a
wider choice from a complete range of gensets. As regards the import of spare
parts, he submits that merely because the spare parts that have been imported
are sold and not used in the manufacture of gensets by the Assessee, that
cannot deprive the Assessee of the benefit of Section 80-HH of the Act.
8.

Both Sections 80-HH and 80-I of the Act use the expression “profits and

ITA 995/2007

page no 4 of 7

gains derived from an industrial undertaking”. The Supreme Court has drawn
a distinction between the expressions “derived from” and “attributable to” in
Cambay Electric Supply Industrial Co. Limited v. Commissioner of Income
Tax [1978] 113 ITR 84 in the following manner [page 93] :
“In our view, since the expression of wider import,
namely 'attributable to', has been used, the Legislature
intended to cover receipts from sources other than the
actual conduct of the business of generation and
distribution of electricity.”

9.

In the context of Section 80-I, the Supreme Court underscored the above

distinction in its decision in Vellore Electric Corporation Limited v.
Commissioner of Income Tax [1977] 227 ITR 557 (SC). The decisions of the
Supreme Court in Sterling Foods Limited and Pandian Chemicals Limited
reiterate this distinction and insist that only such business profits that have a
direct nexus to the essential business activity of the Assessee can qualify for
deduction under Section 80-HH of the Act. Inasmuch as both Sections 80-HH
and 80-I use the expression “profits and gains derived from an industrial
undertaking”, the burden is on the Assessee to show the income earned from an
activity, the profits from which are claimed to qualify for deduction, has an
immediate and direct nexus to the essential activity of the industrial
undertaking.
10.

We are in agreement with the approach adopted by the Tribunal in the

instant case, which is to examine the claim in the background of the purpose of
providing deductions from business profits under Section 80-HH which was to
encourage industrial activity in India. It is inconceivable that the deductions
should be made available in respect of profits and gains which are derived from

ITA 995/2007

page no 5 of 7

an activity not having a direct nexus to the industrial activity as contemplated
under Section 80-HH (2) of the Act. The entire section has to be read as a
whole and the interpretation placed thereon has to be fit the overall scheme of
the provision which is to encourage industrial activity in India.

If the

interpretation sought to be placed by learned counsel for the Assessee is
accepted then it might possibly lead to a situation where an industrial
undertaking which has been set up for manufacturing a commodity may
undertake very little manufacturing in a particular Assessment Year and yet
claim deduction from the profits and gains from the sale of imported goods.
That would defeat the very purpose of the provision.
11.

Learned counsel for the Assessee sought to contend that in an extreme

situation like the one just adverted, the Assessee may not be able to claim
deduction and that the facts of every case would determine whether the
Assessee should be deprived of the deduction only because a part of the income
is earned from a trading activity. In our view, It is not possible to lay down a
hard and first rule since, according to us, that can be only lead to further
complication. That also does not appear to be the intention of the legislature in
enacting the provision as it stands. Therefore, we find no infirmity in the
conclusion arrived at by the Tribunal.
12.

As regards the question whether profits and gains from the sale of

imported spare parts used in providing after sales service to customers would
qualify for deduction, we are in agreement with the conclusions arrived at by
the Tribunal that this activity might be incidental to the business activity of the
Assessee but that it has no direct nexus with the activity of the industrial
undertaking which is the manufacture of gensets. The Tribunal was, in our
ITA 995/2007

page no 6 of 7

opinion, right in concluding that profits and gains from such activity cannot be
held to be “derived from the industrial undertaking”.
13.

For the above reasons, we are of the view that no substantial question of

law arises in this appeal. The appeal is dismissed with no orders as to costs.

S. MURALIDHAR, J

MADAN B. LOKUR, J
OCTOBER 25, 2007
rk

ITA 995/2007

page no 7 of 7

