*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Orders reserved: 31st August, 2007.
Date of decision: 24th September, 2007.

%

+

ITR No. 395 of 1985
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
..... Petitioner
Through Ms. P.L.Bansal with Mr.Vishnu Sharma,
Advocates.
versus
ASHOK KAPUR(HUF)
Through None.

..... Respondent

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S.MURALIDHAR
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the order?
YES
To be referred to the reporter or not?
YES
Whether the order should be reported in the YES
Digest?

DR. S.MURALIDHAR,J.

1.

Relevant for the assessment year 1980-81 the following questions

have been referred to us by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
('Tribunal)under Section 256(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ('Act'):
“1.Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case,
the Tribunal was right in holding that there was no 'transfer' of
the asset?
2.Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the
Tribunal was right in holding that no capital gains was
assessable in the hands of the assessee?”
2.

Despite service none appears for the Respondent.

3.

Assessee is a Hindu Undivided Family ('HUF') which owned a part of

the property situated at 21, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi ('property'). The
ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 1 of 10

property belonged to a larger HUF and after partition took place amongst
the family members, the Assessee HUF acquired one-fifth share in a fiveeighth part of the property in terms of a decree dated 27.3.1968 passed by
this Court. According to the Assessee, the Karta of the Assessee HUF, Mr.
Ashok Kapur, wanted to start a business of real estate in the name of
another entity named Ashok Kapur & Co. HUF. Therefore, on 6.11.1979
Mr. Ashok Kapur made a declaration that he as Karta of Ashok Kapur HUF
(the Assessee) was converting the Assessee's share in the property as stockin-trade of the new venture to be started in the name of Ashok Kapur & Co.
(HUF). Based on the rates fixed by the Land & Development Office
('L&DO'), the Assessee's share in the property was valued at Rs. 5,58,000.
This was taken to be the market value of the Assessee's share of the property
on the date of conversion and the same amount was credited to the capital
account of Ashok Kapur & Co. (HUF).

4.

Mr. Ashok Kapur, describing himself as Karta of Ashok Kapur & Co.

(HUF) entered into an agreement with M/s. Ansal Properties & Industries
(Ansal Properties') on 19.11.1979 for construction of a multi-storeyed
building at Barakhamba Road. In this agreement Ashok Kapur is described
as Owner Dealer and Ansal Properties, as Builders. The Builders were to
demolish all the structures at 21 Barakhamba Road for constructing the
multi-storeyed building. It was agreed that after construction 50% of the
building would be handed over to the Builders and the remaining 50%
would be retained by the Ashok Kapur & Co. (HUF). It is not disputed that
the Assessee was, in terms of the agreement, paid Rs.10 lakhs by the
builders towards security.
ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 2 of 10

5.

A question arose before the Income Tax Officer ('ITO') whether in the

previous year 1979-80 (relevant to the assessment year 1980-81) there had
been a transfer of the Assessee's share in the property as the stock-in-trade
of Ashok Kapur & Co.(HUF) which had resulted in capital gains in the
hands of the Assessee.

6.

Initially the ITO held that the transfer had occurred at two stages: first

when the Assessee's share was brought into the stock-in-trade of the
proprietorship of Ashok Kapur & Co.(HUF) and at second stage when there
was a transfer of the property from the said proprietorship concern to M/s.
Ansal Properties on 19.11.1979. The ITO proposed to charge capital gains
on both transfers and referred the draft assessment order for instructions to
the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner ('IAC').

7.

The IAC disagreed with the ITO that there had been conversion of the

Assessee's share in the property into the stock-in-trade of the proprietary
concern Ashok Kapur & Co. (HUF). The IAC held the conversion had taken
place only at the stage of the agreement dated 7.11.1979 with the Builders.
Consequently, the ITO acted on the opinion of IAC and held that the joint
venture with Ansal Properties was in the nature of a partnership and that by
transferring its share of the property to the partnership, at the cost indicated
in its books i.e. Rs. 5,58,000 capital gains had accrued in the hands of the
Assessee. A demand was accordingly raised.

8.

In the appeal filed by the Assessee, the Commissioner of Income Tax

ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 3 of 10

(Appeals) ['CIT(A)'], by an order dated 9.9.1983 did not accept the
contention of the Assessee that it had transferred the share in the property as
stock-in-trade of the proprietorship concern Ashok Kapur & Co.(HUF). As
regards the other issue concerning transfer of the share in the property to the
joint venture, the CIT(A) agreed with the ITO that a partnership between the
Assessee and the Builders had indeed come into existence in the previous
year 1979-80 and that the Assessee had transferred its one-eighth share in
the property to the joint venture. Consequently the CIT (A) held that such
transfer was assessable to capital gains tax in the hands of the Assessee.
The ITO was directed to recompute the Assessee's total income even while
the computation of capital gains at Rs. 3,77,250 was affirmed.

9.

The Assessee's appeal ITA No. 5098(DEL)/1983 was allowed by the

Tribunal by an order dated 31.12.1984. The conclusions of the Tribunal as
set out in para 24 of its order read thus:
“1.The assessee's admitted conversion of his immovable
property into stock-in-trade on 6.11.1979 has not resulted in
any transfer within the meaning of Income Tax Act for the
purpose of charging of capital gains. Firstly we have not
accepted the bonafides of such conversion and secondly we
have hold that the legal effect of such conversion, even if, it
had taken place, could not be a transfer for the purpose of
charging capital gains.
2.
By entering into an agreement with the Builders M/s.
Ansal Properties and Industries Pvt. Ltd. The assessee did not
enter into a partnership agreement and the two parties were to
deal with each other on principal to principal basis. The
important elements of partnership were absent in this activity.
3.
The assessee did not bring in his immovable property as
a contribution towards his joint venture with the Builder and
the agreement contemplates the continued ownership of the
assessee in respect of the immovable property.
4.
There has thus been no transfer by the assessee of the
immovable property and the so-called firm or joint venture was
ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 4 of 10

10.

not converned with the notional valuation of the property as far
as the venture's accounts were concerned. The addition in
respect of the capital gains has, therefore, to be deleted.”
Arising from the above impugned order, the two substantial questions

of law set out in para 1 of this order have been referred to us for our
opinion.

11.

As regards the first question, it is necessary to recall the issue

concerning the two stages of transfer was examined by the ITO to begin
with.

As regards the question whether there was a conversion of the

Assessee's share in the property into the stock-in-trade of the proprietorship
concern of Ashok Kapur & Co.(HUF), the ITO, the CIT(A) and the ITAT
have concurrently held that no such transfer took place. In view of the
concurrent findings by the three authorities, we are not persuaded to take a
different view. Having again examined the orders of these authorities and
the relevant documents, we find nothing erroneous in the conclusion
reached by the authorities on this aspect.

12.

As regards the second stage of the transfer namely the transfer by the

Assessee of the share in the property to the joint venture with the Builders,
the agreement dated 6.11.1979 is required to be examined. A copy of the
said agreement, which is included in the paper book, reveals that it has been
entered into between the Ashok Kapur as Karta of Ashok Kapur &
Co.(HUF), described as “Owner Dealer” and M/s. Ansal Properties as
“Builders”. The following preamble clauses of the agreement are indicative
of the status of the parties at the time the agreement was entered into:
“AND WHEREAS Shri Ashok Kapur vacated the portion of
the said property in October, 1979, with the object of carrying
on the business of the real estate.
ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 5 of 10

AND WHEREAS on 6th November, 1979, Shri Ashok Kapur
declared that he has converted his undivided one fifth share of
the said property, into the stock in trade of M/s. Ashok Kapur
&Co. (HUF) and contributed the same as proprietor's capital for
the purpose of carrying on the business.
AND WHEREAS M/s. Ashok Kapur & Co. (HUF) is carrying
on the business of dealing in real estates, sale and purchase of
immovable properties and property agents; builders, contractors
and financiers.
WHEREAS the Builder is proposing to build a composite
multistoreyed commercial building on the entire premises No.
22, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi, and has offered in
connection therewith to the OWNER DEALER to erect a part
of the said proposed multistoreyed commercial building on the
one fifth share of the Owner Dealer in the said property (which
amounts to One Eighth share in the said premises No. 21,
Barakhamba Road, New Delhi, after demolition of existing
structures, at Builder's own cost and expenses and with
Builder's Own resources and to pay in respect thereof or
therefor all incidental and other charges including but not
limited to commercialisation charges in consideration of the
Owner Dealer allocating to the Builder 50% of the Owner
Dealer's share, as herein after defined, in the said multistoreyed commercial building, in the manner and subject to and
on the terms and conditions hereinafter contained.”
13.

The clauses in the agreement dated 6.11.1979 regarding the

conversion of the share of Shri Ashok Kapur in the property into the stockin-trade of the Ashok Kapur & Co. (HUF) have not been believed by any of
the authorities and we too have concurred with that finding. Therefore, the
logical corollary is that it is the Assessee i.e. Ashok Kapur (HUF) which is
for all practical purposes the Owner Dealer as regards the agreement dated
6.11.1979. In terms of the said agreement in consideration of the Owner
Dealer “allocating to the Builder 50% of the Owner Dealer's share”, the
Builder was to erect a part of the multi storeyed building on the one-fifth
share of the Owner Dealer in the property. This clause itself indicates that
the Owner Dealer has already agreed to the allocation of 50% of its share in
ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 6 of 10

the property to the Builder.

14.

The terms “saleable space”, “owners”, “allocation”, and “builders

allocation” have been separately defined in the agreement dated 16.11.1979
and they read as under:
'Saleable Space' shall mean the space in the project building
available for independent use and occupation and shall include
additional space available after payment of penalties to
statutory and local authorities for use and occupation, parking
space and lofts, after making the provision for common
facilities.
'Owners allocation' shall mean 50% of the saleable space
comprised in owner's share and proportionately spread and
shall include basements, parking spaces and lofts,
proportionately spread in the project building belonging to the
owner dealer according to the portion to be agreed upon
mutually between the owner Dealer and Builders.
'Builder's allocation' shall mean 50% of the saleable space
comprised in Owner Dealer share and proportionately spread
and shall include basement parking space and lefts in the
project building allocation to be mutually decided between the
Builder and the Owner Dealer, subject to and on the terms and
conditions hereinafter contained, in consideration of Builder,
developing, obtaining necessary permissions and approvals
including those in regard to user of the plot and of the plans for
the project building, constructing and completing in all respect
the project building for occupation and use and for doing all
other acts, deeds and things and assuming all obligations and
liabilities as contained hereinafter.”

15.

Again, the aforementioned definitions reveal the intention of the

parties that the Builder's allocation was an identified portion of the property
in question and that such allocation was to take place in terms of agreement
itself. The expression “transfer of space” was defined to “include transfer
by delivery of possession” which also indicates that this was not an
exhaustive but an inclusive definition.

ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 7 of 10

16.

Clause 6 of the agreement talks of the restrictions on Builder

occupying and using any part of the “existing construction and structures”
unless certain approval has been obtained from the authorities. Clauses 22
& 23 of the agreement is significant and reads as under:
22. The Builder is allowed to agree to sell the area comprised
in Builder's allocation his portion of 50% area to prospecting
Flat Buyers at Builder's own risk and responsibility even prior
to the sanctioning of the Building plans and the approval of the
Project Building by the concerned authorities or
commencement of construction. The BUILDER shall be
entitled to sell to any third person whole or part of the saleable
floor space, basement space, and parking space forming part of
BUILDER'S allocation provided that such a transfer shall be
registered only after the BUILDER has completed the project
building in all respects and has obtained occupation
certificates, and the OWNER DEALER has allocated 50%
interest in his one eighth share in the plot to the BUILDER or
his nominees at BUILDER'S cost i.e. BUILDER or his
nominees paying the stamp duty and registration charges in
respect thereof, such transfer being part of the consideration
pursuant to and in accordance with this agreement.
23. The BUILDER agrees and undertakes to indemnify and
keep indemnified the OWNER DEALER against all or any
claims and which may be made by any persons against the
OWNER DEALER in respect of the sale or dealings by the
BUILDER with third persons in respect of the BUILDERS
allocation in the Project Building.”

17.

In our view, the above clauses 22 and 23 clinch the issue concerning

transfer of the Assessee's share in the property to the Builder in terms of the
aforementioned agreement. The Tribunal was persuaded by Clause 43 of
the agreement to hold that there was no partnership between the Assessee
and the Builder. Clause 43 reads as under:
“43. MISCELLANEOUS:
(i) The Owner Dealer and the Builder have entered this
agreement on a principal to principal basis only and nothing
contained herein shall be deemed or construed as constituting a
partnership between the Builder and Owner Dealer, or as a joint
venture or Joint Advanture between the Owner Dealer and the
ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 8 of 10

Builder, nor shall the Builder and Owner Dealer in any manner
constitute an association of persons. Each shall be strictly
responsible for his/her its own tax liability, and shall keep the
other party hereto indemnified from and against the same.”
18.

We find that the above clause by itself cannot be determinative of

whether there was a transfer from the Assessee to the joint venture or if
there was a partnership between the Builder and the Owner Dealer. The
other clauses, namely the preamble clauses, as well as Clauses 22 and 23 are
unequivocal that the Assessee has allocated to the Builder 50% of the
building to be constructed and has also given the Builder the right to sell the
Builder's allocation to third parties. These clauses have all the elements of
transfer. For the purposes of capital gains what was critical to be examined
was whether pursuant to the agreement there was a transfer of an asset from
one party to the other. Even if one were to accept the argument that there
was no joint venture between the Assessee and M/s. Ansal Properties, still
the inescapable conclusion is that there was a transfer of property from one
entity to the other. In that view of the matter, this Court is unable to agree
with the Tribunal that there has been no transfer by the Assessee of its right
in the property in question.

19.

We are also not persuaded by the reasoning of the Tribunal that there

is no capital gains arising from such a transaction since the value of the
property in the hands of the Assessee was not indicated anywhere in the
agreement. We are of the view that even if the agreement did not spell out
the value of the property in the hands of the Assessee, the valuation of the
property in question indicated by the Assessee itself in its accounts should
be sufficient for the purposes of computation of capital gains tax.
ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 9 of 10

20.

In that view of the matter, the impugned order of the Tribunal to the

extent it holds that there was no transfer of the Assessee's share in the
property in question from the Assessee to the Builders pursuant to the
agreement dated 6.11.1979 is erroneous.

Consequently, both questions

referred to us are answered in the negative, that is, in favour of the Revenue
and against the Assessee. The computation by the ITO of the capital gains
tax, concurred with by the CIT(A) is affirmed.

21.

The reference is disposed of.

S. MURALIDHAR, J

MADAN B. LOKUR, J
SEPTEMBER 24, 2007
dn

ITR No. 395 of 1985

page 10 of 10

