IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

Reserved on:
November 06, 2007
Date of Decision: November 21, 2007
WRIT PETITION (C) 4725/2003

COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH
... PETITIONER
Through : Ms. K.Iyer, Advocate

Versus

S.N. RAI

.... RESPONDENT
Through: Respondent in person.

CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR

1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in
Digest?

Yes

Dr. S. Muralidhar, J.
1.

The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research („CSIR‟) has filed

this writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India
seeking the setting aside of a judgment dated 13th March, 2003 of the Central
Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi („Tribunal‟) in O.A.
No. 1829 of 2001. By the impugned judgment, the Tribunal allowed the
application filed by the Respondent and quashed the orders dated 1 st/5th
September, 2000 and 28th February, 2001 issued by the CSIR declining the
request of the Respondent for counting the past service rendered by him in

WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 1 of 10

the Food Corporation of India („FCI‟) and National Coal Development
Corporation („NCDC‟) (which is at present Coal India Ltd.) prior to his
absorption in the CSIR, for the purpose of calculating pensionary benefits.

2.

The Respondent joined the service of NCDC on 2nd March, 1963.

Thereafter, with effect from 7th October, 1966 he joined the FCI as Accounts
Assistant. He was promoted as Assistant Accountant in July, 1972 and was
confirmed on that post on 24th/29th January, 1973. He was further promoted
as Junior Accounts Officer (Selection Grade) on 25th January, 1983 and was
confirmed in that post.

3.

The CSIR issued a letter on 18th September, 1982 to the Chairman and

Managing Director, FCI asking him to send suitable nominations for filling
up on deputation some of the posts of Under Secretaries/Administrative
Officers (Grade-I) in the CSIR. Pursuant to his application, the Respondent
was appointed as Under Secretary on deputation on foreign service in CSIR
for a period of two years with effect from 16th August, 1983. On expiry of
the period of deputation, the applicant was absorbed as Under Secretary on
regular basis in CSIR with effect from 15th May, 1987.

4. The FCI wrote a letter dated 30th March/16th April, 1988 to the CSIR
stating that the terminal benefits of the Respondent payable to him by the
FCI could be transferred on pro-rata basis to the CSIR for the period the
respondent the served under the FCI subject to CSIR agreeing to such
transfer. The CSIR wrote to the FCI on 8th July, 1988 conveying that they
had no objection in accepting the pensionary liability in respect of the
WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 2 of 10

Respondent on the basis of continued service. The CSIR wrote to the FCI
on 21st April, 1989 asking the latter to disburse to the CSIR the pro-rata
gratuity payable to the Respondent for facilitating the counting of his past
service rendered in FCI. Thereafter on 25th May, 1989 a sum of Rs.31,770/was sent by the FCI to the CSIR towards pro-rata gratuity and leave salary
of the Respondent.

5.

The Respondent on 12th November, 1987 wrote to FCI requesting that

the past service rendered by him in NCDC and FCI be counted for
calculating his pensionary benefits. Nearly three years thereafter, on 22 nd
March 1990, the CSIR issued an Office Memorandum („OM‟) stating that
there were no Government of India orders under which the service rendered
by the employees in Public Sector Undertakings („PSU‟) on their absorption
in the Government or the CSIR can be counted towards their pensionary
benefits. The Respondent was given an opportunity to produce any
Government of India orders in support of his request for counting the past
service for pensionary benefits.

6.

In response thereto, the Respondent submitted a representation dated

25th May, 1990 regarding the counting of his past service in NCDC and FCI.
The CSIR issued another OM dated 25th July, 1991 regretting its inability to
accept the Respondent‟s request. This was reiterated in its letter dated 1 st/5th
September, 2000. A further representation dated 28th September, 2000 made
by the Respondent which was rejected on 28th February, 2001 by the
Chairman, CSIR That is how the Respondent approached the Tribunal for
quashing the said letters. The Tribunal allowed the respondent‟s application
WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 3 of 10

by the impugned judgment dated 13th March, 2003, which has been
challenged in the present petition.

7.

While directing issue of notice in this petition 29th July, 2003, the

Division Bench of this Court stayed the operation of the impugned order of
the Tribunal. The said interim order was made absolute on 7 th February,
2005. During the course of hearing of the case on 22nd October, 2007, this
Court required the learned counsel for the Petitioner to place on record the
counter affidavit filed by the CSIR before the Tribunal as well as the
decision taken by the Governing Body of the CSIR pursuant to the
communication dated 23rd June, 1999 issued by the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure, E.V. Branch to the CSIR. Pursuant thereto, the
Petitioner has placed on record the documents as directed by this Court.

8.

The Tribunal noticed that the Governing body of the CSIR in its

meeting held on 22nd December, 1976 decided to count the past service
rendered by its employees in other organizations including PSUs for
computing the pensionary benefits payable by CSIR.

However, the

Governing body decided that past cases should not be reopened and only
pending requests should be considered. A circular implementing this
decision was issued by the CSIR on 9th February, 1977. It was stated that
the decision as to the benefit of counting his past service for pensionary
benefits was applicable to those employees who had joined CSIR service
before 21st April, 1972. A further circular was issued by the CSIR on 18th
January, 1983 notifying that service rendered in central and state
autonomous bodies and PSUs would qualify for counting past service.
WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 4 of 10

9.

The Tribunal accepted the contention of the respondent that the

circular dated 9th February 1977 stipulating a said cut-off date of 21st April
1972 was unfair, unreasonable and arbitrary.

Before the Tribunal, the

Respondent referred to two other identical cases where the past service had
been counted for pensionary benefits. One was that of Dr. V.B. Reddy, an
Assistant of CSIR who had gone on deputation to a State PSU and was
absorbed there. When he was denied calculation of the pensionary benefit on
the basis of his combined past service in a State PSU, he successfully
challenged the said action before the Tribunal. The Tribunal directed the
counting of his past service.

10. The same benefit was also given to Dr. N.K. Jain, another employee of
CSIR. It may be mentioned here that this Court in Director General, CSIR
v. Dr. (Prof.) N.K. Jain SLJ 2002(1) 194 directed that past service of a
amployye of the CSIR in a “central autonomous body” should be counted
for computation of pensionary benefits. The Tribunal struck down the
impugned orders dated 1st/5th September, 2000 and 28th February, 2001. The
Petitioner was directed to issue a fresh order regarding the Respondent‟s
pension and other retiral benefits after taking into account his past service in
the two PSUs. Further payments after making due adjustments were to be
made to the Respondent within three months of the order.

11.

The Tribunal found that there was nothing on record to show that the

Petitioner had even made an attempt to treat the Respondent‟s case as a
special case. In fact the CSIR was found to have resiled from its earlier
WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 5 of 10

acceptance of the Respondent‟s request for counting his past service.

12.

Ms.K.Iyer, the learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that there

was no justification for the Tribunal‟s direction to count the past service of
the Respondent for pensionary benefits and that this would, apart from
creating administrative difficulties also give rise to other similar claims
which would impose an enormous financial burden on the CSIR. It was
further sought to be contended that the CSIR can grant only so much benefit
as is permitted by the Ministry of Finance. In the absence of an approval by
that Ministry, there was no discretion in the CSIR to take a decision to count
the past service. The learned counsel for the Petitioner expressed an
apprehension that the order of the Tribunal, if upheld by this Court, might
constitute a precedent for other similar claims.

13. The Respondent who appeared in person pointed out that he had retired
from the services of CSIR in August 1990 and the CSIR refunded the
amount of pensionary liability received from FCI to the Respondent on the
ground that PSU service did not count for pension under the Pension Rules
of the Government of India. He further pointed that he had received the
amount under protest. He further submitted that if this Court were to uphold
the order of the Tribunal then with a view to implementing the said
judgment, the Petitioner CSIR might require the Respondent to return the
pensionary liability which had been refunded to him together with interest.
He, accordingly, submitted that if he was required to pay interest on such
sum, equally the CSIR should also be asked to pay interest on the pension
withheld from the Respondent as a result of not counting his past service.
WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 6 of 10

14. A perusal of the Minutes of the Meeting of the Governing body of the
CSIR held on 27th July, 1998 shows that as regards the question of counting
of past service of the Respondent, the decision was in fact approved by the
Governing body “subject to concurrence of Finance Minstry/Member
(Finance).” Further, the Action Taken Note submitted to the 147th Meeting
of the Governing body held on 9th December 1999 states in the action
column that “the matter was referred to the Ministry of Finance for its
concurrence but was not agreed to as implementation of the CSIR‟s proposal
will have widespread repercussions.” In the view of this Court, apart from
this bald statement regarding widespread repercussions, there was no
justification given for denying the Respondent his past service in the PSUs
for the purpose of pensionary benefits.

15.

In its counter affidavit filed by the Respondent before the Tribunal

dated 23rd November 2001, the only explanation given by the CSIR was that
it was a mistake.

The following passages in the counter affidavit are

relevant in this context:
“That the respondent who had inadvertently
accepted the request of the applicant to count his
services rendered at FCI/NCDC for pensionary
benefits immediately rectified the same as soon as
the same mistake came to light. It is settled
principle of law that the administrative errors can
be rectified in order not to perpetuate the same
mistakes any further.
It is submitted that due to certain inadvertence in
interpretation of the Government‟s instructions
with regard to counting of past services rendered
by an employee for the pensionary benefits the
liabilities of the applicant was called from FCI.
However, when in actual the applicant‟s
WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 7 of 10

admissibility was considered, doubts were
expressed by the concerned divisions. The council
in order to clarify their doubts referred to the
Government of India for their opinion.
The Government of India vide their letter of the
August, 1990 opined that service rendered in
Public Sector Undertaking is not counted along
with service rendered under the Government for
the purpose of pension and that CPF benefits
received from FCI should be returned to the
applicant.
In pursuance to the same, the applicant was
informed vide OM dated 22.3.1990 and
25.7.1991.”

16.

We find that apart from the vague justification for the decision of the

CSIR to deny the benefit of past service to the Respondent, there is
absolutely nothing in the record to indicate the reasons for the decision that
grant of benefit to the Respondent would have “widespread repercussions.”
The record does not show what are the repercussions and whether there were
in monetary terms. The learned counsel for the Petitioner was also unable to
throw light on the legal basis for the denial of benefit of counting of past
service to the Respondent.

17.

In our view, the CSIR took a well-informed decision in the first place

to permit the Respondent to count his past service for the purpose of
pensionary benefits. It was on the acceptance of the proposal by the FCI and
the CSIR that the Respondent joined the services of the CSIR. This was in
fact an assurance held out to the Respondent that he would not lose his past
service if he joined the services of the CSIR. The subsequent decision not to
grant him the benefit of his past service was, in the circumstances, arbitrary
and unreasonable. There appears no rational justification for denying the
WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 8 of 10

respondent the benefit of his past service with the NCDC and FCI. The plea
of financial burden has remained unsubstantiated by the CSIR with any facts
and figures. In any event this Court does not consider that a sufficient
justification for denying the respondent the benefit of his past service for the
purposes of computing his pensionary and retiral benefits.

18. For the aforementioned reasons, this Court finds no grounds have been
made out by the petitioner for persuading this Court to interfere with the
well-reasoned order of the Tribunal. The writ petition is without merits. As
regards the plea that the decision of the Tribunal should be confined to the
facts of the present case, we may observe that it is trite that each case of
grievance of arbitrary treatment has to be determined ultimately on facts.

19. While dismissing the writ petition this Court considers it, in the interests
of justice, to issue the following directions:
(i) The impugned order dated 13th March 2003 passed by the Tribunal
in OA No. 1829 of 2001 is affirmed and the writ petition is dismissed;
(ii) The Petitioner CSIR will implement the judgment of the Tribunal
by reworking the pensionary and other retiral benefits of the
respondent from the date of his retirement in accordance with the
impugned judgment and issuing appropriate orders on or before
March 1, 2008;
(iii) The petitioner CSIR will pay to the respondent the amount
constituting the arrears of the reworked pension and other retiral
benefits from the date of his retirement along with 12% simple
interest per annum from the date of retirement till the date of payment
WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 9 of 10

which in any event will not be later than March 1, 2008; the revised
pension will in any event become payable not later than March 1,
2008;
(iv) Any delay in making the payment of the arrears of the revised
pensionary and retiral benefits to the Respondent beyond March 1,
2008 will result in the CSIR, apart from being liable for contempt of
court, having to pay to the Respondent penal interest @ 18% per
annum for the period of delay;
(v) The Petitioner will pay to the Respondent costs of Rs.5,000/within a period of four weeks from today and in any event not later
than December 31, 2007.

20.

The writ petition is accordingly dismissed with the aforesaid

directions.
21.

List for compliance on 4th April, 2008.

S. MURALIDHAR, J.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.

NOVEMBER 21, 2007
rk

WP(C) 4725/2003

Page 10 of 10

