*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision: February 23,

2007
24
+

W.P.(C) 10912/2006 & CM No 8367/2006

PREM KAKAR

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. N. Kinra, Advocate

versus

D.D.A.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Anil Sapra, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?
No

Dr. S.Muralidhar J. (open court)

The petitioner filed Writ Petition (C) 7593 of 2000 earlier in this Court
seeking a writ of certiorari quashing of the decision of Delhi
Development Authority ('DDA') cancelling the allotment of a flat to her
at Rohini in New Delhi. The petitioner contended that the demandcum-allotment letter had been sent to the wrong address and
therefore, she suffered loss on account of the fault of the DDA. This
plea was not accepted by the learned Single Judge of this Court. In
the judgment 24.5.2002, it was held as under:
“The mistake lies on the part of the petitioner.
In her letter dated 7.5.1994 she clearly stated
that she came to know about the allotment of
flat to her. She, however, also slept over the
matter and woke up only in 1998 when she
again wrote a letter on 25.4.1998 requesting
the respondent to send the allotment letter.”

Accordingly, the writ petition was dismissed. Nevertheless, in the last
portion of the judgment, the following equitable relief was granted:
W.P.(C) 10912/2006

1 of 3

“However, the respondent in order to protect
the interest of the petitioner, has agreed to
allot another flat to the petitioner at current
cost in the next draw. The petitioner shall be
at liberty to accept the allotment of another
flat at current cost.”

Consequently, the respondent-DDA issued a fresh demand letter to
the petitioner allotting a flat in Rohini on hire purchase basis. The
petitioner was to make the initial payment before 19.9.2002. The
petitioner admittedly did not make this payment.

The petitioner filed an appeal against the order of the learned Single
Judge dated 24.5.2002 which came to be dismissed on 16.12.2003 by
the Division Bench of this Court. Admittedly, there was no interim
order during the pendency of the appeal protecting the second
allotment made to the petitioner by the DDA consequent upon the
direction contained in the judgment of the learned Single Judge.

Mr. Kinra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner states that the
petitioner is now prepared to make the payment for the flat allotted
on the second occasion at current cost and that the respondent should
be directed to allot her a flat at current cost. Mr. Anil Sapra, learned
counsel appearing for the DDA points out that the petitioner not
having availed the second opportunity, the said allotment stood
automatically cancelled and in these circumstances, the DDA is not
obliged to issue a fresh demand-cum-allotment letter.

This Court is of the view that the present case cannot be equated with
other cases where they may have been delays, for various reasons, in
the allottees making payments of instalments, for which the DDA has
framed certain policies and where the Court has also granted
W.P.(C) 10912/2006

2 of 3

equitable relief.

The present case is one where the Court did not

accept the contention of the petitioner, rejected the petition on merits
but granted equitable limited relief to the petitioner for availing an
opportunity of taking a flat at current cost. The petitioner did not avail
of the said opportunity.

Also, there was no interim stay of the

cancellation of the second allotment during the pendency of the
petitioner’s appeal before the Division Bench of this Court. In these
circumstances, the contention that the petitioner has suffered
injustice that warrants interference by this Court cannot merit
acceptance.

The writ petition is dismissed. The application is also dismissed.

Sd/S. MURALIDHAR,
J
FEBRUARY 23, 2007
rk

W.P.(C) 10912/2006

3 of 3

