*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

Reserved on :
October 22, 2007
Date of Decision : October 25, 2007

+

ITA No. 392 of 2007
OCEAN STRUCTURES (P) LTD.
.......Appellant
Through : Mr. Krishan Mahajan, Advocate.
versus
ASST. COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX ...Respondent
Through: Ms. Sonia Mathur, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in Digest?

Yes

JUDGMENT
Dr. S. Muralidhar, J.

1.

This appeal under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (the

`Act') is directed against the Order dated 29.9.2006 passed by the Income
Tax Appellate Tribunal (the `Tribunal') in ITA No. 2847/Del/2002 for the
Assessment Year 1999-2000. The Tribunal reversed the Order dated
15.4.2002 passed by the Commissioner of Income Tax [the `CIT(A)'] and
held that the income earned by the Assessee should be charged to tax under
Section 22, i.e., under the head “income from house property” and not under
Section 28 of the Act, i.e., under the head “profits and gains of business”

ITA 392/2007

1 of 4

2.

The Assessee constructed a building named 'CTC Plaza' on a plot of

land measuring 1200 sq. yds. at F-43, Kilokri Ring Road, Ashram Chowk,
New Delhi ('the premises'). The Assessee entered into a licence agreement
dated 30.9.1998 with M/s Chhabra Silk & Sarees, Chandni Chowk, New
Delhi under which the licensee was permitted to use the premises for its
business of dealing in sarees, garments, fabrics, etc. for a consideration
which was to be a percentage of the sale proceeds.

3.

The Assessing Officer (AO), after discussing the terms of the licence,

came to the conclusion that the Assesssee and the licensee were not
independent entities but were closely connected to each other. The AO
concluded that the licence agreement had been drafted in a manner to make
the receipt of the income from the house property appear to be business
income calculated as a percentage of the sales of the licensee. The AO, as a
matter of fact, further found that during the Assessment Year in question,
the shareholding pattern of the Assessee company had undergone a sea
change. The partners of the licensee firm M/s Chabbra Silk and Sarees were
the majority shareholders with a controlling interest over the Assessee
company. The AO concluded that “the receipt of income in the hands of
assessee company is based on sale made by the licensee over which the
assessee company would have no control had both the entities been
independent commercial entities.” Based on these findings, the AO
concluded that the income had to be charged as income from house property
and not as business income.

ITA 392/2007

2 of 4

4.

In the appeal filed by the Assessee, the CIT(A) after discussing some

of the clauses of the licence agreement came to the conclusion that the
commission earned by the Assessee was business income and not income
from house property and that this was “duly evidenced by the size of
commission received by the company which only a commercial complex
carrying commercial activities can fetch.”

5.

The Tribunal reversed the decision of the CIT(A) relying on the

principles settled by the Supreme Court in the decisions in United
Commercial Bank v. Commissioner of Income Tax, 32 ITR 688 and East
India Housing and Land Development Trust Ltd. v. CIT, 42 ITR 49(SC)
which had been reaffirmed in Universal Plast v. CIT, 237 ITR 454(SC).
The Tribunal concluded that the nomenclature given by the parties to the
consideration for use of premises was immaterial, and that clause of the
licence agreement made it clear that the Assessee had parted with the
possession of the premises to M/s Chabbra Silks for earning income from
such premises. Accordingly the Tribunal upheld the order of the AO that
the proper head for charging income tax would be under Section 22 of the
Act, i.e., “income from house property”.

6.

We have heard the submission of Mr. Krishan Mahajan, learned

counsel for the assessee and Ms. Sonia Mathur, learned Standing Counsel
for the Revenue. On examining the clauses of the licence agreement we
ITA 392/2007

3 of 4

detect no infirmity in the finding of fact arrived at by the AO that the entire
arrangement of a licence agreement with M/s Chabbra Silk was a colourable
device to make the income from house property appear as income from
business. We are not a little surprised that the CIT(A) has, without adverting
to the finding of the AO that the licensor and the licensee are not
independent entities but are closely connected to each other, come to a
conclusion that the commission paid to the Assessee was not 'income from
house property'. It is apparent from the reading of the clauses of the licence
agreement that the Assessee has merely parted with the possession of the
premises for the purposes of earning income therefrom. We are also unable
to appreciate the conclusion arrived at by the CIT(A) that the quantum of
the consideration was determinative of whether the income was business
income or income from house property. We accordingly find no infirmity in
the conclusions on facts arrived at by the AO which have been affirmed by
the Tribunal.

7.

No substantial question of law arises for consideration. The appeal is

dismissed.

S. Muralidhar, J.

Madan B. Lokur, J.
October 25, 2007
ak

ITA 392/2007

4 of 4

