*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

%

+

#
!

Date of order

: January 31, 2007.

W.P.(C) 1470 of 1990 & CMs No 2272/1990, 1020/1991

H.K. JOSAN & ORS
Through None.

..... Petitioners.

versus

$
^

DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Through None.

..... Respondent.

CORAM :HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the order?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the order should be reported in Digest? Yes
ORDER
S.MURALIDHAR, J. (ORAL)
1.

This petition filed in the year 1990 sought the quashing of the

draw of lots and the allotment of common covered and open car
parking spaces made by the Respondent Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) in respect of sixty six car parking spaces in Kailash Towers I, II
& III, East of Kailash, New Delhi. It also sought the quashing of the
demand of Rs.15,275/- made by respondents for such allotment on the

WP(C) 1470/1990

Page no 1 of 7

ground that the demand was violative of rules, regulations and terms
and conditions of allotment.

2.

Although notices were directed to issue to the respondents on

21.5.1990, no interim relief was granted by this Court. On 6.2.1992,
Rule was issued and it was directed as under:
“Neither the petitioner nor any other person
who have been allotted parking space for car
will put any chain in that area or raise a wall
or construction or put obstruction for the
others to pass through that area except the
parking space would be used for parking cars
by those who have been allotted.”

3.

None appeared on behalf of the parties when the matter was

listed for final hearing on 10.1.2007. In the interests of justice, no
adverse order was passed and the matter was directed to be kept on
Board.

4.

Today also none appears for the parties. Since this writ petition

has been pending for over sixteen years, the Court is proceeding to
dispose of the petition on the basis of the pleadings and documents on
record.

WP(C) 1470/1990

Page no 2 of 7

5.

A perusal of the petition shows that the principal ground on

which the demand has been questioned is that the common areas and
facilities vest in the association of flat owners and these cannot be
allotted by the respondent DDA to individual owners. It is contended
that the DDA had in fact assured the flat owners that being a Self
Financing Scheme, the cost of the flat included the cost of the car
parking space. Secondly, it is contended that the entire exercise of
allotment of parking spaces has been done without notice to the flat
owners and in an arbitrary manner. Thirdly, the basis of the
determination of the demand of Rs.15,275 has been questioned on the
ground that details of the costs of construction and the formula
arriving at such a demand have not been disclosed.

6.

The Reply of the DDA as filed on 12.12.1991 shows that the

original price of the flat did not include the car parking space and at
no point of time was it ever represented to the petitioners that the
price of the flat would include car parking space.

It is stated that

there was a computerized draw of lots on the basis of which the
allotment of cars parking space was made and since the allotment was
made separately, the demand was also raised separately. As regards
the cost, the explanation offered in the amended reply affidavit is as
under:

WP(C) 1470/1990

Page no 3 of 7

“It was however not feasible to calculate
different costs for each allottee. That is why,
a lumpsum amount was fixed by the Finance
Wing of the DDA towards the cost of the car
parking

spaces,

keeping

in

mind

and

maintaining an average balance between the
slight difference is sizes and costs of the car
parking spaces.

However, it is very important to note that
whatever expenditure has been incurred for
parking has been charged only to those
allottees who have been allotted parking
spaces and not to anyone else. It is also worth
mentioning that nothing has been included in
the cost of car parking spaces towards the
land component since the total areas of the
scheme

of

multi-storeyed

accounted for by the flats.

flats

stands

Only the cost

incurred for building the car parking spaces,
including

the

cost of

building

the

main

buildings on stilts, and the roads etc. was
taken

into

account

and

accordingly

was

divided between the successful allottees.”

7.

It may be mentioned that DDA was permitted to file the

amended reply vide order dated 12.12.1991 reserving liberty to the
petitioner to say that the amended pleadings were wrong and

WP(C) 1470/1990

Page no 4 of 7

contrary to the records.

8.

In their rejoinder, the petitioners contend that the DDA has

taken a contradictory stand. It is pointed out that in its unamended
counter affidavit the DDA had said that the applications for allotment
of car parking space had been invited from the apartment owners. In
the amended counter affidavit it was said that the names of all the
allottees of flats were sent to the computerized cell for draw of lots
and the computerized draw was held on 23.3.1998. It is contended
that this renders the entire procedure arbitrary. It is also contended
by the petitioners that no publicity was given about this computerized
draw and that allotment of parking space exclusively to some of the
apartment owners is not in consonance with the spirit of community
living.

9.

A perusal of the pleadings and documents indicates that the

common areas could not have been sufficient for the parking of all the
cars of the flat owners.

There is also nothing to indicate that the

statement of the DDA in its counter affidavit, based on the records of
the case, that the original price of the flats did not include the cost of
car parking space, is incorrect.

Apart from their averment, the

petitioners have produced no document to evidence DDA holding out

WP(C) 1470/1990

Page no 5 of 7

such an assurance. Also, there is no document produced to
substantiate the claim that the parking lots have been carved out from
the common areas that vested with the residents’ association

10.

Further, merely because all the names of the allottees were sent

to a computer and a computerized draw was held for allotment for car
parking spaces, it cannot be said that the procedure was arbitrary or
unreasonable.

In most colonies in Delhi there is a tremendous

shortage of space for car parking and some reasonable basis would
have to be devised to provide for parking space especially when the
demand far exceeds the supply.

Viewed from this angle, the

procedure adopted cannot be said to be arbitrary or unreasonable.
Unless there is some regulation of car parking space within a
residential colony, it leads invariably to chaos and confrontation
among neighbours. For a peaceful coexistence within the colony, it
would be important for residents to have earmarked car parking
spaces for exclusive use. No doubt that some residents may be left out
in the process, but the benefit of some regulation and orderliness that
this brings to the use of the colony roads and pavements far
outweighs the constant friction and tension that ensues between
neighbours in the absence of such regulation.

WP(C) 1470/1990

Page no 6 of 7

11.

Also there is no merit in the challenge to the amount demanded

for the parking lot that has been allotted. Given the prevalent prices
in Delhi, particularly in the area with which this petition is concerned
(Kailash Towers), it can be hardly said that a sum of Rs. 15,275 for a
parking lot, even in 1990, was arbitrary or unreasonable.

In any

event, the aspect of costing on the basis of which the demand for car
parking spaces has been computed is not amenable to be tested on
‘judicially manageable standards’ for the purposes of judicial review
under Article 226 of the Constitution.

These are matters of details

and, on the facts of the present case, there is nothing patently
arbitrary or unreasonable in the computation of the cost that warrants
interference by the Court.

12.

For all the above reasons, there is no merit in the writ petition

and it is dismissed as such.

The applications are disposed of. No

order as to costs.

Sd/S. MURALIDHAR, J
JANUARY 31, 2007
raj

WP(C) 1470/1990

Page no 7 of 7

