UNREPORTABLE

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+
%

WP(C).No.8400/2006
Date of Decision :

August

17 , 2007
#Ex Recruit Manoj Deswal
!

Petitioner
Through: Mr.A.K.Bakshi with
Mr.R.K.Bakshi,

Advocates.
Versus
$ UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
^
Advocate

Respondents
Mr.Shishir
Singh,

Through:

Maj.S.S.Pandey.

CORAM:* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1. Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see the
judgment?
2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Per S.N. AGGARWAL, J.
The legality, validity and the effect of a discharge order
terminating the services of the petitioner during training without
giving him a show cause notice of proposed termination is the only
question that calls for our consideration in this writ petition. The
background facts of the case necessary to deal and decide the above
referred question are not in dispute and are delineated herein below.
2.

The petitioner was recruited for the post of Store Hand

Technical (SHT) in Army Supply Corps and he joined basic military
training at Army Training Centre, Bangalore on 14.8.2004. He

W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 1 of 11

successfully completed his basic military training during the period
between 23.8.2004 to 4.1.2005. He was granted annual leave for 28 days
from 5.1.2005 to 1.2.2005. His technical training started in February,
2005. Immediately after start of his technical training, he fell ill and
was hospitalised for four days from 4.2.2005 to 8.2.2005. Later he was
granted 15 days casual leave from 24.2.2005 to 10.3.2005. On 11.3.2005
he rejoined his training but on that date he received a message from his
home that his mother was not well. On 12.3.2005 he sought voluntary
discharge but he withdrew the same on 14.3.2005. Thereafter he
absented

himself from the training from 2.4.2005 onwards till he

rejoined training of his own on 21.7.2005. On 27.8.2005 he was
informed by his Commanding Officer that his services stood
terminated

w.e.f.

that

date.

The discharge order was sent to the petitioner vide communication
dated 22.9.2005 signed by Lt.Col., Senior Record Officer, for OIC
Records, Bangalore. The petitioner was discharged from service during
training under Army Rule 13(3)(IV) of the Army Rules, 1954 on the
ground that he was unlikely to make an efficient soldier. It is this
discharge order which the petitioner has challenged in the present writ
petition.
3.

Though the impugned discharge order has been challenged by the

petitioner on several grounds but during arguments, the learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner had restricted his
arguments only on the point of service of show cause notice not given to
the petitioner before terminating his services while he was undergoing
training. It was contended by the learned counsel that the petitioner
W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 2 of 11

could not have been terminated from army service without giving him
an opportunity to explain his conduct relating to his alleged absence
from training w.e.f 2.4.2005 till 21.7.2005. On the other hand, counsel
appearing on behalf of the respondents had argued that the
respondents were justified in terminating the services of the petitioner
during training period as he unauthorisedly absented himself from
training for a period of 108 days from 2.5.2005 till 21.7.2005. It was
further contended by the learned counsel for the respondents that no
show cause notice was required to be given to the petitioner in terms of
Rule 13(3)(IV) of the Army Rules, 1954 before terminating his services
on the ground that he was unlikely to make an efficient soldier. As per
counsel for the respondents there is no infirmity in the impugned
discharge order and the same cannot be interfered with only for want of
service of show cause notice upon the petitioner.
4.

We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have

also perused the record. It is not disputed that the services of the
petitioner were terminated while he was undergoing training in
exercise of powers conferred on the Commanding Officer under Rule
13(3)(IV) of the Army Rules, 1954. It is also not disputed that the
petitioner was not given any show cause notice of proposed termination
before he was actually terminated from Army Service w.e.f 27.8.2005.
The stand of the respondents is that no such show cause notice was
required to be given while invoking powers under Rule 13(3)(IV) of the
Army Rules, 1954. To appreciate the said contention on behalf of the
respondents, it would be necessary to refer to the provisions of Rule
13(3)(IV) of the Army Rules, 1954 and the same are reproduced herein
W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 3 of 11

below :“Rule 13
Authorities..................................:
Sub-Rule (3)(IV)

W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 4 of 11

Category

Grounds of
discharge

1

2

Competent
authority
authorise
discharge

to

3

Persons
IV. All classes of
Commanding
enrolled under discharge.
Officer or officer
the Act but not
commanding Recruit
attested.
Reception Camp or a
Recruiting,
Technical Recruiting
or Deputy Technical
Recruiting Officer.

Manner of

4

In the case of
persons requesting
to be discharged
before fulfilling the
conditions of their
enrolment,
the
Commanding
Officers
will
exercise this power
only where he is
satisfied as to the
desirability
of
sanctioning
the
application that the
strength of the unit
will not thereby be
unduly reduced.
Recruits who are
considered unlikely
to become efficient
soldiers
will
be
dealt with under
this item.

5.

A plain reading of the above rule would show that the

Commanding Officer was competent to discharge any recruit if he is of
the view that such a recruit is unlikely to make an efficient soldier. It is
true that the rule does not contemplate service of a show cause notice
on the person concerned before terminating his services on the said
ground. We are of the view that if the rule does not expressly provide for
service of a show cause notice then this by itself does not necessarily
imply that the Commanding Officer can discharge the services of a
recruit arbitrarily. The termination of services of a person has serious
consequences. The termination of an employee not only deprive the

W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 5 of 11

employee terminated from service from his right of livelihood but also
deprive his other family members who are dependent for their bread
and butter on him. Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees to every
citizen that his right to life or liberty cannot be taken away except with
due process of law. The question is what is 'due process of law' as
envisaged in Article 21 of the Constitution vis-a-vis termination of
services of an employee. In our view, the due process of law would
necessarily encompass in its fold a right of hearing to be given to the
person whose services are proposed to be terminated. It is true that the
decision as to whether a recruit would or would not make an efficient
soldier lies within the absolute discretion of the Commanding Officer
under whom such a person is undergoing training but by no means the
Commanding Officer can be allowed to exercise his discretion to
terminate the services of a recruit by invoking Rule 13(3)(IV) without
providing him a bare minimum opportunity of hearing in the form of a
show cause notice of proposed termination.
6.

In Surinder Singh Sihag vs UOI, 2003 I AD (DELHI)

123, a Division Bench of this Court had relied upon the procedure laid
down by the respondents in its circular dated 28.12.1988, the relevant
provisions whereof reads as under :“5.Subject to the foregoing, the procedure to be
followed for dismissal or discharge of a person under
AR 13 or AR 17, as the case may be, is set out
below:(a)Preliminary enquiry : Before recommending
discharge or dismissal of an individual the authority
concerned will ensure:(i)That an impartial enquiry (not necessarily a court
W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 6 of 11

of inquiry) has been made into the allegations
against him and that he has had adequate
opportunity of putting up his defence or explanation
and or adducing evidence in his defence.
(ii)That the allegations have been substantial and
that the extreme step of termination of the
individual's service is warranted on the merits of
the case.

7.

(b) Action by competent authority: The authority
competent to authorize the dismissal or discharge of
the individual will consider the case in the light of
what is stated in (a)above. If he is satisfied that the
termination of the individual's services is
warranted, he should direct that a show cause
notice be issued to the individual in accordance with
AR 13 or AR 17 as the case may be. No lower
authority will direct the issue of a show cause
notice. The show cause notice should cover the full
particulars of the cause of action against the
individuals. The allegations must be specific and
supported by sufficient details to enable the
individual to clear understand and reply to them.“
The administrative instructions extracted above holds the

field even today as it was not disputed by the learned counsel appearing
on behalf of the respondents that these instructions are applicable to
Army personnel till date. Basing its decision on these instructions, it
was held by this Court in Surinder Singh Sihag's case (supra) that
action to terminate the services of a recruit can be taken by the
competent authority only after service of show cause notice upon the
delinquent employee. The relevant portion of this judgment is
reproduced herein below :“Thus, the delinquent employee must be given an
adequate opportunity of putting his defence or
explanation or adducing evidence in support of his
case. The allegations against him must be
substantial. Extreme step of termination of the
individual's service is warranted only upon
considering the merit of each case.
Recommendations for dismissal or discharge is
required to be forwarded to the competent
W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 7 of 11

authority,
whereupon
the
intermediate
authorities must consider the case in the light
what is stated in clause (a) above.
Only upon receipt of the show-cause notice action
thereupon can be taken and thereafter only the
competent authority may pass final orders.”
8.

In D.K.Yadav vs J.M.A. Industries Ltd.(1993)3 SCC

259, it was held by the Apex Court that before terminating the services
of an employee the principles of natural justice are required to be
complied with.
9.

In Delhi Transport Corpn. vs. D.T.C Mazdoor Congress

1991 SCC (L&S) 1213, it was held by the Apex Court as under :“.........that right to public employment and its
concomitant right to livelihood received
protective umbrella under the canopy of Articles
14 and 21 etc. All matters relating to
employment include the right to continue in
service till the employee reaches superannuation
or until his service is duly terminated in
accordance with just, fair and reasonable
procedure prescribed under the provisions of the
Constitution and the rules made under proviso
to Article 309 of the Constitution or the statutory
provisions or the rules, regulations or
instructions having statutory flavour. They must
be conformable to the rights guaranteed in Parts
III and IV of the Constitution.
It is thus well-settled law that right to life
enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution
would include right to livelihood. The order of
termination
of
the
service
of
an
employee/workman visits with civil consequences
of jeopardizing not only his/her livelihood but
also career and livelihood of dependents.
Therefore, before taking any action putting an
end to the tenure of an employee/workman fair
play requires that a reasonable opportunity to
put forth his case is given and domestic inquiry
conducted complying with the principles of
natural justice.”
10.

It is apparent from the above referred judgments that the

services of the petitioner could not have been terminated by the
W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 8 of 11

respondents without serving him with a show cause notice of proposed
termination. Since in this case the show cause notice was admittedly
not given by the respondents to the petitioner before discharging him
from service, the impugned discharge order cannot stand the test of
judicial scrutiny.
11.

In all fairness to the learned counsel for the respondents, we

would like to mention that the respondents' learned counsel had placed
reliance upon another Division Bench judgment of this Court in Rajbir
Singh vs. Union of India & Ors.2003 VI AD (DELHI) 541. This
judgment was relied upon by him to buttress his contention that a
recruit can be legally terminated by the Commanding Officer during
training and his said decision is not open to judicial review. We do not
dispute this proposition urged on behalf of the respondents. The point
before us is to examine the effect of non service of show cause notice
upon the petitioner. The facts of Rajbir Singh's case (supra) are
almost akin to the facts before us. In that case also the services of a
recruit were terminated by his Commanding Officer while he was
undergoing technical training as in the present case. However, in
Rajbir Singh's case (supra) the authorities had given show cause
notice of proposed termination to the petitioner before his services were
terminated. This lends support to our view that the service of a show
cause notice upon the petitioner was a condition precedent before his
services could be terminated vide impugned discharge order. In that
view of the matter, the judgment in Rajbir Singh's case relied upon
by the respondents' counsel is of no help to the case of the respondents.
12.

There is yet another important aspect of this case which is

W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 9 of 11

culled out from the pleadings of the respondents contained in their
counter affidavit. In Para 13 of their counter affidavit, the respondents
have

referred

to

Army

Headquarter

letter

No.

A/

20314/MT-3 dated 28.2.1986 according to which a recruit would not be
allowed to rejoin his training in the event of his remaining absent for 30
consecutive days during basic military training period. It is provided in
the above referred circular that the absentees for less than 30 days may
be considered for relegation if otherwise found suitable for retention. It
is further provided that once the technical training of a recruit has
commenced, the discretion to discharge a recruit for such absence is left
to the Commandant of the centre who may retain or discharge him
considering the case on merits. In the present case, the petitioner had
successfully completed his basic military training and he allegedly
absented himself for 108 days while he was undergoing technical
training at Bangalore prior to his impugned discharge. In case the
petitioner would have been given a show cause notice before his
impugned discharge then probably he could have explained his alleged
absence from training and satisfied the Commanding Officer that his
was a fit case to retain him in service in view of discretion conferred on
the Commanding Officer in the above referred circular.
13.

In view of the above, we have no hesitation in holding that

the impugned discharge order terminating the services of the petitioner
w.e.f 27.8.2005 cannot be sustained in law and the same is liable to be
set aside. We accordingly quash the impugned discharge order and
direct reinstatement of the petitioner in service forthwith subject to the
following conditions:W.P.(C) 8400/2006

Page 10 of 11

1. The respondents may hold a fresh enquiry against the petitioner
after serving him with a show cause notice as per law.
2. The fresh enquiry against the petitioner, if held, should be
completed as expeditiously as possible but not later than four
months from today.
3. The question relating to back wages for the period between the
date of impugned discharge and the date of reinstatement shall
be dependent upon the final outcome of the fresh enquiry to be
held against the petitioner. Needless to say that in case no fresh
enquiry is held, the petitioner shall be entitled to back wages as
well as seniority immediately on expiry of four months given for
completing the enquiry.
In the result, this writ petition succeeds and is allowed in
terms referred above. No order as to costs.

S.N. AGGARWAL
(JUDGE)

August 17, 2007
mb

W.P.(C) 8400/2006

T.S.THAKUR
(JUDGE)

Page 11 of 11

