UNREPORTABLE
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C).No.10913/2004

%

Date of Decision :

January 18, 2008

#SMT. NILA PRAMANIK
..... Petitioner
!
Through: Mr.A.C. Pradhan, Advocate
Versus
$ UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS
^

..... Respondent

Through: Mr. Siddhartha Singh,
Advocate

CORAM:* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see
the judgment?
2.To be referred to the reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Per S.N. AGGARWAL, J.
The petitioner Smt. Nila Pramanik is the widow of late
Sh. Anup Kumar Pramanik who was working as a cook in
CISF and had died after serving for 12 years while still in
service on 02.04.1997. The petitioner in this writ of
wpc10913/2004

Page1 of 9

mandamus has prayed for directions to the respondents to
provide compassionate appointment to her as per Policy of
the respondents for compassionate appointment in vogue.
2

The brief facts of the case giving rise to this writ

petition are as follow:The petitioner's late husband No. 85420026 Cook Anup
Kumar Pramanik was serving in CISF for last more than 12
years and died while in service on 02.04.1997. The petitioner
is VIII Class pass. After the death of her husband, she had
applied

for compassionate appointment on or around

February, 1998. The case of the petitioner for compassionate
appointment was strongly recommended by the concerned
authorities of the respondents. The respondents vide their
letter dated 21.11.2000 had intimated the petitioner that
she was eligible for the post of follower in group 'D'. On
08.08.2003, the respondents informed the petitioner that
they do not have any vacancy in group 'D' post and that
since her late husband had died 5 years ago, her case for
compassionate appointment could not be considered. The
grievance of the petitioner is that the respondents have
declined

compassionate

application

of

mind

appointment
or

without

to
any

her

without

sympathetic

consideration for her, she being a young widow. The
petitioner has alleged that the action of the respondents in
not providing compassionate appointment to her is arbitrary
wpc10913/2004

Page2 of 9

and illegal. Therefore, she has filed this writ petition for
directions to the respondents to provide her compassionate
appointment on account of untimely death of her husband
while he was still in service.
3

In

response

to

notice

of

this

writ

petition,

the

respondents have filed their counter affidavit. In their
counter affidavit, the respondents have stated that the
petitioner was considered by the CISF, Directorate for her
compassionate appointment during the years 1998, 2000,
2001 & 2003 respectively for the post of follower (Group 'D')
but could not be approved due to non-availability of the
vacancy in the said category in CISF for appointment on
compassionate ground. The respondents have stated that as
per the instructions of the Government of India contained in
its Office Memorandum dated 05.05.2003, the case for
appointment on compassionate grounds can be considered
within three years only from the date of death of the
government employee. According to the respondents, since
the

case

of

the

petitioner

for

her

appointment

on

compassionate grounds has become 5 years old, she could
not be offered appointment on compassionate grounds. The
respondents have further stated in their counter affidavit
that the CISF, Directorate had decided to consider the case
of the petitioner for her appointment on compassionate
grounds in group 'C' post (Constable) if she had passed 10th
wpc10913/2004

Page3 of 9

class and the petitioner was informed accordingly by CISF
Directorate vide letter No. 874 dated 22.06.2000 but the
petitioner could not avail the said facility due to her failure
in producing the proof of required educational qualification.
The respondents have also stated that they have paid all the
death benefits to the petitioner after the death of her
husband, as per details given in para 3 of their counter
affidavit. The petitioner is stated to be in receipt of monthly
family pension of Rs. 1,275/- in addition to dearness
allowance. The respondents have denied the allegation of
the

petitioner

that

she

was

declined

compassionate

appointment without application of mind or that her case for
such appointment was not considered as per Policy of the
Government in existence. The respondents have prayed for
the dismissal of the present writ petition.
4

We have heard the arguments of the learned counsel

for both the parties and have also perused the entire case
file with utmost care.
5

Mr. Pradhan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the petitioner had argued that the petitioner is a young
widow and her case for compassionate appointment was not
considered by the concerned authorities of the respondents
as per Policy of the Government. He had further argued that
the petitioner was wrongly denied appointment on a false
premise that no vacancy was available with the respondents
wpc10913/2004

Page4 of 9

in the category of followers during the years her case was
allegedly taken up by the respondents for consideration. On
the other hand, Mr. Singh learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondents had vehemently argued that the
case of the petitioner for her appointment on compassionate
grounds was duly considered by the concerned authorities of
the respondents as per Policy of the Government and her
case for such appointment could not be approved because
the petitioner was lower down in the waiting list and no
vacancy was available for her.
6

In order to appreciate the rival argument advanced by

the learned counsel for the parties, this Court vide its order
passed on 01.02.2006 had directed the respondents to file a
detailed break up of the vacancies in follower category
(group

'D')

including

those

vacancies

arising

due

to

retirement in the four years i.e. 1998, 2000, 2001 & 2003. In
compliance with the said directions of this Court, the
respondents have filed the affidavit of Mr. S.P. Selvan,
Assistant

Inspector

General

(Establishment)

at

CISF,

Headquarters, New Delhi which is there at pages 53 to 55 of
the paper book. Mr. Selvan on behalf of the respondents has
stated in his affidavit that the Committee constituted for
consideration of the cases of compassionate appointment
had considered 268 cases including the case of the
petitioner in the year 1998. He has further stated that
wpc10913/2004

Page5 of 9

having regard to the limitation of vacancies available for
such appointment and the large number of applications, the
Committee unanimously decided that the compassionate
appointment should in the first place be offered to the
son/wife/daughter of those members who died in action
(actual extremists/insurgent attack) and in the second place
to those who have died while performing bonafide official
duty which is attributable to the risk of the office. As per
affidavit of Mr. Selvan, 46 persons were in category A for the
appointment of group 'C' & 'D' post, 175 persons were not
found eligible within the aforesaid criteria and they were,
therefore, put in category B and the name of the petitioner
was listed at serial No. 91 in category B list. There were only
22 vacancies available in 1998 and 22 persons were
appointed against these vacancies. In the year 1999, the
Committee

reexamined

cases

of

compassionate

appointments including the case of the petitioner. The
petitioner was listed at serial No. 39 in category B. The
Committee found that the petitioner was not matriculate.
Keeping in view the eligibility standard, the Committee
found the petitioner eligible only for the post of followers.
But this time, due to non availability of vacancies in
followers, none of the candidates including the petitioner
could be given appointment. The Committee recommended
to keep the name of the petitioner in waiting panel.
wpc10913/2004

Page6 of 9

7

In the year 2002, the Committee considered 166 cases

(28 fresh and 138 old cases) including the case of the
petitioner for appointment in group 'D' post. The petitioner
was listed at serial No. 36. In 2002, there were only 23
vacancies and therefore 23 cases were recommended by the
Committee in the follower category (i.e. 8 Cooks, 9 Water
Carriers, 03 Sweepers and 3 Washer Man) for appointment.
The name of the petitioner could not be recommended by
the Committee due to prescribed ceiling of 5% quota. Since
the

petitioner

was

considered

for

her

compassionate

appointment three times, she was not kept in waiting panel
for appointment in the category of follower any further.
8

Mr. Selvan who has filed his affidavit on behalf of the

respondents has further stated in his affidavit that in the
year 2003, a Committee constituted by Inspector General/ES
had examined the case of the petitioner for her appointment
to the post of follower (tailor) but she could not be
considered for appointment in that year due to non
availability of vacancy within the prescribed ceiling of 5%
quota. Mr. Selvan has further stated that the Committee
recommended the case of the petitioner for rejection as her
case had become more than five years old in terms of Office
Memorandum

dated

05.05.2003.

The

petitioner

was

accordingly informed by the respondents vide their letter
dated 06.01.2004 that she could not be appointed with the
wpc10913/2004

Page7 of 9

respondents on compassionate ground.
9

On going through the record, particularly the affidavit

of Mr. Selvan, we do not find any merit in the argument of
Mr. Pradhan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner that the petitioner was denied appointment on
compassionate grounds without application of mind or
arbitrarily. It is evident from the affidavit of Mr. Selvan that
the petitioner was considered for her appointment on
compassionate grounds as many as on four occasions in
terms of the Policy of the Government contained in its Office
Memorandum dated 05.05.2003. As per Policy of the
Government contained in its Office Memorandum dated
05.05.2003 (Annexure R-7 at page 46 of the paper book),
the case of the petitioner for compassionate appointment
cannot be considered after expiry of five years from the
death of her husband. 10 years have since expired when the
husband of the petitioner had died in 1997. We are of the
view that the appointments on compassionate grounds can
be made in terms of the Policy of the Government within the
prescribed ceiling of 5% quota meant for such appointments.
The petitioner could not be appointed by the respondents for
want of vacancies in the follower category (group 'D' post)
during the years in which she was considered for her such
appointment.
10

Mr. Pradhan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

wpc10913/2004

Page8 of 9

the petitioner had argued that even if there is no vacancy
available for the petitioner in the follower category (group
'D' post), the Court may create a supernumerary post and
direct the respondents to appoint the petitioner against the
said supernumerary post. In the facts and circumstance of
the case, we do not find it to be a fit case to direct the
respondents to create supernumerary post for appointment
of the petitioner on compassionate grounds. Hence the
request

of

the

petitioner's

counsel

for

creating

In view of the above and having regard to

the facts

supernumerary post is declined.
11

and circumstances of the case, we do not find any merit in
this writ petition which fails and is hereby dismissed leaving
the parties to bear their own costs.

S.N. AGGARWAL
(JUDGE)

T.S. THAKUR
(JUDGE)
January 18, 2008
a

wpc10913/2004

Page9 of 9

