REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*
+

OMP No. 327/2002

%

Date of Decision: March 19, 2008

# Union of India
..... Petitioner
!

Through: Ms. Sanjay Pathak , Advocate
Versus

$ N.K. Garg
.....Respondent
Through: Mr. Sandeep Sharma, Advocate

^
CORAM:

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see
the judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

S.N.AGGARWAL, J (ORAL)

The petitioner

being Union of India has

filed the

objections against the arbitral award under Section 34 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The arbitral award

OMP No. 327/2002

Page 1 of 9

against which objections have been filed was given by a panel
of three arbitrators namely Sh. Parmatma Sharn, Chief
Engineer, Northern Railways, Sh. R.K. Kardam, Adviser/Judicial
Commission, Northern Railways and Mr. Shanker Banerjee,
FA&CAO, Northern Railways. Sh. Parmatma Sharm was the
Presiding Arbitrtor in the panel of arbitrators.

The arbitral

award was announced on 11.02.2002 and the objections filed
against the said award are within limitation.
2

The panel of arbitrators have made award in respect of

four claims of the respondent and they are as follow:S.
No.

Claims

1

Claim No. 1- Work done nut not
paid

2

Amount
claimed in
Rs.

Amount
awarded
in Rs.

15,50,000/-

8,75,000/-

Claim No. 2- Refund of Security

2,33,571/-

2,33571/-

3

Claim No. 6- Claim on account of
loss of costs of trees

6,20,000/-

2,50,000/-

4

Claim on account of interest

OMP No. 327/2002

Interest
claimed @
24% p.a.

Interest
awarded @
12% p.a. on
the entire
award
amount
minus
Rs.50,000/(STDR)

Page 2 of 9

3

The learned arbitrators have rejected the claim of the

petitioner for Rs. 4 lacs claimed on account of liquidated
damages. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner has argued that the learned arbitrators were wrong
in holding that the petitioner was not justified in terminating
the contract in question despite holding that the respondent
was also contributory to the delay in execution of the contract.
This Court does not sit in appeal over the judgment of the
Arbitral Tribunal and cannot substitute its own view in place of
the arbitrators unless the objections fall within the parameters
of Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
4

The award on claim No. 1 is challenged by the petitioner

on the ground that the learned arbitrators have overlooked
Clauses 45 & 63 of the General Conditions of the Contract
according to which the measurements taken by the Railways
with regard to the work done by the respondent were to be
treated as final and binding. I have gone through the arbitral
award and the documents available on record. The learned
arbitrators have awarded an amount of Rs.8,75,000/- to the
respondent in respect of its claim No. 1 on the basis of the
OMP No. 327/2002

Page 3 of 9

joint measurements of the work recorded by the Court
Commissioner pursuant to order passed by this Court on
29.05.1998 in OMP No. 127/1998. The joint measurements
were taken by the Court Commissioner after notice to the
petitioner in terms of the Court Order dated 29.05.1998. The
measurements are stated to have been taken by the Court
Commissioner for a period of about one month in presence of
representatives of both the parties. The representatives of the
petitioner did not record any objection in the measurements of
work done taken by the Court Commissioner and therefore
those measurements became final and binding between the
parties. The petitioner cannot be now allowed to turn around
and urge that the learned arbitrators should have taken the
measurements

which

were

taken

by

the

Railways

on

19.03.1998 instead of relying on the measurements taken by
the Court Commissioner in presence of representatives of both
the parties. All the three arbitrators who constituted the panel
of arbitrators were technical persons and belong to the
Department of the petitioner itself. They knew the nitty-gritty
of the contract awarded to the petitioner and in the opinion of
OMP No. 327/2002

Page 4 of 9

this Court they rightly relied upon the measurements taken by
the Court Commissioner in presence of representatives of both
the parties for deciding the claim of the respondent in respect
of work done and not paid claimed against claim No. 1. The
objection of the petitioner in regard to the award on claim No.
1 is therefore disallowed.
5

Mr. Pathak, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the petitioner has then argued that the learned arbitrators
went wrong in directing refund of security while deciding claim
No. 2 of the respondent because according to him the security
deposited by the respondent was liable to be forfeited on
account of delay on its part in completing the contract work
within the stipulated time period. This argument is of no
consequence because the learned arbitrators have returned a
finding in the arbitral award under consideration that the delay
was not wholly attributable to the respondent. The learned
arbitrators have further returned a finding that the termination
of the contract of the respondent by the petitioner was not
wholly justified. It is for these reasons that the learned
arbitrators have directed refund of the security of the
OMP No. 327/2002

Page 5 of 9

respondent while deciding claim No. 2. This Court does not find
any error in this part of the award which may call for an
interference while deciding the objections under Section 34 of
the Act. The objection of the petitioner with regard to claim No.
2 is also disallowed.
6

Mr. Pathak has then argued that the learned arbitrators

have not given any reason while awarding an amount of Rs.
2,50,000/- in favour of the respondent against claim No. 6 on
account of loss of costs of the trees. This argument is not
supported from the record of the arbitrators. A perusal of the
arbitral award would show that the learned arbitrators have
given cogent reasons for awarding the amount of Rs.2,50,000/in favour of the respondent on account of loss of costs of 39
trees out of 72 trees cut by the respondent at site. The learned
arbitrators noted in the arbitral award that the petitioner could
prove that it had returned only 33 out of 72 trees to the
respondent and this makes the petitioner liable to pay the
costs of remaining 39 trees. Hence I do not find any merit in
the contention of the petitioner's learned counsel that the
learned arbitrators have not given any reason for making the
OMP No. 327/2002

Page 6 of 9

award under this head. The objection of the petitioner with
regard to this claim is also disallowed.
8

The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner

has lastly argued on the point of interest awarded by the
learned arbitrators in favour of the respondent. Mr. Pathak the
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has
relied upon Clause 16(2) of the General Conditions of Contract
and also the provisions of Section 31 (7) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 in support of his contention that since
there was a prohibitory clause in the contract between the
parties against award of interest, the learned arbitrators went
wrong in awarding interest contrary to the terms of the
contract between the parties. In this regard, it would be
relevant to refer to Clause 16(2) of the General Conditions of
Contract and the same is reproduced here-in-below:“INTEREST OF AMOUNTS
No interest will be payable upon the earnest money
or the security deposit or amounts payable to the
contractor under the contract, but Government securities
deposited to term of sub-clause (1) of this Clause will be
repayable with interest accrued thereon”

9

The

above

referred

prohibitory

clause

came

for

consideration before this Court in a number of judgments and
OMP No. 327/2002

Page 7 of 9

in all those judgments, this Court took a view that the
arbitrator was justified in awarding interest on the amount
withheld by the Department. Reference is made to a Division
Bench judgment of this Court in FAO (OS) No. 187/2006 titled
Union of India VS. Pradeep Vinod Construction Company
decided on 03.04.2006. At this stage, Mr. Pathak, the learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has pointed out
that the Railways have taken the above referred judgment of
Division Bench of this Court in Special Leave Petition before
the Hon'ble Supreme Court and according to him the Special
Leave Petition has been admitted for hearing and in that
Special Leave Petition, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has stayed
the payment of interest. Having regard to the facts that the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has stayed the payment of interest in
Pradeep Vinod Construction's Case, the award of interest by
the learned arbitrators in the present case is upheld subject to
the condition that the interest shall be paid to the respondent
depending on the final out come of the abovementioned case
pending in the Supreme Court.
10

For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in the

OMP No. 327/2002

Page 8 of 9

present objections petition. The same is, therefore, dismissed
leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

March 19, 2008
a

OMP No. 327/2002

S.N.AGGARWAL
[JUDGE]

Page 9 of 9

