REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

Date of Decision :

%

March 14, 2008

A.A. No.23/2007

#Sh. Rajesh Kumar Garg
..... Petitioner
!
Through: Mr. B.P. Singh, Advocate
Versus
$ MCD & Anr
^

..... Respondents
Through: Ms. P.L. Gautam, Advocate
AND

%
A.A. No.24/2007
#Sh. Rajesh Kumar Garg
..... Petitioner
!
Through: Mr. B.P. Singh, Advocate
Versus
$ MCD & Anr
^

..... Respondents
Through: Ms. P.L. Gautam, Advocate
AND

%

A.A. No.390/2007

#Sh. Om Praksh Singhla
..... Petitioner
!
Through: Mr. B.P. Singh, Advocate
Versus
$ MCD & Anr
AA No. 23/2007

..... Respondents
Page1 of 22

^

Through: Ms. P.L. Gautam, Advocate
AND

%

A.A. No.391/2007

#Sh. Hari Om Verma
..... Petitioner
!
Through: Mr. B.P. Singh, Advocate
Versus
$ MCD & Anr
^

..... Respondents
Through: Ms. P.L. Gautam, Advocate

CORAM:* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see
the judgment?
2.To be referred to the reporter or not?
3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
S.N. AGGARWAL, J.
These are four applications filed for appointment of
arbitrator under Section 11 (6) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.
2

All these applications are proposed to be decided by

this common order because question of facts and law
involved in all of them are identical.
3

Briefly stated the facts of these four cases are as

AA No. 23/2007

Page2 of 22

follow:Case No. 1:- A.A. No.23/2007 titled Sh. Rajesh Kumar
Garg Vs. MCD & Anr
4

The MCD had awarded a contract to the applicant for

improvement of Footpath in Patparganj Society in AC-43,
Shahdara Zone vide work order No. 537 dated 20.02.1998.
The tender amount was Rs. 15,06,513/- and the contract
amount was Rs.44,51,745/-. The work was to be completed
within five months. As per the applicant, the contract work
was completed within the stipulated time period of five
months whereafter the work was inspected by the officials of
the

MCD

and

measurements

were

taken

in

the

Measurements Book. The applicant has alleged that the
respondents have not made the final payment despite his
representations dated 08.05.2003 and 05.05.2005. The
applicant is stated to has sent a legal notice dated
18.09.2006 to the respondents demanding arbitration for
adjudication of disputes regarding final payment but the
respondents are stated to have not responded to the said
legal notice and therefore, the applicant has filed an
application under Section 11 (6) for appointment of an
arbitrator in terms of the arbitration clause contained in the
work order.

AA No. 23/2007

Page3 of 22

Case No. 2:- A.A. No.24/2007 titled Sh. Rajesh Kumar
Garg Vs. MCD & Anr
5

The respondents had awarded a contract to the

applicant described as CC Channel Back Lines, Blocks A & B,
Surajmal Vihar, C-80, Shahdara Zone vide work order No.
434 dated 12.01.1998. The tender amount was Rs.4,83,326/and the contract amount was Rs.4,97,830/-. In terms of
contract between the parties, the work was to be completed
within five months from the date of the work order. As per
the applicant, he had completed the work within the
stipulated time period of five months but the respondents
did not make final payment under the said contract. The
applicant sent a legal notice to the respondents on
18.09.2006 and demanded appointment of an arbitrator but
the respondents did not respond to the said notice and
therefore

he

has

filed

the

present

application

for

appointment of an arbitrator in terms of work order No. 434
dated 12.01.1998 for adjudication of disputes regarding final
payment and return of security under the said work order.

Case No. 3:- A.A. No.390/2007 titled Sh. Om Prakash
Singhla Vs. MCD & Anr
6

The respondents had awarded a contract to the

applicant for construction of Link Road in Saket, Block C-72
in Shahdara Zone vide work order No. 46 dated 09.06.2000.
AA No. 23/2007

Page4 of 22

This work was for an amount of Rs. 1,79,117/- and was to be
completed within two months of the date of the order. As per
the applicant, he had completed the work within the
stipulated time period of two months but the respondents
did not make his final payment and therefore he sent a legal
notice dated 12.06.2007 to the respondents and demanded
appointment of an arbitrator. Since the respondents did not
respond to his aforementioned legal notice, he filed the
present petition seeking appointment of an arbitrator for
adjudication of disputes under the above referred work
order.

Case No. 4:- A.A. No.391/2007 titled Sh. Hari Om
Verma Vs. MCD & Anr
7

The respondents had awarded a contract to the

applicant

for

improvement

of

Link

Road

from

Main

Mandawali Road to Moni Baba Mandir, New Chowk, Bhim
House in Saket Block C-72 in Shahdara Zone vide work order
No.

387

dated

01.01.2001.

The

tender

amount

was

Rs.1,98,171/- and the contract amount was Rs.2,14,352/-.
The work under the said work order was to be completed
within two months. As per the applicant, he had completed
the work within the stipulated time period of two months but
the respondents did not make his final payment under the
said work order and therefore he sent a legal notice dated
AA No. 23/2007

Page5 of 22

25.07.2007 to the respondents calling upon them to appoint
an arbitrator for adjudication of disputes relating to final
payment and since the respondents failed to respond to the
said legal notice, the petitioner filed the present petition for
appointment of an arbitrator in terms of above referred work
order.
8

Ms. Gautam appearing on behalf of the respondents

has opposed the appointment of arbitrator in all the above
four cases on the ground of limitation. She has relied upon
two unreported orders of this Court in Arb. P. No. 264/2007
titled Rajinder Kumar Goel Vs. MCD & Anr decided on
28.11.2007 and A.A. No. 267/2007

titled Rajinder Kumar

Goel Vs. MCD & Anr decided on 28.11.2007. In both these
cases, this Court had dismissed the petition for appointment
of arbitrator on the ground of limitation on similar facts.
However, Mr. Singh, the learned counsel appearing on behalf
of the petitioners/contractors has relied upon another
judgment of this Court in Sham Sunder Vs. MCD, 133(2006)
DLT 545 where also the facts were identical to the facts of
the present case but in that case the Court directed
appointment of an arbitrator treating the petition within
limitation holding that the limitation to apply under Section
11 (6) would apply from the date of legal notice issued by
the contractor to the respondent for invoking the arbitration
AA No. 23/2007

Page6 of 22

clause.
9

The counsel for the parties have relied upon two

divergent views of this Court on the point of limitation and
therefore

it

becomes

necessary

to

examine

the

law

applicable in the present case to ascertain whether the
applications filed for appointment of arbitrator are within
limitation or not.
10

The counsel for both the parties invited attention of this

Court to the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in para 39 of its judgment in M/s S.B.P. & Co. Vs. M/s
Patel Engineering Ltd. and Anr., JT 2005 (9) SC 219 which are
as under:“It is necessary to define what exactly the
Chief Justice, approached with an application under
Section 11 of the Act is to decided at that stage.
Obviously, he has to decide his own jurisdiction in
the sense whether the party making the motion has
approached the right High Court. He has to decide
whether there is an arbitration agreement, as
defined in the Act and whether the person who has
made the request before him, is a party to such an
agreement. It is necessary to indicate that he can
also decide the question whether the claim was a
dead one or a long barred claim that was sought to
be resurrected and whether the parties have
concluded the transaction by recording satisfaction
of their mutual rights and obligations or by receiving
the final payment without objection. It may not be
possible at that stage, to decide whether a live
claim made is one which comes within the purview
AA No. 23/2007

Page7 of 22

of the arbitration clause. It will be appropriate to
leave that question to be decided by the Arbitral
Tribunal on taking evidence, along with the merits
of the claims involved in the arbitration. The Chief
Justice has to decide whether the applicant has
satisfied the conditions for appointing an arbitrator
under Section 11 (6) of the Act. For the purpose of
taking a decision on these aspects, the Chief Justice
can either proceed on the basis of affidavits and the
documents produced or take such evidence or get
such evidence recorded as may be necessary. We
think that adoption of this procedure in the context
of the Act would best serve the purpose sought to
be achieved by the Act of expediting the process of
arbitration, without too may approaches to the
Court at various stages of the proceedings before
the arbitral tribunal.”

11

A glance to the above observations of the Hon'ble

Supreme Court would suggest the scope of the order under
Section 11 to be passed by the Chief Justice or his designate.
The Chief Justice or his designate has to decide the issues
regarding territorial jurisdiction and the existence of the
arbitration agreement between the parties and whether
such party has approached the Court for appointment of the
arbitrator within limitation period or not. The question of
limitation normally is a mixed question of law and facts. In
case the Chief Justice or his designate finds that the claims
sought to be referred to the arbitrator are ex-facie time
barred then reference of such dispute for arbitration would
be exercise in futility. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Shree
Ram Mills Ltd. Vs. Utility Premises (P) Ltd., (2007) 4 SCC 599
AA No. 23/2007

Page8 of 22

has noted with approval the above observations of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in M/s S.B.P. & Co. Vs. M/s Patel
Engineering Ltd. and Anr.'s case (Supra) and has discussed
in para 27 of its judgment that the Chief Justice or his
designate has to record his satisfaction that prima facie the
issue has not become dead by lapse of time or that any
party to the agreement has not slept over his right beyond
the time permitted by law to agitate the issue covered by
the agreement.
12

Section 43 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

provides that the provisions of Limitation Act would apply to
the arbitration in the same manner as they apply to claims
before the Court. The law is well settled through a catena of
judgments both of Hon'ble Supreme Court and also of the
various High Courts that the provisions of Article 137 of the
Limitation Act applies to application for appointment of an
arbitrator under Section 11 (6) of the Act. Reliance in
support of this view is placed upon the judgments of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Major (Retd.) Inder Singh Rekhi
Vs. DDA (1988) 2 SCC 338; Kerala State Electricity Board Vs.
T.P. K.K. Amson and Besom, (1976) 4 SCC 634 and Town
Municipal Council, Athani Vs.Presiding Officer, Labour Court
(1969) 1 SCC 873.
13

Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963 is a residuary

AA No. 23/2007

Page9 of 22

Article and deals with limitation in cases not specifically
provided for in the other articles. As per Article 137, the
limitation is three years from the date of accruing of cause
of action. In other words, the period of three years
prescribed under Article 137 will start from the date when
the right to apply for arbitration accrues. Though in work
contracts, a right to get payment would normally arise on
completion of the work but that is not enough for making an
application for appointment of arbitrator under Section 11.
The question of limitation has to be decided on the basis of
facts of a given case.
14

In S. Rajan Vs. State of Kerala & Another (1992) 3 SCC

608, an agreement was entered into between the applicant
and State of Kerala on February 19, 1966 whereunder the
appellant undertook to carry out certain work within a period
of ten months but he did not complete the work within the
period prescribed whereupon the contract was terminated
on December 19, 1968 and the work was retendered. It was
completed by another contractor. State of Kerala took
proceedings under the provisions of Revenue Recovery Act
for recovering the loss suffered by the State on account of
the appellant's failure to carry out the work in accordance
with the contract. A notice of demand was served by the
State on the appellant on May 30, 1974 calling upon the
AA No. 23/2007

Page10 of 22

appellant to pay the assessed amount of loss. The appellant
challenged the said notice by way of writ petition in the High
Court of Kerala which was dismissed on November 25, 1978.
In the year 1983, he applied to the Government of Kerala to
refer the disputes and differences between them to an
Arbitrator. This was refused in the year 1984 whereupon the
appellant filed an application under Section 20 of the
Arbitration Act. On these facts, it was held by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court that the application filed for appointment of
arbitrator was barred by limitation under Article 137 of the
Limitation Act, 1963 since the right to apply for arbitration
had

accrued

to

the

appellant

in

1974

when

notice

demanding assessed loss was served upon the appellant.
Hence it may be seen from the Judgment of the Supreme
Court in S. Rajan's case (Supra) that the Supreme Court does
not say that the limitation for filing an application for
appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11 would start
from the date of service of legal notice demanding
arbitration. The ratio of judgment in S. Rajan's case (Supra)
is that the limitation for filing an application under Section
11 would start on the date of accrual of cause of action. In
that case, cause of action accrued when the State made a
demand upon the contractor to pay the assessed loss since
the

contract

work

was

got

completed

from

another

contractor.
AA No. 23/2007

Page11 of 22

15

In Major (Retd.) Inder Singh Rekhi Vs. DDA (1988) 2

SCC 338, the DDA vide its letter dated 05.10.1976 had
accepted the tender of the appellant for construction of 240
Janta Houses at the estimated costs of Rs. 24,49,262/-. The
work was to commence on 15.10.1976 and was required to
be completed by 14.07.1977. By a subsequent extension of
time, the work was finally completed on 02.04.1980 and the
houses so constructed were alloted to several people.
Between February 1983 to December 1985 the appellant
sent several letters to the respondent requesting it to
finalize the bills. The first of such letters was written by the
appellant

on 28.02.1983. Thereafter, the appellant finally

sent a notice to the DDA on 04.09.1985 and requested it to
release his security of Rs. 1 lac and refer the dispute relating
to final bills for arbitration. The DDA failed to do so. In
January 1986 the appellant filed an application under
Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 for directions from
the Court for referring the dispute to the arbitration. It was
on these facts that the Supreme Court held that the
application filed by the appellant for appointment of an
arbitrator was within time computing the limitation from the
date of first letter written by the appellant on 28.02.1983
requesting the DDA to finalize his bills. It may be seen that
letter dated 28.02.1983 written by the appellant was within
AA No. 23/2007

Page12 of 22

limitation of three years of the date of completion of the
work

completed

on

02.04.1980.

The application

for

appointment of an arbitrator was filed in January 1986 which
was also within limitation of three years reckoned from the
date of first letter dated 28.02.1983. On these facts, it
cannot be said that the Supreme Court has held that the
limitation for filing of application under Section 11 would
start from the date of service of legal notice. The limitation
for filing of an application under Section 11 starts from the
date of accrual of cause of action.
16

In Hari Shankar Singhania & Others VS. Gaur Hari

Singhania & Others, (2006) 4 SCC 658, the facts of the case
were that a partnership firm was formed by three brothers of
a

family.

The

family

owned

considerable

amount

of

immovable property which was brought into the firm's
business. In 1987, the partnership firm was dissolved by way
of

dissolution deed as a family settlement. Under the

dissolution deed, clause 13 enabled the parties to go for
arbitration in case there was a dispute between them. As
disagreement between the parties took place as to the
division of the assets involved in the partnership firm, the
distribution of the said immovable properties could not be
effected by 31.05.1987 as contemplated by the deed of
dissolution. Ultimately in February 1988, the three groups
AA No. 23/2007

Page13 of 22

each appointed a nominee to work out an arrangement
whereby distribution of the said immovable properties of the
said dissolved firm could be made and effected in the
manner acceptable to all. The nominees held several
meetings but no agreement of distribution could be arrived
at. Further, there were numerous letters written by both the
parties to find a way to settle the dispute pertaining to the
division of assets. The last letter that was exchanged in this
regard was a letter dated 29.09.1989. On 08.05.1992 a
plaint under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 was filed
before the High Court by the appellants. On these facts the
Supreme Court found the petition to be within time holding
that the right to apply under Section 20 accrued to the
appellants only on the date of last correspondence between
the parties and the period of limitation was reckoned from
the date of last communication which was on 29.09.1989. In
para 24 of its judgment in Hari Shankar Singhania's case
(Supra) , it was observed by the Supreme Court as follows:“Where a settlement with or without
conciliation is not possible, then comes the stage of
adjudication by way of arbitration. Article 137, as
construed in this sense, then as long as parties are
in dialogue and even the differences would have
surfaced it cannot be asserted that a limitation
under Article 137 has commenced. Such an
interpretation will compel the parties to resort to
litigation/ arbitration even where there is serious
hope of the parties themselves resolving the issues.”

17

From the above judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme

AA No. 23/2007

Page14 of 22

Court, the legal position that emerges is that an application
for appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11 can be
filed within three years from the date of accrual of cause of
action. When cause of action to apply under Section 11
accrues is to be seen in the light of the terms and conditions
of the contract between the parties.
18

Clauses 7 & 9 of the contract between the parties are

relevant and the same are reproduced here-in-below:“CLAUSE 7
Payment on Intermediate Certificate to be
Regarded as Advances
No payment shall be made for work,
estimated to cost Rs. Twenty Thousand or less till
after the whole of the work shall have been
completed and certificate of completion given. For
works estimated to cost over Rs. Twenty thousand
the interim or running account bills shall be
submitted by the contractor for the work executed
on the basis of such recorded measurements on
the format of the Department in triplicate on or
before the date of every month fixed for the same
by the Engineer-in-Charge. The contractor shall
not be entitled to be paid any such interim
payment if the gross work done together with net
payment/adjustment of advances for material
collected, if any, since the last such payment is
less than the amount specified in Schedule 'F', in
which case the interim bill shall be prepared on the
appointed date of the month after the requisite
progress is achieved. Engineer-in-Charge shall
arrange to have the bill verified by taking or
causing to be taken, where necessary, the required
measurements of the work. In the event of the
AA No. 23/2007

Page15 of 22

failure of the contractor to submit the bills,
Engineer-in-Charge shall prepare or cause to be
prepared such bills in which event no claims
whatsoever due to delays on payment including
that of interest shall be payable to the contract.
Payment on account of amount admissible shall be
made by the Engineer-in-Charge certifying the sum
to which the contractor is considered entitled by
way of interim payment at such rates as decided
by the Engineer-in-Charge. The amount admissible
shall be paid by 10th working day after the day of
presentation of the bill by the contractor to the
Engineer-in-Charge of his Asstt. Engineer together
with the account of the material is issued by the
department, or dismantled materials, if any.
All such interim payments shall be regarded
as payment by way of advances against final
payment only and shall not preclude the requiring
of bad, unsound and imperfect or unskilled work to
be
rejected,
removed,
taken
away
and
reconstructed reerected. Any certificate given by
the Engineer-in-Charge relating to the work done
or materials delivered forming part of such
payment, may be modified or corrected by any
subsequent such certificate(s) or by the final
certificate and shall not by itself be conclusive
evidence that any work or materials to which it
relates is/are in accordance with the contract and
specifications. Any such interim payment, or any
part thereof shall not in any respect conclude,
determine or affect in any way powers of the
Engineer-in-Charge under the contract or any of
such payments be treated as final settlement and
adjustment of accounts or in any way vary or
affect the contract.

AA No. 23/2007

Page16 of 22

Pending consideration of extension of date of
completion interim payments shall continue to be
made as herein provided, without prejudice to the
right of the department to take action under the
terms of the contract for delay in the completion of
work, if the extension of date of completion is not
granted by the competent authority.
The Engineer-in-Charge in his sole discretion
on the basis of a certificate from the Asstt.
Engineer to the effect that the work has been
completed upto the level in question make interim
advance payments without detailed measurements
for work done (other than foundations, items to be
covered under finishing items) upon lintel level
(including sunshade etc.) and slab level, for each
floor working out at 75% of the assessed value.
The advance payments so allowed shall be
adjusted in the subsequent interim bill by taking
detailed measurements thereof.

CLAUSE 9
Payment of Final Bill
The final bill shall be submitted by the
contractor in the same manner as specified in
interim bills within three months of physical
completion of the work or within one month of the
date of the final certificate completion furnished
after submission of the final bill and these shall be
deemed to have been waived and extinguished.
Payments of those items of the bill in respect of
which there is no dispute and of items in dispute,
for quantities and rates as approved by Engineerin-Charge, will, as far as possible be made within
the period specified hereinunder, the period being
reckoned from the date of receipt of the bill by the
Engineer-in-Charge or his authorised Asstt.
Engineer, complete with account of materials
issued by the Department and dismantled
AA No. 23/2007

Page17 of 22

materials.
(i) If the Tendered value of work is upto Rs.5
lakhs : 3 months
(ii) If the Tendered value of work exceeds Rs.5
lakhs : 6 months

19

Mr. Singh the learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the applicants had referred and relied upon Clause 25 of the
agreement and relying upon the same, he had argued that
the applications filed for appointment of arbitrator are within
limitation because the applicants did not receive any
intimation from the Engineer-in-Charge of the respondents
that their final bills were ready for payment. It was
contended by the learned counsel that the applicants could
have filed an application for appointment of arbitrator within
120 days of receiving the said intimation from the Engineerin-Charge of the respondents. The relevant portion of Clause
25 of the agreement is extracted here-in-below:“CLAUSE 25
Settlement of Disputes & Arbitration
“... It is also a term of this contract that if the
contractor does not make any demand for
appointment of arbitrator in respect of any claims in
writing as aforesaid within 120 days of receiving the
intimation from the Engineer-in-Charge that the
final bill is ready for payment, the claim of the
contractor shall be deemed to have been waived
and absolutely barred and the MCD shall be
discharged and released of all liabilities under the
contract in respect of these claims.”
AA No. 23/2007

Page18 of 22

20

It is an admitted case of the applicants that they had

completed the contract work within the scheduled time and
that they had given legal notice demanding arbitration after
more than 6-8 years of completion of the work by them. It is
not their case in the applications that the final bills were not
prepared by the respondents and that since the final bills
were not prepared by the respondents, dispute did not arise
between them till they served a legal notice upon the
respondents after more than 6-8 years of the completion of
the work. The applicants have not pleaded any such fact in
their applications from which it may be said that they were
vigilant or were serious in finalizing of their bills under the
work orders. They all slept over the matter for a long time of
6-8 years after completing the work till legal notices were
served by them upon the respondents prior to filing of the
applications under consideration. A plain reading of Clause 9
of the agreement reproduced above would show that it was
incumbent upon the applicants to have submitted the final
bill within three months of completion of work or within one
month of the date of completion certificate furnished by the
Engineer-in-Charge, whichever was earlier. The payment of
final bill was to be made by the respondents within three
months in case the tendered value of the work was up to Rs.
5 lacs and within six months if the tendered value of the
work exceeded Rs. 5 lacs. In the event of failure of the
AA No. 23/2007

Page19 of 22

respondents to make the final payment within the stipulated
time period mentioned in Clause 9 of the agreement, the
disputes arose at that point of time regarding final payment
to which applicants were entitled. Reliance placed upon
clause 25 by the counsel for the applicants appears to be
misplaced. What is provided in Clause 25 of the agreement
is that if the contractor would fail to make a demand for
appointment of arbitrator in respect of any claim in writing
within 120 days of his receiving the intimation from the
Engineer-in-Charge that the final bill was ready for payment,
then the applicants would be deemed to have been waived
all claims contrary to the final bill. This does not mean that
where the Engineer-in-Charge has not given any intimation
that the final bill is ready for payment, the applicants could
wait indefinitely on the belief that the limitation has not
started to run. In the opinion of this Court the applicants
could have filed an application under Section 11 within three
years after expiry of six months' time stipulated for final
payment in clause 25 of the contract. In view of the same,
with respect, I do not agree with the view taken in Sham
Sunder's case (Supra) where it is held that the limitation
would start from the date of issuance of legal notice for
demanding arbitration. In Sham Sunder's case (Supra), the
relevant clauses of the contract were not considered and
even the relevancy of the judgments referred therein has
AA No. 23/2007

Page20 of 22

not been discussed. In the facts and circumstances of the
case, I tend to agree with the view on the point of limitation
taken by this Court in the two cases of Rajinder Kumar Goel
referred above.
21

Reverting to the facts of the case in hand, it may be

seen that in two out of four cases under consideration the
work was completed by the applicants in 1988 and the
payment was also received in 1988. The legal notice
demanding arbitration in those two cases was sent by the
applicants after about 8 years of the completion of the work
on 18.09.2006 and the applications for appointment of
arbitrator under Section 11 were filed on 12.01.2007. In the
third case, the work was completed in the year 2000
whereas

notice

demanding

arbitration

was

sent

on

12.06.2007 i.e. after about 7 years of the completion of the
work and when dispute arose regarding payment. In the
fourth case, the work was completed in the year 2001 and
the notice demanding arbitration was sent by the applicant
after more than 6 years on 25.07.2007. The facts of these
cases would show that the applicants had slept over their
right, if any, under the work orders for a long time ranging
between 6-8 years. In terms of the contract between the
parties, the final bill was required to be submitted by the
applicants to the respondents within three months of the
AA No. 23/2007

Page21 of 22

completion of the work. The terms of the contract further
show that it was not obligatory upon the respondents to
prepare the final bill and under the circumstances, the
applicants cannot take advantage of their own lapse in the
matter and seek appointment of the arbitrator for reference
of alleged disputes after expiry of 6-8 years from the date
cause of action for the same accrued. The alleged claims of
the applicants have become stale and are hopelessly barred
by limitation.
22

For the foregoing reasons, all the four applications filed

for appointment of arbitrator are held to be barred by time
and are therefore dismissed on the ground of limitation. The
parties are left to bear their own costs.
23

A copy of this order be kept in the files of all the four

cases disposed of by this common order.
S.N. AGGARWAL
(JUDGE)
March 14, 2008
a

AA No. 23/2007

Page22 of 22

