REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

*

+

Arb.P.No.471/2006

#TVC India Pvt.Ltd.

..... Petitioner

!

Through: Mr.Ajay Verma, Advocate
Versus

$ABN Amro Bank N.V
.....Respondent
Through: Mr.Samrat Nigam, Advocate

^

CORAM:* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to
see the judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

S.N.AGGARWAL, J (ORAL)
*1.

The petitioner has filed this petition against the

respondent seeking appointment of an Arbitrator under Section
11(6) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.
2.

Briefly stated the facts of the case are as follows:

3.

The

petitioner

is

engaged

in

the

business

of

establishing, maintaining and operating the closed users group
domestic 64 kbps Network via INSAT satellite system using VSATs
(Very Small Aperture Terminals) throughout India. The parties
entered into an agreement dated 17.5.1999 whereby the
petitioner

agreed

to

provide

the

agreed

services

to

the

respondent at its various sites in India using the equipment
Arb.P.No.471/2006

Page 1 of 8

leased to respondent on the basis of the terms and conditions
contained in the agreement. The said agreement executed
between

the

parties

contained

an

arbitration

clause

for

adjudication of dispute that may arise between the parties under
the contract through arbitration. Clause 9.3 is the relevant clause
in the agreement which provide for dispute resolution mechanism
agreed upon between the parties and the same is extracted
below:
“9.3 Dispute Resolution
9.3.1 All disputes arising directly under the
express terms of this Agreement or grounds for
termination thereof shall be resolved as follows
a)
The nominated representatives of both
parties shall meet to attempt to resolve such
disputes. If disputes cannot be resolved by the
nominated representatives, either party may
make a written demand for formal dispute
resolution. Within thirty (30) days after such
written notification, the parties agree to meet for
one day with an impartial mediator and consider
dispute resolution alternatives other than by way
of arbitration.
b)
If an alternative method of dispute resolution
is not agreed upon within thirty (30) days after the
one day mediation, either party may begin
arbitration proceedings.
9.3.2 Any disputes submitted for arbitration in
accordance with the provisions of sub-clause 9.3.1
hereinabove shall be settled within a period of two
(2) months from the date of submissions of such
disputes. Arbitration shall be in accordance with
the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996.
9.3.3 The Courts of Delhi shall have jurisdiction
for the purposes of the implementation of any
arbitral award given under the provisions of this
clause 9.3.2.
9.3.4 The decision of the arbitrator under subclause 9.3.2 shall be final, binding and
incontestable and may be used as a basis for
judgment thereon.
9.3.5 No party shall be entitled to commence or
Arb.P.No.471/2006

Page 2 of 8

maintain any action in court of law upon any
matter in dispute until such matter shall have
been submitted and determined as hereinabove
before provided and then only for the
enforcement of the amount found due on such
arbitration.
9.3.6 Pending the submission to arbitration and
thereafter until the Arbitrator publishes his award,
the parties shall, except in the event of
termination, continue to perform all their
obligations under this Agreement without
prejudice to a final adjustment in accordance with
the said award. Provided that in the event of
termination of this Agreement, Telestra V-Comm
will be entitled to forthwith possess or repossess
the Equipment owned by Telestra V-Comm,
notwithstanding the continuance or otherwise of
the any arbitration or other proceeding. Similarly,
Subscriber will be entitled to refund of advance
fee paid for the balance period from the date of
termination arising out of any of the reasons as
contained in 5.4 above, notwithstanding the
continuance or otherwise of any arbitration or any
other proceeding.”
4.

Certain disputes and differences are alleged to have

arisen between the parties under the above-referred agreement.
The petitioner in terms of Clause 9.3 of the agreement, vide its
letter dated 25.9.2003 had nominated its representative to
resolve the dispute and also called upon the respondent to
nominate its representative for the said purpose. However, the
respondent failed to nominate its representative and, therefore,
the petitioner vide its letter dated 27.3.2004 made a written
demand on the respondent for formal dispute resolution by
nominating Justice K. Ramamoorthy (a former Judge of this Court)

Arb.P.No.471/2006

Page 3 of 8

as an impartial mediator. The respondent vide its letter dated
12.4.2004 agreed to the appointment of Justice Ramamoorthy as
a mediator in terms of Clause 9.3 of the agreement. The
proceedings before the Mediator continued till 30.6.2006 when
the respondent allegedly withdrew itself from the mediation
proceedings. Thereafter, the petitioner vide its letter dated
17.8.2006 called upon the respondent to inform which alternative
method of dispute resolution it was agreeable to so that the
same could be considered. It was further clarified that in the
event respondent fail to do so, the petitioner would be
constrained

to

initiate

appropriate

proceedings

under

the

contract. Since the respondent did not respond to the petitioner's
letter dated 17.8.2006, the petitioner filed the present petition
seeking appointment of an Arbitrator in terms of arbitration
agreement between the parties on 13.11.2006.
5.

Mr.Nigam appearing on behalf of the respondent has

raised a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the
present petition on the ground of limitation. Mr.Nigam has
contended that the contract between the parties was terminated
by

the

respondent

on

30.11.2002

to

be

effective

from

31.12.2002. Mr.Nigam has contended that the cause of action in
favour of the petitioner for demanding arbitration arose on the
date when the contract was terminated on 30.11.2002. According

Arb.P.No.471/2006

Page 4 of 8

to Mr.Nigam, provisions of Article 137 of the Limitation Act are
applicable to the present case and according to him, this petition
could have been filed by the petitioner within three years to be
reckoned from 30.11.2002. It is contended that since the present
petition was filed by the petitioner beyond three years reckoned
from 30.11.2002, the present petition is liable to be dismissed as
barred by limitation.
6.

Upon hearing the learned counsel for the parties and

on perusal of the relevant documents, this Court could not
persuade itself to agree with the contentions on the point of
limitation urged on behalf of the respondent. A perusal of Clause
9.3 of the agreement extracted above would show that the
parties had agreed for an inbuilt dispute resolution mechanism
while they had entered into the contract in question. This inbuilt
dispute resolution mechanism provided in the contract refers for
resolution

of

dispute

in

the

first

instance

through

the

representatives to be nominated by both the parties and
thereafter in case it was not possible for the representatives of
the parties to resolve the dispute, the aggrieved party could
demand appointment of a mediator for one day mediation which
was agreed to be appointed within thirty days of such demand.
Further perusal of Clause 9.3 would show that no time limit was
fixed in the said clause for demanding appointment of a mediator

Arb.P.No.471/2006

Page 5 of 8

for one day mediation. What was provided in Clause 9.3 is that
the mediator for one day mediation was to be appointed within
thirty days of such demand being made by the aggrieved party.
In the present case Hon'ble Mr.Justice K. Ramamoorthy (a former
Judge of this Court) was appointed as a mediator with the
consent of both the parties. However, instead of one day
mediation

agreed

by

the

parties

in

the

agreement,

the

proceedings before the mediator went on for about two years
when the respondent admittedly withdrew itself from the
mediation proceedings on 30.6.2006. It shall be significant to
mention that the respondent acquiesced itself in the mediation
proceedings by continuing in the mediation proceedings till
30.6.2006. It was only after the mediation failed or could not
work, the petitioner

has

to

file

the present petition

for

appointment of an Arbitrator for resolving the dispute that have
arisen between the parties under the contract. In the opinion of
this Court the cause of action for appointment of Arbitrator has
arisen in favour of the petitioner when the mediation did not work
out as a result of withdrawal by the respondent on 30.6.2006. In
case the limitation for filing of the present petition is reckoned
from the said date of 30.6.2006, the present petition filed by the
petitioner on 13.11.2006 cannot be said to be beyond limitation
prescribed in Article 137 of the Limitation Act.

Arb.P.No.471/2006

Page 6 of 8

7.

In Hari Shamkar Singhania & Ors. vs. Gaur Hari

Singhania & Ors. reported as (2006) 4 SCC 658 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held in Para 24 of the said judgment as under
:“Where a settlement with or without conciliation is
not possible, then comes the stage of adjudication
by way of arbitration. Article 137, as construed in
this sense, then as long as parties are in dialogue
and even the differences would have surfaced it
cannot be asserted that a limitation under Article
137 has commenced. Such an interpretation will
compel the parties to resort to litigation/arbitration
even where there is serious hope of the parties
themselves resolving the issues.”
8.

The above-referred judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme

Court lend support to the view of this Court that the cause of
action for seeking appointment of an Arbitrator arose to the
petitioner only when the disputes could not be resolved through
mediation or other alternative dispute resolution mechanism
provided in the agreement. Hence, this Court does not find any
merit in the contention on the point of limitation urged on behalf
of the respondent.
9.
very

Mr.Nigam appearing on behalf of the respondent has
fairly

submitted

that

all

contentions

raised

by

the

respondent on merits of the case may be examined by the
Arbitrator to be appointed by the Court. The existence of
arbitration agreement and the dispute under the contract

Arb.P.No.471/2006

Page 7 of 8

between the parties is not denied by the counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondent.
10.

In view of the above and having regard to the facts

and circumstances of the case and the submissions made by the
learned counsel for the parties, Hon'ble Mr.Justice Satpal, a
former Judge of this Court (SFS, 53, DDA Flats, East Mukherjee
Nagar, Delhi-9; 27653129, 27654302) is hereby appointed as the
sole Arbitrator to decide the disputes and differences between
the parties that have arisen between them under the contract in
question. The fees of the learned Arbitrator, to be shared initially
by both the parties equally, is left to be decided by the learned
Arbitrator himself. The parties are directed to appear before the
learned Arbitrator for further directions at 5.00 pm on 14.3.2008.
11.

A copy of this order be sent to the learned Arbitrator

for information forthwith.

February 13, 2008
mb

Arb.P.No.471/2006

S.N.AGGARWAL
[JUDGE]

Page 8 of 8

