UNREPORTABLE
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Test Cas.No.55/2004

%

Date of Decision March 20, 2008

#
Shri Joginder Nath Wadhwa
!

Through:

.....
Petitioner
Petitioner in person.
Versus

$State
^

.....Respondent
Through:

Nemo.

CORAM:HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see
the judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the

Digest?

S.N.AGGARWAL, J (ORAL)

+

The petitioner Sh Joginder Nath Wadhwa has filed this *petition

under Section 276 of the Indian Succession Act, 1945 seeking probate of a
registered Will dated 17.10.87 of his father late Sh. Ram Lal Wadhwa who died
at Delhi on 15.8.1990. On the date of his death, the father of the petitioner
was survived by his widow Smt. Ram Pyari, three daughters and two sons
including the petitioner. The names of all the relations of the deceased
testator are given in Para 2 of the petition.
The testator's widow Smt Ram Pyari also expired before filing of the
present petition on 16.2.2002. The present petition seeking probate of the Will
of the deceased testator was filed by the petitioner on 13.9.2004. Soon after
the filing of the said petition, the petitioner's brother Sh. Mohinder Nath

Wadhwa (respondent no.4) also expired on 20.10.2004 and on the date of his
death he was survived by his widow Smt Kamlesh Wadhwa and two sons Sh.
Aseem Wadhwa and Vikas Wadhwa who were impleaded as his LRs in the
present petition.
The notice of the present petition was sent to all the relations of
the deceased testator and a citation of the present petition was got published
in 'Statesman' of 4.3.2005 edition. In response to notice of the present
petition, all the relations of the deceased testator have filed their no objection
to the grant of probate in respect of the Will of the deceased testator.
The Will of which probate is sought by the petitioner is a duly
registered Will. It was got registered by the Registrar with the sub-Registrar
vide Registration No.1770, Vol. No.443 Page 97 dated 19.4.1988. The said Will
is shown to have been attested by two witnesses namely Sh.Mool Chand
Sharma and Sh. K.P.Sud, Advocate. Sh. Mool Chand Sharma who is one of the
attested witnesses of the Will in question has filed his affidavit in evidence and
has deposed that the deceased testator Sh Ram Lal has executed his Will
dated 17.10.87 in his presence and also in presence of another attesting
witness Sh K.P.Sud, Advocate. Sh. Mool Chand Sharma has further testified on
oath in his affidavit that the deceased testator Sh Ram Lal Wadhwa was fully
conscious and was in full senses when he executed the Will Ex.PW1/1.
Mr.Sharma has identified the signatures of Mr.K.P.Sud, Advocate also on the
afore-mentioned Will Ex.PW1/1. The petitioner has also filed his affidavit in his
evidence and has reiterated the averments contained in the petition to be
correct. The petitioner has proved the death certificate of his late father in his
affidavit as document Ex.PW2/1. The evidence produced by the petitioner on
record to prove the Will in question has remained unrebutted and I have no
reason to doubt the same.
From the unrebutted testimony on record it stands proved that the
Will of which probate is sought by the petitioner was the last and genuine Will
of the deceased testator and the said Will was validly executed by him while
he was possessed of sound disposing mind. The petitioner and his deceased

brother Sh Mohinder Nath Wadhwa are the sole beneficiaries of the Will of
their deceased father. The petitioner has also been appointed as an executor
of the Will by the deceased testator.
In view of the above and having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case, it is ordered that probate of Will Ex.PW1/1 be
granted in favour of the petitioner on his depositing requisite court fee and on
his furnishing the administration bond for due administration of the estate of
the deceased in accordance with the wishes of the deceased.
The original Will Ex.PW1/1 be kept in the safe custody.
This petition stands disposed of accordingly.

MARCH 20, 2008
mb

S.N.AGGARWAL, J

