*

UNREPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW
DELHI

+

IAs No.4048/2007 & 5715/2007 in
CS (OS) No. 974/1994
Date of Decision : August 21, 2007

#Krishna Gupta
!

..... Plaintiff

Through: Ms. Lily Thomas &
Mr. A.K. Panigrahi, Advocates

Versus
$ All India Women's Conference & Ors.
.....Defendants
^
Through: Mr. Atul Y Chitale & Ms
Suchitra
A. Chitale, Advocates
for
defendant
No. 1
CORAM:* HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see
the judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

S.N.AGGARWAL, J
*
This order shall dispose of an application under Order
7 Rule 11 CPC filed on behalf of defendant No. 1 for rejection of
the plaint inter alia on the ground that the suit filed by the three
plaintiffs under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 1 of 14

cannot continue at the instance of sole plaintiff No. 3 after
plaintiffs No. 1 & 2 were permitted to withdraw from the suit vide
order passed by this Court on 25.01.2006.
2

In order to decide this application it shall be necessary

to give a brief background of the case which is as follows:Defendant

No.

1

namely

'All

India

Women's

Conference' in short ('AIWC') is a society registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860. AIWC was founded in the year
1930 to actively work in the general progress, upliftment and
welfare of women and children. A piece of land at Bhagwan Dass
Road, New Delhi measuring 3 acres was acquired by defendant
No. 1 Society from the Central Government through a perpetual
Lease Deed dated 22.10.1962 at a nominal price. The land was
given to the Society by the Central Government for setting up a
memorial to Sarojini Naidu and Margret Cousins. Huge
construction now stands on this property, part of which is stated
to has been rented out to Agha Khan Foundation, City Bank,
Canara Bank and M/s Dalal Consultants and Engineers Pvt. Ltd.
AIWC has about 500 branches with more than one lac members

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 2 of 14

spread throughout the country. Its headquarter is located at 6,
Bhagwan Dass Road, New Delhi.
3

AIWC constituted a Trust in the year 1975 with the

object of carrying out the construction of a multi-storeyed building
on the land allotted to AIWC; to establish, manage and maintain
and provide in the said building [i] an Auditorium for Women's
meetings, seminars, discussions and educational and cultural
programmes; [ii] libraries, reading rooms, information centres
and study circles for women and children; [iii] an international
hostel for the young women; and [iv]

to provide requisite

facilities, amenities and conveniences in connection therewith.
Under Clause (5) the Trustees were to get and collect the income
and rent of the said building and the income rent interest and
dividend of the Trust Fund from time to time and to pay
therefrom

all

costs,

charges

and

expenses

relating

to

management, preservation, upkeep and maintenance of the
building mentioned above.
Defendants No. 2 and 3 namely Shobhana Ranade and
Dr. Aparna Basu were the former Hon. President and former

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 3 of 14

Hon. Vice President respectively; defendant No. 4 Dr. Kalavathi
Tripathi was the former Hon. Treasurer of AIWC whereas
defendant No. 5 Dr. Lakshmi Raghuramiah (deceased) was the
Managing Trustee of the AIWC Trust.
4

Plaintiffs No. 1 and 2 namely Sarla Shah and Usha

Bhowmik respectively are the two members of defendant No. 1
Society from Maharashtra Branch. Plaintiff No. 3 (Krishna
Gupta) claims herself to be a member of Delhi Branch. The
plaintiffs had filed an application in this Court seeking leave of
the Court to institute a suit under Section 92 CPC against the
defendants alleging inter alia that there was mis-management of
the income of the Trust, rent realized was not credited to the
Trust Account, claiming the following reliefs:-

(i)to declare that by virtue of Section 5 of the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 the AIWC Estate, income
arising therefrom and donations received shall vest
in the trustees as provided in the Trust Deed of 1975
read with Art. IX of the AIWC Constitution & they
alone are competent to execute the lease and other
deeds for the use and occupation of AIWC Estate;
CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 4 of 14

(ii)to declare that the trustees alone are entitled to
receive the rents, arrears, payments and income
arising from AIWC Estate;
(iii) to pass such other further orders as this Hon.
Court may deem fit and proper;
5

The permission, as required, to institute the suit under

Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure was granted to the
plaintiffs vide order passed by this Court on 08.05.1994. This
permission was granted to them ex-parte. After the service on the
defendants, an application was moved by them for recall of grant
of leave to file the suit under Section 92 CPC and for dismissal of
the suit. This application of the defendants was allowed by the
Learned Single Judge vide order dated 20.01.1995 and leave to
institute the suit was revoked holding that the reliefs claimed in
the suit did not fall under Section 92 CPC.
6

Aggrieved against the order of the Learned Single

Judge, the plaintiffs filed an appeal before the Division Bench
which was allowed vide order dated 22.09.1996 whereby the order
of the Learned Single Judge granting leave to institute the suit
under Section 92 CPC was restored. Aggrieved therefrom the

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 5 of 14

defendants filed a Special Leave Petition before the Supreme
Court which was dismissed vide order passed by the Hon'ble Apex
Court on 22.09.2004.
7

From the above it is apparent that the parties had

agitated the question of grant of leave to the plaintiffs to institute
the suit under Section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
right up to the Apex Court. The order granting leave to the
plaintiffs passed by this Court was upheld up to the Apex Court
and it seems that the parties had spent about 10 years since the
institution of the suit in litigating only on the point of grant of
leave to the plaintiffs to institute the suit under Section 92 CPC.
8

After the order granting leave became final, two of the

plaintiffs being plaintiffs No. 1 & 2 withdrew themselves from the
array of the plaintiffs leaving plaintiff No. 3 Krishna Gupta as the
sole plaintiff to continue with the proceedings of the present suit.
Plaintiffs No. 1 and 2 were allowed to withdraw from the suit vide
order passed by this Court on 25.01.2006 on an application being
IA No. 3163/2005 filed on their behalf. Paras 3 to 6 of their said
application are relevant and are extracted below:-

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 6 of 14

“3

That in the interregnum the All India

Women's Conference i.e. the Defendant No. 1 has had
several elections and the Governing Body has also
undergone change of personnel from time to time.
Similarly, the Executive Committee of the Defendant No. 1
has also changed from time to time.
In the circumstances, the reliefs sought for in
the suit, with passage of time against the then Committee
Members has virtually become infructuous and is of no
effect whatsoever.
In that view of the matter, the applicants, by
separate letters addressed to their respective Advocate,
requested for withdrawal of the suit in so far as the
applicants/ plaintiffs No. 1 and 2 herein are concerned.
Copies of the said correspondents dated 24.12.2004
addressed by the plaintiff No. 1 and dated 27.01.2005
addressed by the plaintiff No. 2 are annexed hereto and
marked

as

ANNEXURES

PA-1(Colly)

to

this

application.
4

That despite such requests the Advocate has

not yet withdrawn the suit and also despite various
requests has not yet effected the change of Vakaltnama.
In the circumstances, the applicants herein
are constrained to file the instant application under the
provisions of Order XXIII Rule 1 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 inter-alia praying for leave to withdraw
the suit in so far as the applicants are concerned.
It is, therefore, prayed accordingly.
CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 7 of 14

5

Until or unless orders as prayed for are

passed, the plaintiffs No. 1 &2 herein/Applicants shall
suffer an irreparable loss and injury.
6

That this application is bona fide and made

in the interest of justice.”

9

After plaintiffs No. 1 & 2 had withdrawn themselves

from the present suit, defendant No. 1 has filed the instant
application seeking rejection of the suit mainly on the ground that
the suit at the instance of only one plaintiff cannot continue in
view of provisions contained in Section 92 of CPC which require
presence of two or more persons in a suit to be filed under Section
92. Mr. Chitale appearing for defendant No. 1 had placed reliance
on a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Narain Lal Vs.
Sunderlal Tholia Jorthi (1967) 3 SCR 916 wherein it was held as
under:“We hold that an authority to sue given to several
persons without more is a joint authority and must be acted
upon by al jointly, and a suit by some of them only is not
competent. AS Sir George Rankin said in Musammat Ali
Begam Vs. Badr-ul-Islam Ali Khan 5, “where the consent is
writing of the Advocate-General or Collector is given to a
suit by three persons as plaintiffs, the suit cannot be validly
instituted by two only. The suit as instituted must conform
CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 8 of 14

to the consent.”One the representative suit is validly
instituted, it is subject to all the incidents of such a suit; the
subsequent death of a plaintiff will not render the suit
incompetent, see Raja Anand Rao Vs. Ramdas Daduram6,
and an appeal by some of the plaintiffs impleading the
remaining plaintiff as a respondent is not incompetent
because all did not join as appellants, see Musammat Ali
Begam Vs. Badr-ul-Islam Ali Khan.”

10

On the strength of the above judgment, Mr. Chitale

had argued that the permission to sue granted to three plaintiffs
was a joint permission and the same cannot be acted upon at the
instance of sole surviving plaintiff being plaintiff No. 3 herein.
The contention of Mr.Chitale was that the suit filed under Section
92 of CPC cannot continue only at the instance of one plaintiff.
11

Ms. Lily Thomas appearing for plaintiff No. 3 had

repelled the aforementioned contention urged on behalf of
defendant No. 1. Her contention was that the institution of the
suit and its continuation are two distinct matters. She argued
that for institution of the suit under Section 92, presence of two or
more persons is required but after the institution of the suit,
there is no such requirement of two or more persons in law to

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 9 of 14

continue with such a suit. Ms. Thomas had placed reliance on a
Division Bench Judgment of Sind High Court in Hashim Haroon
Vs. Gounsalishah and Ors. AIR (29) 1942 Sind 137 wherein it was
held as under:“.......After the suit had been instituted, he had filed a
statement to the effect that he did not desire to continue the
suit against the appellant, and it was argued that his
consent to join as a plaintiff had been obtained by
misrepresentation. The reason for this is apparent from his
admission that the appellant had been paying his Rs. 5 per
month. There is no reason whatever for supposing that the
signature of plaintiff 2 had been obtained on the plaint by
any misrepresentation or by any fraud. It is obvious that the
appellant had succeeded in getting round plaintiff 2 after
the institution of this suit. As the learned Judge pointed out
there is nothing in S. 92 which requires that all the
plaintiffs to whom sanction had been given for filing the suit
should after filing the suit continue actively to prosecute the
suit, and we cannot see any substance whatever in this
contention of the appellant.”

12

This Court has given its anxious consideration to the

rival submissions made by the counsel for the parties. This Court
is of the considered view that representative suit validly
instituted pursuant to permission granted under Section 92 CPC

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 10 of 14

can be continued even at the instance of a sole plaintiff. The
requirement of two or more persons as provided for in Section 92
is only for the purpose of initial institution of the suit relevant for
granting or not granting permission required under Section 92.
Once the representative suit is validly instituted, it is subject to
all the incidents of such a suit. The subsequent death of one of the
plaintiffs or his deletion from the array of the plaintiffs for any
reason would not make the suit incompetent after grant of
permission. Suits under Section 92 CPC are filed primarily for
challenging the affairs of a public trust for grant of relief as
provided in Section 92. After filing of such a suit, the possibility of
winning over of some of the plaintiffs by the other side cannot be
ruled out. In the present case, the permission to institute the suit
was granted when there were three plaintiffs in the case. Later on
two out of them withdrew themselves from the contest. This, in
my opinion, would not disentitle plaintiff No. 3 to continue with
the proceedings of the present suit only because two of the
plaintiffs have withdrawn from the contest. After the grant of
permission by the Court, the active participation by all the

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 11 of 14

plaintiffs was not required to continue with the proceedings of the
present suit. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Narain Lal's
case (Supra) is distinguishable on the facts of the present case
inasmuch as in Narain Lal's case the Hon'ble Apex Court was
seized with the question of validity of a suit instituted by some
out of several persons to whom permission to sue was granted by
the Advocate General. In that case, the very institution of the suit
was questioned as the suit was not filed by all the persons jointly
in whose favour permission was granted. This is not the case
here. What has been questioned here before this Court is the
right of the sole surviving plaintiff to continue with the present
suit filed under Section 92 of the Code. In my view, subsequent
withdrawal by plaintiffs No. 1 & 2 would not disqualify plaintiff
No. 3 from continuing with the proceedings of the present suit.
Even the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed in Narain Lal's case
(Supra) that once a representative suit is validly instituted, it is
subject to all the incidents of such a suit and that the subsequent
death of the plaintiff will not render the suit incompetent. Similar
view, as taken by the Supreme Court in Narain Lal's case was

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 12 of 14

taken by the Division Bench of Sind High Court in

Hashim

Haroon's case (Supra). This adequately lends credence to the view
taken by this Court that a suit validly instituted by two or more
persons after obtaining requisite permission as required in
Section 92 CPC, the said suit can be continued even at the
instance of one plaintiff only.
13

Mr. Chitale appearing on behalf of defendant No. 1 had

further argued that AIWC Trust which was created for the object
of carrying out the construction of a multi-storeyed building at
Bhagwan Dass Road, New Delhi was revoked by the Standing
Committee at its Annual General Meeting in June, 1997 in terms
of Article 33 of the Trust Deed dated 01.09.1975. It was urged by
him that since the Trust stood revoked, the cause to continue with
the present case even otherwise does not survive. The contention
regarding revocation of the Trust cannot be gone into while
deciding the instant application seeking rejection of the plaint
under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC. The question of validity of revocation
shall be examined at appropriate stage of the proceedings.
14

For the foregoing reasons, this Court does not find any

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

Page 13 of 14

merit in the instant application of defendant No. 1 and the same
is therefore dismissed but with no order as to costs.
IA No. 5715/2007
During arguments on this application, the counsel for
the plaintiff had agreed to produce the plaintiff No. 3 Krishna
Gupta before the Court on the next date of hearing and in view of
said statement made by the plaintiff's counsel, the instant
application was not pressed by the counsel for defendant No. 1.
The instant application has even otherwise become infructuous in
view of statement made by the plaintiff's counsel to produce the
plaintiff before the Court on the next date of hearing.
The instant application is disposed of accordingly.

August 21, 2007
S.N.AGGARWAL
a

CS (OS)No. 974/1994

[JUDGE]

Page 14 of 14

