*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: 30.01.2008
Date of Order: 8th February, 2008

+ IA No. 14649/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2392/2007
%

08.02.2008
Pantaloon Retail (India) Ltd.
...
Plaintiff
Through: Mr. Bhimrao Naik, Sr. Advocate,
Mr. Rajiv Nayar, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Rishi Agarwala, Mr. Ameet Naik &
Mr. Akshay, Advocates
Versus
Jones Lang Lasalle Meghraj & Ors.
...
Defendants
Through: Mr. Arun Jaitley, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. R.S.Endlaw, Advocate
JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
Judgment?
Yes.
To be referred to the reporter or not ?
Yes.
Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
Yes.
ORDER:
This suit has been filed by the Plaintiff with a prayer that this

Court should pass a mandatory injunction against the Defendants
directing Defendants to execute lease deed in respect of 1,10,000 sq. feet
of area in “South Point”, DLF City, Phase V, situated in Sector 53 Village
Wazirabad, Gurgaon, Haryana as per draft dated 8th May, 2007 sent by
Defendant No.2 and to take all consequential steps for allowing the
Plaintiff to perform the Plaintiff's rights and obligations under the Lease
Deed and the MoU/agreement dated 12th May, 2004.
2.

WS has been filed by Defendants No. 2 & 3 raising objection

about the maintainability of the suit within the territorial jurisdiction of
this Court in view of Section 16 of CPC. I have heard the Counsel on the
question of jurisdiction.
3.

Brief facts relevant for the purpose of deciding the issue are

that Plaintiff alleges that Defendant No. 2 had agreed to grant a Lease to
the Plaintiff in respect of a area of about 1,10,000 sq. feet in the abovesaid Mall for a period of 9 years @ Rs.39/- per sq. feet. A Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) was signed between the parties for this purpose on

IA No. 14649/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2392/2007

Page 1of 6

12th May, 2004, which gave details about the understanding

reached

between the parties. In terms of this MoU, Plaintiff handed over a cheque
of Rs.1,01,000/- as token money, which amount was duly accepted and
the cheque was got encashed by Defendant No. 2 at New Delhi.

After

execution of MoU, correspondence ensued between the parties while the
construction of Mall was going on. When the construction of the Mall got
completed, Defendant No. 2, by e-mail dated 5th October, 2006 forwarded
a draft of formal Lease Deed to Plaintiff. The Plaintiff alleged that some
terms of MoU were not incorporated in the draft Lease Deed, so by e-mail
dated 10th October, 2006 Plaintiff requested Defendant No. 2 to
incorporate all the terms of the MoU. Though the initial MoU was signed
by Defendant No. 2, the draft Lease Deed sent contained the name of
Defendant No. 3 also as the lessor.

On enquiry Defendant No. 2 told

Plaintiff that Defendant No. 3 was in possession of the property and was
part of various group entities of Defendant No. 2. The Plaintiff prepared
for opening its store in the Mall and incurred an expenditure of about
Rs.60 lac and on the request of Plaintiff, Defendant No. 2 permitted sister
company of the Plaintiff to store fixtures in the premises.

The Plaintiff

forwarded a draft of the bank guarantee for Rs.59 lac by e-mail dated 26 th
April, 2007 for Defendant No.2's approval.

Plaintiff was communicated

that Defendant would get the draft approved from their lawyers.
Defendant No. 2 however, failed and neglected to take steps to approve
the same. The Plaintiff again reminded the Defendant to do the same in
May, 2007 and thereafter in August, 2007.

Plaintiff submitted that

thereafter Plaintiff found a change in the attitude in Defendant No. 2.
Defendant No. 2 did not enter into any further correspondence.

So,

Plaintiff had serious apprehension that on account of boom in real estate
sector and increase in property prices, Defendant No. 2 was attempting to
resile from the contract and alienate the suit premises to a third party.
Plaintiff had filed the present suit with the above relief.
4.

The basic facts about entering of MoU between Plaintiff and

IA No. 14649/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2392/2007

Page 2of 6

Defendant No. 2 and non-signing of Lease Deed are not disputed. The
question arises is, whether this Court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit
for specific performance of MoU in respect of a property situated in
Haryana. Counsel for the Plaintiff relied on Adcon Electronics Pvt. Ltd v.
Daulat & Anr. 2001(7) SCC 698 wherein the question of territorial
jurisdiction of Bombay High Court was considered by the Supreme Court
in respect of suit for specific performance of agreement to sell of a
property situated in Indore, M.P. The question was considered in view of
Clause 12 of Letters Patent of Bombay High Court which provided that
suits for land or other immovable property, if such property is situated
within the local limits of original jurisdiction of High Court, can be tried in
High Court and in all other cases, if the cause of action arisen wholly
within the local limits of ordinary original jurisdiction of the High Court or
if the Defendant dwells or carries on business or personally works for gain
within such limits. The Bombay High Court had held that as far as it was
concerned, the suit for specific performance of an agreement to sell even
though it may relate to the land, was not a 'suit for land'.

The Supreme

Court considered the question in Adcon Electronics Private Limited case
as to what is a 'suit for land' and after considering various judgments
observed as under:
17.It may be seen that sub-section (1) is an
enabling provision.
A plaintiff in a suit of
specific performance may ask for further reliefs
mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) thereof.
Clause (a) contains reliefs of possession and
partition and separate possession of the
property, in addition to specific performance.
The mandate of sub-section (2) of Section 22 is
that no relief under clauses (a) and (b) of subsection (1) shall be granted by the court unless
it has been specifically claimed. Thus it follows
that no court can grant the relief of possession
of land or other immovable property, subject
matter the agreement for sale in regard to
which specific performance is claimed, unless
the possession of the immovable property is
specifically prayed for.
18.In the instant case, the suit is for specific
performance of the agreement for sale of the
suit property wherein relief of delivery of the
suit property has not been specifically claimed,
as such it cannot be treated as a “suit for land”.

IA No. 14649/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2392/2007

Page 3of 6

19.We cannot also accept the contention of Mr
Chitale that the suit is for acquisition of title to
the land and is a “suit for land”. In its true
sense,
a
suit
simpliciter
for
specific
performance of contract for sale of land is a
suit for enforcement of terms of contract. The
title to the land as such is not the subjectmatter of the suit.
5.

Plaintiff also relied on Bhawna Seth v. DLF Universal Limited

& Anr. 138(2007) DLT 639 wherein this Court had considered the
Supreme Court Judgment in Adcon Electronics Private Limited as well as
judgment in Harshan Chiman Lal Modi v. DLF Universal Ltd. & Anr. (2005)
7 SCC 791 and observed that in case a suit for specific performance does
not claim the relief of possession, even if the property is situated outside
the Delhi, the suit can be entertained by Delhi Court.

There are other

judgments cited by the Plaintiff Counsel of Delhi High Court to the same
effect.
6.

The Defendants have relied on Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v.

DLF Universal Ltd. and Anr. (2005) 7 SCC 791 wherein objections as to
territorial and pecuniary jurisdiction of the Defendant were upheld by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court despite the fact that Defendant in the initial
Written Statement had specifically taken the stand that it admits to the
jurisdiction of the Court and trial had continued for about 8 long years and
after 8 years Defendants raised objection to the jurisdiction of the Court.
The District Court upheld the objections and held that Court was not
having jurisdiction to entertain a suit for specific performance of the
property where property was outside the jurisdiction of the Court.

No

doubt that in the suit for specific performance filed by the Plaintiff in that
case Plaintiff had sought relief of execution of Lease Deed and delivery of
possession. Defendants also relied on Uttam International v. Jogender Pal
Singh 78(1999) DLT 254 wherein this Court had held that when the
industrial plot was outside Delhi the suit seeking a decree for specific
performance of contract would not be maintainable in Delhi.
7.

A

perusal

of

different

judgments

on

the

question

of

jurisdiction shows that in case of a suit for specific performance of an

IA No. 14649/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2392/2007

Page 4of 6

agreement to sell, if the Plaintiff does not claim the relief of possession
and only claims the relief of execution of sale deed, this Court can
entertain the suit on the ground that Defendant resides within the
jurisdiction of this Court. Thus, it is to be seen as to what is the nature of
the suit of the Plaintiff. Plaintiff had entered into a MoU whereby it was
agreed between the Plaintiff and Defendant No.2 that after completion of
the Mall, Defendant No. 2 would execute a Lease Deed in favour of the
Plaintiff at a specified rate and hand over the possession of the area as
agreed to the Plaintiff, for running its business. The rate of rent, increase
in rent, the period of lease were all given in the MoU. The prayer clause
of the Plaintiff would show that Plaintiff had asked this Court to issue an
injunction to the Defendants jointly and severally to execute the Lease
Deed as per the draft dated 8th May, 2007 signed by Defendant No. 2 and
also to give mandatory injunction to take all consequential steps for
allowing the Plaintiff to perform the Plaintiff's rights and obligations under
the said lease Deed. The consequential step which a lessor can take in
pursuance of the execution of Lease Deed is to hand over the possession
for the beneficial enjoyment of the premises by the Plaintiff.

Thus, this

suit is seeking mandatory directions to the Defendants to honour the
Lease Deed and to give possession of the property to the Plaintiff, so that
Plaintiff can exercise his right under the Lease Deed of running the
business.
8.

It cannot be disputed that lease confers an estate in the

land/immovable property and it is not a mere personal or contractual
agreement. A lease, whether for fixed term or a periodic lease, confers a
right in the property enabling the tenant/lessee to exclude all third parties
including the landlord from possession for duration of the lease period in
return of the rent.

Therefore, when injunction is sought from the Court

against the Defendants for all consequential steps, it only means that
Plaintiff has sought injunction from the Court for handing over the
possession of the leased premises and allowing the Plaintiff to exercise his

IA No. 14649/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2392/2007

Page 5of 6

right of possession and enjoyment.

There cannot be a lease without

transfer of the possession and use of the property in exchange of
payment of rent. I consider that the present suit has been filed by the
Plaintiff not only for mere execution of an instrument titled 'Lease Deed'
but it is a suit seeking mandatory injunction against the Defendants for all
consequential steps i.e. the transfer of possession, handing over the
premises and enjoyment of premises by the Plaintiff for its business.

The

present suit, therefore is in respect of immovable property and not for
personal obedience, I find that in view of Section 16 CPC and in view of
Judgment of Supreme Court in Harshan Chiman Lal Modi v. DLF Universal
Ltd. & Anr. (2005) 7 SCC 791, this Court has no jurisdiction to entertain
the suit.

The plaint be returned to the Plaintiff to enable him to file the

same before the Court of appropriate jurisdiction.

February 08, 2008
vn

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

IA No. 14649/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2392/2007

Page 6of 6

