*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve 11th January 2008
Date of judgment: 5th February, 2008

+

OMP No. 265/2003

%

05.02.2008
M/s. Supreme Structure Pvt. Ltd.
Through:Mr. Dinesh Kr. Gupta, Advocate

...Petitioner

Versus
M/s Harbans Singh & Anr.
...Respondents
Through: Mr. Harish Malhotra, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Rajender Aggarwal,
Advocates for R-1.
JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not ?
Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?

1.

JUDGMENT:
This petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act,

Yes.
Yes.
Yes.

1996 ( for short “the Act”) has been preferred by the petitioner against an
award dated 12th April 2003 whereby the Arbitral Tribunal upheld the
claim of the respondent of Rs.7,85,858/- with

interest @ 24% from 9 th

November 2001 to 15th October 2002 amounting to Rs.76,204/- and
further interest @ 24% from 16th October 2002 till realization. Another
claim of Rs.3,40,000/- for loss of profit was also upheld. Thus total claim
of Rs.13,27,62.78 plus interest on Rs.7,85,852/- @ 24% from 16.10.2002
was allowed and the award was passed against the petitioner.
2.

Brief facts relevant for the purpose of deciding this petition are that

the petitioner purchased Swarn Cinema from its erstwhile owner Mr.
Sarabjit Singh through valid documents. Mr. Sarabjit Singh, owner of firm
M/s Swarn Cinema, was having an agreement/contract with M/s Harbans
Singh and Company under which M/s Harbans Singh and Company used
to supply movies for running on

Swarn Cinema on sharing basis. M/s

Harbans Singh and Company and Mr. Sarabjit Singh, owner of Swarn
Cinema, both were members of Motion Pictures Association and as per the
rules of Motion Pictures Association, all disputes between its members
OMP No. 265/2003

Page No.1 of 8

were to be referred to the Arbitral Tribunal, one Arbitrator

to be

appointed by each party and the two Arbitrators jointly to appoint the
Third Arbitrator. M/s Harbans Singh and Company raised a dispute that its
agreement

with

M/s

Swarn

Cinema

was

breached

by

the

petitioner/purchaser as the petitioner had not allowed movies of
respondent to run on the cinema. Petitioner had also not paid the old dues
when the Cinema was owned by Mr. Sarabjit Singh.

Respondent No.1

referred the matter to Motion Pictures Association for Arbitration and
made M/s Swarn Cinema and the present petitioner as parties.
3.

It is to be noted that M/s Swarn Cinema was a proprietorship firm of

Mr. Sarabjit Singh and he was running the cinema in the name of this
proprietorship firm. The agreement for supplying movies was between M/s
Swarn Cinema and M/s Harbans Singh and Company. After the matter was
taken to the Motion Picture Association, a notice was served upon
petitioner and Mr. Sarabjit Singh both for appointing an Arbitrator. It was
informed that M/s Harbans Singh and Company had appointed its own
arbitrator and the respondent i.e. M/s Swarn Cinema and petitioner should
appoint their side of arbitrator. Mr.Sarabjit Singh appeared before the
Arbitrator and told that he had sold the cinema to petitioner and he
abstained himself from the proceedings. The petitioner raised objection
that there was no arbitration agreement between the petitioner and M/s
Harbans Singh and Company. There was no privity of contract between
petitioner and M/s Harbans Singh and Company at any point of time. The
Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to entertain the dispute. When the firm M/s
Swarn Cinema and the present petitioner did not propose the name of any
of the arbitrators, the Motion Pictures Association of its own nominated
Mr. Surinder Paul as arbitrator to act on behalf of petitioner herein. Before
the Arbitral Tribunal was appointed, M/s Harbans Singh and Company had
also filed an application under Section 9 of the Act before this Court.
However, during pendency of the proceedings under Section 9 of the Act,
the applicant M/s Harbans Singh and Company was asked to file original

OMP No. 265/2003

Page No.2 of 8

written arbitration agreement between claimant and the respondent, but
instead of filing the arbitral agreement, the application itself was
withdrawn.
4.

Even before the Tribunal, the petitioner raised the objections about

the authority of tribunal to proceed with the matter. The very first
objection being that there was no agreement between claimant and the
petitioner. The other issue raised was that Arbitral Tribunal was not
properly constituted and the third objection was that the Arbitral Tribunal
has no jurisdiction to give the award fourth being that there was no privity
of contract between claimant and respondent. All these objections were
considered by the Arbitral Tribunal and dismissed/rejected. The Arbitral
Tribunal held that the petitioner, who purchased the cinema from its
previous owner Mr. Sarabjit Singh, was bound by the agreement entered
between M/s Swarn Cinema and M/s Harbans Singh and Company
regarding movies since the petitioner purchased a running cinema and he
had stepped into the shoes of Mr. Sarabjit Singh. It was also stated that
Picture “Ashoka” running at the time of purchase of Cinema, was allowed
to be run by the petitioner also at Cinema. This picture was running under
the agreement between Mr. Sarabjit Singh and M/s Harbans Singh and
Company and the fact that this picture was allowed to run by petitioner
shows that the petitioner had stepped into the shoes of M/s Swarn Cinema
and he was bound by the agreement. The Tribunal also held that since the
petitioner and Claimant M/s Harbans Singh and Company both were
members of Association, as per the rules of the Motion Pictures
Association, a company duly incorporated under the Companies Act, both
were found by the Memorandum and Article of Association of the Motion
Pictures Association and the rule containing Arbitration was binding on
both of them.
5.

After holding that the petitioner was bound by the Contract with M/s

Harbans Singh and Company and holding that the petitioner was also
bound by the Arbitration Agreement between M/s Harbans Singh and Mr.

OMP No. 265/2003

Page No.3 of 8

Sarabjit Singh, the Arbitral Tribunal gave the impugned award upholding
the claim of the claimant/respondent.
6.

The award has been challenged before this Court on inter alia twin

grounds; one that there was no Arbitration agreement between parties,
second that the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted in an illegal manner.
7.

It is undisputed fact that M/s Swarn Cinema is a proprietorship firm

of Mr. Sarabjit Singh and there was an agreement between M/s Swarn
Cinema and claimant M/s Harbans Singh and Company in respect of
supply of movies for exhibiting at the Cinema. It is also undisputed that
the petitioner was not a party to this agreement.
8.

The proprietorship firm is not a legal entity and it is known by its

proprietor and acts through proprietor. Thus the agreement between M/s
Swarn Cinema and claimant was in fact an agreement between Mr.
Sarabjit Singh (proprietor of M/s Swarn Cinema) and M/s Harbans Singh
and Company. The present petitioner had nothing to do with the
agreement. Merely because the present petitioner purchased Swarn
Cinema complex , he did not become a party to the agreement entered
into between Mr. Sarabjit Singh and M/s Harbans Singh and Company. If,
at the time of purchase of Cinema by the present petitioner, there was an
agreement between the present petitioner and previous owner that
petitioner would be bound by previous contract then and only then, the
petitioner would have been bound by the contract between M/s Swarn
Cinema and the third parties. In absence of any agreement between the
present petitioner and M/s Swarn Cinema in respect of the petitioner
being bound by the contract entered into with third parties, the petitioner
was not bound by any such agreement which Mr. Sarabjit Singh had
entered with third parties.
9.

The present petitioner had purchased Swarn Cinema complex with

all its structure, fittings and fixtures in a running condition on payment of
a valid consideration by a duly registered conveyance deed. The liability
of the petitioner in respect of the property is only after the date of

OMP No. 265/2003

Page No.4 of 8

purchase if there are any taxes, cess, dues qua the property before date
of sale, the liability is of previous owner, liability of the petitioner cannot
be in respect of the previous owner's dues in respect of contracts entered
by previous owner with third parties concerning maintenance or providing
of movies, security services, house keeping services etc. The petitioner,
after purchasing the Cinema had a right not to continue with any of the
previous contracts and to enter into fresh contracts in respect of running
the cinema. A person who purchases a proprietorship firm or a cinema
hall or any running business from its proprietor, does not step into the
shoes of previous owner for the liabilities of earlier period unless it is
specifically provided in the conveyance deed. He is liable only for
liabilities mentioned in the contract/conveyance deed of the purchase. I,
therefore, consider that the

petitioner cannot be said to have stepped

into the shoes of Mr. Sarabjit Singh for any intents and purposes, much
less for the purpose of bearing the liabilities of M/s Swarn Cinema, a firm
being run by the previous owner. The petitioner had not inherited the
Cinema without payment or consideration, that it would inherit the
liabilities attached with the Cinema also. The previous owner had charged
the market value from the present petitioner for the Cinema Complex and
all previous liabilities ought to be paid by the previous owner and not by
the present petitioner. Neither the present petitioner can be bound by the
contract between the previous

owner and the third parties unless it is

specifically mentioned in the conveyance deed.
10.

I consider that the Arbitral Tribunal's decision that the petitioner

was bound by arbitration agreement between previous owner and M/s
Harbans Singh and Company because the petitioner stepped into the
shoes of the Mr. Sarajbit Singh is wrong. Neither the petitioner can be
held

bound by the arbitration

agreement

because

the petitioner

subsequently became the member of Motion Pictures Association. Merely
by becoming member of the Motion Picture Association, the petitioner
does not incur liabilities of the previous contract. By becoming a member

OMP No. 265/2003

Page No.5 of 8

of Motion Pictures Association, the petitioner in fact bound itself to the
future contracts between its suppliers of movies and he could not have
incurred liabilities of the previous owner by just becoming member of
Motion Pictures Association. The Arbitration Tribunal went wrong in
holding that by becoming member of Motion Pictures Association, the
petitioner became bound by the contract between the previous owner and
the third party.
11.

In M/s Sahani Enterprises v. New Filmistan Cinema 1986(1)

Arbitration Law Reporter 411, this Court held as under:
“4.

The conclusion that there was no valid

agreement was also reached by the learned Single
Judge on the evidence of Shri. K.K. Jalan, one of the
Directors of Filmistan Exhibitors Pvt. Ltd., who
stated that there was no such person employed by
the Company as Dhani Ram. There was also a
reference to some other letters in which the
appellant themselves had described Dhani Ram
belonging to M/s Movies Pvt. Ltd. It was thus
concluded that the agreement was not concluded
between the appellant and M/s Filmistan Exhibitors
Pvt. Ltd. As the case of the appellant was that the
film had been exhibited and as such it was sought
to be urged that there must have been some
agreement on the basis of which that picture was
screened. As no alternative agreement had been
put forward, it is urged that the picture 'Aaina'
must have been screened under the agreement
under which an arbitration is sought. We must say
that this is not the real point to be decided in an
arbitration. There must first be an arbitration
agreement and there must be a dispute between
the parties to that arbitration agreement. What is
being sought to be referred is a dispute between
M/s Sahni Enterprises and M/s Filmistan Exhibitors
Pvt. Ltd. on the basis of an agreement signed by
M/s Sahni Enterprises and Shri Dhani Ram for
Filmistan Cinema. There is no dispute arising on
this agreement because M/s Filmistan Exhibitors
Pvt. Ltd. is not a party to this agreement. This is
OMP No. 265/2003

Page No.6 of 8

why this matter cannot be referred to arbitration
and the appellant must be left to go to the
ordinary civil court. As the matter cannot be
referred to arbitration, the appeal is dismissed but
we leave the parties to bear their own costs.”
12.

It is apparent that merely because the film Ashoka was continued

screening by the petitioner, that does not bring into existence of an
arbitration agreement between the petitioner and the respondent.
13.

In Shakuntla Silk Mills vs. Swadeshi Cotton Mills 1985(3)

Arbitration Law Reporter 405, the Court held that if the defendants,
were not a party to the Arbitration Agreement, they were not bound by
the Arbitration Clause. The Court also observed that despite the fact that
defendants 1 to 4 were primarily liable to pay the price but since they
were not a party to the arbitration clause the disputes qua them cannot
be referred to the arbitrator.
14.

The procedure which has been followed by Motion Pictures

Association in appointment of the Arbitrator is also illegal. The arbitration
agreement, even if considered valid provided that one Arbitrator shall be
appointed by each party. In the present case, previous owner of the
Cinema was party to the agreement. He appeared before the Arbitrator
appointed by the claimant stated that he had nothing to do with the
Cinema and went away without even contesting the claim. Since no
arbitrator was appointed by the present petitioner on the plea that there
was no arbitration agreement, the Motion Picture Association itself
appointed an arbitrator on behalf of the petitioner and the two arbitrators
appointed a third arbitrator. It is stated by the Arbitral Tribunal in the
award that Motion Pictures Association appointed the second arbitrator on
behalf of the petitioner in terms of Article 63 of the Article of Association
and such an appointment was a valid appointment. Where the arbitration
agreement provides that one arbitrator has to be appointed by each
party, if one of the parties failed to appoint an arbitrator, there is no
alternative before the claimant but to approach the Court for appointment
of a sole Arbitrator and the claimant or Association cannot itself appoint
OMP No. 265/2003

Page No.7 of 8

the second arbitrator on behalf of the petitioner. The rules of an
association cannot override the statutory provisions of law.
12.

The appointment of an Arbitrator is a matter of agreement between

the parties. The agreement cannot be unilaterally altered either by the
claimant or by Motion Picture Association and the Motion Pictures
Association cannot usurp the right of appointment of an arbitrator on
behalf of the non cooperating party, more so when the claim of the
petitioner was that there was no arbitration agreement between the
petitioner and the claimant. I consider that the appointment of an
Arbitrator in the present case was contrary to law as well as contrary to
the alleged agreement.
15.

The rules and regulations of the Motion Pictures Association cannot

take the precedence over the statutory provisions of law. There has to be
a written arbitration agreement between the parties in order to invoke the
arbitration clause and the arbitrator must be appointed in terms
agreement and not in terms of the policies and articles of Motion Pictures
Association.
16.

In view of my foregoing discussion, I hold that the award passed by

the Arbitral Tribunal suffers from inherent defect. There was no
agreement between the petitioner and the claimant but still the Arbitral
Tribunal proceeded to decide the dispute. I consider that the constitution
of the Tribunal itself was not valid. The award passed by the Arbitral
Tribunal has no validity or sanctity under law. Resultantly, the petition is
allowed and

the award passed by the Arbitral Tribunal is hereby set

aside.

February 05, 2008
rd

OMP No. 265/2003

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA J.

Page No.8 of 8

