*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: 14.2.2008
Date of Order: 19.02.2008

+ AA No. 61/2008
%
Ms. Chhaya Shriram
...
Petitioner/Applicant
Through: Mr. Manmohan Singh, Sr Advocate
Mr. Sumeet Kachwaha, Mr. Ashok Sagar,
Ms. Anuradha Sharma &
Mr. R.Vasanth, Advocates
Versus
Deepak C. Shriram & Ors.
...
Respondents
Through: Mr. Sudhir Chandra, Sr. Advocate
Mr. Rajiv Endlaw, Advocate for
Respondents No.1-4
Mr. Vinay Bhasin, Advocate
Mr. H.L.Tiku, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Kewal Singh, Advocate for R-6
JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
ORDER:
This application under Section 11 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 has been made by the applicant seeking
appointment of sole Arbitrator for adjudication of the disputes between
the applicant/petitioner and the respondents, arising out of or in
connection with the Trust Deed dated 14th September, 1984.
2.

Brief

facts

relevant

for

the

purpose

of

deciding

this

application are that a trust in the name of 'Chinar Trust' was constituted
on 14th September, 1984 between Brigadier Rajaratnam Lokranjan ( on
one part) and Mr. N.R.Dongre and Mrs. Sumitra Charat Ram (on the other
part).

Brigadier Rajaratnam was the Settlor of the Trust and Mr.

N.R.Dongre and Mrs. Sumitra Charat Ram were the two trustees of the
Trust. This Trust with an amount of Rs.5001/- was opened for the benefit
of the beneficiaries as defined in the Trust. As per Trust, upto the period

AA No. 61/2008

Page 1of 5

of 30th June, 1989 Vishvakarma Trust, a Trust settled by Mr. Prem Pandhi
in terms of Trust Deed dated 26th June, 1984 was to be the beneficiary
and from 1st July, 1989 the beneficiaries as stated in Vishvakarma Trust
were to become beneficiaries under this Trust in the same proportion,
extent and mode as under Vishvakarma Trust. The Trust also provided
that after original trustees, the subsequent trustees shall be those as may
be appointed under the provisions of the Trust Deed.
3.

The Trust Deed contained an Arbitration Clause which reads

as under:
“All disputes and questions whatsoever which shall
arise either during the continuation of this TRUST
between the SETTLOR, TRUSTEES and Beneficiaries
to the income or to the Corpus of their respective
representatives or any of them touching this Deed
or the construction or the application thereof or any
clause or thing herein contained or any account,
calculation or dividend or division of assets or
liabilities to be made hereunder, as to any act,
deed or omission of any one of the TRUSTEES or as
to any other matter in any way relating to the Deed
of Trust or any affairs thereof or the rights, duties
and liabilities of any person under this Deed shall
be referred to a single arbitrator in case the parties
agree upon or otherwise to two arbitrators, one to
be appointed by each party to the dispute, in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Indian Arbitration Act or any statutory modification
thereof for the time being in force. In case the two
arbitrators so appointed do not agree upon the
matter, it shall be referred to an umpire to be
appointed by the two arbitrators representing each
of the parties to the dispute.”
4.

The applicant in this case is one of the beneficiaries and

respondents are also the beneficiaries under the Trust.

It is submitted by

the applicant that a dispute had arisen between the beneficiaries since
the respondents wanted to part with their share of benefit under the Trust
to a third party, for consideration and the spirit of the Trust as may be
gathered from the Trust Deed is that it was a family Trust and the entire
benefits must remain within the two families in the proportion mentioned
in the Trust and no beneficiary can sell his/her benefit to a third party
without giving first offer to other beneficiaries of the same family. It is
therefore submitted that since Respondents intend to transfer their share

AA No. 61/2008

Page 2of 5

without offering the same to the Petitioner, a dispute has arisen and in
view of the Arbitration Agreement contained in the Trust Deed, the matter
should be referred to the sole Arbitrator to be appointed by the Court.
5.

The Counsel for the Respondents have submitted that there

was no Arbitration Agreement between the petitioner/applicant and the
respondents and the Arbitration Agreement relied upon by the applicant
was not applicable between the applicant and respondents and therefore
this application under Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act
was not maintainable.
Learned Counsel for the applicant argued that it was not necessary that
the parties must sign the agreement. It was sufficient that the agreement
was in writing and was binding on the parties.

He relied upon Babaji

Automotive v. Indian Oil Corporation Limited 2006(1) Arb. LR 566
(Calcutta) and Dr. S.Z.Zafrey v. M/s Modern Industrial Enterprises, Indore
& Ors. AIR 2006 (MP) 56 to press this point and submitted that
irrespective of the fact that beneficiaries had not signed the Trust Deed,
the beneficiaries were bound by the Arbitration Agreement. He pleaded
that under the Trust, the applicant and the respondents have been
reaping benefits therefore they were bound by the terms of the Trust
including the Arbitration

Agreement, even if, the beneficiaries had not

signed it.
6.

Section 7 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act reads as under:
Arbitration Agreement. - (1) In this part, “arbitration
agreement' means an agreement by the parties to
submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a
defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of
an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form
of a separate agreement.
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is
contained in -(a)
a document signed by the parties;
(b)
an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or
other means of telecommunication which provide a
record of the agreement; or
(c)
an exchange of statements of claim and
defence in which the existence of the agreement is
alleged by one party and not denied by the other.

AA No. 61/2008

Page 3of 5

7.

(5)
The reference in a contract
containing an arbitration clause
arbitration agreement if the contract
the reference is such as to make that
part of the contract.
As per the provisions of Section 7, an

of a document
constitutes an
is in writing and
arbitration clause
Arbitration Agreement

is an agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain
disputes. Thus, wherever one party invokes Arbitration Clause vis-a-vis
other party, both parties must have agreed to submit all their disputes to
the arbitration. An Arbitration Agreement to be a valid agreement, the
parties to the agreement must be ad-idem to the fact that if there is a
dispute between the parties, the same shall be referred to the Arbitrator.
8.

It is not disputed that none of the parties to this application

were signatories of the Trust Deed and the only signatories to the Trust
Deed were Settlor and Trustees. The beneficiaries were not signatories to
the Trust Deed. The question arises, can a person reaping benefit under
the Trust, becomes bound by the Arbitration Clause given in the Trust and
his disputes with the other beneficiaries is to be referred in terms of the
Arbitration Clause? There is no doubt that a beneficiary can have benefits
of the Trust only in accordance with the terms of the Trust and in the
same ratio and proportion which is provided under the Trust. But he is
granted benefits by the Trust not out of any contract between him and the
Trustees and the Settlor. He is not made beneficiary out of his choice but
because of the desire of the Settlor. The Trust is not a contract between
Settlor and the beneficiary.

A Trust is a contract between Settlor and

Trustees, where Settlor places some property in the hands of Trustees
and gives power to the Trustees to manage the property in a specified
manner and to give benefit of the property to certain persons. A Trust
may be a Private Trust or a Public Trust and a similar arbitration clause
can be there even in a Public Trust. In Public trust or Trust of religious
nature, the beneficiaries would be innumerable persons, who are not even
known to the Trustees. I consider that the Settlor and Trustees together
cannot enter into a contract on behalf of the beneficiaries. Any dispute
between the beneficiaries can be referred to the arbitration only if there is

AA No. 61/2008

Page 4of 5

an independent Arbitration agreement between the beneficiaries for
referring the dispute to the arbitration.
9.

It is settled law that in order to enter into a contract, the

parties must be legally competent.

A minor or a person of unsound mind

cannot enter into an agreement, but under the Trust relied upon by the
applicant, a minor
beneficiary.

as well as a person of unsound mind can become

No Arbitration Agreement can become binding on them

because they are not even competent to enter into the agreement.
Moreover, an Arbitration Agreement is binding on the parties who by their
own will and consent agree to refer the dispute to the Arbitrator.

Two

persons cannot bind their successive generations to a contract entered
into between them.

Similarly, a person may while making a Will and

appointing somebody as Executor of the Will, provide for an arbitration
clause that any dispute between the beneficiaries of the Will, will be
decided by the Arbitrator.

Such a clause would not be binding on the

beneficiaries, because they were not party to the Arbitration Agreement
although they may be getting benefits out of the Will.

A person can

dispose of his property by Will but a person cannot create a contract
between two other persons by his Will. Similarly, Settlor and Trustees can
create a Trust and specify who will be the beneficiaries under the Trust
but they cannot create a binding contract between the beneficiaries in
respect of settlement of dispute and cannot say that all disputes between
the beneficiaries shall be decided by arbitration. The arbitration clause
relied upon by the applicant is therefore not binding on the beneficiaries
and this application is not maintainable and is hereby dismissed as such.

February 19, 2008.
vn

AA No. 61/2008

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

Page 5of 5

