*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: 11.2.2008
Date of Order: 14.2.2008

+OMP No. 53/2007
%

14.02.2008
Fortune Park Hotels Limited
...
Petitioner
Through: Mr. Anil Kumar, Sr. Advocate
Mr.P.K.Mohapatra, Advocate
Versus
Marwar Hotels Limited

...
Respondent
Through: Ms. Pinky Behera, Advocate
Ms. Hemantika Wahi, Advocate

JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
JUDGMENT :
This application/petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration

and Conciliation Act, 1996 has been made by the applicant seeking relief
that the applicant should be allowed to run hotel known as 'Fortune
Ummed Hotel' situated at Banar Road, Jodhpur, Rajasthan till the end of
30th April, 2007 in terms of the agreement dated 3rd November, 2003. The
other relief sought is that the respondent should be directed to furnish
security, by way of a bank deposit, for a sum of Rs.6 crore being the
outstanding amount and compensation payable by the respondent to the
applicant and direct the respondent and its successors to provide 50 room
nights per year, at the above-mentioned hotel on complimentary basis till
the disputes between the parties are resolved through arbitration.
2.

Brief

facts

relevant

for

the

purpose

of

deciding

this

application are that the applicant entered into a Technical, Pre-opening,
Operating and Marketing Services Agreement dated 3rd November, 2003
in respect of the above-said hotel with the respondent. The agreement
was valid for a period of ten years commencing from operating date with

OMP No. 53/2007

Page 1of 5

liberty to the parties to extend the operating terms of the agreement for
two successive period of 5 years each. Under this agreement, applicant
was to render services in connection with marketing, advertising and
publicity of the hotel.

In consideration of the services to be rendered, a

pre-opening fee of Rs.2.5 lac was to be paid to the applicant and during
each fiscal year of the operating term of the agreement, services fee
equivalent to 5% of the Gross Operating Income of the hotel was to be
paid to the applicant. The applicant was also entitled to a minimum of 50
room nights in each fiscal year on a complimentary basis for use in the
hotel.

However, during continuance of the agreement, the respondent

sold the hotel to a third party and terminated agreement of the applicant.
The applicant has moved this application under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act since the agreement contained an
arbitration clause 'Article 15' wherein it was provided that all disputes and
differences arising from the agreement or in any way connected thereto
shall be settled by way of arbitration proceedings conducted at New Delhi
by a sole Arbitrator appointed by ICA in accordance with the provisions of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act. It was also provided that this clause shall
survive termination of the agreement.
3.

During arguments it transpired that the applicant has already

invoked the arbitration clause and made request for appointment of
arbitrator.

It is submitted by the Counsel for the applicant that the

respondent has illegally terminated the agreement and sold the hotel. As
per terms of the agreement, respondent was to maintain the ownership of
the hotel and because of sale of the hotel by the respondent, there was
breach of agreement and the applicant was entitled to claim damages as
well as the dues.

It is submitted that the dues to the tune of

Rs.36,33,666/- have been admitted and acknowledged by the respondent
vide its letter dated 10th January, 2007. The applicant was entitled to get
this much amount secured and this Court should ask the respondent to
furnish a bank guarantee to the extent of this amount or to deposit this

OMP No. 53/2007

Page 2of 5

amount in the Court as security.
4.

Respondent in its reply has taken the stand that the

respondent was forced to sell the property under threat of action under
Securitisation

Reconstruction of Financial Assets Act by the bankers of

the respondent. It is stated that in case the respondent had not entered
into sale of property and had not sold the property in the market, the
property would have been sold as a distress sale under the Act by the
Bank and would not have fetched the amount it fetched presently. The
sale done by the respondent was under these circumstances and
respondent had not sold it with any other motive. Regarding agreement
dated 3rd November, 2003 it is not disputed that this agreement was
entered into however, it is stated that applicant has not raised any
dispute or difference in relation to the agreement and therefore, the
applicant under Section 9 was pre-mature. It is also stated that the Court
should not exercise its discretion under Section 9 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act.
5.

The Counsel for the applicant has submitted that respondent

has itself taken the plea of its financial constrains and stated that the
respondent had to sell the property under financial constraints in order to
enter into one time settlement. The documents filed by the respondent
show that there was term loan of Rs.700 lac and a funded interest loan of
Rs.670 lac to the company and from the sale of this property the
respondent had paid its dues of the Vijaya Bank, IDBI Ltd., LIC & SICOM
Ltd but the respondent has not paid the admitted dues of the applicant
,thus the intention of the respondent was not bonafide.

Even if the

respondent sold the hotel for financial constraints under distress, the
respondent was liable to pay admitted dues of the applicant and non
payment of the dues despite sale of the hotel shows malafide on the part
of the respondent.
6.

The Counsel for the respondent has relied upon M/s Global

Company v. M/s National Fertilizers Ltd. AIR 1998 Delhi 397 wherein a

OMP No. 53/2007

Page 3of 5

Single Judge of this Court held that the relief sought under Section 9 for
protection of the subject matter of the Arbitration Agreement or to secure
the applicant was in the nature of relief under Order 38 Rule 5 CPC and
the applicant had to prove that the respondent's intention was to defeat,
delay or obstruct the claim of the applicant and only if the respondent
proved, the applicant had a bonafide ground to claim the relief. On the
other hand applicant relied upon Nepa Limited v. Manoj Kumar Agrawal
AIR 1999 (MP) 57 wherein the Court observed that in an application under
Section 9 and in order to safeguarding and preserving the subject matter
of the contract, the order can be passed by the Court and Court can issue
directions for measurement of the quantity of coal and preserve the
contracted quantity of coal ash after due measurement and keep the
amount safe in

a nationalised bank.

Court observed that this was

necessary in view of the plea of taking poor financial condition of the
appellant company.
7.

In the present case, the respondent has not disclosed for

what amount the hotel and building appurtenant thereto have been sold
and why the respondent, while discharging other debts of financial
institutions and banks, have not discharged its liability of the admitted
amount to the applicant.

I consider that the quantum of damages

suffered by the applicant are yet to be determined by the Arbitrator and
this Court cannot secure the applicant to the extent of the damages
suffered by the applicant.

However, since the admitted amount of the

applicant was deliberately not paid, the applicant was justified in doubting
the intentions of the respondent. The apprehension of the applicant that
the respondent may dispose of all other assets and income and the
balance

amount

available

consideration of the hotel.

after

paying

debts

from

sale

of

the

The applicant, therefore, has reasons to

believe that nothing may be available to the applicant after the award is
passed in favour of the applicant. The Counsel for respondent in this case
has not disputed the letter acknowledging dues of Rs.36,33,666/-.

OMP No. 53/2007

Page 4of 5

8.

I, therefore consider that the application of the applicant

should be allowed to the extent of directing respondent to furnish the
security either in the form of immovable property or a bank guarantee to
the tune of Rs.36,33,666/-.

The respondent is therefore directed to

furnish bank guarantee/ valid security in the form of immovable property
to secure admitted amount of the applicant to the tune of Rs.36,33,666/within a week with the Registrar General of this Court.
With this direction, the OMP stands disposed of.

February 14, 2008
vn

OMP No. 53/2007

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

Page 5of 5

