*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: 5.2.2008
Date of Order: 18.2.2008

+ IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007
%

18.2.2008

Shri Jasvinder Singh
...
Plaintiff
Through: Mr. Harish Malhotra, Sr. Advocate
Ms. Anupama Kaul, Advocate
Versus
Shri H.S.Ghai & Ors.
...
Defendants
Through: Mr. Arvind Nigam, Advocate &
Mr. Abhijit, Advocate for Defendants No. 1&2
Mr. Sanjeev Narula, Advocate &
Mr. Sunil Dalal, Advocate for Defendant No.3
JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
ORDER:
Plaintiff filed a suit claiming himself to be owner of 50% share

in property no. F-1/2 Vasant Vihar, New Delhi and sought a declaration to
this effect from the Court. He also sought a decree for partition of the suit
property in two equal parts on the ground that he was owner of 50% share
and also prayed decree of permanent injunction against Defendants
restraining Defendants from selling or alienating the property in any
manner. In the suit, he filed an application under Order 39 Rule 1&2 CPC
seeking interim injunction against Defendants restraining Defendants
from selling alienating or transferring the property. An ex-parte injunction
was passed by this Court and Defendants were directed to maintain status
quo in respect of title and possession of the property on 30th May, 2007.
Thereafter, the Defendants filed an application under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC
for vacating the ex-parte stay.
2.

Plaintiff has claimed that he was doing business of sale and

purchase of various properties along with Defendant No. 2 and Plaintiff
and Defendant No. 2 used to purchase properties and then sell those

IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007

Page 1of 8

properties. It is stated that property no. F-1/2 Vasant Vihar, New Delhi,
subject matter of this suit, was purchased from Mr. P.C.Mitra, the original
allottee of the property and since no Sale Deed could be executed in
respect of the property, an Agreement to Sell, GPA and Will were
executed by Mr. P.C.Mitra in favour of Plaintiff and Defendant No. 2. It is
stated that Will was executed in favour of the Plaintiff while Agreement to
Sell was executed in favour of Defendant No. 2 in respect of the property.
Mr. P.C.Mitra expired on 17th January, 1992.

Thereafter, Plaintiff filed a

Probate Petition in July, 1997 before the District Court seeking Probate of
Will of Mr. P.C.Mitra dated 2nd December 1991 in his favour and Probate
was granted on 22nd March, 1999.

Plaintiff claims that he became

exclusive owner of the property due to grant of the Probate although he
and Defendant no. 2 were owners of the property in equal share.

It is

further pleaded that property no. F-1/2 Vasant Vihar, New Delhi was in
dilapidated state at the time it was sold by Mr. P.C.Mitra and Plaintiff and
Defendant No. 1 agreed to get this property re-constructed so that it
could be sold.
agreement

with

For this purpose Defendant No. 2 entered into an
Defendant

No.

3

titled

as

'Agreement

for

Construction/Collaboration' under which Defendant No. 3 was to make
alterations, improvements and re-construction on the said property at her
own cost and expenses estimated to be about Rs.20 lac and in
consideration of that, Defendant No. 2 permitted Defendant No. 3 to reap
rent of the said premises after completion of the said work for a period of
four years. The parties had anticipated that the property would fetch a
rent of Rs.15,000/- per month. After completion of work of construction,
Defendant No. 3 let it out to Embassy of Sultanate of Oman at a rent of
Rs.60,000/- per month for a period of four years and received entire rent
in advance.

The lease of the property in favour of the Embassy of

Sultanate of Oman was further extended by Defendant No. 2 for another
period of 2 years. Embassy vacated premises on 8 th November, 2001 and
possession of the premises was taken over by Plaintiff and Defendants no.

IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007

Page 2of 8

1 & 2.

Thereafter, Defendant No. 3 filed a suit against Plaintiff and

Defendants no. 1 & 2 alleging that the possession was forcibly taken with
the help of gundas and sought permanent injunction and declaration from
the Court claiming herself to be an absolute and exclusive owner of the
property.

It is stated by Plaintiff that since no interim injunction was

granted, Defendant No. 3 withdrew the said suit and filed another suit
bearing Suit No. 192/2005 for possession, mandatory injunction and for
recovery of Rs.16,88,000/- against Plaintiff and Defendants No. 1 & 2.
Defendant No.3 took the stand in this suit that pursuant to the grant of
loan of Rs.40 lac, Plaintiff in conspiracy with Defendant No. 2 had taken all
original documents, title deeds of the suit property and had also taken
more than 60 blank documents bearing the signatures of Mr. P.C.Mitra
and Defendant No. 3. In the said suit, an interim order was granted by the
Court in favour of Defendant No.3 and parties were directed not to create
any third party rights in the said property. It is stated that WS was filed
on behalf of the Plaintiff by Defendant No. 2 in that case and all pleadings
were drafted under the instructions of Defendant No. 2.

Plaintiff was

having faith in Defendant No. 2 and he kept on signing the pleadings
blindly without reading.

In the pleadings, Plaintiff later on learnt that

there was no mention of Probate obtained by Plaintiff in his favour and the
Plaintiff also stated that he had no concern with the said suit property. It
is stated by Plaintiff that misstatement of facts on the part of Plaintiff was
manged by Defendant No. 2 herein as he was looking after the litigation in
the suit filed by Defendant No.3 against the Plaintiff and other Defendants
and Plaintiff had been signing replies and WS etc. on the instructions of
Defendant No. 2 having blind faith in him.
3.

Plaintiff has mentioned about other property of Malcha Marg

and stated that Plaintiff and Defendant No. 1 were joint owners of Malcha
Marg and they had sold their respective shares to the third parties. It is
stated that Defendant No. 1 became dishonest with the purchaser of his
share of the Malcha Marg property and filed a suit against the purchaser

IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007

Page 3of 8

and later on compromised the suit only after he received Rs.1 crore from
the purchaser.

On this incident, Plaintiff became suspicious of the

intentions of Defendants No. 1 & 2 and asked them to execute written
documents in respect of the property no. F-1/2 Vasant Vihar, New Delhi.
Defendants no. 1 & 2 started dillydallying and

did not execute any

document in respect of the property in question. The Plaintiff suspected
that Defendant No. 1 had become dishonest and had intentions to grab
the suit property as he had earlier become dishonest in respect of Malcha
Marg property. He, thereafter, engaged another counsel and inspected
the file of Suit No. 192/2005 and learnt that WS and other proceedings
filed on his behalf stated that he had no right in the property no. F-1/2
Vasant Vihar, New Delhi. The Plaintiff was taking steps to amend his WS
in that suit.
4.

Plaintiff has claimed that the cause of action for filing this suit

arose because he learnt that Defendants with oblique motives had been
approaching various parties and property dealers to sell the suit property
so as to misappropriate the entire sale proceeds to the exclusion of
Plaintiff and denying the benefits of the same to the Plaintiff, who is joint
owner of the property. Since Defendants no. 1 & 2 disputed the right of
the Plaintiff to have his 50% share in the property, the Plaintiff was
compelled to file this suit.
5.

In the WS filed by Defendant No. 3, she took the stand that

Plaintiff and Defendants no. 1 & 2 have filed the present suit in collusion
with each other, Defendant No. 3 was the real owner of the property. She
stated that the Probate of Will of Mr. P.C.Mitra dated 2 nd December 1991
was obtained by Plaintiff by playing fraud. Mr. P.C.Mitra had left behind
his four legal heirs viz. Mr. Kalyan Kumar Mitra (son), Mr. Alok Kumar Mitra
(son), Mrs. Bithika Bose (daughter) and Mrs. Shanti Mitra (widow).
However, Plaintiff did not make other legal heirs as party and only made
Mr. Kalyan Kumar Mitra as a party to that Probate Petition showing him
sole legal heir. Even the address of Mr. Kalyan Kumar Mitra was wrongly

IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007

Page 4of 8

given. Mr. Kalyan Kumar Mitra was not living at the address furnished by
the Plaintiff, in the Probate Petition. His address was given as 13A DDA,
SFS Flats Motia Khan, New Delhi which was incorrect address of Mr.
Kalyan Kumar Mitra who was residing at relevant time at 40/197, First
Floor, Chittranjan Park, New Delhi.

It is stated that the address of Mr.

Kalyan Kumar Mitra as mentioned under his signature as attesting witness
to the said Will is KD-41, Pitampura, Delhi but Mr. Kalyan Kumar Mitra
never lived at this address. Despite the fact that Mr. P.C.Mitra had three
other legal heirs apart from Mr. Kalyan Kumar Mitra, Plaintiff made
statement on oath that Mr. P.C.Mitra was survived by only son. It is also
stated that by Defendants no. 1 & 2 in application under Order 39 Rule 4
CPC that Defendants No.1 & 2 have already filed a suit for cancellation of
the Probate.
6.

I have perused the order of Probate granted by the District

Judge and a perusal of this order shows that Mr. Kalyan Kumar Mitra was
mentioned as sole legal heir of Mr. P.C.Mitra. In replication filed by the
Plaintiff to the WS of Defendants wherein Defendant No. 3 had
categorically disclosed that all other legal heirs were not made party,
Plaintiff has not denied this assertion.

Plaintiff has not denied the

assertion in WS of Defendant No. 3 that he was aware of other legal heirs
and they were not made party to the Probate Petition.
7.

Defendant No. 3 in her WS has further stated that Plaintiff

was a party to Suit no. 192/2005 filed by Defendant No. 3 and in that suit
Plaintiff herein had filed WS on 16 th May, 2005 and in that WS he
categorically stated that he had no connection with the suit property.
Relevant paragraph of WS, filed in that suit is as under:
“The replying Defendant No.3 has absolutely nothing
to do with the alleged inter-se dealing amongst the
Plaintiff and other defendants. He neither has any
interest whatsoever nor in possession of any part of
the property for which the present suit for
possession and other reliefs has been filed”
Plaintiff further stated in paras 14 & 16 as under:

IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007

Page 5of 8

“14. That the contents of para 14 of the plaint are
wrong and denied. It is wrong to allege that there
was any such conduct of the replying defendant
which allegedly apprehended the plaintiff.
The
replying
defendant
never
claimed
any
ownership/share in the suit property, at any point of
time. Rest of the contents of this para are wrong and
denied, being not related to the replying defendant”.
“16. That the contents of para 16 of the plaint are
wrong and denied. It is wrong to allege that the
replying defendant, ever went to the suit premises,
much less with defendants no. 1 and 2 or 22/25
persons, much less with knives and sticks, much less
on 13.11.2001, much less in the manner as alleged.
It is all concocted story created by the plaintiff to suit
her own convenience. The replying defendant has
nothing to do with the ownership of the suit property
or dealings, amongst the plaintiff and defendant
never went to the suit premises there was no
question of entering into the same. Rest of the
contents of this para are wrong and denied.
The
replying defendant is not aware that his name has
been entered in D.D.Entry No. 37-A, dated
13.11.2001.
It is stated that the Plaintiff has taken the contradictory stand in the
present suit from his pleadings in suit no. 192/2005 only with malafide
intentions.

Plaintiff in collusion with Defendant Nos. 1 & 2 has filed this

suit in order to deprive Defendant No. 3 of her lawful rights in the
property.
8.

The claim of the Plaintiff on the suit property is based on two

factors; one Probate of the Will and second that he purchased this
property along with Defendant No. 2 in joint ownership. It is settled law
that Probate of a Will does not confer a right of title over a property.
Probate is a certificate of genuineness of the Will and it is not a certificate
of title over the property. A person can execute Will in respect of property
of which he is not the owner and this fact may not be brought to the
notice of the Court and another may obtain Probate of the Will. By merely
obtaining Probate of the Will, a person does not become owner of the
property.

A person may execute Will in respect of property which he

already sold.

The person in whose favour Will is executed does not

become owner of the property by obtaining Probate of the Will in respect
of property already sold. The title of the property and Probate are two
different things. In order to claim title over the property, the person, in

IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007

Page 6of 8

whose favour Probate is there has to show that the property in respect of
which he has obtained Probate was actually owned by testator at the time
of his death and there was no other claimant of the property either by way
of possession or any adverse title or because of any other factor.
Moreover, in the present case, grant of Probate has been challenged and
the Probate on the face of it, seems to have been obtained without
impleading all legal heirs of the deceased/testator.

The Plaintiff knew

these facts very well and that seems to be the reason that after the order
of the Probate, Plaintiff did not execute necessary Security Bond and did
not file Court fee to obtain Probate Certificate from the Court.
9.

The alleged Probate was obtained by Plaintiff in the year

1999 and Plaintiff claims that on the basis of that Probate he became
exclusive owner of the property.

He did not file any suit in respect of

property after 1999 despite the fact that the property was in possession
of Defendant No. 3 and Defendant No. 2 had already created exclusive
right in favour of Defendant No. 3 to his knowledge.
10.

The plea of the Plaintiff that an agreement for construction

and building was entered into with Defendant No. 3, who was to spend
Rs.20 lac on construction and to enjoy the benefits of rent for a period of
four years is unbelievable. The rent assessed was only Rs.15,000/- per
month therefore, the rent for four years would come to Rs.7,20,000/-. No
person is fool enough to spend Rs.20 lac on construction for realizing a
sum of Rs.7,20,000/- and that too spread over a period of four years. The
plea, therefore, is not tenable and cannot be considered.
11.

It is pleaded that Plaintiff under a belief that Defendant No. 2

was dealing with the property on his behalf kept on signing WS blindly.
Pleadings of a party in a suit are binding on him. A person is not allowed
to blow hot and cold. The Plaintiff who took a stand in Suit No. 192/2005
that he was not owner of the property and had no concern with the
property, cannot be allowed to plead that he was owner of 50% of the
property.

The Plaintiff has no document of ownership except Probate.

IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007

Page 7of 8

Plaintiff has not stated, if he had contributed any amount for purchase of
this property and no consideration at all has been mentioned by the
Plaintiff in the suit as to for what amount property was purchased from Mr.
P.C.Mitra by him and Defendant No.2.

Will is not a document of

ownership. Will comes into effect only after death of the person. While
according to Plaintiff, ownership was transferred by Mr. P.C.Mitra during
his life time. The suit of the Plaintiff is also hit by Section 4 of Benami
Transaction Act and the plea of the Plaintiff that he was co-owner of the
property cannot be considered.
12.

I find that Plaintiff has no prima facia case neither the

balance of convenience lies in favour of the Plaintiff rather it lies against
the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff has approached the Court in the year 2007

while he obtained Probate in the year 1999. The suit prima facia also is
barred by limitation. I, therefore, find no force in the application under
Order 39 Rule 1&2 CPC and the same is hereby dismissed.

The ex-parte

interim order passed is hereby vacated.

IA No. 8423/2007(under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC)
The application stands disposed of in view of order passed in
application under Order 39 Rule 1 &2 CPC.

CS(OS) No. 1043/2007
To come up for framing of issues on 29th April, 2008.

February 18, 2008.
vn

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

IA No. 6691/2007 in CS(OS) No.1043/2007

Page 8of 8

