*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: 14.2.2008
Date of Order: 19.02.2008

+ IA No. 14996/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2559/2007
%

19.02.2008
Ashok Mittal
...
Plaintiff
Through: Mr. Jayant Bhushan Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Manish Jain, Advocate
Versus
Mr. Ram Parshotam Mittal & Ors. ...
Defendants
Through: Mr. Arvind Nigam, Advocate
Mr. Sandeep Mittal, Advocate
JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
ORDER:
By this application under Order 39 Rule 1&2 CPC, Plaintiff has

sought an interim order restraining Defendants to consider and act upon
Agenda Items No. 3 & 4 in the forthcoming meeting of the Board of
Defendant No. 5 Company.
2.

Plaintiff is one of the Directors of the Defendant No. 5

Company while Defendants No. 1 & 2 are also Directors on Board of the
Company. Defendant No. 2 is wife of Defendant No. 1, Defendants No.
4&5 are additional Directors. The notice of Board Meeting was issued on
17.12.2007 and Agenda Items No. 3&4 are as under:

3.

3.To consider reappointment of Shri R.P.Mittal
as Managing Director of the Company for a
further period of 5 years from 1.1.2008.
4. To fix date, time and place for convening
Extra Ordinary General Meeting to approve the
reappointment of Shri R.P.Mittal as Managing
Director.
Plaintiff seeks injunction against carrying on meeting agenda

in respect of above-mentioned two items on the ground that Defendant
No. 1, who is sought to be appointed as Managing Director of Defendant
No. 5 Company was not qualified in terms of provisions of Companies Act.

IA No. 14996/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2559/2007

Page 1of 5

Plaintiff has relied upon Section 267 and 316 of the Companies Act to
canvass that Defendant No. 1 was not competent enough to be appointed
as Managing Director. Sections 267 and 316 of the Companies Act read
as under:
267. Certain persons not to be appointed managing
directors.-No
company
shall,
after
the
commencement of this Act, appoint or employ, or
continue the appointment or employment of, any
person as its managing or whole-time director, who-(a)
is an undischarged insolvent, or has at
any time been adjudged an insolvent;
(b)
suspends, or has at any time suspended,
payment to his creditors, or makes, or has at any time
made, a composition with them; or
(c)
is, or has at any time been, convicted by a
Court of an offence involving moral turpitude.
316. Number of companies of which one person may
be appointed managing director--(1) No public
company and no private company which is a subsidiary
of a public company shall, after the commencement of
this Act, appoint or employ any person as managing
director, if he is either the managing director or the
manager of any other company (including a private
company which is not a subsidiary of a public
company), except as provided in sub-section(2).
(2) A public company or a private company which is a
subsidiary of a public company may appoint or employ
a person as its managing director, if he is the
managing director or manager of one, and of not more
than one, other company (including a private company
which is not a subsidiary of a public company.
Provided that such appointment or employment
is made or approved by a resolution passed at a
meeting of the Board with the consent of all the
directors present at the meeting and of which meeting,
and of the resolution to be moved thereat, specific
notice has been given to all the directors then in India.
(3)
Where, at the commencement of this Act, any
person is holding the office either of managing director
or of manager in more than two companies of which
each one or at least one is a public company or a
private company which is a subsidiary of a public
company, he shall within one year from the
commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act,
1960, choose not more than two of those companies
as companies in which he wishes to continue to hold
the office of managing director or manager, as the
case may be; and the provisions of clauses (b) and (c)
of sub-section(1) and of sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 276 shall apply mutatis mutandis in relation to
this case, as those provisions apply in relation to the
case of director.
(4)
Notwithstanding anything contained in subsections (1) to (3), the Central Government may, by
order, permit any person to be appointed as a
managing director of more than two companies if the
Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary

IA No. 14996/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2559/2007

Page 2of 5

that the companies should, for their proper working,
function as a single unit and have a common
managing director.
4.

It is submitted that Section 267(b) of the Companies Act was

attracted in this case since Defendant No. 1 has played fraud with several
persons.

The modus operandi of Defendant No. 1 was to incorporate

companies, lure investors in the company, thereafter misappropriate the
funds and send the company into liquidation. The Counsel for the Plaintiff
argued that the disqualification as stated in Section 267(b) of the
Companies Act is also attracted, if a person acting as a Managing Director
or Director of a Company plays fraud with the creditors and the company
of which he is a Director or Managing Director is not able to make
payment or suspends payment to creditors. It is stated that Defendant
No. 1 was declared defaulter of Reserve Bank of India since he cheated
PNB and failed to pay to the creditors and financial institutions viz. IFCI,
ICICI, IDBI, PNB, UBI, Bank of India and South Indian Bank. It is submitted
that he cheated the above banks/financial institutions through companies
viz. M/s Mittal Fertilizers Limited, M/s Mittal Ispat Limited and M/s Sharda
Castings Limited. Since he as Managing Director had not conducted the
affairs of above companies in a prudent manner and the creditors were
not paid, he was disqualified from becoming Director of Defendant No. 5
Company.

Learned Counsel for the Plaintiff argued that this Court can

pierce the veil and see that the person behind playing fraud with the
creditors or banks was Defendant No. 1.
5.

In order to establish a case under Section 316 of the

Company Act against Defendant No. 1, it is stated by the Plaintiff that
Defendant No. 1 cannot become Managing Director of Defendant No. 5
company as he was already a Managing Director of more than two other
companies viz. M/s Mittal Ispat Limited and M/s Sharda Castings Limited
etc.
6.

A perusal of Section 267 of the Companies Act would show

that disqualification under this Section is personal. A combined reading of

IA No. 14996/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2559/2007

Page 3of 5

Section 267(a)(b)&(c) makes it clear and if a person, who is sought to be
appointed as Managing Director in his individual capacity was suffering
from a disqualification as specified under Section 267(a)(b)&(c) then only,
he cannot be allowed to become Managing Director. This disqualification
is not attracted, if a person is alleged to have mismanaged the affairs of
another company or the another company in which he was Director or
Managing Director has not been able to pay debts of some creditors. The
Counsel for the Plaintiff then argued that Defendant No. 1 in his individual
capacity stood as guarantor for the loan given to the institutions and
despite being a guarantor he failed to make payment to the creditors.
The Plaintiff has filed many documents along with the suit but has not
filed any document showing that Defendant No. 1 in his individual
capacity failed to make payment to his creditors or at any time made a
composition with any of them or at any time past or present, suspended
the payment to his creditors. I, therefore, consider that Section 267 of the
Companies Act will not be attracted in this case.
7.

The Defendant in the WS has denied that he was Managing

Director of M/s Mittal Ispat Limited or M/s Sharda Castings Limited.
Learned Counsel for the Defendant pointed out that Plaintiff himself was a
Director in these companies and if Defendant No. 1 had been a Managing
Director. Plaintiff would have been in custody of Annual Report and other
documents showing that Defendant No. 1 was Managing Director of these
companies.

Plaintiff has not those documents deliberately since they

would have gone against Plaintiff. He stated that share capital of these
companies was less than Rs.5 crore and as per Companies Act, the
company was not obliged to have a Managing Director. It was specifically
denied that Defendant No. 1 was Managing Director in M/s Mittal Ispat
Limited and M/s Sharda Castings Limited.
8.

In order to succeed in application under Order 39 Rule 1&2

CPC, Plaintiff has to show that he has a good prima facia case and balance
of convenience was in favour of the Plaintiff and the Plaintiff would suffer

IA No. 14996/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2559/2007

Page 4of 5

irreparable loss. The Plaintiff has not succeeded on either of the three
grounds, Plaintiff has failed to show that he has good prima facia case,
Plaintiff failed to show that Defendant No. 1 suffered from any
disqualification to be appointed as Managing Director, Plaintiff also failed
to show that he was going to suffer any irreparable loss.
9.

Plaintiff

Counsel

claimed

that

Plaintiff

was

holder

of

Preference Shares and since Plaintiff had not been paid dividends for two
years, the Plaintiff was entitled to vote in the Board Meeting and General
Body Meeting as a Shareholder and the entire effort of Defendant No. 1 is
to deprive the Plaintiff of the fruits of its investment.

The investment

made by the Plaintiff as claimed to be much more than that of other
shareholders together.

The issue whether the Plaintiff has right to vote

is already sub-judiced before the Appeal Court since a Single Judge of this
Court held against the Plaintiff and Plaintiff. This therefore is no ground
to grant injunction.
10.

I find that the instant application has no force and is hereby

dismissed.

February 19, 2008.
vn

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

IA No. 14996/2007 in CS(OS) No. 2559/2007

Page 5of 5

