*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: 23.7.2007
Date of Order:
19.02.2008

+ E.A.No.270/2002 in Ex.P.No.99/1998
%

19.02.2008

M/s S.A. Builders Ltd.
...
Decree-Holder
Through: Mr.Nilesh Gupta & Mr.Deepak Sabharwal,
Advocates
Versus
Municipal Corporation of Delhi...
Judgment-debtor
Through: Ms.Smita Shankar, Advocate
JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?
To be referred to the reporter or not ?
Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
ORDER:
A dispute had arisen between the parties which was referred

to the arbitration of sole arbitrator Mr.S.P. Rai. Mr.S.P. Rai gave his award
dated 16.12.1997 in favour of the claimant and the last paragraph of his
award reads as under:-

2.

“I have summarized the claims & counter
claims as a result of my reasoning and award as
above and deducting the payments already made
to the Claimant in the enclosed Annexure I. The
Annexure 2 deals with the calculations with
respect to labour escalation.
I direct the
respondent to pay the net amount concluded in
Annexure I as enclosed to the Claimant.
It is a fact that the Contractor has been
deprived of the use of blocked money arrived at in
the above said award resulting in financial
sufferings towards his business. The contractor is
entitled for compensation & I award a simple
interest @ 18% p.a. on the award amount from
1.4.90 to the date of actual payment made to the
Claimant except on Claim No.23(b).”
This award was challenged by the respondent/judgment-

debtor. However, the challenge to the award failed till the highest Court
and execution was filed before this Court. During the execution there was
a disagreement between the decree-holder and judgment-debtor in
respect of the amount payable under the award as the decree-holder was
calculating interest differently.

Decree-holder pointed out to the Court

that there was no clarity whether the interest was awarded under sub-

ExP-99/98

Page 1of 6

clause (a) of sub-section (7) of section 31 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short “the Act”) and sought permission of the
Court to move the Tribunal for clarification. The Court granted liberty to
the petitioner/decree-holder to approach the Tribunal but simultaneously
observed that this should not be understood as if the Court expressed any
opinion about the payment of interest either under sub-section (a) or subclause (b) of sub-section 7 of section 31 of the Act.

The petitioner

thereafter made an application to the Arbitrator for clarification and the
Arbitrator passed an order in the nature of clarification on 15.3.2005. He
modified the award by way of clarification in the following manner:“ The interest under the act can be awarded under
Section-31, sub-section-7(a) & (b) of the act. These
sections empower the arbitrator to award interest
for pre-reference period, pendentelite and post
award. Unlike the old act where the award become
final on making it a rule of court by the respective
courts, the award under the new act gains finality
and is enforceable as decree as per section-36.
Thus, the amounts so awarded along with interest
for the pre-reference and pendentelite periods
becomes decretal amount directed to be paid on
the date of award. The subsection-7(b) is clear that
award carries an interest @ 18% unless the award
otherwise directs.
While awarding the interest, I have held in my
award that “contractor has been deprived of the
use of blocked money arrived at in the above said
award resulting in financial sufferings towards his
business”. Therefore, I have no doubt and clarify
that post award interest in the said award shall be
payable on the awarded sums i.e. the amounts of
claims awarded plus the interest for the prereference period and pendentelite upto the date of
award at the rate mentioned therein till it is paid.
Date: 15.3.2005
Place: Delhi
3.

sd/-S.P.RAI
(SOLE ARBITRATOR)”

The judgment-debtor has filed objections against the order

dated 15.3.2005 stating therein that the clarification issued by the
Arbitrator was beyond jurisdiction of the Arbitrator. The dispute regarding
interest was already considered by the Arbitrator in the award passed by
the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator had become functus officio after passing the
award. By way of giving clarification Arbitrator, could not have casted any
additional burden on the judgment-debtor.

ExP-99/98

Page 2of 6

The Arbitrator instead of

giving clarification passed fresh award in respect of the interest directing
that the interest on the amount awarded to the decree holder would be on
principle sum plus interest upto the date of award. It is stated that the
clarification given by the Arbitrator in fact amounted to a fresh award and
was without any valid arbitration agreement and the clarification should
be set aside, and the interest as awarded by the Arbitrator in the earlier
award only would hold good.
4.

In reply to the objections, decree holder had taken the stand

that section 31 (7)(b) of the Act clearly stipulates the payment of interest
from the date of award till the payment of the awarded amount and the
awarded amount as per new Act is the principle plus pendente lite & past
interest. The decree holder has calculated interest @ 18% on the amount
which was due and payable on the date of payment i.e. 16.12.1997 which
was disputed by the judgment-debtor and since the award was not clear
about the manner in which interest was leviable, a clarification was
sought from the Arbitrator. It is stated that the clarification given by the
Arbitrator was well within his authority and should be treated as part of
the earlier award. The decree holder has prayed that the objections of
the judgment-debtor should be dismissed since the clarification was in
accordance with the provisions of Act.
5.

Section 32 of the Act reads as under:“(1) The arbitral proceedings shall be
terminated by the final arbitral award or by an
order of the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (2).
(2)
The arbitral tribunal shall issue an order for
the termination of the arbitral proceedings where--(a) the claimant withdraws his claim, unless the
respondent objects to the order and the arbitral
tribunal recognises a legitimate interest on his part
in obtaining a final settlement of the dispute,
(b)
the parties agree on the termination of the
proceedings, or
(c)
the
arbitral
tribunal
finds
that
the
continuation of the proceedings has for any other
reason become unnecessary or impossible.
(3)
Subject to section 33 and sub-section (4) of
section 34, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal
shall terminate with the termination of the arbitral
proceedings.”

6.

ExP-99/98

Section 32 specifically provided that the mandate of the

Page 3of 6

Arbitrator shall terminate with termination of arbitral proceedings and
thereafter if any correction or interpretation of the award or additional
award is to be done, the same can be applied to the Arbitrator within 30
days from the receipt of arbitral award.

The limit of 30 days can be

extended only by the agreement between the parties.

A perusal of

clarification issued by the Arbitrator would show that the Arbitrator on
receipt of application of decree holder issued a notice to the judgmentdebtor and hearing them, passed the clarification without considering
whether the Arbitrator had any authority to issue such a clarification or
not. This Court while giving liberty to the decree holder had categorically
stated that this Court was not expressing any opinion about the claim
made by the decree holder before the Court and left it to the Arbitrator to
consider the application and disposed it of according to law. Giving liberty
to the petitioner to file an application before the Arbitrator by the Court
does not change the statutory provisions of the Act.

Liberty given by the

Court is liberty as available under law. If the law permitted the Arbitrator
to issue a clarification, then only the clarification could be issued by the
Arbitrator, otherwise not.
7.

This Court in Ircon International Ltd. Vs. Budhiraja Mining &

Construction Ltd., 2007(4) Arb. LR 159 (Delhi) had occasion to consider
the question of correction of computational and typographical error in the
award and observed as under:“A plain reading of the aforesaid provisions
indicates that, unless another period of time has
been agreed upon by the parties, and application
for correction of any computational errors or
typographical errors has to be made to the arbitral
tribunal within 30 days from the receipt of the
arbitral award. It is also necessary to observe that
the application has to be made with notice to the
other party. Sub-section (3) of Section 33 also
empowers the arbitral tribunal to make such
corrections on its own initiative within 30 days from
the date of the arbitral award. Sub-section (2) of
Section 33 stipulates that the arbitral tribunal, if it
considers the request for corrections to be justified,
shall make the corrections within 30 days from the
receipt of the request and the same shall form part
of the arbitral award. It is, therefore, clear that
there are three different sets of periods of

ExP-99/98

Page 4of 6

limitation prescribed under the said provisions. The
first is the period of 30 days of receipt of the award
by a party during which the said party can request
the arbitral tribunal to correct any computational or
typographical errors in the award. The second
period is a period of 30 days for the arbitral tribunal
make the correction. The third period proscribed is
in the case where the arbitral tribunal seeks to
make a correction on its own initiative. The period
prescribed is 30 days from the date of the arbitral
award.
Since the arbitral tribunal makes a
correction under this provision, on its own initiative,
the date of the receipt of the arbitral award is not
relevant and the clock starts running from the date
of the arbitral award itself. In the present case this
provision is not in issue but it brings out the nature
of the limitation periods prescribed for making
corrections of computational errors/typographical
errors. The nature being that it is strictly time
bound and cannot be extendable unless provided in
the statute itself. The provision for extension of
time has been made in sub-section (6) of Section
33 and it only pertains to the time during which the
tribunal may make a correction under sub-section
(2) or sub-section (5) of the said Section 33. In
other words, there is a specific provisions for
extending the time within which the tribunal makes
the correction after a request is received by it.
There is, however, no provision enabling the
tribunal to extend the time for receiving the
request from a party to make corrections of
computational and/or typographical errors. This is
sufficient indication of the fact that the legislature
permitted extension of time to the arbitral tribunal
to decide on the question of corrections but did not
permit extension of time by the arbitral tribunal for
receiving an application whereby a party makes a
request for carrying out corrections. It is in this
context that sub-section (3) of Section 33 also gains
importance. As pointed out above that provision
enables the arbitral tribunal to make a correction
on its own initiative and only 30 days time was
granted for doing so and that too from the date of
the arbitral award.
There is no provision like
Section 33(6) which enables the arbitral tribunal to
correct an error on its own initiative beyond 30
days from the date of the arbitral award. The
position, therefore, is very clear that where the
legislature permitted extension of time it did so
expressly. In these circumstances, the inescapable
conclusion would be that the legislative intent was
that the delay, if any, in filing of an application
under Section 33(1)(a) of the said Act could not be
condoned by invoking the provisions of Section 5 of
the Limitation Act.
This is so because of the
provisions of Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act
read in the light of the Supreme Court decisions in
the case of Hukumdev and Popular Construction.”
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

As a result of the discussion above, the

ExP-99/98

Page 5of 6

8.

answers to the questions posed in paragraph 3 are
that the applications under Section 33 of the said
Act were not filed within the period of 30 days
stipulated therein. Secondly, the delay in filing the
same could not be condoned by invoking the
provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963.
As such the impugned orders dated 11.08.2003 in
both the petitions are liable to be set aside. The
same are set aside. It would be open to the parties
to challenge the awards dated 23.05.2002 if the
law otherwise permits them to do so.
These
petitions stand allowed to this extent.”
I consider that the Arbitrator in this case had become

functous officio and had no authority to entertain the application for
clarification. The earlier order of the Arbitrator awarding simple interest
@ 18% per annum on the awarded amount from 1.4.1990 to the date of
actual payment takes care of the interest part and specifies what is the
interest to be given. If the decree-holder was aggrieved by the interest
awarded by the Arbitrator and the manner in which the interest was
awarded, decree holder had the option to challenge the award on this
count under section 34 or to seek clarification from the Arbitrator within
30 days of the receipt of the award. Decree holder did not challenge the
award nor sought correction/clarification within 30 days. After 30 days of
the award, Arbitrator had no authority to make any change in the award.
The Arbitrator ignored the mandatory provisions of the Act while issuing
clarification. It is also not a case where respondent/judgment-debtor had
agreed for extension of time limit.
9.

I, therefore, set aside the clarification issued by the Arbitrator

and the award as earlier passed shall hold good and the interest awarded
in the award dated 16.11.1997 shall be payable by the judgment-debtor.
E.A. stands disposed of.

February 19, 2008.
v

ExP-99/98

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

Page 6of 6

