IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: January 08 2007
Date of Order: January 22, 2008

%
+

IA No.7543/2005 in CS(OS) No.1189/2005

#
!

Heinz Italia S.r.I. & Another
...
Plaintiffs
Through: Ms. Anuradha and Ms. Divya Vijan, Advocates
Versus

$
^

Mr. D. Koteswara Rao
...
Defendant
Through: Mr.K. Seshachary, Advocate

*

JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
ORDER:

1.

IA No.7543/2005
By this application under Order 7 Rule 11 (a) & (d) read with

Section 9 and Section 151 CPC the defendant has contented that the
plaint filed by the plaintiff was liable to be rejected.
2.

First ground taken by the applicant is that the 2 nd plaintiff

was only a

permitted/licensed user of the trade mark.

In view of the

Section 53 of Trade Mark Act read with Section 2(1)(r)(ii) of the Act, the
suit filed by the 2nd plaintiff for infringement of trade mark does not lie
since Section 53 of Trade Mark Act specifically provides that a permitted
user shall have no right to initiate proceedings for infringement.

It is

stated that in view of the Section 9 of CPC, the suit was not maintainable
since it was specifically barred under Section 53 of Trade Mark Act. It is
further urged that neither 1st plaintiff nor the 2nd plaintiff were registered
proprietor or registered user of the trade mark 'Glucon-D' and the
certificate filed by the plaintiffs in this respect would show that 'M/s. Glaxo
India Limited' was the registered proprietor of the trade mark. The suit
was therefore not maintainable on behalf of either of the plaintiffs.
3.

The counsel during arguments also pointed out that in the

plaint, self-contradictory averments have been made by the plaintiff. In

IA No.7543/2005 in CS(OS) No.1189/2005

Page 1of 6

para 3 of the plaint, it is stated that plaintiff was registered proprietor in
India of the trade mark 'Glucon-D' whereas in para 4, it is stated that
trade mark Glucon-D was assigned to the 1st plaintiff by Glaxo India
Limited

by

a

deed

of

assignment

dated

30 th

September,

1994.

Defendant's counsel contended that the two averments cannot go side by
side. The plaintiff cannot, simultaneously, claim to be assignee of a trade
mark as well as registered proprietor of the trade mark. An assignee or
licensee had no right to file a case for infringement in view of Section 53
of Trade Mark Act.
4.

The next contention of the applicant is that there was no

averment in the plaint whether the plaintiff no. 1 or 2 were either
registered proprietor or registered user of the trade mark.

Trade Mark

Act 1999 recognizes only two categories of persons, namely, registered
proprietor or registered user who can enforce the rights for the
infringement in a registered trade mark. The suit was therefore bad in
law.

It is further pleaded that suit was also barred under Section 134

(1)(a) & (b) since this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to try this suit. It
is submitted that under the above provisions of law suit can be instituted
in the District Court having jurisdiction within whose jurisdiction, at the
time of the institution of the suit, the person instituting the suit actually
and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.
The 1st plaintiff neither resides nor carries on business within the territory
of India nor there was any averment to this effect. Rather the plaintiff no.
1 was located in Milano, Italy. Plaintiff no. 1 therefore has no locus standi
to file the present suit. Where there are more than one person instituting
the suit, any of them should actually and voluntarily reside or carry on
trade or personally work for gain within the local limits of the District
Court concerned.

Since the 2nd plaintiff was neither the registered

proprietor nor the registered user and had no right to bring an action for
infringement and the 1st plaintiff of its own showing

had no place of

business within the local limits of this Court, therefore this suit was barred

IA No.7543/2005 in CS(OS) No.1189/2005

Page 2of 6

under Section 134 of the Act.
5.

It is also argued that as far as the passing of action against

the defendant was concerned there is not even a whisper in the plaint
that defendant had at any point of time carried on any commercial
operation within territorial jurisdiction of this Court. It is also averred that
defendant has neither directly or indirectly marketed or sold any of its
products within the Delhi.

Regarding copyright action, it is argued by

counsel for the defendant that the packaging design has also been
claimed by the plaintiff to be registered under the trade mark and not as a
copyright. The plaintiff has claimed that a deed of assignment dated 30 th
September, 1994 was granted to it assigning rights in the artistic work
used on the packaging of 'Glucon-D' but the said deed of assignment has
not been annexed to the plaint. The plaintiff has not placed on record any
document of ownership of the artistic work. Neither the packaging was
covered under the artistic work to enable the plaintiff to claim the
copyright. It is submitted that the plaint does not disclose any cause of
action and therefore was liable to be dismissed.
6.

A perusal of trade mark registration certificate, relating to

this trade mark, filed by the plaintiff would show that the trade mark
Glucon-D' was renewed in the name of Glaxo Laboratory India Ltd. on 21 st
May, 2003.

The certificate also gives a history in respect of the trade

mark and history shows that this trade mark was renewed for a period of
7 years from 21st May, 2003 and advertised in Journal No. 13101.
Thereafter, a request was made on form No. TM 33 on 2 nd June, 2004 and
vide order dated 10th June, 2004, the registered proprietor’s name was
changed to M/s. Glaxo Laboratory India Ltd. Another request in form No.
TM 24 dated 16th March, 2004 was made and vide order dated 10th June,
2004 M/s. Heinz Italia S.r.l Via Cadolini 26, 20137, Milano, Italy was
registered as a subsequent proprietor of this trade mark w.e.f. 30.9.1994
by virtue of an assignment deed dated 30.9.1994. Order was also made
regarding change of name in certificates dated 2.2.1998 and 30.7.1999.

IA No.7543/2005 in CS(OS) No.1189/2005

Page 3of 6

Thus, it is apparent that as per the document filed by the plaintiff on
record, plaintiff was assignee and registered user of trade mark 'Glucon-D'
and the name of the plaintiff was entered into trade mark register as a
proprietor of the trade mark under an assignment agreement. The
averment made by the plaintiff of being a registered proprietor is based
on documentary proof. There is no contradiction between averments
made in paras 3 and 4 of the plaint. The plea of the defendant that
plaintiff no. 1 was not a registered user is, prima facie, belied from the
documents filed by the plaintiff no.1. Plaintiff no. 1, therefore, could have
brought an action for infringement against the defendant in respect of the
trade mark 'Glucose D' and the labels registered and assigned to the
plaintiff no.1.
7.

It is avered in the plaint that plaintiff no. 2 was a subsidiary

of plaintiff no. 1 and was a company incorporated in and affiliated to Heinz
Italia.

The 2nd plaintiff was permitted/licensed user of the trade mark

'Glucon-D' and 2nd plaintiff was engaged in manufacturing and marketing
of the product. Though, 2nd plaintiff, being not a registered user could not
have independently brought an action for infringement, but when suit has
been jointly filed by the plaintiff no.1 and 2 for infringement of trade mark
and plaintiff no.1 is a registered user of the trade mark, the bar of Section
53 of Trade Mark Act is not applicable in this case.
8.

The second contention of the applicant/defendant the suit

being barred under Section 134, is also not tenable. The plaintiff no.2 is a
subsidiary of plaintiff no.1. The plaintiff no. 2 after getting the proprietary
rights in the trade mark and right to manufacture the product from Glaxo
Laboratories India Ltd. constituted a subsidiary company and started
manufacturing and marketing this product in India through plaintiff no.2.
For the purpose of jurisdiction of Court in terms of Section 134 of Trade
Mark Act, the conditions precedent is that the plaintiff must actually and
voluntarily reside or carry on business or personally work for gains within
the territorial jurisdiction. The expression ‘carries on business’ does not

IA No.7543/2005 in CS(OS) No.1189/2005

Page 4of 6

mean that the person has to be personally present within the jurisdiction
of the Court. A business can be carried out at a place without even the
presence of the company at that place. Such business may be carried out
through an agent or subsidiary company or through a manager or through
a servant. It is not necessary for the owner of a business to reside or have
office within the jurisdiction of the Court and an owner may carry on
business without his presence through his agent. In the present case, the
plaintiff no. 1 is carrying on business within the territorial jurisdiction of
this Court through plaintiff no. 2 who is a subsidiary of plaintiff no. 1.
Though plaintiff no.1 is not having his business address in Delhi but
plaintiff no. 2 a subsidiary of plaintiff no. 1, is having its place of business
and office in Delhi. I, therefore, consider that the suit for infringement
action by plaintiff no. 1 is not barred u/S. 134 of Trade Mark Act because
of the fact that plaintiff no. 1 is carrying on business within the jurisdiction
of this Court through its subsidiary.
9.

The action brought against the defendant is in respect of the

infringement of registered trade mark 'Glucon-D'. The defendant has
started using trade mark 'Glucose-D' which plaintiff alleges is deceptively
similar to plaintiff’s trade mark. Since the action is a combined action for
infringement and passing of the action, the jurisdiction of this Court can
be invoked under Section 134 of Trade Mark Act by the plaintiff on the
basis of the fact that plaintiff was carrying on business within the
jurisdiction of this Court. The plea that the defendant was not carrying on
any business within the territory of this Court, therefore passing of action
would not lie within the territory of this Court, would have been tenable if
the suit filed by the plaintiff was only for passing of action. In fact, the
plaintiff in the suit has made prayer that the defendant be restrained from
using in relation to its goods the trade the mark 'Glucose-D' or any other
trade mark deceptively similar to 'Glucon-D' and also that the defendant
be restrained from using in relation to its goods and its designs or labels a
trade mark which is deceptively similar to the plaintiff’s label/mark.

IA No.7543/2005 in CS(OS) No.1189/2005

Page 5of 6

Similarly a prayer is made that defendant be restrained from using
packaging deceptively similar to that of plaintiff’s packaging and that the
defendant be asked to render accounts of profits made by use of trade
mark Glucose-D. The suit is basically a suit for infringement of the trade
mark.
10.

I, therefore, find no force in the application. The application

is hereby dismissed.

January 22, 2008.
ak

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

IA No.7543/2005 in CS(OS) No.1189/2005

Page 6of 6

