IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

•

#
!

Date of Reserve: January 04, 2008
Date of Order: January 24, 2008
IA Nos. 11881/06, 262/07 & CS(OS)No.1455A/06
MMTC Limited
...Plaintiff/Petitioner
Through: Mr.Rohit Puri, Advocate
Versus

$
^

M/s.J.K. Synthetics Limited ....
Defendant/espondent
Through: Mr.Moazzam Khann with Mr.Mudit Sharma
and Ms.Bhavna Kohli, Advocates

*

JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
JUDGMENT:
The award dated 30th September, 2004 was filed by the

1.

Arbitrator before the Court and a notice of filing of the award and arbitral
proceedings was sent to the parties.

Claimant/MMTC filed objections to

this award under Section 30 of the Arbitration Act on the ground that
award was erroneous in law and contrary to the facts. It is stated that the
award given by the Arbitrator suffers from errors which are apparent on
the face of it. The counter claim entertained by the Arbitrator was never
raised prior to commencement of the arbitration and therefore was not a
pre-existing dispute.

The learned Arbitrator though agreed that the

counter claim was raised only during the arbitration proceedings and was
not

a

pre-existing

dispute,

but

rejected

the

claimant/MMTC and adjudicated the counter claim.
went beyond the scope of his authority.

objections

of

the

The Arbitrator thus

The Arbitrator wrongly

determined that non-applicant, i.e., J.K. Synthetics Ltd. had suffered
damages. It is further stated that only one party could be at fault. Both
the parties cannot be held at fault.

The Arbitrator has determined the

losses suffered by MMTC and J.K. Synthetics Ltd. due to breach of

IA Nos. 11881/06, 262/07 & CS(OS)No.1455A/06

Page 1 of 5

contract. There cannot be a breach of contract by both the sides. Once
Arbitrator has considered that there was breach of contract on part of the
J.K. Synthetics Ltd. due to which MMTC Ltd. had to purchase material from
third party incurring more cost and Arbitrator quantified the losses
suffered by MMTC, the Arbitrator could not have held that J.K. Synthetics
Ltd. had suffered loss of profit due to breach of contract by MMTC and
quantify the loss of profit.
2.

The objections to the award have also been filed by the J.K.

Synthetics Ltd. on the ground that the quantification of damages by the
Arbitrator in favour of MMTC Ltd. was wrong and could not have been
done since MMTC Ltd. was the party that violated the contract and this
issue has already become final and cannot be re-opened.
3.

In order to appreciate the arguments of both the sides, a

brief history of the facts is necessary. MMTC Ltd. had invited offers from
various parties for supply of 10,000/- M.T. 'Soyabean' on behalf of their
buyers at Jordan.

The offer of the respondent to supply 10,000/- M.T.

'Soyabean' meal at a price of US$ 205 per M.T. was accepted. However,
the contract could not be carried out due to several reasons and a dispute
arose which was referred to the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator gave an award
dated 5th January, 1994 deciding following issues:
i.

Whether claimants furnished legally valid LC
as per terms of agreement ?

ii. Whether respondents were liable to furnish
performance guarantee even in the absence
of proper LC ?
iii. Whether the damages claimed by the parties
are legally justified and tenable and to what
extent ?
iv. Relief.
4.

The Arbitrator decided issue nos. 1 & 2 against the MMTC Ltd.

and while deciding issue no.iii observed as under :Issue No.iii
In view of my findings on issue no.i & ii, it is clear
that in spite of the agreement which was made
between the parties on 3.10.1991, there were
IA Nos. 11881/06, 262/07 & CS(OS)No.1455A/06

Page 2 of 5

certain steps which were required to be taken by
both the parties before this agreement could be
given effect to.
The buyers (claimants) were
required to open the LC (clause 11) and sellers
(respondents) were required to submit performance
guarantee. Though the buyers opened the LC but it
was not considered to be commercially acceptable
and valid by the sellers and as much they did not
give the performance guarantee and disputed to
fulfill their part of the agreement. In such type of
agreements, where performance is conditional,
both the parties are free to get out of the
agreement due to failure of the either party to
perform/fulfill their part of the agreement and there
is no question of claiming damages from the other
party. The clause 13 of the agreement is regarding
execution of contract and provides that sellers shall
perform the contract satisfactorily and the buyer
has right to purchase at the risk and expenses of
the seller for the quantity defaulted by the seller.
But in this case, there is no question of default in
quantity as the supply never started. The seller
raised objections about the validity of the LC and
did not even furnish performance guarantee which
implies that the stage of performance never
arrived. There is no doubt that claimants and
respondents suffered some losses or did not earn
the profit which they would have earned on
satisfactorily completion of the contract.
The
claimants incurred expenses on opening of LC and
had to purchase material at higher cost and
therefore, had to forgo a part of the profit. On the
other hand, respondents also suffered as they had
already placed orders for the material vide
purchase order dated 21.9.91 on M/s. Next Pvt. Ltd.
Jabalpur and on Kalyan Solvent Extraction, Indore
vide purchase order dated 25.9.91 (photocopies of
which are in the file) and they would have certainly
earned some profits also on satisfactorily
completion of the contract. Since both the parties
suffered losses due to default of each other, the
damages claimed by each are not legally justified
and in my opinion, each has to bear their own
losses.
This issue is decided accordingly.”
5.

Objections were filed against this award by MMTC Ltd. vide

suit no. 336A/1994.

The suit was disposed of by the Court vide order

dated 19th February, 2003. During arguments in suit no. 336A/1994, the
counsel for MMTC had argued that the award of Arbitrator, so far it related
to issue no.iii, was required to be remitted back to the Arbitrator since the
Arbitrator had not quantified the damages suffered by the claimants and
respondents. Considering this argument, this Court observed that there
was an error apparent on the face of the record as the Arbitrator has not
IA Nos. 11881/06, 262/07 & CS(OS)No.1455A/06

Page 3 of 5

quantified the damages suffered by the claimants and remitted the award
to the Arbitrator on the limited question of quantifying the damages as
spoken of under issue no.iii of the award.

Thus, the objections of the

MMTC Ltd. were only partly allowed vide order dated 19th February, 2003
and the award so far as it related to issue no.iii was remitted back to the
Sole Arbitrator for quantifying the damages spoken under issue no. iii.
6.

It is apparent that this Court had rejected the objections of

MMTC Ltd. against the award on all issues, i.e., issue nos. i, ii & iii. But
since there was no quantification of the damages suffered by the parties
as stated in issue no.iii, the award was sent back for quantification. The
subsequent award dated 30.9.2004, the subject matter of challenge in this
petition by the MMTC, is the result of order of this Court and it is an award
limited to quantification of the damages. Thus, this award is a part of the
earlier award dated 5th January, 1994 and cannot be looked upon as a
separate award.
7.

The award dated 5th January, 1994 coupled with the award

dated 30th September, 2004 formed one award.

The objections to the

award dated 30th September, 2004, in fact, would not lie at all since the
objections to the main award have already been dismissed and only
quantification was to be done by the Arbitrator, which the Arbitrator has
done.

The Arbitrator while deciding the issue no.iii, categorically, held

that there were certain steps which were required to be taken by both the
parties before the performance of the agreement.

The agreement was

conditional and each of the party was free to get out of the agreement
due to failure of other party to perform or fulfill its part of the agreement
and there was no question of claiming damages from other party.

The

Arbitrator has further observed that in this case there was no question of
default in quantity as supply never started and the seller raised objections
about the validity of LC and did not even furnish the performance
guarantee which implies that the stage of performance never arrived.
Thereafter, though both the parties claimed that they suffered losses but

IA Nos. 11881/06, 262/07 & CS(OS)No.1455A/06

Page 4 of 5

each party had to bear its own losses.
8.

The Arbitrator had not quantified the losses suffered by each

party because he did not consider it necessary to quantify. He had not
come to the conclusion that MMTC Ltd. was entitled for any claim.
However, this Court considered that quantification of the losses suffered
by the parties should be there. The Arbitrator has quantified the losses
but the fact remains that Arbitrator had come to conclusion that MMTC
Ltd. was not entitled for claiming any losses since MMTC Ltd. had failed to
fulfill its part of agreement of providing legally valid LC.
9.

I, therefore, consider that no challenge lies to the award

dated 30th September, 2004. The objections of both the parties are not
tenable and are hereby dismissed.

January 24, 2008
ak

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

IA Nos. 11881/06, 262/07 & CS(OS)No.1455A/06

Page 5 of 5

