IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: 10.01.2008
Date of Order: January 24, 2008

%
+

CS(OS) No.1815A/1997

#
!

Vipul Kumar Jain

...
Plaintiff/Petitioner
Through: Mr. Shiv Khorana, Advocate

Versus
$
^

Vivek Kumar Jain

...
Defendant/Respondent
Through: Nemo

*

JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
JUDGMENT:

1.

By this Petition, the Plaintiff/Petitioner has challenged the

award dated 28th July, 1997 on various grounds. A perusal of award would
show that the learned Arbitrator passed the award on the basis of
compromise between the parties. The operative part of the award reads
as under:
In response to the notices issued by me both the
parties have appeared before me.
On 12th of July,
1997 S/Shri Vipul Kumar Jain, claimant, Vivek Kumar
Jain, respondent no. 1 and his father Devendra Jain,
respondent no. 2 (that is firm's name) made a
statement before me as follows:
“ The partnership between the partner is admitted. A
sum of Rs.46,06,251/- was paid by the partnership firm
Devendra & Sons to DGS&D, Govt. of India as 25% of
the sale price of the contract awarded to the said firm.
Out of the said amount a sum of Rs.18,70,000/- (Rs.
Eighteen lakhs and Seventy Thousand) is payable to
Sh. Vipul Jain, claimant and the balance amount of
Rs.27,36,251/- is payable to the respondents. The
arbitrator has not given his award as yet against
DGS&D. The above amount along with interest if any
shall be distributed between the parties in the above
ratio whenever it is received from DGS&D. We have
no objection if the amount is received by the arbitrator
and districted by the arbitrator as stated above. From
today onwards the litigation expenses with DGS&D
shall be borne and paid by the partner in the ratio of

CS(OS) No.1815A/1997

Page 1of 2

25% and 75% respectively. The award may be made
accordingly.”
I find that the aforesaid compromise is perfectly
in order and covers all the disputes and differences
between the parties except, however, the alleged
claim of the claimant regarding the amount of
Rs.5,40,000/- approximately which was allegedly
arranged by him from M/s Kwality Traders. It may be
mentioned that M/s Kwality Traders are not party to
this arbitration and obviously the claimant has not
referred to the said claim in the compromise. Hence I
need not give any finding about it.
2.

It is apparent that the objections to the award filed by the

Plaintiff/Petitioner are absolutely misconceived.

The award was in the

nature of a compromise decree passed by the Arbitrator at the behest of
both the parties after the parties had made a statement of compromise
before the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator has not discussed the merits or demerits of the claim or any other issues since the parties entered into a
compromise. An award passed on the basis of compromise is governed
by the same principles as a compromise decree. The award is binding on
the parties and no objections can be filed against such an award.
3.

There is no dispute to the fact that there was an Arbitration

Agreement between the parties and there was a dispute which was
referred to the Arbitrator. In view of the fact that the award has been
passed on the basis of compromise between the parties, I consider that
Plaintiff/Petitioner has no locus standi or ground to challenge the award.
The petition is hereby dismissed.

January 24, 2008.
vn

CS(OS) No.1815A/1997

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

Page 2of 2

