*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: 28.1.2008
Date of Order: 21.2.2008

+ Arb. Petition No. 92/2003
%

21.2.2008
The Travel Agents Association of India Ltd. ... Petitioner
Through: Mr. S.C.Rana, Advocate
Versus
M/s Kwick Travel (P) Ltd. & Ors.
... Respondents
Through: Mr. H.D.Talwani, Advocate for R-1
JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?

ORDER:
This application has been filed by the petitioner/applicant
under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
requesting this Court to appoint Mr. Kavi Kohli, Chairman, NR-TAAI as Sole
Arbitrator and to refer to him dispute as enumerated by the applicant in
para 17 of Annexure 1.

The dispute as stated was that the applicant

claimed a sum of Rs.11,76,018/- from the respondent no. 1 on account of
applicant having paid this amount to Indian Airlines under the Guarantee
Agreement for the respondent no.1's default. Applicant also claimed 24%
p.a. Interest w.e.f. 24th April, 1998.
2.

A perusal of statement of claim filed by the applicant would

show that applicant asserted that respondent no. 1 was member of
Applicant Association and being member, it had signed an Agreement
dated 30th April, 1992 to secure and safeguard the interests of the
applicant company and deposited a sum of Rs.1 lac as security with the
applicant to become an active member. The applicant was informed by
AIP-9 that respondent no. 1 had defaulted under the Guarantee
Agreement and the applicant was under a contractual agreement to pay

Arb. Petition No. 92/2003

Page 1of 5

this defaulted amount.

So, in order to discharge this contractual

obligation, applicant made payment of Rs.8,19,056/- and Rs.5,66,838/through cheques on 27.4.1998 to Indian Airlines (AIP-9) on behalf of
Respondent No. 1. After making this payment applicant made repeated
requests to respondent no.1 to repay the amount of Rs.1,385,894/- less
refund received from IATA of Rs.2,09,876/- i.e. Rs.11,76,018/- however, no
fruitful results got yielded by sending demand notices and not a paisa was
paid.

Respondent just kept on making false promises, hence this

application invoking arbitration clause.
3.

In reply to the application, the respondent denied the

existence of Arbitration Agreement between the applicant and respondent
no. 1 and stated that what has been filed by the applicant was photocopy
of a blank agreement on which somebody had filed names of the
signatories and written sd/- against the names. It is stated that this was
not an Arbitration Agreement bearing signatures of the applicant.

The

second defence taken was that the claim raised by the applicant was
barred by limitation and could not be raised. Even according to applicant
the payment was made on 27th April, 1998 while the application under
Section 11(6) was filed on 3rd April, 2003.
4.

This Court vide order dated 16th February, 2004 directed the

petitioner/applicant to file the original Arbitration Agreement before the
Court however, the original Arbitration Agreement was not filed and the
stand was taken that the original Arbitration Agreement was misplaced.
This Court therefore, vide order dated 27th January, 2005 directed the
parties to lead evidence by filing affidavits on the issue of agreement.
Applicant examined one witness viz. Harkripal Singh, PW-1. He testified
that he was working as Chief Representative and Principal Officer in the
office of Applicant Company. All the members of the Association enter
into an agreement with the Association, Proforma of which was Annexure
II. All members were supposed to execute this agreement to protect the
interests of the Applicant Association.

Arb. Petition No. 92/2003

In case of respondents, the

Page 2of 5

agreement was entered into between applicant and respondent no. 1,
however, the applicant was unable to lay hands on the original Agreement
which got misplaced and was irretrievable.
remember the names

He deposed that he did not

of the witnesses, who had witnessed the

agreement. The agreement was not executed in his presence. He was
asked to produce the membership record of the Association. In response
to this, he brought directory of members for the year 1999 showing that
respondent no. 1 company was a member and Mr. Ajay Goyal and Mr.
Pradeep Goyal were representing the respondent no. 1.

He could not

produce any other document relating to membership of respondent
company.

He admitted that AIP-9 pertains to International Airlines,

whereas the Agreement produced on record by the applicant was in
respect of Indian Airlines.

He stated that no fresh agreement was

required to be signed by members for the purpose of AIP-9.
5.

Mr. Ajay Goyal filed affidavit on behalf of respondent no. 1

and stated that M/s Kwick Travels Private Limited had become member of
the Applicant Association prior to taking over of the management of this
company by the present management.
6

The fact that the respondent no. 1 was a member of the

Applicant Association stands admitted by the respondent. It goes without
saying that in order to obtain membership, respondent had to sign an
agreement indemnifying the Applicant Association and the agreement
Annexure II was signed between the parties though original has been
misplaced by applicant.

The correspondence exchanged between the

parties also shows that the respondent no.1 was a member.
7.

It has been admitted that respondent no.1 company had

deposited security deposit of Rs.1 lac being member of applicant
company.

Although, the respondents have stated that Mr. Ajay Goyal,

who took over the management, had not signed the agreement but it
must be kept in mind that the Agreement was not between Mr. Ajay Goyal
and

the applicant.

The Agreement was between respondent no. 1

Arb. Petition No. 92/2003

Page 3of 5

company and Applicant Association and this Agreement could have been
signed by any authorized person on behalf of the company. Company is a
separate legal entity. It is a case of respondent itself that respondent no.
1 company was member of Applicant Association before respondent no. 2
took over the management.

The respondent no. 1 company was

therefore, bound by the Membership Agreement between the applicant
and the respondent no.1 company. Respondent No. 1 company was in the
traveling business and the applicant/petitioner was an association of the
travel agents. This Association admittedly was formed for the benefit of
the travel agents in order to secure concessions from the Indian Airlines
and other Airlines. There was an Agreement between Indian Airlines and
the Applicant Association to protect the interests of Indian Airlines on
behalf of the members since Indian Airlines was giving concessions in
ticketing to the members.

Since the respondent no.1 had been taking

benefits of these concessions and had also deposited a security deposit of
Rs.1 lac as required under the membership agreement, it is evident that
respondent no. 1 did enter into an Membership Agreement with the
applicant/petitioner. It has not been disputed by the respondent that the
Proforma Agreement filed by the applicant was the one which is signed by
a member.

It has also not been disputed by the respondents that

respondent no.1 company was an active member therefore, it stands
proved that because of the membership of the respondent company with
the Applicant Association, there was an agreement between respondent
company and applicant and this agreement contained arbitration clause.
I, therefore, consider that applicant has successfully proved that there
was a written arbitration clause between the parties.
8.

However, the second objection of the respondent is that no

claim of the applicant can be referred to Arbitration since claim itself is
time barred. It is settled law that the Court can appoint sole Arbitrator
only where there is a live dispute existing between the parties. The law of
limitation applies in respect of the claims before the Arbitrator as it is

Arb. Petition No. 92/2003

Page 4of 5

applicable in respect of the claims before the Court. It is the case of the
applicant itself that the liability against respondent no. 1 arose on 27th
April, 1998 when the applicant paid this amount on behalf of the
respondent o. 1 to Indian Airlines. It is also the case of the applicant that
applicant had been writing to respondent no. 1 soon after 27 th April, 1998
to pay back this amount. The limitation period for recovery of the amount
is three years.

The application for arbitration has been filed by the

applicant in April, 2003 i.e. after a period of five years. The claim raised
by the applicant therefore was not a live claim but a dead claim and was
barred by limitation.

The applicant has not placed on record any

acknowledgment of the respondent admitting this claim on any date after
27th April, 1998. The applicant has only placed on record its own letter
demanding

amount

from

the

respondent.

In

absence

of

any

acknowledgment from the respondent, the period of limitation would
come to an end on 27th April, 2001. The Court cannot refer time barred
claim to the Arbitrator.
I, therefore, consider that the application made by the
applicant for appointment of Arbitrator is liable to be dismissed and is
hereby dismissed.

February 21, 2008.
vn

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

Arb. Petition No. 92/2003

Page 5of 5

