IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.M.B.1495/2006 in Crl.A.341/2000
Reserved on: 30.8.2008
Date of Decision: 30.01.2008
#
!

Mukesh Kumar

....... Applicant/Appellant
Through : Ms.Neelam Grover,Advocate

versus
$
^

State

......... Respondent
Through : Mr.Sunil K.Kapoor, APP for State.
SI Dharam Singh.

*

CORAM:
JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

:
1.

ORDER
This application has been made by the applicant for

suspension of conviction. The sentence of the applicant has already been
suspended. A perusal of the judgment of the trial Court would show that
the applicant along with his father and mother was charged under
sections 498A/307/506/404 read with section 34 IPC.

The allegations

made by the complainant, were that her hands were caught by father-inlaw and mother-in-law and then her husband poured baygon spray forcibly
into her mouth. The evidence before Court revealed that on 24.6.1997
while she was at home with her son she herself consumed baygon spray
and her son, Darpan went to a neighbour Sunil and informed that
something abnormal had happened to his mother. Mr. Sunil immediately
rushed to the house and found complainant lying in semi-conscious
condition and removed her to Hospital. Her husband, father-in-law and
mother-on-law were not at home. In the Hospital, Sunil told the doctor
about complainant lying in semi-conscious condition at her home as she
had consumed baygon spray and then her son came to call him. After

considering

the

evidence

of

independent

witnesses

and

other

circumstances, trial Court came to conclusion that the entire story of the
complainant that her husband, father-in-law and mother-in-law had
forcibly poured baygon spray into her mouth was false and her ocular
testimony got demolished by cogent and independent testimony of other
witnesses and circumstantial evidence.

Trial Court acquitted other

accused, however, convicted husband Mukesh only under section 498A
IPC.
2.

Considering the nature of testimony and nature of allegations

& the manner in which two accused were falsely implicated, I consider it
to be a fit case where conviction of the appellant should be suspended
during the pendency of the appeal.
3.

Accordingly, the application is allowed and the conviction of

the applicant is suspended during the pendency of the appeal.
Crl.A.No.341/2000
The appeal be listed for hearing before the regular Bench in
due course.

January 30, 2008
v

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA,J.

