IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: January 21, 2008
Date of judgment: January 30, 2008

%
+

IA. Nos.1388/2007, 4939/2007 & 6581/2006 in
CS(OS) No.1200/2006

#
!

Mrs.Vaneeta Khanna & Anr.
...Plaintiffs
Through:Mr. H.S. Phulka, Sr. Adv. with Mr. S.N. Gupta, Advocate.
Versus

$
^

Shri Rajeev Gupta and Ors.
Through: Mr. Rajiv Kumar, Advocate for D-1.
Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Advocate for D-3 to D-5.

...Defendants

*

JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
ORDER :
IA Nos. 1388/2007 & 4939/2007

1.

By this order, I shall dispose of the above two IAs moved by the

defendants under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC.
2.

The plaintiffs in the instant suit are husband and wife. They had

filed a suit before learned Additional District Judge under Section 5 and 6
of Specific Relief Act contending therein that in pursuance of sale
transaction with defendant No.2, who was a G.P.A holder of defendant
No.1, they became owner of property No. 8/289, Sunder Vihar, Paschim
Vihar, New Delhi after payment of full sale consideration and execution of
agreement to sell, GPA, Special Power of Attorney by defendant No.2 in
favour of plaintiffs. The vacant physical possession of suit property was
delivered to the plaintiff on 12th May 2004 and plaintiffs after taking
possession had put their locks on the property. It was contended that after
entering into the sale transactions and handing over the possession,
defendant No.1 and 2 colluded with each other and they also colluded
with sisters of defendant No.1 and in order to deprive the plaintiffs of the
property so purchased, trespassed the property. Plaintiffs discovered this

CS(OS) No.1200/2006

Page No.1 of 9

trespass when plaintiffs visited the property on 24th July, 2004. Plaintiffs
filed a suit for passing of a decree directing defendants to vacate the suit
property and to restore back the possession of the suit property to the
plaintiffs. Simultaneously, prayers were also made for passing a decree
for specific performance of the agreement to sell dated 12th May, 2004 on
the ground that the sale consideration has already been paid to the
defendant. Along with this prayer, a prayer for mesne profits @
Rs.15,000/- per month for unauthorized use and occupation of the
property by the defendants was also made and another prayer for passing
a decree of permanent injunction restraining defendants and their agents,
family members from selling, alienating or parting with the possession of
the property was made. This suit of the plaintiff was dismissed at initial
stage on an application of defendants made under Order 7 Rule 11 by the
learned Additional District Judge on the ground that the plaintiffs had not
disclosed to the Court about execution of a collaboration agreement dated
18th May 2004 between defendants No.2 and the plaintiff. Statement of
plaintiff was recorded by the learned ADJ under Order 10 CPC. The plaintiff
had stated that the signatures on the agreement dated 18th May 2004
appeared to be his, but he was not aware how the defendant obtained his
signatures on the documents. Learned Additional District Judge further
observed that the plaintiffs by not producing and disclosing the execution
of collaboration agreement had tried to overreach the Court

and was

guilty of withholding the information of this document and thus played
fraud on the Court and dismissed the suit on this ground. Against this
order, the plaintiff had approached this Court by way of an RFA No. 631 of
2004. This Court observed that since the suit was filed by the plaintiff
under Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act to recover the possession on the
ground the respondents were trespassers, no appeal would lie from the
order or decree passed in such a suit in view of Section 6(3) of Specific
Relief Act. This Court, however, considered the appeal on merits and held
that appellant approached the trial court with uncleaned hands and

CS(OS) No.1200/2006

Page No.2 of 9

suppressed the material and relevant facts and dismissed the appeal.
Against the dismissal of the appeal, the plaintiff preferred an SLP before
the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the Supreme Court passed following order
:
“The petitioners herein had filed a Suit purported
to be under the provisions of Section 5 & 6 of the
Specific Relief Act. However, in the said Suit the
petitioners had prayed for grant of permanent
injunction

or

in

the

alternative

recovery

of

possession or in the further alternative a decree
for specific performance of contract. Such a Suit
was not maintainable in law. However, the learned
Judge had dismissed the Suit purported to be in
terms of Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil
Procedure on the ground that the plaintiff has
played

a

fraud

by

withholding

the

relevant

agreement and material in the matter.”
In view of the fact that the plaintiff can file an
appropriate Suit, we do not think it to be a fit case
for us to exercise our discretionary jurisdiction
under Article 136 of the Constitution. The Special
Leave Petition is dismissed accordingly. “
3.

In view of the observations of the Supreme Court that the suit filed

by the plaintiff claiming multifarious reliefs under Section 5 and 6 of the
Specific Relief Act was not maintainable and the plaintiff can file an
appropriate suit, the plaintiffs filed instant suit before this Court whereby
plaintiffs had prayed for a decree of declaration that plaintiff No.1 was the
sole and exclusive owner of the property in question and also sought a
decree of possession and decree for mesne profits and damages
amounting to Rs.3,16,000/- for wrongful usage and occupation of the
property by the defendants. The plaintiffs also sought decree for
permanent injunction against further sale or transfer of the property and
decree for declaring the various documents as null and void which were
executed by the defendants subsequent to the execution of documents in

CS(OS) No.1200/2006

Page No.3 of 9

favour of the plaintiffs.
4.

In the application by defendant No.1, he has taken the stand that

plaintiffs had not disclosed any cause of action against him and the
transaction relied upon by the plaintiffs was between plaintiffs and
defendant No.2. Defendant No.1 had not executed any document in
favour of the plaintiffs. Defendant No.1 was always in physical possession
of the property. It is further stated that earlier defendant No.1 had a deal
with defendant No.2 and executed a GPA and S.P.A. dated 12th May 2004
in favour of defendant No.2. However,

this

GPA and SPA were

subsequently cancelled by defendant No.1 vide deed of cancellation dated
19th August, 2004. Since GPA/SPA were duly registered, the deed of
cancellation was also got registered. Defendant No.2 also gave a
declaration in favour of defendant No.1 that all disputes have been settled
between him and defendant No.1 qua suit property and defendant No.2
have no right over the suit property. It is submitted that defendant No.1
received no consideration from the plaintiff, however, defendant No.1,
subsequent to

cancellation of G.P.A. and S.P.A. In favour of defendant

No.2 sold the property in question to defendants No.3, 4 and 5 and
executed a registered agreement to sell GPA etc. and received full
consideration from defendants No.3, 4 and 5 and handed over the
possession to them. It is also submitted that since the earlier suit of the
plaintiff under Section 5 and 6 of the Specific Relief Act has been
dismissed, the subsequent suit was not maintainable. Another ground
taken is that in earlier suit, plaintiff had valued the suit property at Rs. 5
lac and had also entered into an agreement to sell with defendant No.2,
who is also a builder to develop the suit property. In fact, a fraud was
played by defendant No.2 in collusion with plaintiffs upon defendant No.1.
The suit filed by the plaintiffs was not maintainable under Section 11 of
the CPC since the matter has been directly in issue in the former suit.
5.

Defendants No.3 to 5 in their application took the stand that no

cause of action accrued against them as they had nothing to do with the

CS(OS) No.1200/2006

Page No.4 of 9

transactions between plaintiffs and defendants No.1 and 2. The other
ground taken by the defendants 3 to 5 is also that in view of the dismissal
of the SLP by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the instant suit is not
maintainable.
6.

A perusal of the present suit would show that the plaintiffs have

given the sequence of events involving defendants No.1 and 2 and how
plaintiff was made to sign various documents on the representation that
defendant No.2 was duly authorized by defendant No.1 to sell the
property. The plaintiffs have placed on record the documents signed
between defendants No. 2 and the plaintiffs as well as copies of those
documents handed over to the plaintiffs to convince that the defendant
No.2 had transferable rights in the property. It is not disputed that
defendant No.1 had executed a registered irrevocable GPA in favour of
defendant No.2 and defendant No.2 was given authority to sell this
property further and on the basis of this authority to sell the property , the
defendant No.2 executed a GPA in favour of plaintiff No.2 and also
executed an agreement to sell in favour of plaintiff No1. In the agreement
to sell, it was specifically mentioned that the possession of the property
had been handed over to the plaintiffs. It is specifically averred by the
plaintiffs that defendant No.2 is a property grabber and is facing several
cases of property grabbing. The various FIRs against the defendant No.2,
as detailed in the plaint are FIR No. 420 of 2002 police station CR Park,
FIR No. 233 of 2001 Police Station Paschim Vihar, FIR No. 335 of 2002
police station Paschim Vihar, FIR No.292 of 2005 Police Station Punjabi
Bagh, FIR No. 12 of 2005 registered with Police Station Rajinder Nagar and
FIR No. 938 of 2004 lodged by the plaintiff against defendant No.2 with
Police Station Paschim Vihar. It is also stated that defendant No.2 was the
BC (Bad Character) of the West Zone Area and was in the business of
property grabbing with the help of his gang.
7.

It is not in dispute that the earlier suit filed by the plaintiff was one

under Section 6 of the Specific Reliefs Act and considered so by this Court

CS(OS) No.1200/2006

Page No.5 of 9

and the Supreme Court. Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act is based on
the principle that no one can be allowed to take law into his own hands for
taking possession, even if he is the lawful owner of the immovable
property. Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act allows a person dispossessed
forcibly or deceitfully to regain the possession of immovable property. The
proceedings under Section 6 of Specific Reliefs Act are in the nature of
summary proceedings and the Court has only to decide whether the
person dispossessed was in settled possession before he was being
forcible and unlawfully dispossessed. The Court has not to decide or
consider the ownership of the property and that is the reason that a
judgment/decree passed under Section 6 is not appealable under 6(3) of
Specific Reliefs Act. The Supreme Court while dismissing the SLP has
categorically observed that the plaintiff can file a suit (based on the title).
In 2004 (4) SCC 664 Sanjay Kumar

Pandey and Ors v. Gulbahar

Seikh and others, the Supreme Court had upheld this view observering:
“4. A suit under Section 6 of the Act is often called
a summary suit inasmuch as the enquiry in the
suit under Section 6 is confined to finding out the
possession and dispossession within a period of six
months from the date of the institution of the suit
ignoring the question of title. Sub-section(3) of
Section 6 provides that no appeal shall lie from
any order or decree passed in any suit instituted
under this section. No review of any such order or
decree is permitted. The remedy of a person
unsuccessful in a suit under Section 6 of the Act is
to file a regular suit establishing his title to the suit
property and in the event of his succeeding he will
be entitled to recover possession of the property
notwithstanding

the

adverse

decision

under

Section 6 of the Act. Thus, as against a decision
under Section 6 of the Act, the remedy of
unsuccessful party is to file a suit based on title.
The remedy of filing a revision is available but that
is only by way of an exception; for the High Court
would not interfere with a decree or order under
Section 6 of the Act except on a case for
CS(OS) No.1200/2006

Page No.6 of 9

interference being made out within the wellsettled parameters of the exercise of revisional
jurisdiction under Section 115 of the Code.”
8.

The instant suit has been filed by the plaintiffs based on the title

and it is not a summary trial suit under Section 6 of the Specific Reliefs
Act. I consider that the instant suit is very much maintainable despite the
fact that Section 6 suit of the plaintiff has been dismissed on the ground
that the plaintiff did not approach the Court with clean hands, although
the plaintiff has refuted this fact. The plea of the defendant No.1 ,3, 4 and
5 that no cause of action arose against them is not tenable. Defendant
No.1 looks instrumental in the fraud. He first executed an irrevocable GPA
in favour of defendant No.2 giving him authority to sell the property in
question. After defendant No.2, on the basis of this GPA allegedly received
consideration and sold the property to the plaintiffs and handed over the
possession

and

executed

documents

as

alleged

by

the

plaintiff,

defendant No.1, cancelled the GPA on the basis of an alleged settlement
with defendant No.2 and defendant No.2 declared that he had nothing to
do with the property. The conveyance documents like agreement to sell,
GPA were executed by defendant No.2 on behalf of defendant No.1 with
the plaintiffs and possession was handed over. Even if it is believed that
there was a collaboration agreement, as was propounded by defendant
No.2 before the trial court, there is no denial of the fact that this
collaboration agreement also states that defendant No.2 was the absolute
owner of the property and had clear title on the basis of documents
executed by defendant No.1 in favour of defendant No.2. Thus it is not a
case where no cause of action arose against defendant No.1. Defendants
No. 3, 4 and 5 are the persons who were allegedly sold the property by
defendant No.1

immediately after cancellation of GPA in favour of

defendant No.2. It is the case of defendant No.1 himself that there was an
injunction issued by a competent Court against the sale of the property. If
despite injunction and earlier transaction property is sold, it gives rise to
cause of action against seller and purchaser both.

CS(OS) No.1200/2006

Page No.7 of 9

9.

Prima facie it seems that defendant No.2 and other defendants

have been in collusion with each other in order to deprive the plaintiffs of
the property. Learned counsel for plaintiffs has also brought to the notice
of the Court other similar transactions and cases in respect of defendant
No.2 and his gang. I consider that there is sufficient cause of action
against all the defendants to proceed and it is not a case where suit can
be dismissed for want of cause of action.
10.

As far as value of the suit is concerned, this issue can be taken by

the defendants in the written statement. The Court will decide at an
appropriate stage whether the valuation done by the plaintiffs was correct
or not. The instant suit cannot be dismissed on this ground as well.
11.

Resultantly, both the applications of defendants are hereby

dismissed.
12.

Another peculiar feature of this case is that the defendant No.2's

name is “Judge Chawla”. It is not known whether this name was given to
him by his parents or he himself acquired this name, but the name of the
plaintiff No.2 itself is deceptive. Nobody can be allowed to name himself
or his sons or wards in the manner that the name looks designation.
Somebody may name himself as District Collector, another may name
himself as Prime Minister, one may name himself as Chief Justice, another
may name himself as Law Minister and put caste behind this. The result
would be that somebody will be telling other that he is talking to ' Chief
Justice Gupta”. There maybe no Chief Justice in the name of 'Gupta”, in
fact he would be a person named as “Chief Justice Gupta” who will be
cheating others using this name. Somebody may name himself 'Law
Minister Gupta' to cheat others. I consider that Legislature should take
cognizance of such names and make appropriate law so that people do
not

start

naming

themselves

or

their

sons

and

daughters

with

designations of high positions and in the garb of having such a name, one
may start cheating innocent people.

CS(OS) No.1200/2006

Page No.8 of 9

IA No. 6581/2006
1.

In view of my observations made in the above two IAs being IA Nos.

1388/2007 & 4939/2007 under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC, it would be
appropriate that the corpus of the suit property be kept intact during
pendency of this suit. If the corpus itself is washed out and the defendants
are allowed to further sell the property or transfer the possession of the
property, this would render the suit itself infructuous. The balance of
convenience is also in favour of the plaintiff who had prima faice case
showing that the property was transferred to the plaintiffs for a valid
consideration and the possession was also handed over to the plaintiffs.
2.

I, therefore, allow this application and it is directed that defendants

shall not sell, transfer, alienate or create any third party interest in the
suit property during pendency of the suit. Defendants are also further
restrained

from transferring the possession to any other person and

status quo shall be maintained in respect of the suit property.
3.

The application stands disposed of.

CS(OS) No.1200/2006
Parties are directed to file original documents within four weeks.
They are directed to appear before the Joint Registrar for admission/denial
of the documents on 28th March, 2008 and for framing of issues before the
Court on 15th July, 2008.

January 30, 2008
rd

CS(OS) No.1200/2006

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA J.

Page No.9 of 9

