IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%
+

Date of Reserve: January 21, 2008
Date of judgment: January 30, 2008
CS(OS) No.2477/2007

#
!

Mr. Vivek Ahuja
...Plaintiff
Through:Mr. K.C. Mittal with Mr. Laxman Singh, Advocate.
Versus

$
^
*

Mr. Shyam Sunder and Ors.

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?
Yes.
To be referred to the reporter or not ? Yes.
Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ? Yes
JUDGMENT:
By this suit the plaintiff sought relief of specific performance of the

2.
3.
1.

...Defendants
Through: Nemo

JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

agreement dated 7th June 2004 in respect of the property bearing number
61, Block V-I, Rajouri Garden, New Delhi. It is stated by the plaintiff that
the total consideration agreed between the parties was Rs.66 lac. The
plaintiff, at the time of execution of the agreement dated 7th June, 2004
had paid a sum of Rs.10 lac, Rs.5 lac in cash and Rs.5 lac through cheque.
The time of execution of the sale deed was extended by mutual consent
of parties up to 25th November 2004. It is alleged that defendant did not
turn up at the Sub Registrar's office for registration of the sale deed on
25.11.2004. In terms of the agreement, in case the defendant backed out,
the defendant was to pay double the amount of earnest money and in
case the plaintiff backed out, the earnest money was to be forfeited. The
plaintiff sent a legal notice to the defendant on 2nd December 2004 asking
for payment of Rs.20 lac i.e. double the earnest money along with 12%
interest. Since the amount was not paid, the plaintiff filed a suit for
recovery of Rs.20 lac alleging a breach of agreement to sell on part of
defendant, before the learned District Judge being Suit No. 45 of 2005.
The plaintiff did not claim the relief of specific performance of the
agreement to sell in that suit.
2.

The defendant in the written statement took a stand that initially 9 th

September 2004 was the date fixed for execution of the sale deed before
the Sub Registar's office but the plaintiff
CS(OS) No.2477/2007

was not able to arrange the
Page No.1 of 5

balance money and he approached the defendant for extension of time.
The defendant accommodated the plaintiff and extended the time up to
25th September 2004 i.e. up to 25th October 2004, still the plaintiff could
not arrange money and again defendant agreed to extend the time lastly
up to 25th November 2004 but the plaintiff could not make arrangement
for paying the balance payment and avoided the deal.
3.

During the pendency of the suit filed before the learned District

Judge, the plaintiff made an application on 26 th May 2006 under Order 6
Rule 17 CPC seeking leave to amend the suit so as to include the relief of
specific performance of the agreement. The plaintiff also sought
amendment of the plaint so as to take the plea that the plaintiff has
always been ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. This
application was contested by the defendant and vide order dated 5 th
August 2006, the application was dismissed by the learned District Judge
holding that relief of specific performance was available to the plaintiff
when he filed the suit, but he omitted to include that relief. Even after
filing of the suit, he did not move an application till trial started which
shows that he was not diligent enough and he moved the application only
when the case was fixed for plaintiff's evidence. Against this order, the
plaintiff preferred a Civil Misc. Petition being No. 1929 of 2006, before this
Court. The plaintiff thereafter filed an application under Order 23 Rule 1
CPC before the learned District Court on 1st August 2007 seeking leave of
the Court to withdraw the suit with permission to file a fresh suit. This
application was dismissed by the learned trial court vide a detailed order
dated 12th July 2007 with cost of Rs.1000/-. The plaintiff preferred a Civil
Misc. Petition before this Court being number 1047 of 2007 against this
order which is stated to be pending. It is further submitted by the plaintiff
that he withdrew Civil Misc 1929 of 2006, the one by which he challenged
the order dated 5th August 2007 passed by learned trial court declining
the leave to amend the suit. Thus, the order, declining the leave to amend
the suit has become final.

CS(OS) No.2477/2007

Page No.2 of 5

4.

It is argued by the plaintiff that the cause of action for filing the

present suit arose on 21st August 2007 when defendant No.1 executed a
sale deed in favour of defendants No.2 and 3 in respect of the same
property and sold the property to defendants No. 2 and 3. It again arose
when plaintiff again issued a notice dated 17th November 2007 to the
defendant No.1 for performing his part of the agreement. It is stated that
the three years period for filing the suit was to expire on 25 th November
2007. The plaintiff, therefore, filed the instant suit on 26 th November
2007, just on the last day of expiry.
5.

It is undisputed that the first suit filed by the plaintiff is pending

adjudication. The earlier suit was filed by the plaintiff on the ground of
breach of agreement to sell dated 7th June 2004. During the pendency of
one suit, on the same cause of action, another suit cannot be filed. The
plaintiff's application under Order 23 Rule 1 CPC seeking leave to
withdraw the suit with permission to file another suit has been dismissed
by the learned Additional District Judge and the instant suit has been filed
after dismissal of the application during pendency of the Civil Misc Main
petition filed by the plaintiff. Learned counsel for the plaintiff relied upon
AIR 1998 AP 414 M.A. Faiz Khan v. Municipal Corporation of
Hyderabad

wherein the Andhra Pradesh High court held that the

procedural rigour cannot be allowed to come in the way of substantive
justice. Filing of the second suit without obtaining permission to withdraw
the first suit should only be treated as a procedural irregularity, which is
curable. The permission to withdraw the first suit to file fresh suit being
pending when such permission is granted, the suit already instituted
should not fail. The permission takes away the bar of res judicata.
6.

The facts of the present case are altogether different from the facts

considered by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. In the present case, the
plaintiff had filed the suit based on the breach of agreement to sell
claiming double the amount of the earnest money. The plaintiff, at the
time of filing the suit had a right to claim the specific performance of the

CS(OS) No.2477/2007

Page No.3 of 5

agreement. He omitted the relief of specific performance of the
agreement and claimed only double the earnest money which was one of
the reliefs available to him. The suit filed by the plaintiff on the basis of
breach of agreement to sell, is pending before the District court wherein
the relief of specific performance has been expressly denied by dismissing
the application under Order 6 Rule 17 CPC. The plaintiff now wants to file
another suit before this Court on the basis of same cause of action
claiming relief of specific performance. The substantive justice in this case
in fact lies in the dismissal of the instant suit. Order 23 Rule 1 CPC reads
as under:
“Order XXIII
Withdrawal and adjustment of suits.
Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim.
1.(1) At any time after the institution of a suit, the plaintiff
may as against all or any of the defendants abandon his suit
or abandon a part of his claim:
Provided that where the plaintiff is a minor or other person
to whom the provisions contained in rules 1 to 14 of Order
XXXII extend, neither the suit nor any part of the claim shall
be abandoned without the leave of the Court.
(2)
An application for leave under the proviso to sub-rule
(1) shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the next friend
and also, if the minor or such other person is represented by
a pleader, by a certificate of the pleader to the effect that the
abandonment proposed is, in his opinion, for the benefit of
the minor or such other person.
(3)

7.

Where the Court is satisfied,-

(a)
that a suit must fail by reason of
some formal defect, or
(b)
that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the
plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the subject-matter of a
suit or part of a claim, it may,on such terms as it thinks fit,
grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw from such suit or
such part of the claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit in
respect of the subject-matter of such suit or such part of the
claim.”
It is thus apparent that no one is allowed to file another suit on the

same cause of action if the earlier suit for the same cause of action is
already pending. Ban on filing fresh suit under the provisions of Order 23
Rule 1(3) CPC is based on public policy. A person cannot be vexed twice
for the same cause of action. The public policy also requires that the
plaintiff should consolidate all his claims in respect of one cause of action

CS(OS) No.2477/2007

Page No.4 of 5

in one suit to avoid multiplicity of litigation. Withdrawal of the suit can be
allowed only where the suit must fail for technical reasons or some formal
defect is there or there are other sufficient grounds for allowing the
plaintiff to institute a fresh suit on the same subject matter. Moreover, in
this case because of plaintiffs not claiming specific performance
defendant changed his position. There was no injunction against sale of
the property in question nor any fatters were put on the defendant in
disposing of his property, since plaintiff did not claim that he was ready
and willing to purchase the property. In view of this position, the
defendant had a right to sell his property and sold the property to third
parties. After the property is sold to third party, now the plaintiff wants to
file another suit claiming relief of specific performance, making third party
as defendants. I consider if filing of such suit is allowed, this would
amount to gross misuse of the judicial process.
8.

Sale of his property by defendant or serving another notice does

not give rise to a new cause of action. The plaintiff cannot now be allowed
to file another suit claiming specific performance of the same agreement
to sell and challenging the sale deed made by the defendant in favour of
the third party. The Supreme Court in Shiv Kumar Sharma v. Santosh
Kumari 2007(4) CCC 46 (SC) 46 held:
“If the respondent intended to claim damages and/or mesne
profit, in view of Order II, Rule 2 of the Code itself, he could
have done so, but he chose not to do so. For one reason or
the other, he, therefore, had full knowledge about his right.
Having omitted to make any claim for damages, in our
opinion, the plaintiff cannot be permitted to get the same
indirectly.”
9.

In view of my foregoing discussion, the instant suit is hereby

dismissed being not maintainable.
January 30, 2008
rd

CS(OS) No.2477/2007

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA J.

Page No.5 of 5

