IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%

Date of Reserve: 21.1.2008
Date of Order: 30.01.2008

+

OMP No. 384/2007 & IAs No. 8419/07 & 12218/07

#
!

MIKUNI CORPORATION
...
Petitioner
hrough: Mr. A.S.Chandhiok, Sr.Advocate with
Ms. Mohna M. Lal & Mr. Mohit Goel, Advocates
Versus

$
^

1.
2.
3.

UCAL FUEL SYSTEMS LIMITED
Carburettors Limited
Siemens VDO Automotive
...
Respondents
Through: Mr. S.Sundram Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Sangeeta Bharti & Mr. Birjesh Anand, Advs. For R-2
Mr. Tejas Karia & Ms. Misha, Advocates for R-3

*

JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

Yes.

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?

Yes.

Yes.

JUDGMENT :
By this order I shall dispose of this application/petition under
Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, made by the petitioner
against the three respondents.

The petitioner had entered into a Joint

Venture Agreement ( in short 'JVA') with respondent no. 2 on 20 th
December, 1988. The relevant clauses of the agreement read as under:
1.

DEFINITIONS

1.1
The term “PRODUCTS” as used in the joint
venture agreement means the products which are
shown on the attached Annex 'A' and which UFS
plans to manufacture and sell.
5.

NON-COMPETITON WITH THE BUSINESS OF UFS

During the term of this agreement each of the
parties hereto agrees not to manufacture, have
manufactured or sell, have sold, in India any types
of products which are the same as the PRODUCTS
for which MIC gives technical know-how to UFS
under the collaboration agreements. This obligation

OMP No. 384/2007

Page 1of 10

is binding on subsidiaries, affiliated companies and
holding companies of both parties.
9.0

CONFIDENTIALITY

Each party hereto agrees to keep strictly
confidential information acquired from the other
parties or from UFS under this agreement. Both
parties also agree not to disclose such information
to any third party.
Such secrecy obligation shall survive termination of
this agreement and thereafter until such
information is made public by any third party or
parties other than CL, MIC, and UFS.
2.

The agreement was between petitioner and respondent no. 2

and countersigned by respondent no. 1. It is stated by the petitioner that
respondent no. 1 was attempting to defeat the petitioner's rights under
the JVA by trying to enter into a collaboration/tie-up with respondent no. 3
and respondent no. 1 was attempting to indirectly obtain the approval of
the board of directors of respondent no. 1 to surpass petitioner's objection
against the collaboration agreement. It is stated that respondent no. 1
had obtained technology to manufacture Carburettors as well as the
Housing and machine cast and without paying for the petitioner's
technology, it was attempting to use the same to help a competitor. It is
also stated that respondent no. 3 had also approached petitioner to
provide them with the technology to manufacture Air Intake Charge
Throttle Body Housing (cast and machined) and ETC5 Housing (cast and
machined) and this request of respondent no. 3 was declined by the
petitioner. Since respondent no. 3 was unable to obtain technology from
the petitioner, the respondent no. 3 devised a method to indirectly obtain
this technology from respondent no. 1 & 2. Respondent no. 3 intends to
manufacture similar products using the current manufacturing facility of
respondent no. 1, developed with the technical expertise provided by the
petitioner, so that they can quickly enter the auto-component market in
India. It is stated that in order to achieve this, a re-organization of the
respondent no. 1 is on the cards and by this re-organization, respondent
no. 3 is sought to be inducted into the management of respondent no. 1
through back door.

OMP No. 384/2007

It is also stated that petitioner apprehends that

Page 2of 10

respondent no. 1 is attempting to set up a competing plant/facility for
Siemens i.e. Respondent No.3 either directly or indirectly (at the facility or
with the collaboration of UCAL Machine Tools Limited), which is in clear
violation of the petitioner's right under the JVA, despite the fact that
petitioner has not given its consent to respondents no. 1 & 2 and
respondents no. 1 & 2 were proceeding with the proposed JVA with
Siemens. Reliance is placed on clause 16 in the JVA which provides for
arbitration and reads as under:
16. ARBITRATION
All disputes, controversies or differences which
may arise between the parties, out of or in
connection with this agreement, shall be settled in
good faith by the parties hereto. If any such matter
cannot be settled by the parties, the matter shall
be referred to the arbitration of the Japan
Commercial Arbitration Association if such matter is
raised by CL [i.e., Respondent No. 2 herein], and
referred to the arbitration of the Indian Council of
Arbitration, New Delhi, India, if such matter is
raised by MIC (i.e., the Petitioner herein). The
decision of the arbitrators shall be final and binding
on both the parties”.
3.

A prayer is made to restrain the respondents, their associates

and subsidiaries either individually or in association with third parties from
breaching the Joint Venture Agreement dated 20 th December, 1988 and as
modified on 30th May, 1989 and 28th December, 1998. The other prayer is
to restrain respondent no. 1 from considering the agenda item no. 11
relating to the collaboration with respondent no. 3 in the board meeting
and restrain the respondents, their associates, subsidiaries and affiliates
from implementing matters relating to the manufacture of Housing (cast
and machined) products for Siemens VDO Project and/or supplying
Housing (cast and machined) products to respondent no. 3.
4.

It is undisputed fact that petitioner and respondent no. 2 has

26% shares each in respondent no. 1 and they have equal number of
directors in the management of respondent no. 1. Rest of the 48% shares
are held by public. It is not possible for respondents no. 1 & 2 to restructure the company i.e. Respondent no. 1 without the consent and

OMP No. 384/2007

Page 3of 10

permission of petitioner and respondent no. 2, who are managing the
company and have equal number of directors and equal number of shares
because of the bar of the Companies Act. Respondents No. 1 & 2 in their
reply have categorical stated the proposal for re-structuring cannot be
carried without the consent of petitioner and therefore has been
abandoned.
5.

Since the proposal for re-structuring stands abandoned the

induction of respondent no. 3 into the management or into the respondent
no. 1 company in any other manner is not possible.

The fears of

petitioner about re-structuring therefore stands dispelled.
6.

The JVA which was entered between the parties has with it

Annexure 'A'. The JVA is in respect of products mentioned in Annexure 'A'
and it does not cover any other product. Annexure 'A' reads as under:
I.
a.

Products for Maruti Vehicles
Carburettor Model No. 24-30 DIDS

Series
b.

Fuel Pumps
Model MDF 72-10
MDF 72-2
MDF 72-1
II.
Any other product or products licensed
by MIC and approved by the Government of India
from time to time.
7.

Clause 1.1 of JVA defines products and Annexure 'A' specifies

that product.

Thus, products shown in para 6 above are the only

products which UCAL Fuel Systems (R-1) is currently manufacturing and
selling under JVA.

However, respondent no. 1 has other product range

also which are not affected by JVA and for which no technical knowhow
has been granted to respondent no. 1 by petitioner or respondent no. 2.
Respondent No.1 argued that JVA and the clauses referred to by the
petitioner were meant to prevent a competition between the petitioner
and respondent no. 2 inter se & vis-a-vis respondent no. 1 since both
petitioner and respondent no. 2 were prevented from competing with
each other by clause 5 stated above. The agreement as seen from clause
5 is clearly between the petitioner and respondent no. 2 and both these
parties had agreed not to manufacture, have manufactured or sell, have

OMP No. 384/2007

Page 4of 10

sold in India any types of products which were the same products for
which Mikuni gave technical knowhow to respondent no. 1 under the
Collaboration Agreement. It is obvious that this non-competition clause
could not have been with respondent no. 1 because the respondent no. 1
was the company created for manufacture of the products after obtaining
technical knowhow from petitioner and respondent no. 2.
8.

Clause 9 makes it clear that a confidentiality was to be

maintained by both the parties.

It specifically provided that both the

parties not to disclose any such information to any third party.

There

could have been no agreement of not disclosing information to
respondent no. 1, since respondent no. 1 was to get this information
under the agreement. When petitioner and respondent no. 2 entered into
JVA with respondent no. 1, respondent no. 1 was already in business and it
was not a new company created by joint venture. Respondent no. 1 was
having a particular expertise in casting and machining. Respondent No. 2
was also in the business of zinc casting for more than 15 years prior to
JVA.

Respondent No. 1 was not prevented from continuing its

manufacturing activities in these fields. JVA was to take effect in respect
of products as mentioned in Annexure 'A'. Therefore, there could have
been no non-competition clause between petitioner and respondent no. 2
on one side and respondent no. 1 on the other side.

Non-competition

obligation was binding only on respondent no. 2.
9.

Since respondent no. 1 received technical knowhow from

petitioner and respondent no. 2 in respect of certain products, I consider
that it becomes obligatory on respondent no. 1 also to honour the JVA to
the extent that the technical knowhow which the respondent no. 1
received from the petitioner and respondent no. 2 was not given away to
third parties without the consent of petitioner and respondent no. 2.
Though practically, respondent no. 1 cannot give away this knowhow to
third parties without the consent of petitioner and respondent no. 2
because petitioner and respondent no. 2 are in the management of

OMP No. 384/2007

Page 5of 10

respondent no. 1.

Petitioner and respondent no. 2 each having 26%

shares, have equal number of directors on the board of respondent no. 1.
However, I consider that respondent no. 1 is free to deal in the products
which are not covered by Annexure 'A' to the JVA and all products other
than those mentioned above in para 06 can be dealt with by respondent
no. 1 and respondent no. 1 has a right to enhance its business
prospectives by dealing in any other products which are not covered by
the JVA.
10.

Another question raised by respondents no. 1 & 2 is that this

Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the application under Section 9. It is
stated that application under Section 9 can be entertained by the Court as
defined in Section 2(1)(e). Section 2(1)(e) defines the 'Court' as under:
“Court” means the principal civil court of original
jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court
in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction,
having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming
the subject matter of the arbitration if the same
had been the subject matter of a suit, but does not
include any civil court of a grade inferior to such
principal civil court, or any court of small causes.”
11.

It is clear from reading of Section 2(1)(e) with Section 9 of

the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, that the Court where an application
under Section 9 can be filed, is the Court which would have jurisdiction to
entertain the suit on the basis of facts given in the application under
Section 9. This Court in Inox Air Products Ltd. v. Rathi Ispat Ltd. 2006(4)
Arb. L.R. 40(Delhi) observed that only that Court will have jurisdiction
where the cause of action arose in the sense as it would have arisen if the
suit had been filed.

Reference was made to decisions of this Court in

Gulati Construction Company, Jhansi v. Betwa River Board AIR 1984
(Delhi) 299, Interstate Equipment (India) Private Limited v. Bharat
Aluminum Company Limited 2004(1) Arb. L.R 456 (Del.), Apparel Export
Promotion Council v. Prabhati Patni, Proprietor, Comfort Furnishers and
Anr. 2005(3) Arb. L.R. 518 (Del.), GE Countrywide Consumer Financial
Services Limited v. Surjit Singh Bhatia & Jaspal Kaur, 2006(4) (AD) Delhi
485=2006(2) Arb.L.R.170(Del.)

OMP No. 384/2007

Page 6of 10

12.

The Counsel for the applicant relied on Jindal Vijayanagar

Steel (JSW Steel Ltd.) v. Jindal Praxair Oxygen Company Limited 2006(3)
Arb. L.R.340 (SC) wherein the Supreme Court had considered the issue of
jurisdiction.

A dispute had arisen regarding interpretation of the

settlement agreement between the parties.

The respondent invoked

arbitration clause against the appellant. Respondent filed a petition under
Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act in Bombay High Court
seeking interim relief against the appellant.

The Bombay High Court

served notice to the appellant in Karnataka. The Appellant had also filed
an arbitration petition under Section 9 before the Principal District Judge,
Bellary, Karnataka for an injunction restraining respondent from breaching
various agreements and obtained an order of interim injunction.

The

respondent objected to the proceedings before the Bellary Court, without
success. The respondent filed appeal before Karnataka High Court which
was allowed holding that issue of jurisdiction would have to be decided by
Bombay High Court.

During the pendency of petition under Section 9

before Bombay High Court, the respondent transferred its registered
office to Mumbai and by the impugned order Bombay High Court held that
it had jurisdiction to entertain the arbitration petition under Section 9 of
the Act on the ground that under clause 12 of the Letters Patent, Bombay
High Court had jurisdiction to entertain the petition as the respondent was
having its corporate office in Mumbai from where it was carrying on its
business.
13.

The issue before the Supreme Court was whether Bombay

High Court had jurisdiction to entertain the application under Section 9
filed by the respondent.

The

Supreme Court held that in view of the

Section 120 CPC which had specifically excluded application of Section 16,
17 and 20 CPC to Chartered High Courts, Clause 12 of the Letters Patent
would be the relevant provision for determining the ordinary original
jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court. The Supreme Court also held that
under clause 12 of the Letters Patent, the Bombay High Court would have

OMP No. 384/2007

Page 7of 10

jurisdiction to entertain the arbitration petition filed under Section 9 of the
act, even if no cause of action arose within its jurisdiction since the
respondent had its office in Mumbai.

The Supreme Court rejected the

contention advanced on behalf of the appellant that jurisdiction under
Section 2(i)(e) should be interpreted uniformly throughout India and in
that case the provision of Section 20 CPC should be invoked and not
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent so that the only test for determining
jurisdiction, is if cause of action had taken place within the jurisdiction of
High Court and not the place of carrying on business.
14.

The Counsel for petitioner argued that in case of Delhi, Delhi

High Court Rules should apply and this Court will have jurisdiction, since if
an award is passed after arbitration only Delhi High Court would be the
Court where the award can be challenged. He argued that the place of
arbitration can either be Japan or New Delhi and in case the place of
arbitration is New Delhi the award can be challenged only in New Delhi
and therefore Delhi High Court will have jurisdiction.
15.

In order to invoke jurisdiction to entertain an application

under Section 9, this Court should look into the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act.

The Act specifically provides that only the Court as

defined in Clause 2(1)(e) will have jurisdiction to entertain the application.
Delhi is not a Chartered High Court and there is no Letters Patent Act
conferring specific jurisdiction on Delhi High Court. Delhi High Court has
original jurisdiction and the original jurisdiction is exercised as per the
provisions of CPC and its own rules framed for the purpose. A perusal of
rules would show that there is no specific rule conferring jurisdiction on
Delhi High Court in a manner in which Clause 12 of Letters Patent
conferred original jurisdiction in case of Bombay High Court. Moreover, in
Jindal Vijayanagar Steel case, Bombay High Court assumed jurisdiction
since the respondent had shifted its office within the jurisdiction of
Bombay High Court. In the present case, neither the petitioner nor the
respondent had their office or place of business in Delhi, neither any

OMP No. 384/2007

Page 8of 10

cause of action or any part of cause of action had arisen in Delhi. The
jurisdiction is sought to be invoked on the ground that situs of the
arbitrator may be in New Delhi.

I consider that the place where the

arbitration may take place is not relevant for deciding the jurisdiction of
the Court for the purpose of Section 9. The jurisdiction for the purpose of
Section 9 can be decided only on the basis of availability of jurisdiction to
the Court as defined under Section 2(1)(e) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act. I, therefore, hold that this Court can have no jurisdiction
to entertain the application under Section 9.
16.

The other argument advanced by respondent no. 1 is that

respondent no. 3 was not a party to the arbitration agreement and no
application lies against it merely because respondent no. 3 negotiated
with respondent no. 1.

There is no arbitration clause between

respondent no. 3 and petitioner.

Since no arbitration proceedings can

take place vis-a-vis respondent no. 3, no application under Section 9 lies
against the respondent no. 3.

The Counsel for applicant relied upon

judgment in CREF Finance Limited v. Puri Construction Ltd. and Ors.
2000(3) Arb. L.R. 331 (Del.) wherein this Court observed as under:
14. Mr. Mohinder Puri, respondent no. 3 herein,
was present before the learned Arbitrator and for
him to now raise highly technical and suspicious
objections that there is no subsisting Arbitration
Clause between him and CREF have convinced me
of his mala fides and doublespeak. He has invited
the orders dated 13.5.2000 from the learned sole
Arbitrator, has not assailed these orders before me
and in one breath stated their acceptance and
applicability to him, in the other has assailed the
petition on technicalities. Finally, the argument
that L&T is not a party before the learned sole
Arbitrator, and that no Arbitration Clause subsists
between CREF and L&T would also not come in the
way of Court granting equitable relief when
circumstances called for it. As has been observed
above L&T is not a stranger to the covenants
between CREF and PCL. Having appointed the
latter as its agent it cannot be permitted to
repudiate the agents' actions in the summary and
self-serving manner in which it has presently acted.
It can also not be permitted to act contrary of the
Development Agreement dated 10.3.1998.
17.

On the other hand respondent no. 1&3 relied upon National

OMP No. 384/2007

Page 9of 10

Highways Authority of India (NHAI) v. M/s China Coal Construction Group
Corporation AIR 2006 (Delhi) 134, wherein this Court held that an interim
order can be passed only in respect of the parties to the arbitration and in
connection with subject matter thereof. No interim order can be passed
in respect of the party who had no privity of contract with the petitioner.
18.

A perusal of judgment in CREF Finance case would show that

this Court categorically observed that the injunction order was being
made against L&T, a third party because it was not a totally stranger to
the agreement between the two contending parties. L&T was appointed
by one of the parties as its agents and this Court observed that having
appointed L&T as its agents, respondent cannot be permitted to repudiate
the agent's action in a self-serving manner and agent cannot be permitted
to act contrary to the development agreement between the parties. In
the present case respondent no. 3 has nothing to do with the agreement
between the two parties and it is specifically contended by respondents
no. 1 & 2 that no restructuring of respondent no. 1 was on the cards to
induct respondent no. 3 as it cannot be done without express consent of
petitioner.

No transfer of technology in respect of the products as

mentioned in Annexure 'A' is being negotiated or shall be done. Under
these circumstances, I consider that respondent no. 3 cannot be a party
to the petition under Section 9 and no injunction can otherwise be issued
against respondent no. 3.
19.

In view of my discussion, I consider that the present

application/petition filed by the petitioner is not maintainable and is
hereby dismissed. IAs No. 8419/07 & 12218/07 also stand disposed of.
January 30, 2008.
vn

OMP No. 384/2007

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA, J.

Page 10of 10

