IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Reserve: January 17, 2008
Date of judgment: January 30, 2008

%
+

IA No.14322/07 in IPA No.15/2005

#
!

Sarbjyot Kaur Saluja & Ors.
...Plaintiffs
Through:Ms. Geeta Luthra with Ms. Aanchal Mullick, Advocates.
Versus

$
^

Rajender Singh Saluja & Anr.
...Defendants
Through: Mr. Aman Lekhi, Sr. Adv. with Mrs. Jaspreet S. Rai,
Advocates.

*

JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?

2.

To be referred to the reporter or not ?

3.

Whether judgment should be reported in Digest ?
ORDER :
IA No. 14322/2007

1.

By this order, I shall dispose of an application for fixing interim

maintenance for the plaintiffs. Plaintiff No.1 is the wife of defendant No.1
and plaintiffs No.2 and 3 are minor children of defendant No.1. The
plaintiffs have claimed a regular maintenance of Rs.1.5 lac per month in
the suit and also sought right to live in the house No. 8/15 WEA Karol
Bagh, New Delhi, where they are presently residing.
2.

It is undisputed that the plaintiffs No.2 and 3, the minor children

are school going. The marriage between plaintiff No.1 and defendant No.1
had taken place on 18th November 1990. The first child i.e. plaintiff No.2
was born on 16th December 1991 and the second child i.e. plaintiff No.3
was born on 29th January 1995. Plaintiff No.1 made various allegations in
the plaint justifying as to why it was not possible for her to live in the
company of defendant No.1 and why she was constrained to live with her
two minor children separately from defendant No.1. No doubt the house is
the joint matrimonial house of the parties where the plaintiffs lived all
along.

IPA No.15/2005

Page No.1 of 4

3.

Plaintiff No.1 contended that she was not able to maintain herself

and she had no source of income while defendant No.1 was running a
hotel “Royal Palace” at 1/62, Old Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi near Ganga
Ram Hospital. He is having Hyundai Santro Car bearing No. DL 6CG 3594
. He has having shares in the companies and many other properties and
assets unknown to the plaintiffs.
4.

The defendant in the written statement had denied the various

allegations made by the plaintiffs against him and had made counter
allegations which need not be gone into at the stage of deciding this
application. However, defendant No.1 stated that he never escaped his
obligation to maintain his wife and children in accordance with his position
and status. He admitted that in the above property, the first floor was
owned by defendant No.1 and alleged that the intention of the plaintiff
seemed to be to grab the property. He was compelled to leave his own
home. He had been living in this property along with his family but now he
was not being allowed to live in that house. The plaintiffs were not
allowing him to enter

into the house belonging to him and his only

residence. Regarding maintenance, it is submitted that he was regularly
paying to the plaintiffs sufficient amount to run the house. He was earlier
paying Rs.10,000/-, then Rs.15,000/- and presently he was paying
Rs.20,000/- per month to plaintiff No.1 for running the house. He was also
paying electricity bill of the house. He was paying school fees and other
education expenses of the children.
5.

During arguments, the above facts were not disputed. It is

submitted that considering the income and status of defendant No.1, the
maintenance was not just and proper. The defendant No.1 is owner of
“Royal Hotel” near Ganga Ram Hospital. This hotel was having 15 rooms,
rent for each room per day is Rs.1800/- + taxes. Since the hotel is
situated just near Ganga Ram Hospital, a well known hospital, the
occupancy rate of the rooms was above 90%. Photocopies of occupancy
register have been filed by the plaintiff to show that all the rooms of the

IPA No.15/2005

Page No.2 of 4

Hotel normally used to remain occupied. It is alleged that the earnings of
the defendant No.1 from the hotel and other sources was around Rs. 6 lac
per month. The plaintiff have claimed only Rs.1.5 lac per month and this
amount should be allowed as interim maintenance. On the other hand, it
is stated by counsel for defendant No.1 that the defendant No.1 has filed
income tax returns showing that his annual income was less than Rs.3 lac.
About hotel, it is stated that the hotel was an illegal hotel and the
occupancy was not as high as claimed. The rate of rent, as stated by the
plaintiff, is not disputed. During arguments, an offer was made to the
defendant No.1 by plaintiff No.1

that the plaintiff was prepared to

manage the hotel and was ready to give Rs.3 lac per month out of the
hotel income, to the defendant No.1, If he was ready to hand over the
management of the hotel to the plaintiff. It was also stated that the
ownership of the hotel would be that of the defendant No.1 and only the
management should be given to the plaintiff No.1. The plaintiff No.1 would
not claim any further maintenance from defendant No.1,

if she was

allowed to manage the hotel and would pay a lumpsum payment to
defendant No.1. The entire administrative expenses and other expenses
would be met by the plaintiff No.1 out of the gross income of the hotel.
This offer was not accepted by defendant No.1 who took the plea that it
would not be in his dignity that he ceased to be the owner of hotel or
management of the hotel was taken away.
6.

It is obvious that the real income of defendant No.1 is not reflected

in the income tax returns filed by defendant. It is defendant's own case
that he has been paying plaintiffs about Rs.20,000/- per month. He has
been meeting expenses of education of the children. He has also been
paying electricity charges of the above house.
7.

Considering the income of the defendant No.1 during pendency of

this suit, defendant No.1 shall continue to :
i.

bear electricity charges of the house bearing
number 8/15 WEA Karol Bagh, New Delhi

IPA No.15/2005

Page No.3 of 4

subject to a maximum of Rs.5,000/- per
month.
ii. He

shall

continue

to

pay

the

school

fees/tuition fees and other expenses for the
education of the two children.
iii. He shall pay a sum of Rs.25,000/- per month
to plaintiff No.1 on account of household
expenses and other misc expenses.
iv. He shall not dispossess plaintiffs from the
first floor of House No.8/15 WEA Karol Bagh,
New Delhi.
v. He shall purchase full medical coverage
insurance policy for all the three plaintiffs
and shall get the same renewed year after
year, during pendency of the instant suit.

8.

With above directions, the application stands disposed of.

IPA No.15/2005
List this matter now on 29th April, 2008.

January 30, 2008
rd

IPA No.15/2005

SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA J.

Page No.4 of 4

