3
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005
Reserved on : September 20, 2007.
Decided on : January 7, 2008.

ATMA SINGH LUBANA PRESIDENT & ORS.
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Rajiv Garg with Mr. Ashish
Garg,Advocates.
versus
GOVT. OF N.C.T. OF DELHI & ANR
..... Respondent
Through: Ms. Avnish Ahlawat with Ms. Latika
Chaudhary, Advocates.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.
2.

Whether reports of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Yes.

The writ petitioners are challenging the decision of the

respondents to allot TSR permits by inviting applications, as opposed
to the previous policy of doing so, on first-cum-first serve basis.
2.

The petitioner claims to be President of Jyoti Auto

Transport Welfare Society, a social worker espousing the cause of the
interests of weaker sections of the society and victims of 1984 riots. It
is averred that on 20.12.2002, the Supreme Court, in WP(C)
No.13029/1985 titled “MC Mehta Vs Union of India” had modified
its previous order and permitted the issuance of 5000 fresh TSR
W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005

1 of 8

permits. Consequently, a public notice was issued by the respondents
inviting applications for such permits.

750 of such permits were

earmarked to Scheduled Caste (SC) applicants; 375 were earmarked to
Scheduled Tribe (ST) applicants and 1350 to Other Backward
(OBC) and 2525 to General Category applicants.

Class

The conditions

stipulated were that the candidates should have valid driving licence,
driving badge, a domicile certificate of Delhi and in case of reserved
category candidates, a certificate in that regard apart from a minimum
qualification. The last date of submission of application was 14.5.2003.
Pursuant to this exercise, all the 2525 General Category permits were
issued as also to SC category.

However, the ST and OBC category

permits could not be filled up.

On 22.9.2003, the petitioners

represented to the Chief Minister for extending the Scheme to the
victims of 1984 riots as in the case of grant of such benefits to OBC
candidates.

It

is

alleged

that

without

considering

these

representations, the respondents unilaterally instructed for grant of
232 permits to SC applicants.

The petitioners relied on further

representation for extension of benefits to Anti-Sikh riot victims.
3.

On 2.2.2005, the respondents issued a public notice

inviting applications for re-issuance of 407 permits to the OBC
applicants and 368 to ST category applicants. It is claimed that the
respondents have received 1100 applications; the petitioners alleged

W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005

2 of 8

that they should not have entertained such applications when only 775
permits were available.
4.

It is claimed by the petitioners that all this while, the

applications were accepted only on the basis of the first-cum-first serve
policy and, therefore, now accepting the applications beyond the total
number of permits created complications.

The decision to issue

permits by inviting applications is, therefore, assailed as arbitrary, and
contrary to the intend of the Supreme Court order.
5.

The respondents, in their counter affidavit, does not deny

that the Supreme Court order permitted issuance of 5000 TSR permits
and that previously it was decided to allot on first-cum-first serve basis.
According to it, the advertisement now issued on 2.2.2005 did not
mention that the permits would be issued on a first-cum-first serve
basis. It, however, denies claims that this decision is, in any manner,
arbitrary or that it was not bound to accept applications in excess of
the number of permits. According to the respondents, the last date for
receipt of applications was fixed because earlier experience had shown
that fewer applications would be received when intimation for
allotment of permits on first-cum-first serve basis were considered and
issued. It is claimed that the impugned notice had invited applications
for 407 permits under the OBC category and 368 under ST category.
In the ST category, only 87 applications were received whereas in the

W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005

3 of 8

OBC category, 1105 applications were received out of which 1070
were found valid and eligible. It is also claimed that a draw of lots was
held for 407 OBC vacancies with 100 more in the waiting list and that
no draw of lots was held in the list of ST category.

It was also

submitted that as a result of some candidates not claiming their
permits, 54 General Category permits have been left over; 83 having
been more vacancies existing the OBC category and that in the ST
category, a balance of 226 are left.
6.

During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the

parties reiterated the submissions made in the pleadings. According to
the petitioners' counsel, the respondents should not have changed the
basis for allotment since the vacancy notified should have been filled
up on first-cum-first serve basis. It is submitted that the entire General
Category and SC category permits were issued in the first round on
first-cum-first serve basis and since the present round has been
necessitated because of non-availability of eligible applicants, they too
have to be considered on the same basis. On the other hand, counsel
for the respondents submitted that the question of issuing licences or
permits to anyone on first-cum-first serve basis would arise only if the
number of applicants matched or was below the available permits.
Once the number of applicants exceeded the number of vacancies, the
respondents were justified in resorting to a transparent and rational

W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005

4 of 8

method for granting the permits.
7.

The above narrative would show that out of 5000 permits

which were issued on first-cum-first serve basis, initially, 4245 permits
could be issued, on first-cum-first serve basis. This led to issuance of
the impugned notice inviting applications for 407 permits in the OBC
category and 368 permits in the ST category.

Only 87 applications

were received in the ST category and in the OBC after scrutiny 1070
applicants were found eligible. In the meanwhile, 54 General Category
and 83 OBC category vacancies appear to have been arising. So far as
Scheduled Tribe category is concerned, 87 applicants could be
accommodated and at the moment, there is a balance of 226 vacancies.
The question, therefore, is whether, at this stage, the respondents'
decision to hold a draw of lots was valid or whether they were bound to
issue licences on first-cum-first serve basis. Now, it is settled law that
so long as an executive or administrative decision has been taken
keeping all relevant factors in mind and in a fair manner, and in bona

fide exercise of power, the Court, exercising judicial review power
should not be interfered with the decision. In this case, the Supreme
Court had placed a moratorium on the registration of TSR vehicles in
1997.

By an order made in 2002 that was lifted and 5000 vehicles

were permitted to be registered. In this background, the applications
were invited, in the first round, from eligible persons and allotments

W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005

5 of 8

were made. The criteria adopted was the first-cum-first serve basis.
That the petitioners do not aver that they had applied at that time and
that they could not be accommodated or that they applied late but
were found eligible and that they were deprived on due consideration.
Whatever be their individual consideration, the fact remains that in
their earlier round, there was no vacancy in the General Category;
some vacancies were left over in reserved categories.

These were

advertised and a fresh round of applications was called for.

The

grievance made is not that the petitioners had any overriding claim or
right on account of their having expected that their cases would be
dealt with in any such manner but that other reserved categories such
as SC and ST were accommodated and permits were issued without
recourse to a draw of lots. In this regard, the explanation given by the
respondent, to my mind, is perfectly reasonable. Where the number of
applicants is less than the available number of permits, all that the
authority would have to do is to determine whether and, if so, how
many applicants are eligible and grant each one of them the permit.
However, if the number of applications exceed the number of permits
available, the concerned agency would have to devise a proper method
of choosing who should be given the permit.

It is, in these

circumstances, that the respondents decided to opt for a draw of lots.
Though not the best method of determining merit or yet it is the most

W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005

6 of 8

well accepted mode.

So long as the draw is conducted in fair and

transparent manner, all participants would have an equal and
reasonable chance based upon the number of probability.
8.

Now, the figures supplied by the respondents, during the

course of hearing, show that 40 vacancies for OBC applicants were
existed all of them have been accommodated in the draw of lots and
100 in the waiting list who too can be accommodated, there were 83
more vacancies; there are 226 Scheduled Tribe vacancies.

In these

circumstances, the most feasible course for the respondents would be
to confirm the draw of lots held earlier in respect of the OBC vacancies
and with respect to the balance number of vacancies, the respondents
should decide having regard to relevant materials and circumstances
including the past events, the best manner of ensuring that the permits
are issued to deserving candidates. Past experience has shown that for
the last five years or more, the number of ST candidates have always in
a fraction of what has been advertised. In these circumstances, even
while ensuring fair representation of such applicants, a suitable
decision to adjust some of the vacancies of General Category or other
categories may be taken and thereafter conduct the draw of lots from

W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005

7 of 8

the unsuccessful candidates from amounts those who had applied
pursuant to the advertisement dated 2.2.2005.
9.

The Court, therefore, is of the opinion that no exception can

be taken to the draw of lots conducted pursuant to the impugned
notice. The decision in that regard may be declared. A further draw of
lots in respect of the balance vacancies arising in the respective
categories should be held after taking a reasoned decision. The draw
of lots in so far as the OBC candidates are concerned, should be
confined from amongst those unsuccessful applicants who had come
forward with applications pursuant to the public notice dated 2.2.2005.
The entire process shall be completed within six weeks from today.
10.

The writ petitions are accordingly disposed of in the above

terms. No costs.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
JANUARY 7, 2008
'sn'

W.P.(C) 9565-71/2005

8 of 8

