*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on: April 20,2007.
Date of decision : May 1st, 2007

+

CRL.REVISION PETITION NO.58/2007
DHARAMPAL YADAV
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. G.P. Thareja, Mr. R.S. Mahla, Advocates.
versus
THE STATE

..... Respondent
Through Mr. R.M. Tiwari, Advocate.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?
Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Yes

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. This present Criminal revision petition is directed against the order on charge
under Section 304/330/201/193/34 IPC passed by the Additional Sessions
Judge (“the trial court”) on 09.11.2006.
2. The brief facts necessary to decide this petition are that on 09.12.1997 FIR
No.360/1997 was registered at Hauz qazi police station relating to a stabbing
incident that took place the previous day. The present petitioner (SHO
Dharampal) and an Assistant Sub Inspector (ASI) had picked up Harishankar
(herein after referred to as “the deceased”) and others when they could not find
CRL.R.P NO.58/2007

1 of 6

any clues of the assailant, allegedly the son of the deceased. These relatives of
the accused were taken to the Police Station.
3. The deceased and the others were allegedly made to stand in rain, in the cold
night of December and forced to beat each other with Chappals, in the Police
Station. Thereafter, they were locked up in the “Shankarman Kaksh”. They
were not provided with food, water, clothes and blankets.

The deceased and

the other relatives of the accused were not witnesses in the stabbing case, but
they were illegally detained by the Petitioner and the other ASI.
4. The Petitioner was approached by a Municipal Councilor for release of the
deceased. He stated that the deceased would be released only when his accused
son surrendered. The deceased and others were allegedly detained till the next
day. They were allegedly tortured to extract information about the accused and
on 10.12.97 the Petitioner allegedly beat up the deceased and made him
‘MURGA’, (i.e. holding one's ears, even while bending and continuing in that
position, causing acute pain and distress) . The deceased was in this position
for half an hour, when he was also kicked and beaten up. The deceased was
brought back to the room by a constable at 3 pm. He was not in a position to
stand, and fell down on the other detainees Gurdayal Singh and Hiralal. The
deceased was later on taken to LNJP hospital in an auto-rickshaw at 4.30 pm
where he was declared as “brought dead”.
5. In the inquest proceedings conducted on the death, a medical board of 3
doctors opined that the death was caused due to heart attack and there were no
external injuries on the body. There was another expert opinion of experts of
AIIMS who felt that after death, a person's body sphincter looses grip and the
person may pass urine, and stool; and that cold, hunger and mental trauma
during unlawful custody could have triggered a heart attack.
CRL.R.P NO.58/2007

2 of 6

6.

The charge sheet stated that the deceased was made “MURGA”. He was
kicked and beaten up by the Petitioner. Thereafter he was brought back to
‘sankarman Kaksh’ by the constable and left in the room. The deceased then
fell down on the detainees; he was unconscious and had no control over his
bowels, he passed stool and urine. On seeing the deceased in that condition, the
detainees knocked at the door to get some help, but there was none to help
them. After a couple of minutes, the ASI saw the deceased and asked the
detainees to take him to LNJP hospital. The deceased was declared brought
dead by the hospital authorities.

7. On the information given by the other detainees the doctor had mentioned in
the hospital medico legal injury register and in the OPD card it was alleged that
the deceased was brutally beaten up in the police custody, when the other
detainees complained about the deceased's illness still the police did not give
proper care and attention.
8. It is alleged in the investigation report that the petitioner and the ASI
manipulated the entries in the daily diary of the police station to cover up the
wrongful confinement of the deceased. The ASI also prepared false Section
160 Cr.P.C. notices in the name of the deceased and also other detainees; they
forged signatures on them so as destroy evidence.
9. The trial court charged the petitioner of having committed offences punishable
under Section 304/342/330/365/201 IPC. The extracts of the Ld. ASJ's order
dated 9.11.2006 are as follows.
“On a prima facie consideration of the overall evidence
coming on record coupled with the SDM report and medical
opinion there appears to be sufficient material on record to
presume the commission of the offence under Section 304/330
and 201/34 IPC. At the same time the report of the SDM has
indicated the 2 accused of fabricating false evidence by
making false DD entry and false notice under Section 160
CRL.R.P NO.58/2007

3 of 6

Cr.P.C. on which signatures of the receipients were found to
be forged. In view of the same it would also make out a
prima facie case for the charge under Section 193 IPC and
471 IPC against the 2 accused.
However, they are discharged for the offence under Section
365 IPC as no where it is the case that Harishankar was
secretly confined to any place of which others were having no
knowledge. There is no need to frame a separate charge for
the offence Under Sections 323 and 342 as Sec. 330 IPC is
sufficient to cover up the offence under these provisions.
Order on charge is made accordingly.”
10. Mr. G.P. Thareja, learned counsel contended that the entire allegations in the
FIR, the charge sheet and the expert medical evidence do not amount to
sufficient evidence which can lead to a charge under Section 304 IPC. Counsel
contended that at best the allegations against the petitioner were that he
illegally detained the deceased, and made him murga for some time; this did
not imply a mental frame showing knowledge that death of the deceased would
take place.
11. Learned counsel relied on the judgments reported as Dnyaneshwar Dagdoba
Hivrekar Vs. The State of Maharashtra 1982 Crl. L.J. 1870; Annadurai Vs.
State 1989 (2) Crimes 315; Bhagat Ram Vs. State of H.P. 1989 Crl. L.J. 2520;
Thomas Vs. State of Kerala 1992 Crl. L.J. 581 for the submission that the acts
complained of, in support of a valid charge for commission of offence
punishable under Section 304, should be clear enough to show knowledge that
death would occur. It was also argued that the evidence does not lead to grave
suspicion about commission of the offence.
12. Mr. Tiwari learned counsel for the CBI, which was entrusted with the investigation
and had filed a charge sheet in the case, contended that this Court had occasion to
examine the facts in a previous proceeding being Crl.R.P. No.522/200, reported as
CRL.R.P NO.58/2007

4 of 6

CBI Vs. Dharam Pal Singh & Anr. 123(2005) DLT 592. It was contended that the
Court had in that case considered the relevant materials and allowed the CBI's
revision. Under these circumstances the petitioner could not seek relief from this
Court.
13. It was next contended that the circumstances of the case did point to more than a
serious suspicion about the petitioner's knowledge that his acts would in the natural
course of events lead to the death of the deceased. Counsel highlighted the material
circumstances for that purpose such as the unlawful detention for about 40 hours
during the coldest part of winter when the temperatures were at the most about, 10
degree C; absence of any warm or adequate blanket/clothing to protect the deceased
from the cold climate; absence of any food provided by the police during the custody
and repeated torture and mental agony including asking the deceased to be “murga”. It
was submitted considering the deceased's age, there was every likelihood of his death.
The deceased as a result of treatment (which included acts and omissions,
intentionally caused by the petitioner) died while in custody. The Court, it was
submitted cannot examine the adequacy of the testimonies as long as reasonable
material pointing to a grave suspicion exists, the Court should frame the charge.
14. The factual narrative is not seriously disputed. The only question is whether the acts
of omission and commisson, seen in totality point to a frame of mind disclosing
intention to cause injury or harm that would have, in the normal course of events
resulted in death of the deceased.

Here though the petitioner asserts that mere

unlawful detention and asking a person to remain “murga” - in the absence of any
external injuries, would not normally result in the death of a person, a cumulative
effect rather than isolated events would have to be seen. The prolonged and unlawful
detention of the deceased, the cold winter climate (allegedly at that time there were
rains) – no provision for warm blankets; no provision for food, agony and harassment
to the deceased and asking him to be “murga” for half an hour – he was 55 years old –
cumulatively in my opinion point to intention to cause such injury or harm as would
in all likelihood have resulted in death. The judgment cited by the counsel no doubt
CRL.R.P NO.58/2007

5 of 6

shows that the Courts would have to examine the evidence and one or the other
isolated incident, which in the subjective facts of the case lead to death, may be
insufficient to convict the accused, yet they are not authorities that charges on the
basis of a cumulative reading cannot be framed. In fact all the cases cited were on the
basis of evidence led, and judgments delivered by the Court on merits. None of the
authorities deal with the consideration of evidence and discharge of the accused.
15. After considering the materials on record including the charge sheet I am of the
opinion that charges framed in the impugned order do not require any interference.
The revision petition is accordingly dismissed without any order as to costs.

May 1st, 2007
mlb

CRL.R.P NO.58/2007

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

6 of 6

