*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : December 02, 2007
Date of decision : July 02, 2007

+

WP(C) NO. 348/1993

1.

SURJAN SINGH & ORS.
Through Mr. Vats, Advocate

..... Petitioners

versus
FINANCIAL COMMISSIONER & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through: Ms. Sujata Kashap for Respondent Nos.1,2,3.
Mr. Ajay Laroia for Respondent No. 4
Mr. N.S. Dalal, Advocates

2.

WP(C) 5815/2000
KISHAN LAL & ORS.
Through Mr. Arun Khosla, Advocate
versus

..... Petitioners

FINANCIAL COMMISSIONER & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through: Ms. Sujata Kashap for Respondent Nos.1,2,3.
Mr. Ajay Laroia for Respondent No. 4
Mr. N.S. Dalal, Advocates

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

1 OF 20

1.

In these writ petitions, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners

question orders made by the Financial Commissioner in consolidation proceedings, in terms of
the East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation & Prevention of Fragmentation ) Act, 1948, as
extended to Delhi (called “the Act”) in Village Mundka, Delhi started in 1975. A scheme of
consolidation was drawn up inviting applications for residential plots in the extended Lal Dora
within thirty days from 1.4.76. The scheme was published and was confirmed by the Settlement
Officer (Consolidation) on 26.7.1976. In terms of the confirmed scheme, repartition of
residential plots within the extended Lal Dora as well as agricultural lands were effected, by
authorities under the Act.

2.

A resolution was passed by the village panchayat on 29.4.1979 suggesting variations in

the scheme and on 8.5.1979 the Settlement Officer issued an order, holding inter alia that:
(1) Claims in applications allowed by the predecessors would be included in the
Scheme.
(2) In addition to the applicants indicated in Annexure II (to the Scheme) there were
some other applications submitted by the Haqdars in April, 1976 but were not
included in the Scheme; they could also be included in the Scheme.
3.

As demands of

right-holders had to be met with, amendments to the scheme of

consolidation were proposed. The draft amended scheme was published on 06.08.80. This was
subsequently dropped by the Settlement officer (Consolidation) on 22.05.82 on the ground that
there was no area for allotment and that a few right holders had opposed the allotment. This
order was set aside by the Financial Commissioner, when challenged before him. Again, after
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

2 OF 20

remand, the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) did not comply with the order of the Financial
Commissioner. Some Villagers, and right holders, feeling aggrieved by the order approached
the Financial Commissioner. The revision petitions, in the second round, however, were
rejected, on the view that once the scheme was confirmed, there was no scope for its
amendment.
4.

A batch of writ petitions were filed; they were heard by a Single Judge of this Court,

who disposed them by order dated 23.11.1984. The court found that the claim of the three writ
petitioners before it, had to be considered; the authorities were directed to proceed with the
proposal to amend the Scheme in accordance with the observations made in the judgment.

5.

In order to comply with the directions, of this court, the proposal for amendment of the

scheme was again revived. Consequently, the earlier amended scheme was allowed and
confirmed by the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) on 4.3.1985 with the remark that there was
no necessity for undertaking the circuitous procedure in view of the order of the High Court.
Allotment of residential plots was made out of the land included through the amendment within
the extended Lal Dora.
6.

Apparently some more eligible right-holders were left out. They claimed to be entitled to

plots according to orders of this Court. A need was felt to earmark land for allotment to
persons, whose cases were still pending before this Court and some more area for providing the
passages to various plots had to be allotted. In view of these circumstances, the proposal for
further amendment of the scheme of consolidation to include an area of 92 bighas 7 biswas
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

3 OF 20

within the extended Lal Dora was drawn up by the Consolidation Officer on 20.05.1988. The
Settlement Officer (Consolidation) accepted the proposal on 15.06.88. Pursuant to this
amendment of the scheme, allotments of plots were made to the concerned right holders
according to the demand approved earlier.

7.

The confirmation of the scheme, was challenged through two revision petitions under

section 42 of the Act being case No. 215/89 - Shri Surjan Singh & Others Vs. S.O (C) and
another and case No. 216/89- Shri Hari Singh & Anr. Vs. S.O. (C) and Anr, before the Financial
Commissioner. In the two revision petitions, the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) and the
Consolidation Officer were impleaded as respondents. Other parties, likely to be affected by the
outcome of the decisions, were not impleaded. The order dated 19.09.89 allotting plots, which
had been passed prior to the filing of the two revision petitions was, however, not assailed. The
revision petitions were decided by the Financial Commissioner by order dated 31.10.1989
without issuing notice to the concerned or affected respondents. The amended scheme was set
aside, and the matter was remanded to the the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) for carrying
out amendments afresh by following the rules and consideration the observations made in the
said order.

8.

The order dated 30.10.1989 of the Financial Commissioner was questioned in five writ

petitions before this Court by persons to whom plots had been allotted out of the land included
within the extended Lal Dora through the amended scheme. A learned judge of this court, by

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

4 OF 20

his order dated dated 24.3.1992 quashed the Financial commissioner's order dated 31.10.89 and
remitted the case with a direction that the matter shall be decided after giving notices to the
interested parties, and after granting opportunity of being heard.

9.

After receipt on remand, the matter was registered as Case No.58/92. The Financial

Commissioner issued notices to the parties i.e. the petitioners in the earlier two revision
petitions (decided by the Financial Commissioner on 31.10.89) as well as those who who filed
the five writ petitions. In response to the notices Shri S.S. Vats, Advocate appeared on behalf of
the petitioners in the revision petition No.215/89 viz., Shri Surjan Singh, Shri Raghbir Singh,
and Smt. Veena Goel. Shri Raj Kumar represented the Petitioners in the other revision petition
No.216/89 viz. Shri Hari Singh and Shri Ran Singh. None appeared on behalf of the persons
who had approached the High Court by filing the writ petitions. It was suggested by Shri Vats
and Shri Mahipal Singh that since the matter had to be decided by the Financial Commissioner,
after issuing notices to the interested parties and after giving them opportunity of being heard,
in view of this Court's order, notices to all the interested persons likely to be affected by the
amendment and the allotment of plots ought to be given.

10.

The Financial Commissioner issued notices to all the khatedars likely to be affected;

subsequently, the khatedars who had approached this court, appeared through counsel and a
large number of the right-holders, whose names were recorded in the list were represented in
the proceedings. The Financial Commissioner decided, after hearing the parties and counsel

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

5 OF 20

that a public notice, through press/ newspaper advertisement, as well as proclamation in the
village, should be also given to all the right-holders to make representations, to avoid further
complaints of lack of opportunity. Therefore, notices were published in an issue of Nav Bharat
Times (Hindi) and proclamation by beating of drum in the village was also done.

11.

Pursuant to the publications, a number of right holders represented and participated in

the proceedings; six other counsel appeared in the matter. During the course of hearing, counsel
for petitioner moved an application for amendment of the revision petition. That was disposed
by an order of 1.9.1992. The case was fixed for final arguments. The Financial Commissioner
had agreed to suggestion by the parties that the matter be decided finally, as he had powers
under section 42 of the Act to amend the scheme. The entire matter was heard on all counts
with a view to finally determine the validity or otherwise of the scheme of amendment
confirmed by the settlement Officer (Consolidation) on 15.06.1988.

12.

The Financial Commissioner, by the impugned order, dealt with the objection raised at

that stage that he should not, in exercise of the power under Section 42, amend or confirm the
scheme; he only ought to consider the legality of the order of the lower authorities. By the
impugned order, that objection was overruled. He also considered the merits of the amendment
to the scheme, and held against the petitioners. The relevant part of the impugned order reads as
follows:
“9.

I have given my consideration to the submissions made on behalf of

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

6 OF 20

both sides on this crucial point. From a plain reading of section 36 of the
Act it is apparent that in the matter of variation of revocation of a scheme
of consolidation the subsequent scheme has to be prepared published and
confirmed in accordance with the provisions of the Act. In other words, the
procedure prescribed for preparation, publication and confirmation of the
original scheme has to be equally followed for the subsequent scheme also.
It is true that the High Court has ordered for allotment of plots to some
right-holders who had approached there by extending the phirni. This
cannot be taken to imply that the High Court had itself ordered for the
amendment of the scheme for inclusion of the area at a particular site. All
that was ordered to be done was to allot plots to such persons whose
demands were approved, and that could only be done by extending the
phirni since no area was reported to be available within the extended Lal
Dora earmarked for that purpose in the original scheme. I, therefore, hold
that the procedure laid down under Section 36 had to be followed. Since it
is so held, the remarks recorded by the Settlement Officer (Consolidation)
in his confirmation order that the amendment being in continuation of the
earlier one, the circuitous procedure could be dispensed with do not hold
water. In order to examine the import of the contention of Shri Saroha that
the Lt. Governor has already declined to interfere with the order of
confirmation of the amended scheme and as such the Court has no
authority to reopen the issue. I have gone through the papers filed by Shri
Saroha. It is gathered that the report called for by the Lt. Governor it was
reported that administratively it seemed to be difficult to intervene at that
stage. The aggrieved persons would have to seek remedy though a court of
law. The report was submitted to the Lt. Governor who has appended his
signatures approving the report. It is thus clear that the Lt. Governor had
not considered the merits or demerits of the amended scheme. As against
this, he had approved the proposal that the intervention on the
administrative side was not possible and the aggrieved persons could seek
their remedy through a court of law. It is thus wrong to argue that the Lt.
Governor had upheld the order of confirmation. As decided it was
incumbent upon the Settlement Officer ( Consolidation ) to follow the
procedure and invite objections from the affected persons. That having not
been done admittedly, the order of confirmation of the amendment scheme
cannot be sustained. I hold accordingly.
10. Since the suggestion of the learned counsel representing the parties
that this court may take steps to finally settle the question of amendment of
the scheme and extension of the Lal Dora to accommodate the demands of
the right-holders concerned was approved and accepted, public notices
through press as well as proclamation in the village were issued to enable
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

7 OF 20

the affected persons to prefer objections against the proposed amendment
of the scheme. In response to the notices, many right-holders had appeared
on one or two dates but none filed the written objection. Shri Vats, Shri
Mahipal Singh and Shri N.S. Dass, Advocates have come forward to
challenge the proposed amendment of the revision petition which was
disposed of by my order dated 01.09.92 disallowing the proposed
amendment. The proposed amendment pertained to addition of a new
ground that pursuant to the amendment of the consolidation Rules which
provides (i) that no Hqadar can be given a plot with in the extended Lal
Dora measuring more than 2 bighas 10 biswas (ii) residential plot can be
given to only a person who has been person whose land is included in the
extended Lal Dora will be given three times the land so covered in Lal Dora
and the person getting the Lal Dora plot will have to surrender three times
the extent of the plot being allotted to him, the amended Rule on the subject
be applied in the matter of the amendment of the scheme. Though the
application was rejected but it was left open that since the amendment was
related to the applicability of the amended rules, the plea of the
applicability of the change of law can always be taken at the time of
discussion of the matter on merits. In view of the above, Shri Vats has
sought to reassert his plea that the amended rule be applied for purposes of
determining the issued vis-a-vis the amendment of the scheme. I am not
inclined to accept the submission of Shri Vats on this count. The amendment
pertains to the original scheme and has to be deemed as its integral part in
continuity of the original scheme. The change of law can be applied to the
new scheme only. The amendment in the rules has taken place such after
the publication of the amendment scheme and, therefore, the question of the
applicability of the amended rules to the amendment of the scheme does not
arise. This ground take by Shri Vats thus fails.
11. The next vital ground against the proposed amendment taken on
behalf of the challengers to the said amendment has been that the built up
area of the right holders whose land is proposed to be taken within the
extended Lal Dora cannot be taken away from them. The arguments have
been made that the proposal and the said built area be left out and/or the
same be reserved as such, the amended scheme being a new one. This
argument has been strongly contested on behalf of the opposite side
stressing that the land proposed to be included in the extended Lal Dora to
accommodate the demands of the right holders in view of the High Court
order and other circumstances has been allotted to the person concerned
during repartition under section 21(1) of the Act and it is an agricultural
land for all practical purposes, The said land can be used only for
agriculture and any construction thereon, is thus unlawful and cannot be
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

8 OF 20

given any recognition in law. Further that it is incorrect to argue that the
amended scheme is a new vations, as permitted at the time of original
scheme, cannot be enlarged now to the amended scheme.
12. I find considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel
representing the opposite parties. Use of land allotted during repartition
under section 21(1) of the Act for purposes other than agriculture is strictly
prohibited by law. That being so, the construction, if any, done by the rightholders on such land does not have the sanction of law and cannot be given
any recognition. The plea that the amended scheme is a new one has
already been turned down by me while deciding the issue of applicability of
the amended consolidation Rules in the foregoing paragraphs.
13. Lastly, the learned counsels representing the revisionists and others
Shri Dalal submitted that persons not covered by the High Court cases
should not be included in the amendment. It was stressed that only those
persons whose demands have been approved have a right to be included in
the amendment. It was specifically pointed out that Krishan Kumar was not
at all entitled to any plot and his name has been included in the amendment.
It was explained that neither Krishan Kumar had any recorded demand nor
he had approached the High Court. That being so, his name cannot be
included and the proposed amendment in that behalf was unjustified.
14. In reply, Shri C.S. Saroha, Advocate representing Shri Krishan
Kumar frankly admitted that there was no demand of Shri Krishan Kumar.
He however, sought to plead that there are extenuating circumstances for
accepting his demand and that this court has the jurisdiction to entertain
his demand under section 43-A of the Act treating it as a clerical error or
omission. Shri Saroha did not contest the plea on facts.
15. There is no merit in the submission of Shri Saroha. The amendment
is being restored to pursuant to the orders of the High Court. Undisputedly,
Shri Krishan Kumar had not preferred any demand for the plot. Nor had be
approached the High Court. That being so, it is not practically possible to
entertain his demand for the first time at this stage it may open new fronts
for other similarly placed right-holders. I therefore, disallow the request of
Shri Saroha. Resultantly, it is held that the demand of Shri Krishan Kumar
cannot be included in the amended scheme.
16. On the basis of what has been discussed above, I hereby accept the
proposed amendment and approve the same sanctioning the amendment
scheme in exercise of my powers under section 42 of the Act with the
stipulation that the demand of Shri Krishan Kumar shall not be included in
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

9 OF 20

he amended scheme. The matter stands disposed of accordingly.”

13.

Learned counsel for the petitioners in WP 348/93, submitted that the impugned order is

in error, in not seeing that once the original scheme, was not followed up, or approved, the
subsequent scheme had to be prepared, published and confirmed in accordance with the
provisions of the Act. This was the logical consequence of operation of provisions of Sections
19 and 20, which had to be mandatorily followed. The Financial Commissioner could not have
proceeded to finalize the scheme. The procedure prescribed entailed inviting objections from all
interested; that was admittedly not done. The affected persons whose lands were included
within the extended Lal Dora, were therefore, deprived the opportunity. It was contended that
violation of the provisions of section 19 and 20 rendered the confirmation order illegal and
improper.

14.

Counsel relied upon the scheme of the Act and the rules to submit that the authorities

were bound to follow them. It was contended that Section 14 enables the Government either
suo motu, or on application made, declare its intention by notification to make a scheme for
consolidation of holdings in an estate or estates or any part as may be specified. The
Consolidation Officer has to obtain the advice of the landowners, of the non-proprietors and of
the Gram Panchayat; he thereafter is required to prepare a scheme for the consolidation of
holdings. Under Section 19, the Consolidation Officer has to publish the draft scheme (of
consolidation) and within 30 days thereafter, any person likely to be affected by it can
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

10 OF 20

communicate in writing to the Consolidation Officer, any objection relating to it. He then has to
consider objections, and submit the scheme with such amendments (as he may consider to be
necessary) together with his remarks on the objection to the Settlement Officer (Consolidation).
The scheme, as amended, is then published. Section 20 provides that if no objections are
received to the draft scheme, the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) shall confirm the scheme.
If objections are received, then the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) may either confirm the
scheme, with or without modifications, or refuse to confirm it. If the scheme is confirmed it
should be published. Section 21 relates to repartition to be carried out by the Consolidation
Officer in accordance with the scheme as confirmed under Section 20 and the boundaries of the
holdings as demarcated are required to be shown on the Shajra which is published. Those
aggrieved by such repartition can file written objections before the Consolidation Officer who
after hearing the appellant has to pass such order as he considers proper. An appeal is provided
from the order of the Consolidation Officer to the Settlement Officer (Consolidation). A person
aggrieved by the order of the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) may appeal to the State
Government. Section 22 provides for the preparation of a new record-of-rights by the
Consolidation Officer. Section 23 deals with the rights to possession of new holdings. Section
36 provides for the power to vary or revoke the scheme. It was contended that this scheme
cannot be short circuited or ignored, more so by the Financial Commissioner, whose actions are
to conform to the strict bounds of procedure and the various steps indicated in the Act and the
rules.
15.

It was urged, on the merits, that the impugned order is also not sustainable because it

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

11 OF 20

declined the amendment proposed by the petitioner. The amendments were in the light of the
Amendments carried out to the Rules framed under the Act, that no Hqadar could be given a
plot with in the extended Lal Dora measuring more than 2 bighas 10 biswas and that
residential plots could be given only to persons whose land was included in the extended Lal
Dora who would be entitled to three times the land so covered (in Lal Dora) provided that such
persons getting the plot surrender three times the extent of the plot being allotted. It was
contended that the scheme, even if amended, could not ignore the existing law, as on the date of
the impugned order. Learned counsel relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court reported as
Mithilesh Kumari -vs- Prem Behari Khare 1989 (2) SCC 95, in this regard.

16.

The respondents urged that the demands of those for whom the scheme was amended

had been approved by this Court. The orders of court directed that allotments should be made
by extending the phirni. In such a case, there was no necessity to take recourse to the lengthy
formality of publication of the scheme and inviting objections. It was submitted that the
Settlement officer (Consolidation) in his order dated 15.06.88, had held that the amendment
was in continuity of the earlier scheme, and there was no necessity for undertaking a time
consuming procedure for amending the scheme.

17.

Learned counsel urged that the petitioners cannot even maintain the present proceedings,

since they not only did not object to the procedure adopted by the Financial Commissioner, but
even suggested it. It was submitted that the Financial Commissioner acted within his power to

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

12 OF 20

sanction the amendments, to the scheme, after giving appropriate and proper hearing not only to
the parties before him, but all those who were likely to be affected.

18.

Counsel for the respondents also contended that the amendments were necessitated due

to various orders of the court, which had attained finality. Those writs were binding, and no
grievance was voiced against them or the solution suggested in the directions, by the present
petitioners. It was contended that the petitioner did not have any manner of interest; he did not
disclose as to how or in what manner he would have been affected due to the formalization of
the scheme, by the impugned order.

19.

It was contended that the power under Section 42 of the Act is of widest magnitude. So

long as the Financial Commissioner followed the principles of natural justice, his order- as in
this case, amending the scheme could not be found fault with.

20.

In view of the above facts and contentions, the question which arises for determination is

whether the procedure adopted by the Financial Commissioner in publishing notices inviting
objections deciding the issue of amendment to the scheme, is lawful. The second question is
whether the impugned amendments are illegal or are required to be set aside.

21.

The scheme was originally framed in 1976. The panchayat wanted some amendments to

be incorporated in 1979; this was not done. The matter reached the Financial Commissioner

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

13 OF 20

twice; despite efforts the scheme remained unamended. Aggrieved parties approached this
court. By order dated 23.11.1984 this court found that the claim of the three writ petitioners
before it, had to be considered. The authorities were directed to proceed with the proposal to
amend the Scheme in accordance with the observations made in the judgment. The earlier
scheme was allowed and confirmed on 4-3-1985. Some right holders were however, left out.
Some of them approached courts. The authorities decided to earmark land for allotment to
those, whose cases were still pending before this Court and some more area for providing the
passages to various plots needed to be allotted. A proposal for further amendment of the
scheme of consolidation to include an area of 92 bighas 7 biswas within the extended Lal Dora
was drawn up by the Consolidation Officer on 20.05.1988. The Financial Commissioner's later
order interfering with the amendment was set aside by this court, as he did not issue notice to
any party likely to be affected. Upon remand, the impugned order was issued. By this, the
Financial Commissioner amended the scheme, after issuing notice and considering objections
of all parties.

22.

It has been held (Roop Chand -vs- State of Punjab AIR 1963 SC 1503; State of Punjab

-vs- Suraj Prakash Kapur, AIR 1963 SC 507; Swaran Singh v. State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC
544) that the object of the Act is consolidation of holdings and prevention of fragmentation, to
improve agriculture operations. This court had, after considering those decisions, summarized
the various stages of consolidation, in the judgment reported as Rajinder Singh -vs- Financial
Commissioner, Delhi 122 (2005) DLT 151 as follows:

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

14 OF 20

“The Act was passed to provide for the consolidation of agricultural holdings and
for preventing the fragmentation of agricultural holdings in the State of Punjab. It
was extended to Delhi. Chapter III of the Act deals with Consolidation of Holdings
and it is provided by Section 14 that the Government may either suo motu, or on
application made, declare its intention by notification to make a scheme for
consolidation of holdings in an estate or estates or any part as may be specified.
The Consolidation Officer has to obtain the advice of the landowners, of the nonproprietors and of the Gram Panchayat; he thereafter is required to prepare a
scheme for the consolidation of holdings. Under Section 19, the Consolidation
Officer shall cause to be published the draft scheme of consolidation and within
30 days of such publication any person likely to be affected by such scheme may
communicate in writing to the Consolidation Officer, any objection relating to it.
He then has to consider objections, if any, and submit the scheme with such
amendments as he may consider to be necessary together with his remarks on the
objection to the Settlement Officer (Consolidation). The scheme, as amended, is
then published. Section 20 provides that if no objections are received to the draft
scheme, the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) shall confirm the scheme. If
objections are received, then the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) may either
confirm the scheme, with or without modifications, or refuse to confirm it. If the
scheme is confirmed it should be published. Section 21 relates to repartition to be
carried out by the Consolidation Officer in accordance with the scheme as
confirmed under Section 20 and the boundaries of the holdings as demarcated are
required to be shown on the Shajra which is published. Those aggrieved by such
repartition can file written objections before the Consolidation Officer who after
hearing the appellant has to pass such order as he considers proper. An appeal is
provided from the order of the Consolidation Officer to the Settlement Officer
(Consolidation). A person aggrieved by the order of the Settlement Officer
(Consolidation) may appeal to the State Government. Section 22 provides for the
preparation of a new record-of-rights by the Consolidation Officer. Section 23
deals with the rights to possession of new holdings. Section 36 provides for the
power to vary or revoke the scheme.

29. After preparation of and publication of the draft scheme, the issue is whether
the Consolidation Officer is, in the absence of any objection, bound to confirm the
scheme. Here, it is immediately apparent that the consolidation proceedings are
for the benefit, and efficient utilization of agricultural lands; they are meant to
avoid fragmentation, and consequent uneconomic holdings. Undoubtedly, the
various stages where the scheme is published, objections are invited and
considered, and the scheme is finalized and confirmed, do indicate orderly,
distinct and stage-wise management of the process. Yet, at the same time, there is,
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

15 OF 20

in my opinion, sufficient operational flexibility inherent in the exercise. Thus even
during repartition proceedings, when the allocations are completed, after
confirmation of the scheme, which would contain the broad outlines, the
authorities are empowered to pass orders in relation to individual claims. Hence
having regard to the purpose of the enactment, the Consolidation Officer is under
a duty to apply his mind, while confirming the scheme.”

23.

The power of the Financial Commissioner, to call for records of a case, and make

appropriate orders, is contained in Section 42. That provision reads as follows:
“42. Power of Chief Commissioner to call for proceedings.—The Chief
Commissioner may at any time for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality
or propriety of any order passed, scheme prepared or confirmed or repartition
made by any officer under this Act, call for and examine the record of any case
pending before or disposed of by such officer and may pass such order in
reference thereto as it thinks fit:
Provided that no order or scheme or repartition shall be varied or reversed
without giving the parties interested notice to appear and opportunity to be heard
except in cases where the State Government is satisfied that the proceedings have
been vitiated by unlawful consideration.”
In Johrimal -vs- Director, Consoldiation Holdings AIR 1967 SC 1568, the argument raised
was identical to the plea raised by the petitioners in this case. It was contended that if any
variation of a confirmed scheme was contemplated, recourse to Section 42 was conditioned by
the provision in Section 36, which authorizes authorities to alter or revoke schemes, while
confirming them; in that case the new scheme must be published, objections heard and decided
and the scheme has to be confirmed once again in accordance with the procedure under
Sections 19 and 20 of the Act. The court, however, repelled the contention, in the following
terms:

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

16 OF 20

“To put it differently the contention of the appellant was that the power of
the State Government under s. 42 was controlled by the procedure
prescribed under. 36 if it is involved a variation of the confirmed scheme
and the order of the Director dated March 8, 1957 was ultra vires since the
procedure contemplated by s. 36 of the Act has not been followed. In our
opinion there is no justification for this argument. Section 42 of the Act as
amended by Act 27 of 1960 authorized the State Government to interfere
with the scheme of consolidation or repartition made under the Act. What
the amending Act has done is to substitute for the words 'any order passed
by any officer under this Act', the words 'any order passed, scheme
prepared or confirmed or repartition made by any officer under this Act'.
Section 36 of the Act on the other hand authorizes the authority confirming
a scheme to alter or revoke it and in that case the new scheme must be
published, objections heard and decided and the scheme has to be
confirmed once again in accordance with the procedure under ss. 19 and
20 of the Act. In our opinion the power conferred on the State Government
under s. 42 is a separate power independent of s. 36 of the Act which deal
with the power of the authority confirming the scheme. There is hence no
force in the contention that the scheme of consolidation cannot be varied by
the State Government under s. 42 of the Act except in accordance with s. 36
of the Act. The reason for the two different provisions in SS. 36 and 42 of
the Act is also clear for if a scheme is varied or revoked by the authority
confirming it, then the new scheme has to be published so that interested
parties may object and their objection decided by competent authorities set
up under the Act, those decisions being finally appealable to the State
Government. But when a scheme is to be varied by the State Government
itself under s. 42 of the Act there is no requirement of the statute that the
varied scheme should be published for the State Government is required to
give notice and to given an opportunity to the interested parties to be heard
before the variation is made. We are therefore of the opinion that the power
conferred on the State Government by S. 42 is not controlled by s. 36 and
the procedure of publication and hearing objections contemplated by ss. 19
and 20 of the Act is not necessary. Section 36 and 42 envisage two different
situation and the intention of the Act is to give powers respectively to the
Confirming Authority and to the State Government to act under these
sections in their discretion in any particular case. We accordingly hold that
Mr. Bishen Narain is unable to make good his argument on this aspect of
the case.

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

17 OF 20

24.

In view of the clear declaration of law, the contention of the petitioner regarding lack of

power of the Financial Commissioner to confirm, or vary the scheme have to be rejected.
Another reason why this contention cannot be accepted on the facts is that all the villagers,
including affected parties, as well as the petitioners were put to notice. There was widespread
participation in the proceedings before the Financial Commissioner. The petitioner's counsel, in
fact suggested the procedure. No manner of prejudice has been claimed, except the vague and
general arguments on the basis of assumed loss of appellate forum. I therefore find no merit in
these contentions. The impugned order cannot be faulted as having been made without
jurisdiction.

25.

The second serious ground urged was that the Financial Commissioner erred in not

following the rules framed under the Act, as amended in 1992. Those rules stipulated that
anyone allotted lands in extended Lal Dora had to surrender three times the extent of the plot
allotted. The contention here was that since the amendment had been made as on the date of the
impugned order i.e. in 1992, the Financial Commissioner, while varying the scheme, could not
ignore it, and was duty bound to apply the amended provisions.
26.

The petitioners had relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Mithilesh Kumari's

case (supra). The court had ruled that provisions of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act
applied retroactively; consequently they operated in proceedings pending on the date of its
commencement. However, this reasoning was overruled, in relation to the same Act, in R.
Rajagopal Reddy v. Padmini Chandrasekharan 1995 (2) SCC 630. The court relied upon a

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

18 OF 20

previous decision reported as Garikapati Veeraya v. N. Subbiah Choudhry AIR 1957 SC 540,
where it was held that:
“The golden rule of construction is that, in the absence of anything in the
enactment to show that it is to have retrospective operation, it cannot be so
construed as to have the effect of altering the law applicable to a claim in
litigation at the time when the Act was passed.”

The Supreme Court followed the same reasoning, i.e. amendments made during pendancy of
proceedings, cannot ordinarily apply, unless a contrary intention appears from the provisions, in
its later decisions (Raminder Singh Sethi v. D. Vijayarangam,(2002) 4 SCC 675 ,

C.

Gangacharan v. C. Narayanan, (2000) 1 SCC 459 ). In view of this settled legal position, I find
no merit in the contention of the petitioners that the impugned order is in error, as it did not
adhere to amendments carried out during the pendancy of proceedings.

27.

Neither in the petition nor during the hearing, was the element of prejudice to the

petitioners brought to the notice of the court. The entire tenor of arguments were regarding the
procedure and illegality of the impugned order. In view of the above findings, I find no merit in
Writ petition No.348/1993. It is accordingly dismissed.
28.

The petitioners in WP 5815/2000 are aggrieved by an order of the Financial

Commissioner dated 27-7-2000. They claim to have purchased lands from the first two
petitioners in WP 348/2000 (who are arrayed as Respondent Nos 5 and 6) on 24-12-1985. They
were aggrieved by orders of the Consolidation officer made pursuant to the impugned order in
WP 348/93. They had approached this court directly; but their writ petitions were disposed with
WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

19 OF 20

permission to them to approach the Financial Commissioner. In the order of the Financial
commissioner, the proceedings were adjourned sine die to await the outcome of proceedings in
some other case. I am of the considered opinion that the Financial Commissioner should hear
and decide the revisionists, on the merits. Accordingly a direction is issued that the revision
petition of these petitioners should be decided, in accordance with law, after hearing all parties,
within 4 months from today.

29.

In view of the above, WP No. No.348/1993 is dismissed. WP 5815/2000 is disposed off

with direction to the Financial Commissioner to decide Case No. 145/2000-CA, i.e the
petitioner's revision petition, in accordance with law, after hearing parties, within 4 months.
30.

No costs.

JULY 02, 2007

( S. RAVINDRA BHAT)

JUDGE

WP(C) NO. 348/1993 & WP(C) 5815/2000

20 OF 20

