.*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 159 of 2000
Reserved on : July 31, 2007
Date of Decision : 3rd August, 2007

D. MALIK

….. PETITIONER
Through: Mr. S.D. Salwan Advocate
(Mr. Neeraj Chaudhary & Mr. Paras Khattar, Advocates, with him)
Vs.

STATE AND OTHERS

...... RESPONDENTS
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for the State;
Dr. Sarabjit Sharma, with Mr. Sumit Sharma, for R-2;
Mr. Kishan Nautiyal, for Respondent No. 3

CORAM:

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved by an order dated 6-11-1999 whereby the

respondent-accused were discharged of the offences punishable under Section
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 159 of 2000

1 of 7

341/506/34 Indian Penal Code.
2.

The brief facts are that the petitioner complained to the Deputy

Commissioner of Police (DCP) against the accused, Respondent Nos 2 and 3
(hereafter referred to as "the accused"). The complainant alleged that when, on
4:00 PM, on 18-5-1996, she was in the Old Rajinder Nagar Market, on the way to
her house, the accused went near her, stopped their car, abused and threatened her.
It was alleged that they also threatened her husband, tried to pressurize her to
withdraw litigation filed against them. She alleged that they held out a threat of
breaking her face and teeth, in case the demands were not complied with. They
also allegedly threatened to kill her and the children in case she did not vacate the
house occupied by her, which apparently they wanted to be vacated. She also
alleged that the next day, i.e 19-5-1996, Smt. Indu Mutreja and her husband,
Rakesh Mutreja, forced themselves into her house. Smt Mutreja caught hold of her
by the hair, threatening that she should vacate the house by the month end, or face
dire consequences. The complainant recorded another statement, on 17-6-1996. In
this she alleged that the incident of 18th May, 1996 was witnessed by a scooterist
Manjeet Singh.
3.

After investigation, a report was filed under Section 173, Cr.P.C. which

recommended to proceed against the accused. The trial court, after considering the
records, including statements, and copies of various litigation between the parties,

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 159 of 2000

2 of 7

discharged the accused.
4.

Mr. Sushil Salwan, learned counsel contended that the trial court fell into

error in discharging the accused. It was contended that there were sufficient
materials to proceed and frame charges; the trial court conducted a meticulous
examination of the record, as if it were hearing the case at the stage of trial.
Learned counsel contended that inconsistencies and contradictions highlighted, in
the course of the impugned order were too trivial for the court to discharge the
accused, at that stage; they should have stood trial.
5.

Dr. Sarabjit Sharma, learned counsel for one of the accused resisted the

petition. He submitted that the impugned order is sound and requires no
interference. He relied upon the reasoning in the impugned order and contended
that the trial court was persuaded to discharge the accused, for three good and
valid reasons. One, the discrepancy between the previous statement and complaint
on the one hand, and the supplementary statement recorded later. In the former, the
petitioner was categorical about the absence of any eyewitness. However, later she
improved on the version, and sought to introduce the presence of an eyewitness.
Two, the supplementary statement is silent about the incident of 19-5-1999. Three,
the threat of killing the complainant, allegedly held out by the accused, does not
find mention in her supplementary statement.
6.

The impugned order has to a large extent, accepted the contention of the

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 159 of 2000

3 of 7

accused. It inter alia, reads as follows:
"8.
I find that there are material contradictions in the
complaint filed by complainant Mrs. D. Malik dated 20.05.1996
and her supplementary statement recorded on 17.06.1996. First
of all, in her supplementary statement dated 17.6.1996
complainant D. Malik does not state anything about the incident
dated 19.05.1996. She has not stated anything regarding the role
of accused Indu Mutreja and her husband Rakesh Mutreja. In her
complainant she has made specific allegations against Indu
Mutreja and Rakesh Mutreja that on 19.05.96 at 6.30 a.m both
of them forcibly entered her house and Indu Mutreja caught hold
of her heir and both of them threatened her to withdraw the case
filed against brother of Indu Matreja and to vacate the house by
the end of month. Complainant has not stated a word regarding
the incident dated 19.05.96 in her supplementary statement
recorded on 17.06.96 against Indu Mutreja and Rakesh Mutreja.
9.
Secondly, in her complainant dated 20.05.96 she has
specifically stated in para No.5 that no person was present at the
spot when the incident took place. In her supplementary
statement dated 17.06.1996 she has stated that one person
Manjeet Singh was coming to Karolbagh on his scooter who has
witnessed this incident and accused on seeing Manjeet Singh left
the spot in a Maruti car. In view of the fact that complainant in
her complaint dated 20.5.96 does not state about the presence of
Manjeet Singh at the spot and on the other hand she has
categorically stated that no public person was present at the spot
when the incident took place. Thus presence of PW Manjeet
Singh at the spot at the time of incident is doubtful. Lastly,
complainant in her complaint dated 20.05.96 has stated that
accused Gurvinder Singh and Ajay Malik threatened her to
vacate the house by the end of month otherwise they would kill
her and her children. nothing has been stated about this fact in
the supplementary statement of complainant recorded
10. As discussed above, there are major contradictions in the
complaint made by complainant Mrs. D. Malik on 20.05.96 and
supplementary statement recorded on 17.6.90. These are not
minor variations but major contradictions which make her
statement untruthful and untrust worthy. This cast serious doubt
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 159 of 2000

4 of 7

on the happening of the occurrence. Testimony of complainant is
wholly unreliable and unworthy of credit which make the story
highly improbable."
7.

It is now settled, that the court has the power to either accept or reject a

final report under Section 173; the only condition is that the order should disclose
application of mind, and cogent reasons for doing so. The Supreme Court, in
Gangadhar Janardhan Mhatre -vs- State of Maharastra 2004 (7) SCC 768, held
as follows:
"When a report forwarded by the police to the Magistrate under
Section 173(2)(i) is placed before him several situations arise.
The report may conclude that an offence appears to have been
committed by a particular person or persons and in such a case,
the Magistrate may either (1) accept the report and take
cognizance of the offence and issue process, or (2) may disagree
with the report and drop the proceeding, or (3) may direct further
investigation under Section 156(3) and require the police to make
a further report."

8.

The factual matrix indicated in the preceding part of this judgment shows

that the complainant and the accused knew each other; they were disputants in
courts, for possession of property. According to the complainant, the accused
threatened her on 18-5-1996; the next day, there was another incident where two
other accused threatened her. The common thread appears to be pressure to vacate
the premises occupied by her. However, the court, after considering all the

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 159 of 2000

5 of 7

materials, noticed significant discrepancies, regarding existence of an eyewitness,
nature of the threats ( in the first statement she alleged that the accused threatened
to kill her and her children; later she did not mention it) and the nature of the
incident (dated 19-5-1999 itself-that was not even mentioned in the subsequent
supplementary statement).
9.

It is an undisputed proposition of law that if the court is convinced that

prima facie materials pointing to grave suspicion about involvement of accused in
the commission of an offence exist, charges can be framed. Yet, equally, if the
materials point to a discrepant story, where two views can reasonably be
entertained, the accused has to receive the benefit of the view that favours his
discharge (See Dilawar Babu Kurane -vs- State of Maharastra AIR 2002 SC 564).
10.

I have carefully examined the records, the charge sheet, evidence placed on

record and order of the trial court. The view taken by it accords with the rule in
Kurane's case,in view of the two versions given by the complainant herself.
Consequently, the impugned order cannot be termed as an impropriety or an order
overlooking material facts or in error of law. For these reasons, the revision has to
fail; it is dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
August 3, 2007

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 159 of 2000

JUDGE

6 of 7

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 159 of 2000

7 of 7

