*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Delivered on May 9, 2007

+

CRL.REV. P. 313/2007
AMAR SINGH

.....PETITIONER

THROUGH Mr. L.D. Mual and Mr. S.N. Bhardwaj, Advocates
VERSUS

STATE

.......RESPONDENT
THROUGH Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for State

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:(Open Court)
1.

In this revision under Section 397/401, Criminal Procedure Code, the

petitioner challenges the concurrent findings of the Courts by which he was
convicted of the offences under Section 279 /304A, Indian Penal Code (IPC) and
sentenced to undergo six months simple imprisonment (for the offence under
Section 279) and one years simple imprisonment (for the offence under Section
304A).
CRL.REV. P. 313/2007

1 of 5

2.

The facts are that according to the prosecution on 13.09.99 at 10 A.M., at a

main 100 ft. road, the petitioner was found driving a bus in a rash and negligent
manner. This led to an accident in which one Joginder Singh, a by-stander, in the
bus stand, was struck and received fatal injuries. In support of its case, the
prosecution relied upon the deposition of 12 witnesses. It was alleged that a
Constable, one Niranjan (PW-11) removed the injured to the hospital. Being an
eye-witnesses, he deposed about his presence on duty at the concerned bus stand
when at about 10:10 A.M., the bus driven by the petitioner, proceeded very fast
and hit a person standing there. The bus sped away. He identified the bus
number and narrated how a PCR Van arrived at the spot, how he took the injured
to the hospital and later identified the driver of the bus, i.e. the petitioner. This
witness as well as all other prosecution witnesses were cross-examined. The trial
Court, by its judgment dated 07.08.06 convicted the petitioner and awarded the
sentence impugned. The appeal of the petitioner before the Additional Sessions
Judge was rejected on 28.04.07.
3.

Learned counsel contended that the judgments of the Courts below are

vitiated because they have believed the conjectures and surmises of the
prosecution.

It was contended that the strongest eye-witness PW-11 was a

planted witness. The efforts of the defence, i. e. the petitioner to prove that he
was in fact not present at the site by production of the duty roster despite an
application under Section 311 Cr. P.C., were frustrated. It was contended that if
this course had been adopted, the petitioner would have conclusively proved that
PW-11 was not at the site and could not, therefore, have claimed to be an eyeCRL.REV. P. 313/2007

2 of 5

witness.
4.

Learned counsel claimed that the conduct of PW-11, even if the facts

alleged by him were assumed to be true were unnatural to say the least as, being
charged with enforcement of the law, if indeed PW-11 had witnessed the incident,
the least expected of him was to give a chase which he admittedly did not.
5.

Learned counsel lastly contended that, taken as a whole, the findings

arrived at by the Courts below were unsupported by the evidence which nowhere
showed that the petitioner drove the vehicle in a rash and negligent manner. It
was submitted that the mere allegation of the bus having been driven at a fast
speed did not lead to the inference that it was driven in a rash and negligent
manner.
6.

The Appellate Court, in its impugned judgment, inter alia, held as follows:
“8. Having heard arguments from both the sides and after
perusal of the record, I do not find any infirmity or illegality in
the order as learned MM has carefully scrutinized the evidence
in the light of available material on record as regard to the
identity of the accused driving the erring vehicle. The statement
of PW-1 Ct. Niranjan Sharma recorded at GTB Hospital, Delhi
where injured was removed by him, is worth mentioning. It,
inter alia, mentions that on 13.09.99, he was present at the bus
stand of 212 on his duty from 8 AM to 8 PM at about 10:10 PM.
Bus No. DEP 9770 came from the Seemapuri side being driven
by bus driver in a fast speed and in a rash and negligent manner
and it struck the pedestrians standing at the bus stand waiting
for bus and ran towards Durgapuri. In the meanwhile, PCR Van
baker 13 came. It passed the message through the wireless set.
The MLC of the victim shows arrival of victim at 10:35 AM on
13.9.99 and victim was brought by PW-11 Ct. Niranjan Sharma
whose number is also mentioned as 1496 PS Nand Nagri. It at
least goes to show that the victim was brought from the place of
accident to the hospital by PW-11 Ct. Niranjan Singh. At this
stage, it cannot be said that by not proving the duty roaster of
this Constable, an inference can be reached that he was not on

CRL.REV. P. 313/2007

3 of 5

duty at that place on the fateful day. It can be presumed that
official duties were performed in normal course of nature and
there is no reason as to why just to solve the case, IO will
introduce a false witness. Even the statement of TI Brahm Singh
PW8 went unrebutted who testified that the accused was on duty
in the bus No. DEP 9770 from 4:20 AM to 12:20 PM on 13.09.99
at DTC bus route No. 205 from Seemapuri to Koriya Pull.
Accused was caught on the same bus route by the PCR officials.”
7.

I have carefully considered the judgments of the Courts below and the

submissions made on behalf of the petitioner. In this case, the death occurred
due to the accident on 13.09.99; the Courts convicted the petitioner of the offence
he was charged with and found that he had driven the bus in a rash and negligent
manner. PW-11 was an eye-witness. The objection to his testimony, i. e. his being
a planted witness, does not appear to be correct. During the trial, no attempt was
made to impeach his version about his presence – indeed he was extensively
cross-examined. The effort of the petitioner to have the Roznama summoned at
the appellate stage, therefore, cannot be viewed as an entirely innocent exercise.
It is more in the nature of a desperate attempt to evade and deflect his role. The
testimony of PW-11 was found to be credulous. I am not persuaded by the
submissions on behalf of the petitioner that his not giving a chase was unnatural.
If a public servant or a police man chooses to help an injured victim that surely
cannot be considered unnatural or a circumstance impeaching his credibility.
8.

The scope of revisional jurisdiction in matters where the Court has to

examine the factual findings, and concurrent ones at that, are extremely limited.
The High Court can, if it is convinced that the approach of the Courts were
palpably illegal or led to a manifest failure of justice, intervene under exceptional
CRL.REV. P. 313/2007

4 of 5

circumstances. The judgments of the Courts below do not indicate any infirmity
of such nature as to justify the exercise of revisional jurisdiction. So far as the
sentence is concerned, this is not an incident where the accused had, relatively
speaking, to undergo the trauma of prolonged trial for about 15-20 years. The
Courts below considered all the circumstances, aggravating as well as mitigating,
and sentenced the petitioner. I do not find any infirmity in their approach, as
regards this aspect too.
9.

In view of the above conclusions, this petition has to fail; it is accordingly

dismissed.

MAY 9, 2007

CRL.REV. P. 313/2007

S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
JUDGE

5 of 5

