*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004
Reserved on : February 02,2007
Decided on : July 2, 2007

M/S. EVEREST SANITATION (INDIA) & ANR.
..... Petitioners
Through Mr. Sanjay Sherawat, Advocate
versus
DELHI JAL BOARD & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through : Mr. Sandeep Aggarwal, Advocate for the DJB.
Mr. R.K. Tripathi, Advocate for respondent No.3.
Mr. Sunil Bagai, Advocate for respondent No.4.
Mr. Kartike Anand, Advocate for Intervenors.
CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

In these writ proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, a

condition has been imposed by the respondent, Delhi Jal Board(hereafter referred to as
“DJB”) through a circular, requiring testing of water meters before their procurement has been
impugned.
2.

The petitioners claim to be engaged in the business of manufacturing water

meters (domestic type). They also claim to hold valid licences for use of ISI Standard
Mark, issued by the Indian Standards Institution, by virtue of the Indian Standards

W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

1 of 22

Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1952. It is averred that the use of ISI Standard
Mark is governed by the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (hereafter
referred to as “BIS”) Act as well as the Rules and Regulations framed under that Act. The
BIS has spelt out standards applicable to the domestic water meters, which have to be
adhered to by the manufacturers, to qualify the use of such mark. The specifications are
contained in Indian Standard Water Meters (Domestic Type) Specifications being No. IS
779:1994 (hereafter called “the 1994 Standards”). The methods of testing performance
requirement of water meters covered by the 1994 standards have been prescribed in the
Indian Standard METHOD FOR PERFORMANCE TESTING OF WATER METERS
(DOMESTIC TYPE) being No. IS 6784 : 1996 (hereafter called “Performance Standards
1996”).
3.

Initially in 1987 the predecessor of DJB by its circular approved procurement

of only 8 approved make water meters, which were marked by the ISI, while sanctioning
new water connections or replacement of defective, private meters. On 3.10.1994, due to
a felt shortage of water meters a condition imposed by its previous circular of 1987 was
suspended. On 23.8.2001, the DJB issued a circular in effect reviving its condition that
only those water meters bearing the ISI Mark could be installed. This was followed by
circular of 5.11.2001 which stated that till completion of process of formalities, the
consumers could purchase, on a purely temporary basis (as stop gap arrangement) use of
any ISI Mark dry dial type water meters manufactured as per BIS specification
accompanied by a copy of a valid certification mark licence.
4.

In supersession of its previous circulars the DJB notified on 13.11.2002 the

W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

2 of 22

specifications applicable for use of 15 mm size private water meters for new water
connections as well as for replacement of defective water meters. The specification for
the meter was prescribed to be 15 mm size, Class 'B' Multi-jet, Magnetically coupled,
inferential type with dry dial ISI Marked conforming to IS 779 (1994) with up-to-date
amendments. This circular in addition spelt out the following conditions:
“ Each and every meter shall be accompanied by a test
certificate of testing as per above specifications by any of the following
agencies alongwith the Manufacturers usual test certificate and
Guarantee Card:(1)M/S National Physical Laboratory, Dr. K.S. Krishnan Marg,
New Delhi
(2)M/s. F.C.R.I., Palghat, Kerala
(3)M/S S.G.S. India Private Ltd., 250, Udyog Vihar, Phase-IV,
Gurgaon-122015
(4)Central Water Meter Workshop, Delhi Jal Board, Greater
Kailash-I, New Delhi.”
5.

This notification was followed with a notice published in the Times of India

on 4.8.2003.

The Public Notice reiterated the above condition in addition to the

specification concern, namely, ISI Mark confirming to IS:779(94).
6.

After the Public Notice, another circular was issued by the DJB on 8.9.2003.

This stated, inter alia, that the certificate issued by any recognized testing laboratory to
the manufacturer showing that the particular make/brand of water meter was in
conformity with the prescribed specification, sufficed for the purpose of purchase of such
meters by the consumers. In other words, the additional requirement spelt out in the
circular dated 13.11.2002 and Public Notice 4.8.2003 were dispensed with.
7.

On 14.1.2004, the DJB issued yet another circular; this time re-

stated/reinstated the additional requirement.
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

Further it stated that all Zonal Engineers
3 of 22

and Zonal Officials were to ensure compliance of the instructions; no meter without
testing certificates by the four agencies mentioned in the first circular of 13.12.2002,
(which was reiterated in the last circular of 14.1.2004) could be permitted to be installed.
8.

As a sequel to these circulars in June-July 2004 the DJB issued notice

inviting tender dated 10.6.2004 and a document entitled “expression of interest for the
supply, installation and maintenance of domestic water meters” proposing to procure
water meters from the manufacturers.
9.

The writ petitioners impugn the additional condition embodied in the

requirement that every meter should be accompanied by its certificate of testing by the
four agencies mentioned in the circular dated 14.1.2004.

It is stated that the

specifications for the water meters have been spelt out in accordance with provisions of
the Act, namely, the BIS Act of 1986. The concerned manufacturers like the petitioners
have been certified by the BIS; their processes have been approved. The standards of
performance required to be adhered and followed for testing are in turn prescribed by the
performance regulations of 1996. Thus, when a manufacturer such as the petitioner offers
its products in the market, it is with the authority of the ISI Mark, legitimately entitled to
be used. The imposition of an additional condition of further testing and a certification
by some other laboratory, for an additional fee, defeats the purpose of the Act and is,
therefore, unlawful and arbitrary.
10.

The petitioners allege that the requirement of a manufacturer holding a valid

licence issued by the Institution of Standards, and having to use the ISI Mark in
conformity with BIS Regulations serves the public interest and the basic objectives which
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

4 of 22

also underlie the circulars. It is contended that imposition of a further additional test
would only add to the cost and not the quality of the meter. The petitioners aver that if
such conditions are permitted, yet another circular can be issued requiring completely
unnecessary testing in addition to the further testing. The circular is also attacked on the
ground that although three agencies specified are Public/Government Agencies but the
fourth viz S.G.S. India Pvt. Ltd. is a private laboratory and no rationale has been offered
why such private party for additional testing is required as a condition of procurement or
even installation of meters which bear the ISI mark according to the BIS Act.
11.

It is claimed that the impugned condition of second testing is arbitrary and

unreasonable and violates the petitioners' right to carry on their trade or business in an
unhindered manner. The condition is not a reasonable restriction since it would fuel the
costs of the meters. According to the petitioners, the second testing by any of the three
Government Agencies would result in the cost of each meter working out between Rs.
3000/- to Rs. 5000/- whereas the actual cost of the domestic meter is only Rs. 375/-. It is
also averred that the private agency, namely, S.G.S. India Private Ltd., a private
laboratory, does not have any laboratory of its own. The petitioners further alleged that
the charges collected by the National Physical Laboratory for testing one water meter is
Rs. 5800/-. The other agency, namely, F.C.R.I. is located at Kerala and also charging
similar fees for testing.

Therefore,

the second testing would entail delay and

considerable expenses rendering reasonably priced water meters which are otherwise
permitted to bearing the ISI mark monetarily unfeasible.
12.

This Court by an interim order initially stayed the operation of the

W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

5 of 22

impugned requirement on 5.10.2004. Later, after hearing an application moved by the
DJB, the interim order was varied. The DJB was permitted to carry out condition strictly
in accordance with the circular dated 25.6.2004 which had stated the testing would be by
two agencies, namely, National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi and F.C.R.I. Palghat,
Kerala. This order was made till the final out come of the proceedings.
13.

The stated position of the DJB, reflected in its detailed averment contained

in an application for vacation of stay and further pleading is that the impugned a
requirement was necessary because it had received feedback from its workers/employees
that most of the meters, even those with the ISI mark, were not performing correctly.
According to it, though manufacturers are approved by the BIS, each and every meter
manufactured by them are not in conformity with the prescribed standards. In this respect
DJB invited suggestions from various water meter manufactures, as to how, the quality of
every meter could be ensured. The DJB avers that as long as, manufacturers are selling
meters directly in the open market, they would be responsible for sale of any sub-standard
meters. However, for meters purchased by the consumer through DJB, it becomes the
responsibility of the latter to ensure that such meters supplied are of right quality. In case
of any defect in the meters, the consumer would hold the respondent liable for the defect.
In these circumstances the DJB decided that every meter should be checked by an
independent agency at the cost of the manufacturers, so as to ensure strict compliance of
standards. Both the test laboratories i.e. M/s National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi
and M/s F.C.R.I., Palghat, Kerala charge Rs. 55,000/- for a package of three meters and
also require approximately 40 days for carrying out the said test. For them, it is difficult
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

6 of 22

to carry out tests at the manufacturing unit in respect of every meter, whereas, an
independent testing agency being S.G.S. India Pvt. Ltd. is a world renowned testing
laboratory having more than 1000 labs all over the world. Testing by such an agency of
repute with several branches in India, would actually benefit public interest as it would
address quality concern and also not impose a heavy burden or cost. For these reasons,
the respondent decided to impose the additional condition on manufacturers, prequalifying them to obtain test certificates. However, after being qualified, every meter
was to be certified by an independent agency being M/s S.G.S. Pvt. Ltd., so that a
guarantee card could be given, along with, every meter to the consumer and the latter is
free from any trouble at least for a period of two years.
14.

In the course of the proceedings, the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) was

impleaded as third respondent. In its affidavit it confirmed that the petitioners are
licensees and maintaining the prescribed standards. According to the BIS no complaint
was received against them. However, it is also averred that issuance of licence is by itself
not guarantee that the product with ISI Mark is proper, unless the manufacturer comes on
its production properly. The marking of water meters manufactured by the petitioners
under the BIS certificate mark scheme, it is averred, is done after strictly following IS
779:1994 standard. The manufacturer is granted licence initially for one year in respect
of each article, produced in its factory.

The BIS carries out inspection of the

manufacturing and testing capability located in the factory premises for the relevant
period, draws samples from a batch of the production of the items, tests them in an
independent laboratory, where the complete manufacturing and testing facilities are
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

7 of 22

available. Subject to conformity of the samples to the relevant standard, BIS also carries
out surprise periodic inspection of the licensee factory to ascertain continued
implementation of the standards as well as collect samples from the market including
consumers and organizations such as DJB. Further BIS inspects periodic performance of
the licensee and if the operation of the standards of testing and inspection are not
satisfactory, suitable action is taken.
15.

The BIS has averred that it has no provision for commercial testing of any

item and that it only tests products. It asserts inability to extend its testing facilities to
any other person who has not applied for licence from BIS. It is further averred that BIS
does not provide facilities to anyone to carry out thorough testing of each & every item
manufactured by its licensee. According to the provisions of 1986 Act, if violations are
reported, BIS can commission a search and seizure operation besides taking remedial act
of suspending the licence or cancelling it. It can also prosecute the offending licensee.
16.

Sh. Sanjay Sherawat, learned counsel contended that in terms of the

scheme of the Constitution, particularly, the various Entries in the Lists to the VIIth
Schedule in the Constitution such as Entry 50 List-I, Entry 29 List-II and Entry 33-A of
List-III, Parliamentary legislation on the issue of standards of weights and measures, have
an overriding effect over any other legislation. Thus, even though Entry 17 of List-II
enables the State to legislate on the subject of water, such legislation would be subjected
to and necessarily yield, to provisions in the Parliamentary legislation on questions
relating to standards. It was submitted that in the event of any repugnancy or conflict the
law made by Parliament would override provisions of State legislation. It was contended
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

8 of 22

that in this background the provisions of the BIS Act, and the 1994 standards as well as
the 1996 performance standards

were conclusive. The petitioners' concerns products

being lawfully marked by the BIS in terms of the Act and its specifications cannot be
subjected to further testing. Learned counsel contended that none of the provisions in the
Delhi Water Board Act 1998 by which the DJB was constituted enable testing of water
meters; they do not authorize the DJB in any manner to impose additional conditions in
regard to the quality of water meters marked under the BIS Act.
17.

It was next contended by learned counsel that the requirement having to

undergo additional testing is an arbitrary and unwarranted condition. He relied upon the
decisions reported as Mahendra Labs Private Limited vs. State of Karnataka and Ors.,
AIR 1987 Karn 166 where a tender condition regarding imposition of three years
manufacturing experience was held to be unlawful as it excluded participation by a
licensee under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act who was entitled to sell his products.
Learned counsel also relied upon the decision reported as Gharda Chemicals Limited vs.
Central Warehousing Corporation, 118(2005) DLT 159 where a Division Bench of this
Court held that inclusion of requirement of three years manufacturing experience of an
ISI marked chemical manufacturing licensee was irrational and arbitrary.

Learned

counsel relied upon the judgment of this Court reported as Anil Kumar Gupta vs.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Ors., 113(2004) DLT 3 and submitted that standards
prescribed by the BIS cannot be overridden or ignored by insistence on certain additional
or fresh conditions. In that case, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) had insisted
upon the grant of licence for use of premises for purposes of water packaging plant. The
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

9 of 22

Court had held that having regard to the nature of the process and the licence granted by
the BIS to the petitioner, packaged drinking water could not fall within the term aerated
water.
18.

Learned counsel next contended that the insistence on testing, prescribed by

the impugned circulars amounted to unreasonable restrictions on the right to carry on
trade or business guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g). It was contended that every citizen is
entitled to uninhibited right to carry on a business vocation or trade and that restrictions
to such right can be imposed only on stated grounds, and in public interest.
requirement of testing unreasonably impacted on the petitioner's right to trade.

The
Its

products were manufactured admittedly in confirmity with Parliamentary legislation.
Yet, they were subjected to testing by an outside agency. Learned counsel relied on the
decision reported as Pathumma and Ors. vs. State of Kerala and Ors., AIR 1978 SC 771;
Kharak Singh vs. State of U.P., AIR 1963 SC 1295; Mohd. Yasin vs. Town Area
Committee, AIR 1952 SC 115 and S.L. Sachdev & Ors. vs. Union of India and Ors., AIR
1981 SC 411. Learned counsel lastly contended that once the petitioner was issued a
licence in terms of BIS Act and the Rules, the latter containing an elaborate mechanism
for inspection of quality and putting in place control system which included search and
seizure proceedings, there was no rationale for insisting upon further testing by an
unauthorised and unlicenced agency.

It was contended that the various processes

indicated in the rules which can be resorted to by the BIS included type testing, line
testing, continuous testing of products and temperature test. All these were known as
good manufacturing practices. It was contended that once the products including water
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

10 of 22

meters undergo such rigorous tests and procedure which are pre-conditions to their
marketing, the further insistence of testing by a completely private agency whose
credentials are unknown and were not disclosed to the Court, and whose testing for a few
minutes for a fee is insisted upon, is not only contrary to the provisions of the BIS Act but
an arbitrary condition.

It was contended that such a condition betrays utter non-

application of mind and is not founded on reason. Learned counsel submitted that even if
it were assumed that the DJB as a public procuring agency had a concern and anxiety
about the quality of meters, it had to necessarily address such concerns in a reasonable
manner.

The proper mode would have been to ask the BIS to make a suitable

mechanism. In stead it unilaterally imposed such unwarranted conditions which cannot
withstand the test of reason. All State action including action by instrumentalities of the
State are to be founded on reason. The impugned notification and condition does not
show any reason and are, therefore, irrational.
19.

Mr. Sandeep Aggarwal, learned counsel for the DJB resisted the petition.

Initially, he made an argument about the petitioner's inability to maintain the proceedings
on account of suspension of their licence by the BIS. However, he later did not press the
submission in view of the documents and materials suggestive of the BIS with drawing its
objections. It was contended by counsel that in terms of Section 17 of the Delhi Water
Board Act 1998, DJB has to provide meters to measure consumption of water by users.
Learned counsel contended that the DJB in exercise of its powers under Section 75 had
the authority to enter into contracts and it can make regulations under Section 109 to
effectuate provisions of the Act. Learned counsel also relied upon Section 9(f) of the Act
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

11 of 22

which enables the DJB to provide for ancillary or incidental matters necessary to promote
the object of the enactment. It was contended that on an overall conspectus of provisions
of the Delhi Water Boards Act, the necessary inference is that DJB has legitimate
concerns and, therefore, the power to ensure that water meters supplied by it conform to
their description, perform as such and are of the desired standard and quality. Learned
counsel contended that experience had shown to employees of DJB that a large number of
water meters procured from private manufacturers though labeled with the BIS mark,
were sub-standard. As long as the consumer purchased such meters directly from the
market, he could take suitable action in case of defects in the products. However, where
the DJB in exercise of its powers under Section 17 read with Section 75 procured such
meters and supplies them to the consumers, it owed an obligation to them. It was in order
to allay any such apprehensions that the conditions in the impugned notification were
framed.
20.

Learned counsel contended that under Rule 11 of the BIS Rules, agents can

be appointed for the purpose of testing. Having regard to the experience in the field and
the large number of complaints received the DJB formed the opinion that condition of
testing by the concerned agencies should be insisted. It was submitted that the condition
is neither unreasonable nor arbitrary and designed to achieve a public purpose. Learned
counsel contended that the decision of the DJB, insisting upon the testing by the agencies
is neither actuated by mala fides; admittedly such a pleading had not been made by the
petitioner nor even proved. Further it is in the nature of a decision taken by an expert
body and the Court should be circumspect in interfering with it in exercise of its power
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

12 of 22

under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
21.

Learned counsel relied upon the decisions of the Supreme Court reported as

Ugar Suggar Works vs. Delhi Administration, 2001(3) SCC 635 and submitted that the
courts do not ordinarily interfere with policy decisions of the executive unless they are
faulted on ground of mala fide, unreasonableness, arbitrariness or unfairness. If the
policy cannot be faulted on such grounds, the mere fact that it hurts the business interest
of a party would not justify judicial intervention.

Learned counsel relied upon the

judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Directorate of Education vs. Educomp
Datamatics Ltd., 2004 (4) SCC 19 and submitted that the Court should be careful in
interfering with tender conditions set by the State or its agencies since they are framed in
exercise of undoubted power and to further public interest. He also relied upon the
decision reported as Chairman and M.D., B.P.L. Ltd. vs. S.P. Gururaja and Ors., 2003
(8) SCC 567.
22.

Learned counsel for the BIS Sh. R.K. Tripathi submitted that in terms of the

BIS Act, the Bureau had extensive powers to carry out testing for ensuring adherence to
its standards.

It was submitted that the BIS did not receive any complaints from

consumers regarding the meters manufactured and marketed by the petitioners.

He

further submitted that the BIS does not provide facilities to anyone to carry out thorough
testing of each item manufactured by its licensees.
23.

Pleadings and contentions of parties give rise to the following questions for

decisions by the Court:

W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

13 of 22

1. Whether DJB has the competence and authority of the DJB to insist on additional
testing and inspection of water meters and whether such conditions are contrary to
the BIS Act and standards framed by it;
2. Whether the impugned notification is arbitrary.
QUESTION NO. 1
24.

A look at the provisions of the BIS Act show that it meant to be a

comprehensive legislation for the setting up of a specialised expert body in regard to
formulation of standards, certification of quality of various products and enforcement of
such standards through various methods including penal action. There is no doubt that
the BIS, a successor to the Indian Standards Inspection, was set up pursuant to
Parliamentary intention to have uniformity in standards for products and processes. In
terms of the Act, the BIS is constituted as a statutory, autonomous body. It charged that
the duty of the spelling out standards in regard to both the processes of productions as
well as products. It has regulation framing powers and further to its duties, standards in
regard to the various goods, services and processes have been notified.
25.

The main objection of the petitioner is that once its processes are certified to

be in accordance with the BIS standards and performance norms and it is allowed to affix
the ISI/BIS mark, the requirement of additional inspection or testing for any purpose, for
individual products would violate provisions of the BIS Act. This argument is premised
on two limbs.

The first limb is that the DJB cannot invoke any power under the

Constitution since the legislative field has been occupied by the Parliament which enacted
the BIS Act in 1986. In such case, the DJB cannot prescribe a rival set of standards.
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

14 of 22

Reliance has been placed upon Section 10 of the BIS Act which provides for function of
the BIS, Section 11 which prohibits the improper use of standard mark etc.

The

petitioner also relied upon enforcement powers under Section 25 and 26 of the BIS Act
which enable inspecting officers to make surprise inspections and take coercive action.
Further reliance has been placed upon Section 33 which prescribes penalty for improper
use of standard mark. It was also contended that in terms of Bureau of Indian Standards
Rules, particularly, Rules 10, 11 and 12, the licensees are permitted to affix the
authorized mark on the products only after the BIS is satisfied that its processes are in
conformity with the prescribed standards.

In the absence of any similar elaborate

mechanism or a more detailed specific processes regarding water meters by the Delhi
Water Boards Act, the contention that the DJB cannot insist on additional tests of the BIS
marked water meters of the petitioners.

An important part of this argument is the

contention that the impugned testing requirement, does not have statutory sanction and is
violative of the BIS Acts, Rules and Standards in question.
26.

The second limb of these submissions is that the DJB does not have any

authority under the Delhi Water Boards Act to the insist on additional testing and the
obligation (to supply water meters) if any under Section 17 of the said Act is not
mandatory but only optional.
27.

The provisions of the BIS Act undoubtedly lend support to the submissions

that it is a complete code in itself and to the extent specific rules and standards have been
prescribed regarding production processes, inspection, testing and enforcement, there
cannot be any other mode or method obliging manufacturers to undergo something more
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

15 of 22

by way of standards. The petitioners' submissions would have been attractive if the DJB
were to insist that regardless of the ISI standard or mark, the water meters in question
would have to conform to some other standards prescribed by it or would have to undergo
some other form of testing, inspection and certification, rivaling or claiming to be better
than the BIS standard. That, however, is not the case. The DJB here is accepting the
standard laid down by the BIS—it also recognizes that the petitioner is a licensee of the
BIS and is bound by the standards prescribed under the BIS Acts and Rules. The
impugned notification is, however, insisting the additional procedure of testing—what is
characterized as commercial testing because the DJB's claim is that being a supplier of
procured products, and an instrumentality of the State, it is in public interest concern to
ensure that each water meter performs as required, namely, recording the consumption
accurately. The claim of the petitioners here is not in the context of licensing or their right
to manufacture. That is not disputed by the DJB; in fact the BIS has admitted that it is a
licensee. The additional testing, therefore, is projected as an impediment to its free trade
with the DJB.
28.

In this case, the question of BIS standards being rival or in any manner

questioned or its enforcement processes being disputed do not arise. The DJB's concern
to ensure that the water meters procured and supplied by it perform as water meters is
well within the scope of its power under Section 75 of the Act read with Section 17. It is,
no doubt, true that the DJB is under no compulsion to supply water meters but if it
chooses to do so it not only should supply proper water meters but is also under an
obligation to ensure that they are of the desired quality. Anything less would entail action
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

16 of 22

against the DJB. In these circumstances, the inclusion of an additional condition of
testing in the facts of this case cannot be termed as beyond the competence and
jurisdiction of the DJB or violative of the provisions of the BIS Acts and Rules.
REGARDING QUESTION NO. 2
29.

What has emerged

from the factual matrix is that the two official

laboratories which apparently have sanction under the BIS Act, Rules and the Standards
as agencies nominated for testing water meters, take unduly long time, i.e. about 4-6
weeks in performing their task. They also charge a huge amount. It is an admitted fact that
such testing would entail additional expenditure working out to approximately Rs. 6,000/for each meter. The third agency, M/s. SGS Pvt. Ltd. however charges much lower
amount for inspection and certification. No supporting material has been shown to the
Court as to its acclaimed credentials or experience in this field. It is also not denied that
SGS is not one of the agents nominated under the BIS Acts and Rules as a licensee,
authorized to undertake testing of the products.
30.

In the light of the above facts, the question is whether the imposition of the

additional requirement is arbitrary and unreasonable. In answer to the first question
formulated it was held that the DJB was within its powers under the Act to require
additional test to water meters.
31.

The State, its instrumentalities and public agencies, like any other concern

have the right to stipulate suitable conditions while entering into contracts and disposing
of public property.

Yet, the special character of such State/public agencies and

Constitutional imperatives, particularly, Article 14 require that the stipulations should be
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

17 of 22

non-arbitrary equal in operation and the process of contract awarding, fair and reasonable.
This has been spelt out in numerous decisions of the Supreme Court including in Tata
Cellular vs. Union of India, 1994 (6) SCC 651, Sterling Computers Ltd. vs. M&N
Publications Ltd. & Ors., 1993 1 SCC 445; Union of India Vs. Dinesh Engineering
Corporation, 2001 (8) SCC 491, Air India Ltd. Vs. Cochin International Airport Limited,
2000(2) SCC 617 etc. The Courts have repeatedly held that Article 14 of the Constitution
prohibits the Government from arbitrarily choosing a contractor according to its will and
pleasure. It has to act reasonably, fairly and in public interest while awarding contracts.
The Courts have ruled that at the same time no person can claim a Fundamental Right to
carry on business with the States or its agencies. All that he can claim is that while
competing for the contract he should not be unfairly dealt with or discriminated, to the
detriment of public interest.
32.

In this case, the question is whether the imposition of tender condition

requiring additional testing by any of the three named agencies is arbitrary or
unreasonable. The petitioners assert that such conditions are arbitrary and have no
rationale; they also complaint that the conditions unreasonably restrict the right to carry
on trade and business guaranteed by Article 19(1) (g) of the Constitution. The DJB on
the other hand asserts that the condition is necessary and has been imposed in public
interest. It is contended that the impugned requirement is the product of a policy decision
of an expert body and the Court should be circumspect in disturbing it.
33.

The two decisions cited by the petitioners, namely, Mahendra Labs Pvt.

Ltd. of the Karnataka High Court and the Gharda Chemicals Limited of a Division
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

18 of 22

Bench of this Court no doubt interdicted the stipulations in tender conditions. The
question, however, is whether in the facts of this case the condition for additional testing
are arbitrary in the sense that they unfairly exclude the petitioners.
34.

The Supreme Court in its decision reported as Association of Registration

Plates vs. Union of India and Ors. (2005) 1 SCC 679 had to decide on the challenge to a
tender condition that the bidder or promoter should have sufficient experience in the field
and should have worked in at least five countries for production of licence plate, (which
were sought to be procured) and should have worked at least in countries with licence
place having security features world wide. A condition of minimum of annual turn over
of Rs. 30 crores in the year immediately preceding the bid, of which 25% should have
been from the licence plate business had also been mandated. The Court held that in the
matter of tender condition formulations great latitude had to be conceded to the State
authorities or agencies concerned; unless the action was found to be malicious and in
misuse of its powers such tender conditions were held to be unassailable. The Court held
that such conditions did not violate the equality clause under Article 14 or encroach the
Fundamental Rights of the class of intending tenderers under Article 19 (1)(g) of the
Constitution.
35.

In this case, the condition of additional testing has been insisted upon in

relation to all manufacturers who intend to supply to the DJB.

It applies equally,

regardless of the fact that such suppliers and manufacturers to all licensees of the BIS
who have to conform to its standards.

No material has been shown to the Court

indicative of malice in law or bias against the petitioners. In these circumstances, the
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

19 of 22

charge of the conditions requiring such additional testing being arbitrary as violative of
Article 14 has to fail.
36.

The last limb of arbitrariness set up by the petitioners in the proceedings

was that inclusion of M/s. SGS India Pvt. Ltd. an unlicensed private agency whose
credentials are unknown, vitiates the notification and amounts to non-application of mind.
It was also claimed that such a condition is not founded on reason.
37.

The factual narrative shows that SGS India Private Ltd. was included as one

of the testing agencies for the first time on 13.11.2002. For a brief while this condition
was suspended but later re-introduced on 14.1.2004. While the concern of DJB to ensure
that water meters procured by it and supplied to the consumers conform to the quality and
the necessity of visual inspection and same form of testing cannot be denied, the rationale
for including a private agency and (an unlicensed one at that), to inspect and certify water
meters, has not been disclosed. In terms of Rule 11 of the BIS Rules 1987, BIS can
appoint any person or organisation in India or outside India as its agent for discharging
any of the functions such as carrying out inspection in the manufacturers premises, or test
samples of productions for conformity with the Indian Standards and inspect
consignments intended to be covered by the standard mark. The BIS has asserted in this
case that it cannot test individual products of its licensees. In such an event, if indeed the
DJB was so minded to ensure individual testing of the water meters logically it should
ensure that such testing or visual inspection to its satisfaction is carried out through its
own agency or officials. In stead, it “out sourced” it to the SGS India, which is not an
agent of the BIS under the rules. Had such condition related to a private agency with the
W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

20 of 22

unimpeachable credentials and which was an agent under Rule 11, there could have been
no difficulty. However, neither is the case. No materials were disclosed about the
expertise of the SGS India Private Ltd., although DJB asserted about its experience in the
field.
38.

It is well settled that all decisions of the State have to be founded on reason

which is also a facet of fairness and non-arbitrariness. It is not as if reasons in such cases
have to be elaborate or even disclosed to the concerned parties. Yet, the obligation of the
State agency to act on the basis of reasons which can be justified, is an integral part of the
Constitutional set up. In this case, the DJB's rationale for including SGS India Private
Ltd. as a testing agency has not been disclosed.
39.

In view of the above finding, the petition has to partly succeed.

The

condition in the impugned notification requiring additional testing of the water meters by
the SGS India Private Ltd. is hereby quashed. It is made clear that this judgments does
not preclude the DJB from insisting on testing by inspecting the water meters itself at the
stage of acceptance or insisting that at the stage of pre-tendering they should be tested by
official agencies and/or agencies under Rule 11 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Rules
1987.
40.

The petition is allowed to the above extent. No costs.

July 2, 2007

S.RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE

W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

21 of 22

W.P.(C) 12994-95/2004

22 of 22

