11
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : March 3, 2008.

+

CS(OS) 482/2006

DALJEET SINGH ANAND
..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Ramesh Chandra, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Geeta Mehrotra, Advocate
versus
HARJINDER SINGH ANAND
..... Defendant
Through Mr. Piyush Kalra, Advocate for the defendant.
Mr. Laliet Kumar, Advocate for the applicant in IA
1016/2007.
CORAM: MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes
Yes
Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
I.A. 5079/2007
1.
This is an application by the plaintiff seeking decree based on admission by the defendant.
2.

The plaintiff has claimed the following reliefs in the suit:
"(i) Pass a preliminary decree of partition of the property bearing
No. B-1/37, Ashok Vihar,
Phase-II, Delhi-110052 in equal shares
between the parties herein;
(ii)
Direct an inquiry into the feasibility of a partition by metes
and bounds of the property in the suit;
(iii) Direct that in case a partition by metes and bounds is not
possible, the property be sold and the proceeds be divided between the
parties in their equal shares;

CS(OS) 482/2006

1 of 5

(iv)
Pass an appropriate final Decree and the share of the
plaintiff be separated;
(v)
Costs of the suit be awarded to the plaintiff;
(vi)
Pass any other or further relief which the plaintiff is found
entitled to and which this
Hon'ble Court deem fit and proper, in the
facts and circumstances of the case".

3.

The reliefs are premised on the defendant and plaintiff being joint owners of the suit property

being B-1/37, Ashok Vihar, Phase-II, Delhi-110052, by virtue of Deed dated 15.5.1996, executed in
their favour and registered by the Sub-Registrar. The property is a two storeyed residential buidng
constructed on a 400 sq. yards plot. The plaintiff alleges that the defendant failed to agree upon a
division of the suit by metes and bounds which has necessitated the suit.
4.

The application is premised on admission of documents by the defendant. Learned senior

counsel for the plaintiff/applicant relied upon the Conveyance Deed dated 15.5.1996 (Ex. P-1); A joint
application for mutation (Ex. P-9); Indemnity Bond (Ex. P-10),

an affidavit executed by the

defendant (Ex. P-11) - all dated 17-6-1996. He also relied upon a property tax return filed in relation to
a portion of the property on 17.3.2006 by the defendant (Ex. P-13). It is thus claimed that the materials
on record sufficiently justify the issuance of a decree on the basis of admission.
5.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of a Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High

Court in Shikharchand and Ors. vs. Mst. Bari Bai and Ors., AIR 1974 MP 75, and emphasized that the
expression "otherwise" in Order 12 Rule 6 indicates that it is open to the Court to base its judgment on
statements made by the parties not only in the pleadings but on other materials available on records.
CS(OS) 482/2006

2 of 5

6.

The application is resisted by the defendant who has premised the defence on the contents of the

written statement. It is alleged, and urged on its behalf that the documents relied upon by the plaintiff
have not been denied, but the case set up is that the said were executed fraudulently.
7.

Learned counsel for the defendant relied upon the following averments in the written statement:
"
He had conveyed to the father that for the purposes of the conversion of
freehold to leasehold the presence of not only the father of the parties but also the
present Defendant would also be required. He got certain documents signed from
the father as well as the present defendant on the ground that the same were required
for conversion. Accordingly, the present Defendant accompanied his father to the
office of DDA, where the Plaintiff was already present. The father of the parties as
also the present Defendant believing that everything would be in order signed at the
places, as pointed by the Plaintiff and thereafter, the Plaintiff directed the Defendant
to take the father back home so as to not exert him too much, keeping in mind the old
age of the father. The Defendant trusting his brother and not suspecting any kind of
fraud signed the documents and thereafter came back to home. It is now being
revealed from a perusal of the contents of the present plaint as also the conveyance
deed filed alongwith the Plaint that the Plaintiff infact got the said property
fraudulently transferred in his name and the present Defendant name. It is a matter
of record that no consideration was ever paid by the parties neither the Plaintiff nor
the present Defendant to the father of the parties, as alleged in the Conveyance Deed
and the plaintiff be put to strict proof of the same. The whole transaction being
without consideration is void. Further and in any event, a fraud has been played by
the Plaintiff upon the father of the parties, and as such the transaction is liable to be
declared void and the conveyance Deed dated 15.05.1996 is liable to be cancelled.
It is submitted that the property in question was bought as a plot of land by S.
Kulwant Singh Anand, from one Shri Harcharan Singh son of Shri Harnam Singh
out of the partnership funds. Since the plot of land was a lease hold property, the
owner had sold it by way of power of attorney sale specifically authorizing the S.
Kulwant Singh Anand to further sell/transfer the said plot of land. After buying the
said plot of land, S. Kulwant Singh Anand constructed a house on the said plot of
land out of his own funds. Till date, the property tax of the property is in the name of
Sh. Kulwant Singh Anand. Similarly, the electricity and water connections are also in
the name of S. Kulwant Singh Anand. It is submitted that the father of the parties,

CS(OS) 482/2006

3 of 5

out of natural love and affection, had permitted the Plaintiff and the Defendant to
occupy the said house and stay there with their families. The occupation of the
property in question by the Plaintiff and the Defendant is a permissive occupation
and the constructive possession of the property still remains with the father of the
parties, Shri Kulwant Singh Anand."

It was submitted that an overall reading of the above averments show that there is no unambiguous
admission which is a necessary pre-requisite for an order or decree on the admission under Order 12
Rule 6.
8.

There is no doubt that the Court possesses sufficient discretion and flexibility in terms of Order

12 Rule 6 to decree the suit not merely on the basis of the pleadings but even on statements made by
the parties on the basis of documents. That indeed is purport of the expression "otherwise" occurring in
the said provision. However, what has to be decided in this case is whether the admission of the
documents and their marking in the evidence itself is sufficient to enable the Court to pass a decree.
9.

Now, while considering an application for decree on admission, the Court has to determine

whether the admission is unambiguous and is clear and unequivocal. In this case, the defendant has in
no uncertain terms disclaimed the genuineness and veracity of the transaction regarding the allegations
concerning properties being jointly owned by the plaintiff and himself. The averments indicate fraud
was allegedly played upon by him and his father; the averments also are to the effect that the defendant
executed certain documents under a mistaken belief. The Court has to keep these in mind and cannot
ignore the effect of such pleadings, merely with a view to give effect to provisions of Order 12 Rule 6.

CS(OS) 482/2006

4 of 5

Such a "split vision" is impermissible. The written statement and the other averments have to be taken
in totality; and the pleadings have to be considered as a whole.
10.

On an overall conspectus of the pleadings, the Court is satisfied that there is no unambiguous or

unequivocal admission by the defendant in this case entitling the plaintiff to a decree on admission. In
these view, the application is unmerited; it is, therefore, dismissed.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
MARCH
dkg

03, 2008

CS(OS) 482/2006

5 of 5

