IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

CS (OS) 49/2007
Reserved on : 4th February, 2008.
Decided on : 8th February, 2008.

SHRI SOM NATH

..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Suresh Singh, Advocate
versus

SHRI DAYA CHAND & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through: Mr. S. Sirish Kumar for D-6

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest Yes.

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat :
1.

The plaintiff seeks a decree for partition of properties being Flat

No. A-5/130, Janta Quarters, Janakpuri, New Delhi (hereafter “Janakpuri
property”) and house No. CB-311, Naraina, Ring Road, New Delhi (hereafter
“Naraina property”) by separating his 1/3 share by metes and bounds. In the
alternative he seeks a declaration that he is owner in possession and has
CS (OS) 49/2007

1

perfected his title by adverse possession in respect of portion of the Naraina
property. He also seeks permanent injunction to restrain first defendant from
interfering with his possession in that regard.
2.

According to the averments in the suit, the plaintiff and

defendant Nos. 1 and 2 are brothers; defendant Nos. 3 to 5 are their sisters.
All are children of late Jati Ram, who pre-deceased their mother Smt. Chawli
Devi. The said Smt. Chawli Devi was in Government Service, working in the
Central Ordinance Depot, Delhi Cantonment. The entire family used to live
in official quarters allotted to her.

It is also averred that Smt. Chawli Devi

purchased the suit properties which include the Naraina propoerty, measuring
approximately 160 sq. yards. All these were purchased by her with joint family
funds. It is further averred that to accommodate the growing needs of the
expanding family, Smt. Chawli Devi permitted second defendant to occupy
the Janakpuri property.
3.

In 1977, the plaintiff joined services of the Airport Authority of

India and at the time of filing the suit, he was posted in the Indira Gandhi
International Airport. He claims to have occupied a portion of the Naraina
property in 1983 and constructed upon it to the extent of 32 sq. yards, on
being asked to occupy that portion, due to a threat of dispossession.

It is

claimed that the mother Smt. Chawli Devi permitted him to occupy the
CS (OS) 49/2007

2

premises. The plaintiff applied for LPG gas connection in 1983 and was
granted it on 11.11.1988; he also secured separate electricity connection for
the said premises on 18.9.1989 and was paying charges. It is claimed that the
plaintiff had got consumer card No. 033802, issued on 21.3.1995 which was
later replaced by No. APL 11310472, issued on 1.10.2005. He and his family
members were also issued photo identity cards on 21.1.1995 by the Election
Commission of India.
4.

The plaintiff alleges that the other portion of the Naraina

property, measuring 128 sq. yards was constructed with joint family funds and
Smt. Chawli Devi permitted the first defendant to occupy that portion. He
further states that the said Smt. Chawli Devi used to live with the first
defendant but since he did not take care of her properly, she started living
with the plaintiff; she died on 24.11.2002.
5.

The plaintiff alleges that after death of Smt. Chawli Devi and in

view of his likelihood of getting possession of a flat in Ever Green Cooperative Group Housing Society, the first defendant started pressurizing him
and creating situations whereby he could dispossess him (ie.the plaintiff) from
occupation of his portion of the Naraina, plot. The plaintiff also avers that
on 4.6.2004 the first defendant did attempt to dispossess him which resulted
in the police being called and both parties being subjected to proceedings
CS (OS) 49/2007

3

under Section 107/151 Criminal Procedure Code.

The plaintiff in the

meanwhile secured possession of the society flat where his son shifted to
avoid conflicts and avoid adverse impact to his career prospects. It is claimed
that the first defendant was quiet for a while but again started quarreling with
the plaintiff and making illegal demands, including issuing legal notice on
1.12.2005 asking the plaintiff to vacate the portion of the Naraina property in
his possession. This was resisted by the plaintiff in his reply notice dated
26.12.2005. On the basis of these averments, the plaintiff seeks a decree for
partition and in the alternative prays declaration as well as decree for
injunction.
6.

In the written statement of the first defendant, the averments

of the plaintiff have been generally denied. However, it is averred that the
property at Janak Puri is ancestral property and the plaintiff as well as all
defendants have 1/6th share each.

The plaintiff's version about the

circumstances whereby he occupied a portion of 32.5 sq. yards in the Naraina
plot are denied. The first defendant avers that the plaintiff has no right, title
and interest and the is in permissive possession of the property as the first
defendant allowed him to live there, for a short while.

The plaintiff,

however, did not vacate the property on one pretext or the other. The
defendant also claims that the Naraina property is his self-acquired property
CS (OS) 49/2007

4

and that the plaintiff is likely to secure possession of a flat in Ever Green
Cooperative Group Housing Society.
7.

The defendant denies the plaint averments regarding his

allegedly pressurizing the plaintiff to vacate the premises at Naraina and the
demands being made on his behalf through a legal notice as being incorrect.
8.

This court by its order dated 29.8.2007 noticed that defendant

Nos. 1 to 5 were being unrepresented on the previous two dates of hearing i.e.
12.7.2007 and 9.8.2007.

Therefore, the said defendants were set down ex-

parte. The court permitted the petitioner to file ex-parte evidence by way of
an affidavit which he did, on 1.12.2007. The plaintiff was examined as PW 1
on 8.1.2008 and his affidavit was marked as Exh.PW 1/A.
9.

In the affidavit which is supported by his oral testimony, the plaintiff

has reiterated the contents of the plaint and deposed that all title documents
of both the properties are in the power and possession of the first defendant.
He further deposed that he constructed one room accomodation of 32 sq.
yards in the Naraina property and later constructed another room on the first
floor.

According to him remaining portion of the property was constructed

upon by his mother, the late Smt. Chawli Devi with joint family funds in 1988.
The said late Smt. Chawli Devi lived with the first defendant in that portion.
CS (OS) 49/2007

5

The plaintiff also deposed that he was in continuous and uninterrupted
possession of the portion which was approximately 32 sq. yards.
10.

In support of his claim for being in possession, the plaintiff

marked certain documents such as Ex. PW ½, i.e. an Indane Customer
Subscription Voucher issued by the Indian Oil Corporation; PW 1/3, a Bill/
Cash Memo dated 11.10.1988 issued in his favour, reflecting the premises at
Naraina and PW 1/4 as well as PW 1/5 both dated 8.1.2008; they are bills
issued by the erstwhile Delhi Electricity Supply Undertaking (DESU) for
electricity charges paid in November and December, 1989. The plaintiff has
also produced electricity bills issued by the North Delhi Power Limited dated
16.9.2006 and 19.10.2006 as PW 1/6 and PW 1/7; likewise telephone bills for
different periods have been produced as PW 1/9, PW 1/10, PW 1/11 and PW
1/12.

He has sought to mark photocopies of certain documents like the

consumer/ration card valid for the period 2004 – 2009 and the photocopy of
the identity card issued by the Election Commission; Ex. PW 1/17 is the copy
of reply issued on behalf of the plaintiff to the first defendant's counsel, in
reply to the latter's notice.
11.

The following issues arise for consideration of this court:i)

Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of
partition of the suit properties or any part thereof

CS (OS) 49/2007

6

and if so, what is his share;
ii)

Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a declaration that
he has perfected his title by adverse possession in
respect of the property being CB-311;

iii )

Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of permanent
injunction of the claim;

iv )

Relief.

FINDINGS:
Issue No. 1

:

Yes, one sixth share, in respect of the
Jankpuri property.

Issue No. 2

:

No

Issue No. 3

:

No

Issue No. 4

:

As indicated.

REASONS
Issue No. 1
12.

The pleadings in the suit and the written statement of the first

defendant (as the other defendants did not file any written statement or even
participate in the proceeding at any stage) disclose that the plaintiff and the
first defendant both have no dispute about the nature of the Janakpuri
property, and its status as a Hindu Undivided Family property. According to
both of them, the said property was purchased by Smt. Chawli Devi. She
CS (OS) 49/2007

7

however permitted the second defendant, the eldest son, to reside there, due
to exigencies of a growing joint family. This is also deposed by the plaintiff.
The plaintiff, however claims one third share in the properties, whereas the
first defendant says that both of them are entitled to one sixth share each.

13.

Now, the plaintiff’s claim for two thirds share in the Janakpuri property

is premised on the basis that only male members of Chawli Devi’s family are
entitled to the property. This however, overlooks the fact that the claim for
partition has been made after 2005, i.e after the amendment to the Hindu
Succession Act, which enables daughters to secure shares equal to sons in the
HUF properties. Thus, Section 6, after the amendment, reads as follows:

“ 6. Devolution of interest in coparcenary property :(1) On and from the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act,
2005, in a Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, the daughter of a
coparcener shall, (a) by birth become a coparcener in her own right the same manner as the son ;
(b) have the same rights in the coparcenary property as she would have had if she
had been a son;
(c) be subject to the same liabilities in respect of the said coparcenary property as
that of a son,
and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to include a
reference to a daughter of a coparcener:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect or invalidate any
disposition or alienation including any partition or testamentary disposition of
property which had taken place before the 20th day of December, 2004.
CS (OS) 49/2007

8

(2) Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of sub-section
(1) shall be held by her with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be
regarded, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the
time being in force in, as property capable of being disposed of by her by
testamentary disposition.
(3) Where a Hindu dies after the commencement of the Hindu Succession
(Amendment) Act, 2005, his interest in the property of a Joint Hindu family
governed by the Mitakshara law, shall devolve by testamentary or intestate
succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by survivorship, and the
coparcenary property shall be deemed to have been divided as if a partition had
taken place and, (a) the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a son;
(b) the share of the pre-deceased son or a pre-deceased daughter, as they would have
got had they been alive at the time of partition, shall be allotted to the surviving
child of such pre-deceased son or of such pre-deceased daughter; and
(c) the share of the pre-deceased child of a pre-deceased son or of a predeceased
daughter, as such child would have got had he or she been alive at the time of the
partition, shall be allotted to the child of such pre-deceased child of the pre-deceased
so or a pre-deceased daughter, as the case may be.
Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-section, the interest of a Hindu
Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would
have been allotted to him if a partition of the property had taken place immediately
before his death, irrespective of whether he was entitled to claim partition or not.
(4) After the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005, no
court shall recognise any right to proceed against a son, grandson or great-grandson
for the recovery of any debt due from his father, grandfather or great grandfather
solely on the ground of the pious obligation under the Hindu law, of such son,
grandson or great-grandson to discharge any such debt:
Provided that in the case of any debt contracted before the commencement of the
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005, nothing contained in this sub-section
shall affect (a) the right of any creditor to proceed against the son, grandson or great-grandson,
as the case may be; or
(b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of, any such debt, and any
such right or alienation shall be enforceable under the rule of pious obligation in the
CS (OS) 49/2007

9

same manner and to the same extent as it would have been enforceable as if the
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005 had not been enacted.
Explanation. - For the purposes of clause (a), the expression "son", "grandson" or
"great-grandson" shall be deemed to refer to the son, grandson or great-grandson, as
the case may be, who was born or adopted prior to the commencement of the Hindu
Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a partition, which has been
effected before the 20th day of December,2004
Explanation- For the purposes of this section "partition" means any partition
made by execution of a deed of partition duly registered under the Registration Act,
1908 or partition effected by a decree of a court.”

14.

Apart from the above legal provision, the plaintiff has not led any

evidence showing that the Janakpuri or the Naraina properties were purchased
out of joint family funds. Indeed as far as the Naraina property is concerned,
the plaintiff has not been able to show any material, save his telephone,
electricity bills and document relating to gas connection as well as copies of
the ration card and election identity card in support of his claim. These
documents at best dislose prima facie possession, no more. It is not even certain
as to who owns the properties. The defendant had filed some copies of
documents such as agreement to sell, power of attorney, etc favouring Chawli
Devi which were not marked in evidence. Even they show that the Naraina
plot was notified for acquisition under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act.
In the above circumstances, the plaintiff is entitled only to a one sixth share in
the Janakpuri property.
CS (OS) 49/2007

10

Issue No. 2 and 3:
15.

These issues can be considered conveniently. The second relief claimed

by the plaintiff, is an alternative claim; it is a declaration that he has perfected
title by adverse possession of the portion occupied by him, in the Naraina
property. Any claim based on adverse possession of immovable property
should successfully establish three elements; they were described by the
Supreme Court, in In S. M. Karim v. Bibi Sakina (AIR 1964 SC 1254) in the
following terms:
"Adverse possession must be adequate in continuity, in publicity and extent and a
plea is required at the least to show when possession becomes adverse so that the
starting point of limitation against the party affected can be found."
It is one of the cardinal rules that adverse possession is asserted against the
owner. It cannot be set up against a co-sharer (see Mohammed Ali –vs- Jagadish
Kalita 2004 (1) SCC 271 and Janaki Pandyani –vs- Ganeshwar Panda 2001 (10)
SCC 434). The plaintiff has not established his claim regarding continuous
hostile possession as against the defendant. The production of some bills
issued in the late nineteen eighties, and two electricity bills issued in 2006, after
the disputes arose between him and the first defendant, is not sufficient to
return a finding of continuous and uninterrupted hostile possession. Besides,
the ownership of the Naraina plot itself has not be shown. Even if it were
assumed that the plaintiff established long and continuous possession, his
CS (OS) 49/2007

11

claim, as appearing in the plaint is that the property belonged to the joint
family and that the first defendant was a co-sharer, in possession of a different
portion. This is a self-defeating averment, since there can be no adverse
possession as between co-sharers. The issue has to be accordingly answered in
the negative, against the plaintiff.

16.

The plaintiff cannot claim a permanent injunction against the first

defendant in respect of the Naraina property, because he has nowhere
disclosed exclusive, uninterrupted and continuous possession of the portion
of that property as alleged, independently of his averments. Yet, the pleadings
of the defendant show that he does not deny the plaintiff’s occupation; he
however characterizes it as permissive possession. While the true ownership of
the property is a unclear and perhaps not discernable as it belongs to neither
party, what can be gathered is that the first defendant admits to the plaintiff’s
current possession. In these circumstances, the only relief that the plaintiff can
be entitled to is an injunction against the first defendant not to disturb his
occupation, except in accordance with law. However, this order cannot
purport to bind the real owner or any public authority having title to the
property. Such a party has not been impleaded in these proceedings; the
decree will not bind it.

CS (OS) 49/2007

12

Issue No. 4
17.

In view of the above findings, the plaintiff is entitled to a preliminary

decree declaring that he is entitled to one sixth share in the property bearing
No. A-5/130, Janta Quarters, Janakpuri, New Delhi. All the defendants are
likewise entitled to one sixth share each in the said property. The plaintiff is
also entitled ot a decree of permanent injunction restraining the first
defendant from dispossessing him from his occupation of the 32.5 square
yards of premises being CB-311, Naraina, Ring Road, New Delhi, save and
except in accordance with law.

18.

The suit is decreed in the above terms. No costs.

DATED:
8th February, 2008

CS (OS) 49/2007

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

13

