IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C) NO.6488/2007
Date of decision: September 03, 2007.
DR. PREET PAUL SINGH & OTHERS………PETITIONERS
THROUGH: Mr. Sudhir Walia, Advocate.
VERSUS
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
SCIENCES & OTHERS.

………RESPONDENTS

THROUGH:Mr. Vikas Singh, ASG with
Mr. S.K. Dubey for Respondent No.1.
Ms. Mukta Gupta for Respondent No.2.
Mr. Vinay Bhasin, Senior Advocate with
Mr. S.K. Dubey, Advocate for Respondent No.4.
Mr. Mukul Gupta for Respondent No.5.
CORAM :-

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT: (Open Court)
1.
The petitioners in these proceedings under Article 226 claimed suitable directions
to the Respondents to issue them degree certificates.

They have all successfully

completed undergraduate studies in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, the first
respondent (hereafter called the “AIIMS”).

WP(C) No.6488/2007

1 of 16

2.

By an order made immediately after the conclusion of hearing, the following

operative directions were issued; however due to paucity of time the reasons were not
spelt out; I am proceeding to do so by the present order.

3.

The All India Institute of Medical Sciences was established in 1956 with the

objective of improving competence of medical practitioners and achieving high standard
of medical education, both at the Post Graduate and Undergraduate levels. Another
important objective was the promotion of Medical Research with the goal of obtaining
self-sufficiency in post-graduate medical education. The All India Institute of Medical
Sciences Act, 1956 (hereafter “the Act”) also declares that the AIIMS is an Institute of
National importance.

4.

It is an undisputed fact that all petitioners underwent the course of study and

qualified in the examinations duly conducted by the AIIMS. They are all entitled to
receive degrees. Their grievance in these proceedings is that the respondents have
inordinately delayed issuance of the degree certificates, jeopardizing their further
academic careers.

A large number of these students claim to have performed

exceedingly well in the examination procedures, entitling them to admission in foreign
Universities, particularly in the United States of America for persuading post-graduate
qualifications. It is averred that they have completed the requirements of necessary
qualification in examination for the grant of the “Educational Commission for Foreign
Medical Graduates (ECFMG)” certificates. These petitioners scored 99%, which is the
WP(C) No.6488/2007

2 of 16

highest possible score a candidate can achieve in the tests held for the purpose.

5.

The present petitioners, were admitted in 2001 in the five and half year’s MBBS

Course. The final professional examination ended in December, 2005 after which they
underwent a years' compulsory internship which included three months Rural Health
Programme.

6.

It is not in dispute that for the year 2006 and for some time earlier due to internal

problems, the AIIMS annual Convocation could not took place. The practice of AIIMS
was to handover the degrees to the new graduates in Convocation Functions held for that
purpose. It is alleged that in the absence of a degree certificate, the petitioners aspiration
of pursuing Post Graduate Medical Studies in the United States would be imperilled; the
guidelines of the ECFMG

require that candidates should produce certificates of

academic qualifications i.e MBBS degrees.

It is claimed that these procedures and

formalities are to be completed by Ist September, 2007 after which the ECFMG,
proceeds to verify the documents within six weeks' time frame. The names of candidates
are thereafter short-listed; they are personally interviewed alongwith original documents
and then the admission is completed.

7.

The petitioners allege that they have repeatedly yet unavailingly represented to

the respondents for timely issuance of the degree certificates.

Copies of their

representations made singly as well as collectively are produced on the record.
WP(C) No.6488/2007

3 of 16

8.

On 31.8.2007, a Division Bench of this Court while issuing notice recorded as

follows :
“Some of the Doctors who have passed MBBS examination from
AIIMS are before this Court by filing writ petition. The same is
mentioned before us for urgent listing. However, as it appears, the said
writ petition has not been cleared by the Registry as yet for listing.
Therefore, the earliest point of time when the said writ petition could be
listed is 3rd September, 2007.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, however, states
before us that some of these students are applying for Post Graduation
Residency Course in USA and while submitting their applications they
are required to attach therewith the MBBS degree. But they have been
provided the MBBS degrees by the Director AIIMS which according to
the counsel appearing for the AIIMS is legal and valid. Before issuing
the same to the concerned students, legal opinion to that effect was also
obtained. Since it is the stand taken by the Director AIIMS that the said
degrees are valid in the eyes of law, we take that statement on record.
Learned counsel appearing for respondents No.2 & 5, however,
state that respondents No.2 and 5 do not like to put their signatures on
the Degrees issued by the Director, through Dean (Examination), but
they would independently sign separate degrees and hand over to the
students within two days. The aforesaid degrees signed by the
respondent No.2 and respondent No.5 shall be handed over to the
concerned students within two days from today.
The aforesaid order has been passed keeping in mind the urgency
shown and to safeguard the interests of the students and taking into
account that some of them have applied for Post Graduation Residency
Course in USA and also taking into account that respondent No.4
Director-AIIMS has no objection to this course of action.
List before the appropriate Bench on 3rd September, 2007. The
said Bench shall take note of the order which is passed today.
A copy of this order be given dasti to the parties, under the
signatures of the Court Master.

WP(C) No.6488/2007

4 of 16

Sd/CHIEF JUSTICE
AUGUST 31, 2007
9.

Sd/VEENA BIRBAL, J.”

Subsequent to the above order, the fourth Respondent filed a set of documents;

Respondent no.5 the President of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, who was
represented on 31.8.2007, also caused set of documents to be produced. They were taken
on record during the course of hearing.

10.

It is contended by Mr. Walia that a fair reading of the order dated 31.8.2007

would show that as far as the petitioners claim for issuance of degree certificates is
concerned, there is in fact no dispute. The Respondents no where deny the petitioners'
entitlement to these degree certificates; what is perceived as a hindrance is the position
indicated by the Respondent No.2 and Respondent No.5.

11.

Learned counsel contended that once the entitlement and eligibility of the

students who qualify in the examination after completing the course, is admitted and at
any rate is not in dispute, AIIMS cannot in law withhold the degree certificates on
account of internal bickerings, by its authorities. It was urged that the present impasse
has led to an impossible situation whereby two sets of degrees, one signed by the
Director and the other signed separately by respondents 2 to 5 have been issued. This
has already led to baffled queries as to authenticity of documents by some foreign

WP(C) No.6488/2007

5 of 16

institutions.

12.

Mr. Vikas Singh, learned ASG who appeared on behalf of the Director, AIIMS,

arrayed as Respondent No.4 in these proceedings contended that the Staff Council
Resolution of AIIMS had authorized the Director to authenticate the degrees. Learned
counsel relied upon an inter se correspondence exchanged between the Director,
particularly the letter dated 20.8.2007 written to the President, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences requesting that 49 degree certificates should be signed by him as a
special case. Counsel relied upon a reminder in that regard dated 29.8.2007. It was
submitted that the President declined to accede to the request by his letter dated
28.8.2007. That letter stated that the posting/ appointment of Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal, as
Registrar did not have approval of Governing Body of All India Institute of Medical
Sciences; and since the degree certificates contained the signatures of the said Dr.
Aggarwal, according to the President the degrees were illegal. The President, therefore,
expressed his inability to sign on such illegal documents.

13.

Learned counsel relied upon Section 21 of

the Act and submitted that the

Director alone is empowered to authenticate all instruments. A degree certificate, it is
contended, is an instrument as it is a formal or legal document in writing.

14.

Learned counsel contended that the past practice based upon Chapter 17 of a non-

statutory handbook, cannot govern the issue. That stipulated that degrees should bears
WP(C) No.6488/2007

6 of 16

the signatures of the President, Director, Dean and the Registrar.

Learned counsel

submitted that Section 21 would have an overriding effect; a degree certificate is an
“instrument” which the Director alone is authorized to authenticate and execute.
Learned counsel relied upon the meaning of instrument. The definition of “instrument”
in Black's Law Dictionary is
“a formal or legal document in writing, such as contract, deed,
will, bond or lease …………….
Anything reduced to writing, a document of a formal or solemn character,
the writing has a mean, of affording evidence …………..”
15.

Mr. Mukul Gupta, learned counsel for the first Respondent and Ms. Mukta

Gupta, counsel for the second respondent i.e the Dean, Academic Studies reiterated their
position expressed before the Division Bench that the said respondents would not like to
affix their signatures on the degrees issued by the Director, but would independently sign
separate degrees. It was contended that the stand of the fifth respondent, is also endorsed
by the second respondent is reflective of the correct legal position because the 49 degree
certificates, signed by Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal cannot be considered as valid or legal
documents. Learned counsel contended that according to Chapter 17 of the Handbook,
each degree had to bear the signature of the Registrar of AIIMS. Counsel submitted that
there was a contradiction in the position of the Director vis-à-vis the Registrar’s post.
The Director had by an order dated 6.3.2007 communicated to the then incumbent
Registrar, Shri V.P. Gupta that his appointment to the temporary post of Registrar had
ended on 25.2.2007 by efflux of time. If that was correct, there was no occasion for the
so-called appointment or posting of Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal to a non-existent post.
WP(C) No.6488/2007

7 of 16

Counsel relied upon the Minutes of the 137th Governing Body of AIIMS held on
24.1.207 which had, inter alia, resolved that status quo ante should be maintained with
regard to discharge of functioning of the Registrar. It was submitted that Minutes of this
Meeting were confirmed on 7.5.2007; those decisions were also reiterated.

16.

Learned counsel submitted that even, otherwise, according to the Regulations

governing AIIMS the appointing Authority for the post of Registrar, (being a Group-A
category of post), was either the Governing Body or the President; in any case it was not
the Director. Since Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal was nominated by the Director to officiate as
Registrar, such an appointment/posting was without authority of law, and invalid. In
these circumstances, Respondents 2 and 5 were justified in withholding in declining to
sign the 49 degree certificates which bore the signatures of the said Dr. Aggarwal.

17.

Learned counsel for Respondent No.2 relied upon an order of this Court dated

19.6.1998 in CWP No.2896/1998 and submitted that no direction should be issued. The
Court had declined to entertain a writ petition, claiming advancement of the convocation.
The writ petitioner sought the relief to be able to secure his degree certificate for its
protection before the ECFMG.

18.

The undisputed facts from the above narrative are that all the petitioners, after

pursuing their course of study in the AIIMS and qualifying in the examinations held by
it, are entitled to be issued the degree certificates. Section 24 of the Act provides by a
WP(C) No.6488/2007

8 of 16

non-obstente clause, (overriding the other laws) that the AIIMS shall have the power to
grant medical degrees, displomas and other academic degrees under the Act. Thus there
is no dispute that the petitioners are entitled to such degrees under Section 21. The
present dispute is not really one between them and the AIIMS but an entirely
unavoidable one, the result of an unfortunate difference of opinion between the Director
and the President of AIIMS. The Director of AIIMS appears to have approached the
President on 20.8.2007, enclosing 49 degrees which bore his signatures as well as that of
Dr. Aggarwal; the President declined to put his signatures on those degree certificates,
though neither he nor the second respondent dispute the entitlement of the petitioners to
receive them. It has fallen to this Court to resolve that deadlock.

19.

Before proceeding to consider the merits of the rival contentions it would be

necessary to reproduce the relevant provisions namely, Section 21 in Chapter 17 in the
Handbook. Section 21 reads as follows :

“21. Authentication of the orders and instruments of the Institute.- All
orders and decisions of the Institute shall be authenticated by the
signature of the President or any other member authorized by the
Institute in this behalf and all other instruments shall be authenticated by
the signature of the Director or any other officer of the Institute
authorized in like manner in this behalf.”

It is asserted that degree certificates being instruments can be authenticated by the
Director alone or any person authorized by him. To counter this argument, Respondents

WP(C) No.6488/2007

9 of 16

2 & 5 rely upon Chapter 17(I) of a Handbook compiled in 1979. The relevant provisions
of that Handbook are extracted below :

“17.

CONVOCATION OF THE INSTITUTE

Each year a convocation of the Institute shall be
held sometime during the month of February, when the Degree of
the Institute shall be awarded to the successful candidates.
I.
General
Every candidate for the award of the degree must appear in
person at the Convocation to receive the degree, unless the
Director for special reasons permits him/her to take the degree in
absentia on payment of Rs.10.
The degrees shall bear the signatures of the President,
Director, Dean and Registrar. The Registrar shall issue notice to
each member of the Convocation showing the programme and the
procedure there, at least three weeks in advance of the date of the
Convocation. All the members attending the Convocation shall
appear either in their prescribed academic gown as herein laid
down, or in one appropriate to the degree to which they have been
admitted by their respective universities.”

20.

The delay in issuance of the degree certificates, in this case due to the position of

the fifth respondent that the certificates have been signed by some one who is not
authorized to do so. The President has declined to sign the certificates because the
person who has signed them as Registrar, Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal was not appointed in
accordance with the AIIMS Regulations. This Court was taken through the Minutes of
Meeting dated 24.1.2007 which had, inter alia, dealt with a previous transfer order of the
then Registrar and further recorded that the status quo ante should be restored. There is
no serious dispute about the fact that the said incumbent Registrar, Shri V.P. Gupta was

WP(C) No.6488/2007

10 of 16

issued a letter by the Director on 6.3.2007. A copy of that letter was produced in the
compilation filed on behalf of the fifth respondent. It reads as follows :

“

MEMORANDUM

Shri V.P. Gupta had been appointed vide Appointment
Order dated 25.02.2002 by means of a temporary appointment to
temporary post of Registrar. His appointment order stipulated that the
post is temporary but is likely to continue on year to year basis. This
temporary post has not been extended after 25.02.2007. His temporary
appointment to the temporary post of Registrar has come to an end on
25.02.2007 by efflux of time.
Sd/(DR. P. VENUGOPAL)
DIRECTOR”

21.

The above event was apparently noticed by an order of this Court in WP©

No.1790/2007 which had sought for removal of the said Registrar. The Court disposed
off the petition recording that no relief could be granted in the light of the said order, by
its order dated 7.3.2007. During the course of hearing it was submitted that review
proceedings have been preferred for recall of that order.

22.

The subsequent Minutes of Meeting dated 7.5.2007 confirmed the earlier

decisions. A conjoint reading of all these show that the Governing Body at the relevant
time in January, 2007 required restoration of the status quo ante in regard to the
Registrar’s post; at that time the incumbent had been transferred.

The situation,

however, altered with the issuance of the letter dated 6.3.2007.
WP(C) No.6488/2007

11 of 16

23.

Though a great deal of stress was placed upon the text of the letter dated 6.3.2007

to say that the post of Registrar, even according to the Director did not exist and,
therefore, the degree certificates could not have been signed by Dr. Aggarwal; I am unpersuaded with the submissions. The conundrum apart, the fifth respondent’s stated
position is that the Registrar has to necessarily sign the certificates.

24.

To my mind, the entire controversy is really a non-dispute. The validity, legality

and justification of the action dated 6.3.2007 by which the then Registrar was intimated
about his appointment having ended by efflux of time and as well as the validity of the
action of the Director of AIIMS, nominating Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal on 12.3.2007 to look
after the work of Registrar, AIIMS till further orders are not before this Court. They
have been raised as a collateral argument to justify the refusal by Respondent No.5, to
sign the degree certificates.

25.

One of the established principles of public law is that even if the holder or

incumbent of, a public post may not possess the right to occupy it, due to legal
requirements concerning the post not being satisfied or his being disqualified from
occupying it, yet, to prevent confusion in the conduct of public business, his acts, by the
application of de-facto doctrine cannot be questioned co-laterally. As long as he
continues to act till removal, his actions are binding on the public at large and deemed
proper. (State of Haryana Vs. Haryana Transport; AIR 1977 SC 237; Gokaraju Vs.
WP(C) No.6488/2007

12 of 16

State of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1981 SC 147.

26.

On a careful analysis of the facts in this case it is apparent that what the

Respondent No.5 (as also Respondent No.2 are now doing) is to characterize the
documents i.e the 49 degree certificates as illegal. This to my mind cannot be done at
least in such manner as to jeopardize the future and career prospects of the petitioners
and other similarly situated students. The act of signing of a degree certificate is merely
a formal or ministerial one; it is not a substantive “act”. It is an un-deniable fact that the
litigation between the previous Registrar and Institute is pending. Till that is resolved, or
a decision is taken in accordance with law, the said two respondents by their unilateral
action cannot refuse to sign the degree certificates. They cannot assign to themselves the
role of judging the status of Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal, in this contextual background. In the
case of the second respondent his behaviour is strange to say the least. It was not denied
by counsel that even though the said respondent expressed some reservations on
21.7.2007 about the certificates, nevertheless he proceeded to sign them on 27.7.2007.
He cannot now be allowed to contend that such degree certificates are invalid or illegal.

27.

Although some arguments were made about the exclusive power of the Director

to sign the degree certificates and the inapplicability of Chapter 17 of the Handbook on
account of its not being Statutory, there was no serious dispute that all these years the
four functionaries mentioned in the handbook, i.e. the President, the Director, the Dean
(Academics) and the Registrar have affixed their signatures. This indicates a consistent
WP(C) No.6488/2007

13 of 16

pattern of behaviour by the AIIMS as well as an established convention. The Court
should in my opinion be slow to sanction any radical departure from it. The present
differences between the respondents should not be an occasion to characterize such
tradition as illegal; I am of the opinion that it is not illegal.

28.In view of the above discussion, I find that the action of the respondents 2 and 5 in
refusing to associate themselves in not signing the degree in question, is arbitrary and
unsustainable. The de-facto doctrine is sufficient to cater to the present situation visà-vis Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal.

Accordingly, it is hereby declared that the said 49

degree certificates cannot be discarded as illegal by the fifth respondent. In keeping
with past precedent of the President having to affix his signatures, should do so. A
similar exercise would have to be undertaken in the case of any other student who is
in urgent need of his certificate, and can show such urgency to the respondents.
29. Institutions are designed to be permanent, and grow from strength to strength.
Although it is not within my ken to advise the respondents, one cannot but help
noticing that the students who graduate from institutions, including AIIMS continue
to be inseparably identified with it; in that sense, its imprint continues, expands and
endures. On the other hand, differences of the kind which this court had to deal with
are ephemeral; from a larger perspective, they are meaningless. The excellence of
institutions and their endurance lies in the individuals who are its products; the
differences which seem so sharp to the actors involved, are forgotten in the sands of
time.
WP(C) No.6488/2007

14 of 16

30.

The operative directions pronounced in Court are hereby reiterated; they are to

the following effect :“Issue Rule.
Ms. Mukta Gupta waives notice of rule.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties. I am of the opinion
that this petition deserves to succeed; following directions are issued:
i)

ii)

iii)

Forty nine degree giving certificates forwarded to Respondent
No.5 i.e the President of the All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, containing the signatures of Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal,
shall be deemed to have been affixed on analogy of the de facto
doctrine.
Respondent No.5 shall affix his signatures on the said certificates
as well as such other certificates which may be necessitated on
account of students who have completed their course having to go
on account of security (sic securing) admissions in any other
Universities on disclosing urgency after the same are signed in a
similar manner as these forty nine degrees certificates.
The signatures appended by Dr. Sandeep Aggarwal in his
capacity as Registrar shall be deemed as authentication on behalf
of the Institute only for the purposes of the present case. This
would not preclude any of the parties from raising concerns on
the issues relating to his postings or appointment in any other
Forum.
Mr. Gupta submits that today the 5th respondent is out of town and
is in Chennai. He further submitted that in view of the
conclusions above, the respondent would cooperate and affix his
signatures if the degree certificates are forwarded to him within
24 hours. Learned counsel for Respondent No.4 states that these
49 certificates would be delivered to the Office of the President at
Nirman Bhawan forthwith to facilitate their onward transmission
to Chennai so that they are delivered to the concerned recipients.
Learned counsel for Respondent No.5 stated that if this course is
adopted the signatures would be appended and the certificates
returned back by tomorrow evening.

WP(C) No.6488/2007

15 of 16

The petition is allowed in the above terms.”

September 03, 2007
MLB

WP(C) No.6488/2007

( S. RAVINDRA BHAT )
JUDGE

16 of 16

