*
DELHI

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW
Reserved on: 5.7.2007
Delivered on: July 9, 2007

+

CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION No. 373/2002
BIMLA GUPTA & ORS
..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Salil Kumar Jha with
Mr. Rajeev Aggarwal, Advocates.
versus
STATE OF DELHI

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

This revision petition is directed against an order on charge dated

19.3.2002 by the learned Additional Sessions Judge (hereafter referred to as the
“trial Court”).

By that order the petitioner accused along with others were

charged with commission of offences punishable under Sections 498-A/ 304-B
read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code (hereafter called “IPC”).
2.

The facts necessary to decide this petition are that the marriage between

the deceased Geeta and Rajesh (one of the accused who is not a revisionist in
these proceedings but has been arrayed as A-8) took place on 17.7.1999.
Unfortunately the marriage was short-lived. Late night on the 15th of August,
1999, when the couple were traveling, their car collided with a stationery oil
Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

1 of 9

tanker. Geeta succumbed to her injuries. A-8 Rajesh too suffered injuries and
was hospitalized in the Intensive Care Unit for some time.
3.

In the immediate aftermath of the incident on 16.8.1999 Shri Sham Lal

Gupta, father of the deceased Geeta made a statement. In that he did not attribute
any mischief or foul played by any accused. He stated that the marriage of his
daughter with A-8 took place under normal circumstances. Later, in another
statement, dated 22-9-1999, the said Shri Gupta claimed that the deceased's
mother-in-law and other relatives taunted her immediately after the marriage for
bringing insufficient dowry. He also claimed that the petitioner No.1 (who is the
paternal uncle of A-8, the husband) too had taunted the deceased. This version
was corroborated in a statement by Smt. Suman Gupta, mother of the deceased.
Her statement too was recorded on 22.9.1999. On the basis of these materials the
trial Court by its impugned order proceeded to frame the charges. The order
impugned is short one. It does not contain reasons and reads as follows :
“19.3.02

Present: APP for State

All the accused on bail with counsel.
Arguments on charge heard.
The counsel for the accused states that no
charge is made out against any of the accused persons. I have
perused the record and I find that there is sufficient material
against all the accused persons and a prima facie case U/s
498A/304B/34 IPC is made out against all the accused persons.
Charge U/s 498A/304B/34 IPC is framed against all the accused
persons to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
Case now to come up on 3.5.02 for P.E.
ASJ Delhi 19.3.02”
4.

It is contended on behalf of the petitioners that the impugned order is

unsustainable because there is no material much less credible material to raise a

Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

2 of 9

grave suspicion that the petitioners could have committed the offences they have
been charged with. It is contended that the nature of the incident which led to the
unfortunate death of Geeta was such that no foul play could be attributed. It was
not a case of unnatural death of the kind the legislature contemplated when
Section 304-B was enacted. Learned counsel relied upon the materials including
the evidence of PW-2, PW-3 & PW-4 to say that all of them clearly mentioned
that an accident took place on the fateful night when the oil tanker was stationed
near a petrol pump. Therefore, there was no question of death being the result of
any proximate link between a dowry demand and the incident which led to the
death of Geeta. That was a result of an unfortunate motor accident.
5.

Learned counsel relied upon the text of Section 304-B and submitted that

there is no legal evidence in support of a charge under the provision.

He

submitted that the Court should be satisfied that death resulted due to demands
for dowry made by the husband or his relatives. It was submitted that there is no
live or proximate link between alleged demands spoken about by the prosecution
witness, and the death which was purely accidental.
6.

It was next contended that the petitioners no doubt are relatives of the

deceased's husband.

They are the brother, sister-in-law and niece of the

deceased's father-in-law. Learned counsel contended that the nature of behaviour
required to be established or proved for an offence under Section 498-A should
be of such nature that in the natural and reasonable course of events, the wife
could be driven to commit suicide.

Counsel contended that mere taunts as

alleged in the supplementary statements dated 22.9.1999, cannot be the basis for
such a charge. At best it might amount to a suspicion but in the absence of any
evidence to show persistent cruel behaviour or nagging and demands for dowry,
Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

3 of 9

the charge under Section 498-A is unjustified.
7.

Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that although the initial

statement of the deceased's father was not suggestive of any suspicion, yet he later
made a statement on 22.9.1999. That statement as well as the statement of his
wife, leveled clear and serious allegations against the deceased-in-laws as well as
the petitioners in this case. The mere fact that the petitioners were not part of the
immediate family cannot absolve them from having to face trial.

Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

4 of 9

8.

It was contended by Mr. Sharma learned APP that recording of statement

subsequent to the event cannot be considered unnatural. In the class of offences
such as dowry deaths etc., the Courts have taken a view that later supplementary
statements cannot be fatal to prosecution cases. He submitted that there can be no
uniformity in the manner people react. Some would be able to withstand shock
and make a calm and reasoned statement whereas others would be unable to
withstand pressure on account of emotional trauma.

He relied upon the

judgments of the Supreme Court reported as Alamgir Saini vs. State, 2003 SCC
(Crl) 1447 and Ram Badan Sharma Vs. State of Bihar, AIR 2006 SC 2855.
9.

Learned counsel also contended that the death in this case had occurred

within 7 years of the marriage and indeed within a month.

Therefore, the

statutory presumption under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act clearly applied.
He, therefore, justified the charges and submitted that they do not call for
interference.
10.

The undisputed factual matrix so far as the incident leading to death is

concerned is that just about a month after the marriage, the couple were traveling
in a car when an unfortunate accident occurred. The collision between the car
and the oil tanker resulted in serious injuries to the wife and she succumbed to
them. The accused husband also suffered injuries and was hospitalized. On these
materials, and in the absence of any other supporting evidence or statement, the allegations

as far as the petitioners are concerned, appears to be far-fetched. There is no
doubt that the death occurred as a direct result of the accident. The inspection of
the vehicle photographs as well as the statements recorded during investigations
corroborate this fact.
Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

5 of 9

11.

Section 304-B reads as follows :-

12.

“(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or
bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal
circumstances with seven years of her marriage and it is shown
that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or
harassment by her husband or any relative or her husband for, or
in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be
called “dowry death”, and such husband or relative shall be
deemed to have caused her death.
(2)
Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years
but which may extend to imprisonment for life. ”
In the application of the provision the following ingredients have to be

present :1. Death due to burns or bodily injuries or otherwise then
under normal circumstances within seven years of marriage;
2. The deceased having been subjected to cruelty or
harassment by her husband or his relatives soon before
death;
3. Such cruelty or harassment being in connection with
demands for dowry.
13.

The legislative intention for enactment of Section 304-B as well as 113-B

of the Evidence Act was to curb the menace of dowry death. The creation of
special offences and enactment of presumption in the case of unnatural death was
on account of recognition of the reality that such practices occur in secrecy and
more often than not and the privacy of the home; direct evidence would be hard
to get. Cruelty or harassment may not be merely a physical cruelty. It can also be
mental cruelty. Yet the link between the harassment and the death has to be clear,
which the prosecution has to establish. The Supreme Court has held that the
harassment for dowry and the factum of death must have a proximate or live link

Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

6 of 9

in order to successful prosecution. In the absence of any material direct or
circumstantial to establish such a link, the prosecution under 304-B would not be
justified (Ref. Arvind Singh Vs. State of Bihar AIR 2001 SC 2124; Kans Raj
Vs. State of Punjab & Ors. AIR 2000 SC 2324). In the facts of this case it is
apparent that whatever be the allegations against the accused husband or his
parents, no materials exist on the record pointing to the crucial “proximate and
live link” between the alleged cruelty and the death vis-a-vis the Petitioners.
Indeed the materials existing point to an accidental death and have been
corroborated by the witnesses of the prosecution. The documents in the form of
mechanical report investigations etc. also establish these. Therefore, I am of the
opinion that the trial Court did not apply its mind and fell into error in framing
charges under Section 304-B IPC.
14.

The next question is as to whether in the facts of these case the charge

under Section 498-A is justified. There is a considerable body of case law that
although there is certain element of over-lapping between two offences yet
Section 304-B is in aggravated form and applies where death occurs.

The

distinction between the two kinds of offences may be described as the first
(Section 498-A) dealing with offensive behaviour which can lead to suicide and
the Section (304-B) being an offence on account of unnatural death which is the
result of such unacceptable and offensive behaviour. This distinction is to be
kept in mind because the behaviour sought to be outlawed, namely cruelty has to
be established.
15.

Section 498-A, through its explanation defines cruelty. The fact situation

contemplated is cruelty of such magnitude as would lead the wife to commit
suicide on account of dowry demands by the husband or his relatives. The second
Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

7 of 9

contingency or fact situation contemplated by Section 498-A is wilful conduct
which is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or cause a grave injury or
danger to life.
16.

The supplementary statements which are the only materials and have been

heavily relied upon, attribute cruel behaviour to the Petitioners No.1 & 2.
However, there is no iota of evidence as far as the third petitioner, their daughter,
is concerned. So far as the first two petitioners are concerned, the parents of the
deaceased wife claimed that she had, immediately after the marriage (when she
returned to the parental home) alleged that she was taunted by her in-laws, and
the second petitioner.

The first statement of the deceased's father did not level

any allegations. The supplementary statements of the deceased's parents were
recorded in identical terms, on 22.9.1999.
17.

I have considered the charge sheet, statements and the supplementary

statement of the deceased's parents, which allege that :
(1)Geeta mentioned about taunts by her mother in law, after marriage that
the gifts and articles given in her marriage were insufficient. According
to the parents in law, they had spent Rs.35 lakhs for their daughter's
marriage.
(2)The second petitioner reportedly told Geeeta that she should arrange for
Rs.10 lakhs to help Bunty (her brother-in-law) to set up business.
(3)Though the incident was allegedly narrated by Geeta to her mother, she
was asked not to tell her father, who was suffering from blood pressure.
(4)Geeta's in-laws allegedly threatened her parents, after the accident. A
report was lodged with the Paschim Vihar Police Station on 12.9.1999.
18.

It is apparent that there is considerable delay between the two statements,

Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

8 of 9

i.e 16.8.1999 and 22.9.1999. The latter statements narrate about taunts by Geeta's
parents-in-law and the first two petitioner; the second petitioner allegedly asked
her to arrange for Rs.10 lakhs. Although an allegation about police report dated
12.9.1999 was made, that is not supported by any document.
19.

The Court, while considering whether or not charges should be satisfied

that prima facie, the materials disclose “grave suspicion” that the accused
committed the offences. No doubt, the nature and quality of evidence should not
be meticulously examined.

Yet the Court should be satisfied that “grave

suspicion” about the accused's role exists. This was the law declared in Union of
India Vs. Prafulla Chandra Samal AIR 1979 SC 366; it continues to be so today.
20.

The evidence relied upon is the statement that Geeta was taunted, by her

in-laws after marriage. As far as the Petitioners are concerned, it is alleged that
they asked the deceased to arrange for a further amount, to help her brother-inlaw's business. This is no doubt some evidence; it may even be said to raise
suspicion. However, in my opinion, this material, by itself cannot constitute
“grave suspicion”, warranting charges. I am therefore of the opinion that there is
insufficient evidence, to conclude that the petitioners, prima facie, were involved
in commission of the offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC.
21.

In view of the above reasons, the petition is entitled to succeed. The

impugned order, and charges framed against the Petitioners are hereby set aside.
The petition is thus allowed, without any order as to costs.

July 9 2007

Crl. Rev. P. No.373/2002

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

9 of 9

