1

*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on February 22,2007
Delivered on March 05,2007
CRL.REV.(P) 877/2005
GURCHARAN SINGH

..... PETITIONER
Through: Mr. K.B. Andley, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. M.L. Yadav & Mr. K.K. Singh, Advocates.

VERSUS
STATE THROUGH THE MCD
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Gaurang Kanth & Mr. Daleep Kumar
Dhayani, Advocates for MCD.

Ms. Richa Kapur for the State.
CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr.Justice S.Ravindra Bhat:
1.

In this revision proceeding, the petitioner has impugned the judgment and order of

the Additional Sessions Judge, affirming the conviction and sentence recorded by the
Metropolitan Magistrate (hereafter "the trial court") holding him guilty of offences under
Sections 332 and 461, Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (hereafter "the Act".
2.

The complainant, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, (hereafter called "MCD")

alleged that the petitioner was found raising unauthorized construction in the rear portion

CRL.REV-877-2005

1 OF 6

of the first floor, consisting of two halls and passage in property No. 1384-86, Nicholson
Road, (hereafter "the premises") without its permission. Notice was given; the petitioner
claimed to be not guilty, and was sent for trial.
3.

The accused's defence was that the building became dangerous. The property in

question was visited by Junior Engineer (JE), Shri Avinash Kumar. He was examined by
the complainant as PW-1. He stated that on 11.1.1991, while he was assigned to work as
J.E. in Civil Lone Zone, at 11 am, he inspected the property No.1384-86 Nicholson Road
Kashmiri Gate, Delhi. The accused-petitioner was found present at site; he was raising
unauthorized construction in the rear portion of the first floor consisting of two halls and
passage. Despite demand for permission to raise such construction, the petitioner failed
to show the same. It was also alleged that the petitioner was supervising the construction.
PW-1 prepared the FIR. Orders were issued by the Zonal Engineer (Z.E) for issuance of
Show cause notice. Prosecution report is Ex.PW-1/A. He also prepared the rough sketch
encircled red on the prosecution report. It was stated that the petitioner disclosed that he
was the owner of the property in question.

4.

PW-3, Arun Kumar was the Z.E(B). He corroborated the version of PW-1. He

issued orders for issuance of the notice against the accused and signed them. The First
Information Report (FIR) was put up before him; Show Cause Notice was served through
pasting as the petitioner allegedly refused to accept the same. No reply to the notice was
received.

Thereafter demolition order were prepared and again that notice was not

accepted by owner/builder and was served through pasting. Demolition action was not
taken due to unavailability of police force. He recommended the prosecution of the

CRL.REV-877-2005

2 OF 6

accused on the report of JE(B). Sh. D.R. Tamta further recommended the same to the
Addl.Commissioner. He has identified the writing and signatures of Mr. D.T. Tamta and
Sh. R.K. Singh Deputy Commissioner. PW2, brought the unauthorized construction file
bearing No.312/B/UC/CLZ/90 dated 1.1.1991 and produced the original documents of the
exhibits. He produced the Notification.

5.

The petitioner contended that building was dangerous, an old one, about 125 years

old. Yet he was unable to prove both the contentions, as neither document was produced
on record that building was old one or in dangerous condition and also was declared
dangerous by the building department of MCD. The trial Court concluded that from the
cross-examination of PW1, the fact has been confirmed by JE(B) that unauthorized
construction was noticed on the both sides of passage of first floor and roof of room were
being supported by girders. The Court also held that according to cross-examination of
PW3, building material was lying there. The Court held that no material about the
premises being declared dangerous existed on the file.

6.

The petitioner had stated that earlier he was acquitted by the Metropolitan

magistrate in 1996 in respect of the same property. The Court held that the judgment had
no bearing on the present case. The testimony of the witnesses were unrebutted and went
unchallenged. Both PW2 and PW4 corroborated each other. The Court relied upon their
testimonies of the witnesses, and held that the petitioner was guilty of violating the
provisions he was charged with. On these findings, the petitioner was held guilty, and
convicted. The Court relied on the statements of PW1 and PW3 that the respondent was

CRL.REV-877-2005

3 OF 6

present at the site at the time of the inspection on 30th December, 1991. They had
deposed that the construction was carried out at the instance of the Petitioner who was
present at the site.

7.

The Court, after considering that the petitioner accused had to await for the final

judgment for 11 years, and noting his age at that time as being about 57 yrs, and also that
he was not carrying on business due to his bad health, declined to admit the petitioner on
probation.

Instead, the Court imposed a sentence of six months S.I with fine of

Rs.5000/-. In default one month S.I is imposed upon the convict for alleged offence. Fine
deposited. These findings were challenged; the Additional Sessions Judge rejected the
appeal. Therefore, the present petition.

8.

The counsel for the petitioner reiterated the contention regarding innocence of the

petitioner, and that there was no material to support the allegation of unauthorized
construction. However, the main thrust of the argument pertained to what was termed as
"excessive" and disproportionate punishment of

six months simple imprisonment,

awarded in the case.

9.

Counsel urged that the Court ought to consider granting probation, or, reducing

the sentence to the period already undergone by the petitioner. He further stated that the
events took place 15 years ago, and the ill effects of a prolonged trial could not be lost
sight of. He submitted that the petitioner is aged about 63 years, and has not indulged in
any such activity, in the interregnum period.

CRL.REV-877-2005

4 OF 6

10.

The jurisdiction of the High Court, in cases like the present one, where findings

about the guilt have been rendered concurrently, are extremely restricted. Unless the
record discloses palpable miscarriage of justice, or that the findings were not based on
any acceptable materials, the court cannot intervene .In this case, the crucial official
witnesses admittedly spoke about the unauthorized construction, its nature, the
petitioner's presence, the lack of permission or sanction and his failure to answer the
demolition notice. Thus, the basic ingredients of the offence were made out. To that
extent, the findings of the Courts below cannot be faulted.

11.

The next question, however, is the sentence that was imposed upon the petitioner.

A look at Section 461 read with the Twelfth schedule to the Act reveals that the offence is
punishable with fine, to the extent of Rs.5,000/- and imprisonment, to a maximum period
of six months. The petitioner has been inflicted with these punishments.

12.

The conviction of the petitioner cannot be termed as erroneous. However, the

Court, in my opinion cannot lose sight of the debilitating effect of a prolonged and
delayed trial, upon the petitioner. This aspect has to assume some importance, because
the offender, the nature of the offence, and the propensity to crime, in such cases, are
relevant factors to be kept in mind, while engaging in the sentencing process. Modern
trends in penology point to adoption of a reformative oriented approach by the Court; in
India, circumstantial flexibility has been injected by introduction of plea bargaining in
respect of lesser offences. In this case, an added dimension or factor is that the petitioner

CRL.REV-877-2005

5 OF 6

has aged further, and is now 62 years of age. He has already undergone imprisonment of
about 15 days.

13.

Keeping in mind all the above factors, I am of the considered opinion that in

addition to the period undergone, the petitioner should serve the sentence, to the extent of
a further one month. In the peculiar facts of the case, the petitioner shall deposit
Rs.25,000/- as costs for these proceedings; they shall be paid to the Delhi Legal Service
Authority within four weeks, and a compliance affidavit in that regard shall be filed. Save
the modification of sentence, the judgments of the courts below are affirmed. The petition
is allowed in these terms.
Dasti.
March 05, 2007.

CRL.REV-877-2005

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

6 OF 6

