•

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) 3765/1998
Reserved on: September 18th, 2007
Date of Decision: February 4th, 2008.

AJAY KIRTI KUMAR DALMIA

.... Petitioner
Through Mr. Manmohan, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Bina Gupta, Mr. Gaurab Singh, Advocates

versus
COMPANY LAW BOARD & ORS.

.... Respondents
Through Mr. C. Mukund, Mr. Pankaj Jain,
Mr. Ashok Jain, Advocates

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

In these writ proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution, directions

th
are claimed for quashing of an order dated 15 June, 1998 in Applications i.e. CA Nos.
29-31/1998, moved in Company Petition No. 55/1996. Those applications were moved
before the Company Law Board (hereafter referred to as “CLB”) under Section 8 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereafter “the Act”).

2.

The petitioner alleges to have control over 40% of the share holding in respondent

No.26, through his holdings and those of respondent Nos. 27 to 34. It is claimed that

WP(C) 3765/1998

1

another block of shares is held by second respondent, his family members and associates
i.e. respondents 3 to 18. It is alleged that the parties had sometime in 1991 joined
together with equal share holding in the respondent No.26 Company. It is further averred
that to resolve disputes, which had arisen sometime in 1995-96 between the two groups,
an arbitration agreement had been entered into between both the parties. Apart from
agreeing to refer disputes for settlement through arbitration, the parties further agreed that
the respondent group would bid Rs.78/- per share and that the said price was accepted by
the petitioner group.

According to the agreement, in the event of non-payment, the

respondent group’s share holding was to be forfeited.

3.

The petition alleges that the respondent, disregarding the terms of the agreement,

filed a suit before the Calcutta High Court being Suit No. 269/1996 in which the
petitioners and respondents 26-34 (for the sake of convenience hereafter referred to as
“the AKD Group”) were impleaded as defendants. It is further alleged that on 19.9.1996,
a single Judge of the Calcutta High Court directed that the shares, which had been by
then referred for arbitration, belonging to the second respondent, ought to be deposited
for safe custody with one Advocate receiver, Sh. Paresh Dev. The petitioner preferred an
appeal against this order; on 1.10.1996, the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court
stayed operation of the order dated 19.9.1996, of the single Judge.

4.

On 15.10.1996, the second respondent filed a Company Petition No. 55/1996

before the CLB.

In these proceedings, orders under Section 397 and 398 of the

Companies Act were sought for by the second respondent; he had impleaded the AKD
WP(C) 3765/1998

2

Group as well as others including his associates and relatives, i.e share-holders in the
respondent No.26 company.

5.

After issuance of notice and during the pendency of proceedings in the CLB, the

petitioner file an application under Section 8 of the Act, seeking a direction that the
proceedings before the CLB ought to be stayed pending reference to the Arbitrator. By
the impugned order, the CLB rejected that application. In the impugned order, the CLB
formed an opinion that the application required rejection since it was moved after
considerable delay and in any event after the applicant (who was second respondent
before it) had disclosed his defence in the proceedings.

6.

The petitioner alleges that the impugned order suffers from an error of law and is

also unsustainable because it overlooked that no substantial steps had been taken before
the defence in the CLB proceedings had been entered. It is alleged that the affidavit
dated 2nd December, 1996 filed on the petitioner's behalf only raised preliminary objection
regarding maintainability of the company proceedings as is evident by its order. In any
event, the affidavit was affirmed and lodged in relation to interlocutory proceedings and
cannot, by any stretch of the imagination be construed as reflective of the merits so as to
preclude filing of an application under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act. It is also alleged
that the parties undisputedly entered into an arbitration agreement; the Arbitrator too had
entered into reference. In these circumstances, the company proceedings under Section
397 clearly had to yield to the proceedings before Arbitrator who was an agreed coram
nominated by the parties for resolving their disputes. The disputes included the affairs
WP(C) 3765/1998

3

and management of the company. It is also alleged that the CLB completely ignored that
the respondents 2 to 25 indulged in multiplicity of litigation by first filing proceedings
before the CLB and later withdrawing the suit before the Calcutta High Court ex-parte,
and without notice to them in contravention of provisions of Order 23 Rule 1, CPC.

7.

In the return filed on behalf of the respondents 2 to 25, it is alleged that sometime

in 1996, the writ petitioner had indulged in misappropriation of company funds by not
reflecting the products sold in the books. It is also alleged that sale proceeds secured were
higher than what were disclosed in the books of accounts by the writ petitioner. The
affidavit also adverts to disputes and differences having arisen between the writ petitioner
and respondent No.2 sometime in 1996 and that in August 1996, the former suggested to
the second respondent that both should not continue in the company. The respondents
also alleged that the petitioners cannot seek enforcement of the Arbitration clause since
Sh. Kothari, the nominated counsel, was only empowered to act as a conciliator and hold
securities as well as shares in escrow, not adjudicate disputes. It is alleged besides that
the petitioner had in effect entered into the merits of the dispute by raising a preliminary
objection as to maintainability; the CLB had ruled on it and thereafter the petitioner
sought to invoke the Arbitration clause. Thus, they contend, the application was rightly
rejected. It is lastly averred that all the parties to the alleged arbitration agreement are not
parties before the CLB. The subject matter of the CLB proceedings and the subject
matter of civil disputes between the parties is also different and there cannot be any
reference under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act.
WP(C) 3765/1998

4

8.

Mr. Manmohan, learned senior counsel submitted that the CLB fell into error in

holding that the petitioner had applied under Section 9 after submitting a first statement
on the substance of the dispute. He relied upon Section 8 and the decisions of the
Supreme Court in Food Corporation of India vs. Yadav Engineer & Contractor, 1982 (2)
SCC 893 as affirmed by the decision in Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. & Ors. vs. Verma
Transport Co., (2006) 7 SCC 275. Learned counsel submitted that the expression “first
statement on the substance of the dispute” in Section 8 has to be contrasted with the
expression “written statement”. According to the Supreme Court, it implied submissions
of the parties to jurisdiction of the judicial authority. In this context, if an application is
filed before actually filing the first statement on the substance of the dispute, the parties
seeking enforcement of the Arbitration clause cannot be said to have waived its right to
do so. It was, therefore submitted that taking part or moving a supplemental or an
interlocutory proceeding did not foreclose the petitioners' right to seek reference of the
dispute to arbitration.

9.

Learned counsel next submitted that the core of the disputes related to differences

between the two groups about management of the company. The two groups i.e. the
AKD' group and the respondents group had equal control.

They had arrived at a

settlement which contained an Arbitration clause. The settlement broadly outlined the
manner in which the control of the company had to devolve at a subsequent stage. The
dispute sought to be raised before the CLB was in truth and reality investigation into the
affairs of the companies on allegations of mis-management. A close analysis of the
WP(C) 3765/1998

5

nature of the relief sought by the respondents before the CLB revealed that they concern
the same issues which were the subject matter of the agreement, which contained an
Arbitration clause. In these circumstances, the CLB, therefore, ought to have given due
weightage to the intent of the parties and refer the disputes to arbitration. By not doing
so, it failed to exercise jurisdiction, which it was lawfully bound to. Learned counsel
relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Kalpana Kothari vs. Sudha Yadav,
2002 (1) SCC 203 and submitted that every judicial authority before which an action has
been brought in respect of a matter which is the subject matter

of an arbitration

agreement is under a duty to refer such a dispute to the mechanism agreed upon by the
parties. The emphasis is on the parties to the arbitration agreement, and not the dispute.
If the true spirit and intention of Section 8 were to be given effect to, the parties to the
arbitration were none other than the parties in the CLB that since all shareholders of both
the groups were duly represented. The counsel submitted that the spirit of the provision
as well as its true meaning has to be given due effect to by the Court wherever the issue
of reference under Section 8 is brought up.

10.

Learned counsel contended that the Respondents' conduct did not inspire any

confidence. He adverted to the filing of the suit in spite of the arbitration agreement; the
interim order made by the single Judge which was stayed by the Division Bench; the
application filed by the petitioner under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act for interim relief
against the respondents relating to shares of the company and the surreptitious
withdrawal of the suit with liberty granted ex-parte on 10.12.1996 to the petitioner which
WP(C) 3765/1998

6

was later altered, after the filing of the proceedings in the CLB. Learned counsel
submitted that in the application under Section 9 for interim measure filed by the
petitioner, the District judge at Kanpur, upheld existence of the arbitration agreement and
also observed that the second respondent had failed to perform his obligations. The order
permitting ex-parte withdrawal was, however, later modified on 10.7.1997. He also
st
submitted that the order dated 21 January, 1998 by the Division Bench of the Calcutta
High Court clarified its previous orders and permitted the second respondent only to
withdraw the suit pending on the file of the High Court without reserving liberty to
proceed with the petition, before the CLB. Therefore, these not only underscored the
second respondent's propensity to indulge in litigation, but also that he proceeded with
the CLB petition, without liberty not being granted by the Calcutta High Court before
which the suit was pending.

11.

Mr. Mukund, learned counsel for the respondents opposed the writ petition.

According to him, the conduct of proceedings in the CLB showed that the petitioner had
occasion to project his version of the merits and was, therefore, precluded from filing an
application under Section 8 of the Act. He submitted that the decision in Rashtriya
Inspal Nigam Ltd. & Ors. was inapplicable since the petitioner's preliminary objection to
maintainability of proceedings under Section 397 included a defence on the merits.
Learned counsel next urged that the arbitration agreement between the petitioners and the
second respondents could at the highest bind only the signatories.

However, the

proceedings before the CLB included a number of other parties who had no privity of the
WP(C) 3765/1998

7

contract to the arbitration agreement. Therefore, the disputes before CLB could not be
referred to arbitration. In support of this submission, learned counsel relied upon the
judgment reported as Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd. vs. Jayesh H. Pandya And Anr., (2003) 5
SCC 531. He also relied upon a judgment reported as Alankar Global Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
vs. Dinesh Kumar Mathur, 137 (2007) DLT 164.

12.

Learned counsel lastly contended that the disputes that are subject matter of

proceedings under Section 397 of the Companies Act before the CLB are incapable of
arbitration as many of the reliefs sought from the CLB cannot be granted by the
Arbitrator.

13.

From the above discussion, two questions arise for decision in these proceedings.

One, whether the petitioner lost his right to seek a reference under Section 8 of the Act,
for the reason of having submitted to the merits of the dispute before the CLB and thus
foreclosing his right to seek reference; and two, whether the decision of the CLB
rejecting the application, amounted to omission to exercise jurisdiction lawfully vested in
it.

14.

The factual narrative would show that the bone of contention

in these

proceedings is the submission of disputes to arbitration under Section 8. The existence of
the arbitration agreement was not seriously canvassed even though at some stage in the
proceedings it had been contended that the agreement was merely one for nominating a
conciliator who would hold shares in escrow. The parties undeniably faced each other in
WP(C) 3765/1998

8

litigation in Courts in Kolkatta and Kanpur. The suit before the Calcutta High Court was
due to pendency of the arbitration proceeding. After the initiation of the petition before
the CLB those proceedings were abandoned and withdrawn. The petitioner had sought
for an interim measure under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act in a Kanpur Court. In the
midst of these, the second respondent and several other respondents filed the petition
under Section 397 of Companies Act before the CLB. Initially, the petitioner objected to
maintainability of those proceedings; he invited an adverse finding on that preliminary
issue. He later sought for reference under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act.

15.

Section 8 of the Act in essence mandates that a judicial authority―which includes

Courts and Tribunal (the CLB, broadly answering this description) should refer disputes
pending before them to arbitration, if the litigants were parties to the arbitration clause.
The exception carved out is that the notice of the Court or the Tribunal should be invited
before the parties seeking the reference, filed the first statement on the substance of the
dispute.

The Supreme Court in one of its earlier judgments reported as Food

Corporation of India’s case held that filing an application for stay of the proceedings or
opposing an application for interim relief made in relation to a contract containing in
arbitration clause would not preclude the party concerned from seeking reference. This
view was endorsed in Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd.'s case where the Court had held that
what is material is whether the applicant claiming reference had filed his first statement
on the substance of the dispute or not.

The Court also held that taking part in

interlocutory or supplemental proceedings by itself would not amount to disclosing the
WP(C) 3765/1998

9

first statement in relation to the substance of the dispute. In this case, all that the
petitioner did, was to object to maintainability of proceedings under Section 397. No
doubt, it invited an adverse ruling. Yet that preliminary object cannot be characterized as
entering into the substance of the dispute, and in my opinion, does not amount to waiver
of his right to seek reference under Section 8.

16.

The second question needing determination is the correctness of the CLB’s

impugned order. The narrative regarding history of disputes between the parties only
serves as a backdrop for a decision on this issue; it cannot in the opinion of the Court
influence the legality or otherwise of the impugned order. One of the basic objections of
the second respondent to the proceedings, voiced by it before the CLB and taken in its
counter affidavit and also advanced during the hearing- was that, a reference of the
disputes pending before the CLB to arbitration is not possible because there is no identity
of parties in the proceedings with the parties to the arbitration agreement. Strong reliance
was placed upon the decision in Sukanya Holdings (supra). The arbitration agreement
relied upon in this case, was entered into between the petitioner and some of the
respondents i.e. Raj Kumar Dalmia, Prakash Chandra Jain, Suresh Kumar Jain and Pratul
Kumar Birla on 6.8.1998. The agreement no doubt contained a formula by which shares
were to be bought by one group. Nevertheless, it was executed by five parties. The
Section 397 proceedings before the CLB on the other hand have impleaded a large
number of parties which include these five individuals. The company too is included in
the array of the parties in the CLB proceedings.
WP(C) 3765/1998

10

17.

The petitioners in the CLB proceedings are not only the two or three members of

the second respondents group who had participated in and signed the arbitration
agreement; they are greater in number. They seek a large number of reliefs from the
CLB.

Each of them are parties in their individual capacities as share holders.

Undoubtedly, therefore, there is no identity so far as parties are concerned between the
arbitration agreement and the CLB proceedings.

18.

In Sukanya Holdings (supra), the Supreme Court had ruled that the mandate of

section 8 is applicable when the subject matter of the suit or other proceedings,
comprised disputes which are fully arbitrable.

However, disputes which cannot be

referred to the arbitral tribunal are those where the disputes in the pending legal
proceedings are not subject matter of arbitration and also where one or the other party to
the pending litigation has not entered into an agreement to submit disputes for reference
to arbitration. That is precisely the case in these proceedings. All the parties to the
proceedings before the CLB are not parties to the arbitration agreement.

In these

circumstances, the disputes pending before the CLB could not have been referred for the
arbitration under Section 8 of the Act.

19.

The Court in exercising its discretion under Article 226 of the Constitution,

especially when it called upon to correct decisions of quasi-judicial or statutory
Tribunals, can seek recourse to it where the Tribunal is shown to have acted beyond the
bounds of its powers or acted in manifest illegality. In the absence of such infirmity, the
WP(C) 3765/1998

11

High Court would loath invoke its powers to quash the decisions of statutory Tribunal,
such as the CLB. For these reasons, the impugned order cannot be faulted as illegal or
materially irregular in failing to exercise jurisdiction lawfully vested in the CLB.

20.

In view of the above reasons and findings, this petition must fail. It is accordingly

dismissed. All interim orders are hereby vacated.

Dated : FEBRUARY 4th , 2008

WP(C) 3765/1998

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

12

