9
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 19444-45/2006 and CM 5150/2007
Reserved on : November 1, 2007
Date of decision : January 7, 2008
URMILA PUNERA AND ANR.
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. A.K. Panigrahi, Advocate
versus
U.O.I. AND ANR.

..... Respondents
Through Ms. Shubhangi Tuli, Advocate for R-3 & 4.

CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment?

Yes.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes.

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

The petitioners seek a direction to the respondent State of Maharashtra to give
them alternative accommodation in 'A' Block in Sirmur Plot.

2.

A working women's Hostel known as Western House was located in four
buildings in Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi. It is part of an property
known as Sermur.

In 1964, the Central Government, acting through the

Ministry of Urban Development took possession of the property and continued
to manage the Hostel. The petitioners claim to be residents as licensees in
those premises. On 29.12.1998 the President of India as Lessor permitted
W.P.(C) 19444-45/2006

1 of 6

handing over of the possession of the plot, which apparently originally belong
to the State of Maharashtra.

The letter also contained a condition that

possession would be handed over to the Government of Maharashtra only after
relocation of the occupants at the cost of the State Government and that the
CPWD/Directorate would take all steps to evict all those, if necessary, while
relocating them elsewhere.
3.

Sometime in 2001 apprehending threat of eviction of the residents who lived
in the Working Women's Hostel, the All India Democratic Women's
Association filed a writ petition being W.P.(C) 3095/2001 seeking several
reliefs. On 16th May, 2001 this Court issued an interim order direction that no
demolition should take place unless the eviction orders were finalized. Later,
after noticing the purport and intent of the letter dated 29.12.1998, this Court
disposed off that writ petition inter alia stating as follows:
“5.
On a perusal of the foregoing, it would be
seen that the Union of India has taken care to ensure
that provision is made for relocation of the occupants
at the cost of State/CPWD with stipulation that steps
will be taken for relocation of the occupants. Ms. Lily
Thomas, counsel for the petitioner submitted that
building in question ought to be retained as women's
hostel and grave hardship would be caused to the
women, if they are evicted. The plea is without
substance. Firstly, proceedings for eviction have been
initiated under the P.P. Act, 1971 are separately
pending. It would be for such of the occupants, who
want to defend their occupation to take such pleas, as
are available at law in contesting the proceedings.
Secondly, there is considerable merit in the submission
of Mr. Maninder Singh that some of the occupants
have been occupying premises for considerable period

W.P.(C) 19444-45/2006

2 of 6

of time for more than one or two decades and public
interest or purpose is best served by such hostels
functioning as transit accommodation. However, it is
not necessary for me to express any opinion on this
aspect. The writ petition is not maintainable on the
short ground of it seeking essentially a declaration in
respect of title in property, which cannot be
adjudicated upon in writ proceedings. Moreover, the
petitioners themselves do not claim any proprietary
rights and have no locus.

4.

6. The writ petition has no merit and is dismissed as
not maintainable.”
The petitioners state that on 29.12.1998 a notice was given to them to vacate
the premises within a day since renovation work in the new Maharashtra
Saddan was scheduled to begin. They sought for one year's time to vacate i.e.
31st December, 2005. In these circumstances, they approached this Court for
the reliefs claimed.

5.

After notice was issued, the State of Maharashtra has entered appearance and
filed its returns. It avers that the petition is an abuse of process of Court and
that in the previous proceeding i.e. W.P.(C) 3095/2001, the first petition was a
party, being a second writ petitioner. It is averred that the petitioner had filed
a review proceeding against the judgment disposing off W.P.(C) 3095/2001.
The review petition was dismissed on 22.11.2002. Thereafter, the petitioners
with several other occupants of the Hostel filed writ petitions being W.P.(C)
176/2004 and W.P.(C) 9673/2003 and connected cases. A copy of the
judgment dated 28th April, 2005 has been filed. It is claimed that the Court
rejected all contentions about illegality of the notice of termination of licence

W.P.(C) 19444-45/2006

3 of 6

and dismissed the writ petitions on 28th April, 2005. Subsequently, the
respondent acting through a Special Commissioner issued eviction notice
under Section 5(1) of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act on 9.5.2005, to the first petitioner and on 12.1.2004 to the
second petitioner. The reasoned order in respect of the second petitioner has
also been placed on record.
6.

Learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated the submissions in the pleadings.
Besides, he submitted that the petitioners were not even informed about
eviction proceedings. In these circumstances, the direction issued to them to
evict the premises is utterly arbitrary and unlawful. Counsel also urged that
the respondent could not have legally eviction the petitioners without first
relocating them.

7.

I have examined the materials on record. The residents of the Women's Hostel
amongst whom the petitioners count themselves were represented in the first
proceeding in W.P.(C) 3095/2001. Indeed the first petitioner was a party to
those proceedings. Initially, an interim order was made not to be evicted the
occupants till the eviction proceedings have been finalized. However, the
final order rejected all their contentions and the Court expressed its view that
the writ petition was not maintainable as it sought a declaration in respect of
the title to the property, the review petition too was dismissed. The first
petitioner then filed another writ petition which has not even been disclosed in
these proceedings.

W.P.(C) 19444-45/2006

Here, the relief claimed was a direction against the
4 of 6

respondents not to evict her

and the other before giving suitable

accommodation/relocation. Other petitioners occupants too had sought
identical directions. That writ petition too was rejected and the Court held
that being an allottee was a relevant consideration for entitlement to relocation and that it did not, in any manner, implead the power of the
authorities to issue eviction order.
8.

After receiving notices of eviction in 2004 and 2005, writ petitioners in fact
sought for accommodation and clearly stated that they would vacate the
premises within a year. Having regard to the history of this litigation and the
surrounding circumstances outlined, I am of the opinion that the reliefs
claimed cannot be granted at this stage. Moreover, the petitioners had sought
a one year's time to vacate the premises; even that period is now over. In these
circumstances, if they have any grievance under the orders of eviction, it is
open for them to prefer an appeal under Section 9 of the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act. Since these petitions have been
pending interim orders were made. If such appeals are preferred within two
weeks, the appellate authority shall consider and dispose off them in
accordance with law without considering the issue of limitation. It is clarified
that this order is not, in any manner, reflective of the petitioners' claim for
relocation.

Subsequent to the letters of the Union Government and the

previous orders of the Court, the right to enforce the claim for that purpose is
hereby reserved.
W.P.(C) 19444-45/2006

5 of 6

9.

The writ petitions and all pending applications are dismissed so far as the
claim made in these petitions is concerned subject to the liberty reserved
above.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J

January 7, 2008
dkg

W.P.(C) 19444-45/2006

6 of 6

