1
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

ARB.P. 243/2007
April 1, 2008
SIDHARTH TRADING AND EXPORTS PVT. LTD.
Through Ms. Ginny J. Rautray, Advocate

..... Petitioner

versus

ALCOBEX METALS LIMITED
..... Respondent
Through Mr. S.M.F. Warsi, Advocate
CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)

1.

The petitioner seeks an order for appointment of an Arbitrator in respect of disputes arising out

of the contract with the respondent in terms of an agreement/Memorandum of Understanding dated
27.8.2005. It is alleged that a commission of Rs. 29,10,163.20 was payable to the petitioner by the
respondent for the order placed upon an overseas client in Iran.
2.

The petitioner states that on 10.5.2006 the respondent undertook to pay the sum in two

ARB.P. 243/2007

1 of 5

instalments. The first instalment was payable in June 2006 and the balance on the next month. It is
further claimed that the respondent did not fulfil its commitments and paid only Rs. 10 lakhs towards
the first instalment on 22.7.2006 agreeing later to pay the balance on or before 15.8.2006. It is alleged
to have paid only Rs. 5,10,240/- by a cheque dated 14.7.2006 which was dishonoured but later
replaced through a demand draft. The petitioners therefore claims that Rs. 13,10,163.20 along with
interest @ Rs. 18% is due and payable and that in terms of arbitration clause in the Memorandum of
Understanding, inter se disputes are to be referred to the arbitration. The petitioner suggested the name
of Justice R.C. Chopra, retired Judge of this Court and asked the respondent to convey its acceptance
within seven days of receipt of notice on 13.4.2007. The respondent entered appearance and has not
filed any reply. However, its counsel stated that an application has been filed and produced a copy of
The Rajasthan Relief Undertakings (Special Provisions) Act, 1961 and a Notification issued under
Section 4(1) of the said Act, on 16.11.2007 declaring the respondent as a relief undertaking in the first
instance.
3.

Reliance is placed upon Section 3 and 4 of the said enactment which read as follows:
“3. Declaration of relief undertaking- (1) If at any time, it appears to the State
Government necessary to so, the State Government may, by notification in the official
Gazette, declare that an industrial undertaking specified in the notification, whether
started, acquired, or otherwise taken over, by the State Government, or in respect of
which a notified order under section 18-A of the Industries (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1951 (Central Act 65 of 1951) is in operation, and carried on, or
proposed to be carried on, by itself, or under its authority, or to which any loan,
guarantee, or other financial assistance has been provided by the Statement
Government, shall, with effect from the date specified for the purpose in the

ARB.P. 243/2007

2 of 5

notification, be a relief undertaking for the purposes of this Act.
(Explanation- The issuance and publication of a notification under sub-section (1) in
respect of any industrial undertaking shall not have the effect of treating the
employees of that industrial undertaking as Government Servants unless they are
specifically appointed as such, in writing, by a special order of the State Government,
issued subsequent to the said notification, to manage the affairs of that industrial
undertaking)
(2)
A notification under sub-section (1) shall have effect for such period not
exceeding two yearas as may be specified in the notification: but it shall be renewable
by like notifications, from time to time for further periods not exceeding twelve
months at a time, so however, that the total period in the aggregate does not exceed
(twenty years).”
4.
Power to specify industrial relation and other facilities temporarily for relief
undertaking. - (1) Notwithstanding any law, usage, custom, contract, instrument,
decree, order. Award, submission; settlement standing order or other provisions
whatsoever the State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, direct
that :(a) in relation to any relief undertaking and in respect of the period for which
the relief undertaking continues as such under sub section (2) of section 3.
(i)
all or any of the laws mentioned in the Schedule to the Act or any
provisions thereof shall not apply (and such relief undertaking shall be exempted
therefrom) or shall, if so directed by the State Government, be applied with such
modifications (which do not however affect the policy of the said laws) as may be
specified in the notification; and
(ii)
all or any of the agreements, settlements, awards or standing orders
made under any of the laws mentioned in the Scheduled to this Act, which may be
applicable to the undertaking immediately before it was acquired or taken over by the
State Government or before the issue of the notified order in respect thereof under
section 18-A of the industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (Central Act
65 of 1951) or before any loan guarantee or other financial assistance was provided
to it, by the State Government, shall be suspended in operation or shall, if so directed
by the State Government be applied with such modifications as may be specified in the
notification; and

ARB.P. 243/2007

3 of 5

(b)
no suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted or commenced or if
pending shall be proceeded with, against any industrial undertaking during the period
in which it remains a relief undertaking.
[provided that a notification issued under this Act shall have no effect in respect of
any law, legal proceeding, agreement, settlement, award, standing order or the like
relating to the payment of wages to the workman of the industrial undertaking
specified in the said notification.
Provided further that with the issuance and publication of notification under section 3
or section 4 of the Act, the State Government shall, in no case, be liable for payment
of the wages or any other financial obligations or otherwise on behalf of the
industrial undertaking specified in the said notification.
Explanation.- “Legal proceeding” means any proceeding under any law before any
court, tribunal officer, authority or arbitrator, started on a plaint, petition of appeal,
application, reference; or otherwise,
(2)
The period, during which any suit or legal proceeding cannot be instituted or
commenced because of the provisions of clause 9b) of sub-section (1), shall be
excluded in computing the period of limitation prescribed by the Indian limitation Act,
1908 (Central Act 9 of 1908). or any other law for the time being in force, for such
suit or proceeding.
(3)
A notification under sub-section (1) shall have effect from such date, not being
earlier than the date referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3, as may be specified
therein.
4.

The respondent's counsel

submits that in terms of Section 4(b), no suit or other legal

proceedings can be instituted during the subsistence of the notification.
5.

On a conspectus of the provisions of Section 3 and 4, it is clear that this Court cannot refer the

dispute to arbitration as long as the Notification declaring the respondent as a relief undertaking
continues. Although the provision in Section 3(2) seems to be in extremely wide terms, this Court at
ARB.P. 243/2007

4 of 5

least exercising jurisdiction under Section 11(6) cannot go behind it read it down in any other manner.
6.

Learned counsel for the petitioner had submitted that the appropriate course would be to

adjourn these proceedings till November 2008 to examine whether the Notification would be continued
or not extended. That course unfortunately is not available. As long as the notification subsists as well
as the likelihood of its being extended, this Court does not possess the jurisdiction to entertain this
proceeding, which is undoubtedly a prelude to the legal proceedings to recover the amounts.
7.

In these circumstances, the respondent is directed to intimate to the petitioner immediately after

15th November, 2008 whether the Notification declaring it as a relief undertaking has been extended
and if so to what effect or any other alternative course of action. A copy of the same shall also be
forwarded to the petitioner within two weeks of the expiry of the said period.
8.

The petition is disposed of in the above terms.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
APRIL
dkg

01, 2008

ARB.P. 243/2007

5 of 5

