*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 621 of 2006
Reserved on: July 04, 2007.
Date of Decision : July 9, 2007

MR. MANU KHANNA Represented through mother
Dr. Poonam Khanna

…PETITIONER

Vs.
DR. V.P. SHARMA & Anr.

… RESPONDENTS

CORAM:
Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

The present revision is directed against an order of the of quantum of interim

maintenance fixed in the impugned order dt. 26.06.2006 passed by the Metropolitan
Magistrate (hereafter called "the trial court").

2.

The brief facts necessary to decide this application are that the mother of the

petitioner Dr. Poonam Khanna married the Respondent no.1 on 18.01.1979; the petitioner
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 621 of 2006

1 of 6

was born out of the wedlock on 26.11.1981. The case of the Petitioner as represented by
his mother is that he is mentally challenged and is also suffering from a chronic form of
epilepsy. He has physical ailments of kidney and Bronchial Asthma. It is claimed that for
survival and upkeep, he requires special treatment at Escorts and a nurse to assist him to
lead a normal and dignified life.

3.

The trial court, by its impugned order, fixed Rs. 5000/- as interim maintenance.

The court premised this on the declared income of the respondent father, who stated that
he enjoyed a monthly income of Rs. 20,000/-

4.

The petitioner's mother, Dr. Poonam Khanna, argued the matter. According to her,

the trial court was misled into making the impugned order. The amount fixed is extremely
low. It was submitted that the respondent-father is earning handsomely, and his net
declared monthly income is in excess of Rs. 80,000/-. It was submitted that the
respondent father has the financial ability to maintain two cars. Additionally, he married
again, this time to a nurse. She is independently earning to the tune of Rs. 15,000/- per
month. As against this, the mother, Dr. Khanna is unable to earn well; her practice is
extremely restricted, since she has to take care of the petitioner. She submitted that
though the petitioner's biological age was about 26 years, his mental age was far less. He
has to be constantly tended. In addition, it was contended that the petitioner's mother has
adopted a daughter.

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 621 of 2006

2 of 6

5

Reliance has been placed upon the Convention on the Rights of the Children,

particularly Article 23. Dr. Khanna also referred to the economic rights guaranteed for the
physically challenged in the Constitution and also the relevant provisions of the Persons
with Disabilities(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act
1995 to substantiate the claim. It was contended that in view of Section 125 (1) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the amount of interim maintenance shall, as far as
practicable, be not less than thirty percent of the monthly income of the respondent.

6.

The mother of the petitioner further argued that at the time of divorce no alimony

was paid and only a lump sum in the form of property was awarded towards maintenance
of the petitioner and his mother. Today, it is inadequate to maintain the petitioner,
particularly to meet his medical needs and ensure a life with dignity. It was urged that
respondent no.1 had misrepresented his monthly income as Rs 20,000 p.m. whereas in
reality he is a Senior Anesthetist on the panel of many prestigious Nursing Homes and
earning a handsome salary to the tune of Rs. 80,000/= p.m. The petitioner is a special
child and is completely dependent upon his mother. The monthly expenditure for the
petitioner alone woks out to be around Rs 33,500. Thus, in the light of the special
circumstances, the mother of the petitioner argued that the interim maintenance awarded
to the to the petitioner is a pittance.

7.

The respondent no.1 argued in person and urged that the mother of the

petitioner is a senior gynecologist and running a nursing home, thereby her income is
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 621 of 2006

3 of 6

more than his, which she has deliberately suppressed.

It is in any case the joint

responsibility of both the parents to maintain the child. To substantiate his claim, the
respondent no.1 relied on some case law. It was contended that the petitioner's mother
deliberately suppressed the fact that according to the agreements executed between the
parties when the divorce proceedings were finalized,

two properties were given over to

the petitioner and his mother. They are extremely valuable. The respondent no.1 further
argued that enhancement of interim maintenance on behalf of the petitioner by his mother
on the grounds that he needs an escort is untenable in the light of the fact that the
petitioner used to go to the school independently even when he was only 8-9 years old.
Furthermore, he passed the Class X board examination way back in 1997. Also, the
petitioner knows swimming and used to go to the Vasant Vihar Swimming Pool
independently for swimming. Thus, in the light of all these, the petitioner can by no
stretch of imagination be in need of an escort.

8.

The above narrative shows that the petitioner's parents, who were married in 1979,

divorced each other in 2003. At that time, apparently they had executed agreements. The
trial court, by its impugned order, has fixed Rs. 5,000/- as interim maintenance. Another
fact is that the impugned order was challenged in a revision petition, by the respondent
father, before the Additional Sessions Judge; the revision was rejected on 30th October
2006.

9.

There is considerable acrimony between the petitioner's wife, and the respondent.

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 621 of 2006

4 of 6

However, the trial court held, on the basis of materials on record that the petitioner is a
person of low IQ. He is also a patient of epilepsy. It fixed an ad-hoc interim maintenance
amount of Rs. 5000/- per month.

10.

Dr. Poonam Khanna, the petitioner's mother and the respondent, his father filed

written arguments, besides making submissions. They both relied on some case law. Dr.
Khanna sought to urge that the maintenance amount was inadequate. The respondent
urged that the amount could not have been fixed. As far as the latter argument is
concerned, the right to seek maintenance cannot be questioned, because the respondent's
revision stands rejected; he is not aggrieved by that order. The only question therefore, is
whether the quantum fixed as interim maintenance is adequate in the circumstances of the
case.

11.

The facts of this case, as far as the disabilities of the petitioner are concerned, do

not appear to be seriously in dispute. On the basis of a rough estimation of the
respondent's income, the trial court fixed Rs. 5000/- per month as interim maintenance.
Although there is some material to support the contention that the respondent has
sufficient means, which may be more than Rs. 20,000/- per month, yet there are other
materials, such as Dr. Khanna's income earning potential, which have emerged during the
hearing of the petition. The court's jurisdiction while fixing interim maintenance, is to be
on the basis of a tentative, prima facie estimation of the petitioner's need, and the
respondent's income. The jurisdiction of the High Court, in revision, is even more
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 621 of 2006

5 of 6

circumscribed; it cannot act as an appellate court and ordinarily, should refrain from reappreciating materials, unless it is satisfied that the order of the trial court was grossly
improper, or issued in ignorance of material circumstances, which would result in grave
prejudice. Absent these factors, the existence of another view itself should not impel the
court to intervene and disturb an otherwise valid order.

12.

On an overall conspectus of the facts of this case, I am of the opinion that the

impugned order does not suffer from any illegality, or procedural infirmity of such nature
as to warrant exercise of revisional jurisdiction. In the peculiar facts of this case, it would
be in the interests of justice that the trial court hears and decides the application under
Section 125, Criminal Procedure Code, on its merits, as early as possible and in any case
within four months from today. A direction to that effect is accordingly issued to the trial
court. The parties are further directed to appear before the trial court on 17-7-2007 for
directions and further proceedings.

13.

The petition is disposed off in terms of the above direction. Copy of the order

Dasti to parties; a copy shall be marked separately to the trial court, for due compliance.
No costs.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE
July 9, 2007

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 621 of 2006

6 of 6

