*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on 05 February, 2007
Delivered on 05 March, 2007
CRL.REV.P. 92/1998

+

ONKAR NATH MISHRA & ORS.
……Petitioners
Through Mr. Onkar Nath Mishra, Petitioner in person
Versus
STATE

…..Respondent

Through Mr. V.K. Malik for State
Mr. Nalin Tripathi for respondent No.2
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporters or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes
in the Digest?
%
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

The present Revision Petition No. 92/1998 is preferred against the order dated

24.1.1998 passed by the learned ASJ directing the Metropolitan court to proceed against
the accused under section 498A/406/34 IPC.
2.

The brief facts essential to decide this petition are that the Complainant, wife of

the third Petitioner filed a complaint on 17.05.94 in the Crime against Women (CAW)
Cell Nanak Pura, Delhi alleging that she was harassed by her husband and in-laws. The
matter was compromised on 26.06.94 and she agreed to live with her husband at Bijnor
(UP), where he was posted. She joined him there on 03.07.95. However, she returned
back to her parental home in Delhi in mid-August, 1994. On 08.11.94 she lodged another

CRL.REV.P-92/1998

1 OF 7

complaint in the CAW cell Nanakpura on the basis of which a First Information Report
(FIR) No.155/95 was registered alleging commission of offences under Sections 498A/406/34 IPC.

3.

The police filed a “challan” against the petitioners in the court of the concerned

Metropolitan Magistrate. The Court by its order-dated 29.4.95 discharged petitioners
No.1 and 2 both under Section 498-A IPC. The Magistrate further concluded that no case
under Section 406 IPC was made out against petitioner No.3, the husband of the
complainant.

4.

The State preferred a revision against the said order (being Crl. R.No.53/97). The

revision was disposed of by Additional Sessions Judge, (ASJ) by order-dated 24.1.1998.
The ASJ held that a prima facie case under Sections 498-A and 406 IPC were made out
against all the accused i.e. the present three petitioners.

5.

The first Petitioner who argued the case, submitted that the ASJ ignored the fact

that alleged harassment of the complainant by her mother-in-law could not have
happened because the latter died in 1990 i.e. 3 years prior to the marriage of the
complainant. He contended that even in the charge sheet submitted by the police under
Section 173 Cr. P.C. it was specifically mentioned that the complainant was un-willing to
take back her dowry articles. It was contended by the petitioner that the complainant
resumed co-habitation with her husband, Petitioner No.3 at Bijnor on 3.7.94;
subsequently, she appeared before the CAW Cell and reported that she was happily living

CRL.REV.P-92/1998

2 OF 7

with her husband. In reality, after that date she never lived with petitioners No.1 and 2 as
such the question of their harassing her did not arise. It was contended that the allegations
of cruelty, and so-called beatings, were not at all substantiated. Therefore, the impugned
order was passed mechanically, without applying the mind to the facts of the case.

6.

The Metropolitan Magistrate by his order dated 29.11.95 had discharged the first

Petitioner and the complainant’s sister in law Ms. Kalpana Mishra; he proceeded to frame
charge against the husband of the Complainant, i.e. third Petitioner.
The extracts of the order dated 29.11.95 are as follows,
“I am of the considered view that the property in what so ever manner has
not been misappropriated by the accused Kalpana Mishra, Omkarnath
Mishra and Ashutosh Mishra and all the accused are very much willing to
hand over the possession of dowry articles to the complainant, but the
complainant has failed to take over the possession of the same. As far as
the involvement of the accused 1&2 are concerned offence under section
498A is not proved. Wherein the complainant has admitted that after
execution of the compromise deed, she never lived with accused 1& 2 and
therefore cruelty does not arise. Prima facie evidence of subjecting the
complainant to cruelty is mentioned only against the husband. I am of the
considered view that prima-facie case u/s 498A IPC is made out against
accused the husband. The accused Omkarnath Mishra, Kalpana Mishra
and Ashutosh Mishra are discharged for offences alleged against them u/s
406/34 IPC. Charge be framed accordingly against Ashutosh Mishra u/s
498A IPC.”

7.

The State filed a Revision petition against the impugned order passed by the

Learned Metropolitan magistrate. The ASJ by his order dated 24.1.1998 charged the
Petitioners under section 498A, 406/34 of the IPC and the extracts of the order dated
24.1.1998 are as follows:

CRL.REV.P-92/1998

3 OF 7

“From the facts and circumstances it is clear that the accused persons
had settled the issue in the complaint just to avoid police action otherwise
from the statement of Complainant it is clear that she has been subjected
to constant harassment/cruelty by all the three respondents. On going
through the impugned order I observe that the Trial Court has taken into
consideration steps taken by the respondents before it and the observation
that all the accused persons have very much willing to handover the
possession of the dowry articles to the complainant but the complainant
failed to take over the possession of the same is contrary to the
investigation. But I find that police had given a notice to the respondents
and they had also made search for recovery of the articles also. At the
stage it is difficult to understand that if the articles were handed over to
the complainant, then why she will refuse to take it back. Moreover there
is no evidence on the record that she refused to take back her articles.
Afterall the present case has to be governed from the statements so
recorded by the police upon which a rukka was prepared. Besides this I
also observe that the MM has wrongly observed that since compromise
she never lived with the accused/respondent No.1 & 2 therefore question
of cruelty cannot arise but facts and circumstances shows that it is a
constant and continuous harassment/cruelty meted out to the complainant
because of which she has been not allowed to live in the house of her own
husband and also in-laws, even she gave a birth to her child at her
parents house and she knocked the door of her in-laws house several
times but they did not permit to enter their house, then all the three
respondents are clearly liable for prosecution under section 498-A/34
IPC and 406/34 IPC. At the one hand they are closing their door to her,
on the other hand they are putting their pressure for demanding
Rs.50,000/- and V.C.R. and simultaneously they say that they are willing
to return the Stridhan. It is a clear cut case of contradictory statement on
their part.
In view of the above discussions I am totally in agreement with the
arguments made by the Ld. APP in support of his Revision Petition that
the order has been clearly passed without applying the judicial mind and
proper scrutiny of the facts and circumstances and the MM has
unnecessarily swayed away with the submissions made by the
Respondents before him.
At the stage of framing the charge the Court has to see a Prima
facie case. It is not a stage where a finding can be given by the Trial
Court. At this stage Court has not to evaluate or appraise the evidence
meticulously and to come to the conclusion that respondents would be
ultimately convicted or not. The court is only to satisfy that if accused
involved in the commission of crime necessary charge should be framed
and proceed with the case accordingly. Prima facie case does not mean
proof. In view of my above observations I therefore accept the Revision

CRL.REV.P-92/1998

4 OF 7

Petition and set aside the impugned order and I direct the trial Court to
proceed with the case against the accused persons under Section 498-A/
406/34 IPC and frame the charge accordingly without any delay and the
respondents are directed to appear before the MM on 14.02.98.”

8.

During the course of hearing, it has transpired that the complainant wife continues

to live separately; she is represented in these proceedings. The custody of the child is
with her.

9.

The question here is whether the impugned order of the ASJ overlooked material

facts, and has caused miscarriage of justice. No doubt, the trial Court discharged the
accused, yet the revisional Court on its appreciation of the materials on record, which
included the complainant/wife’s statement recorded before the police, and other attendant
circumstances, reversed the order of the trial Court.

10.

The principal contention by the petitioners is that the complainant had no cause to

allege cruelty and that she had returned to the matrimonial home after a compromise had
been effected. On the other hand, the complainant’s initial allegations against the first
petitioner appeared to be that he had sought to develop physical intimacy. Later, she
stated that the police had been approached in May 1994, when the petitioner allegedly
refused to take her back. At that time, she was pregnant. She also stated that on 26.04.94
the compromise was effected on the condition that the couple would live together; she
went to Bijnor on 03.07.94.

She alleged that on 12.08.94, the third petitioner

(husband)asked her father to take her back to Delhi for the delivery of the child; the child

CRL.REV.P-92/1998

5 OF 7

was born on 04.09.94. She, however, alleged that after the birth of the child, she tried to
go back several times to the matrimonial home but was prevented from doing so by the
first two petitioners. The complainant/wife reiterated these allegations during the course
of investigations on 15.07.95.

11.

It has been repeatedly held that the Court, while exercising its powers and framing

charges, has to sift the materials presented to it, either by way of statements or
documents. The Supreme Court had said in Union of India V. Prafulla Kumar AIR 1979
SC 366 that what would be the proper exercise of sifting such material would necessarily
be subjective to the facts of the case. However, the Court indicated one broad guideline,
namely, that if two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence
produced before him gives rise to suspicion, but not grave suspicion, he would be within
rights to discharge the accused. This view has been reiterated time and again in several
judgments of the Courts including the Supreme Court as well as this Court. It is also
well-settled that the standard of proof and the nature of enquiry is necessarily different at
the charge framing stage as juxtaposed with the final trial. At the time of framing of
charge meticulous consideration of the case or the materials is not required; it is not even
warranted. The Court has to merely form a prima facie view as to whether a grave
suspicion that the crime has been committed exists (C. & S. Manufacturing Co. V. State
of Maharashtra AIR 1972 SC 545, Dr. V.N. Sharma V. State 1995 JCC 558). The
Supreme Court has also held in Joginder Singh V. State of Punjab AIR 1979 SC 339 that
while forming a prima facie view, a Court has to confine itself within certain limits and
should not evaluate or appraise the evidence to arrive at conclusions whether the accused

CRL.REV.P-92/1998

6 OF 7

would be ultimately convicted. In short, prima facie case cannot be confused with proof.

12.

Applying the above test, it would be immediately apparent that the revisional

Court, namely, the ASJ in this case went by the statements made during the course of
investigation and also recorded by the complainant, when the FIR was lodged. This
coupled with the circumstance, that the petitioners did not allegedly take back the
complainant, despite her returning to Bijnor after the birth of the child, and allegedly
demanding that she ought to bring some items of dowry along with cash, weighed with
the Court in making the order that it did. Applying the above test, I am of the considered
opinion that the revisional Court has not fallen into any error that would result in
miscarriage of justice requiring interference. I am further of the opinion that whether
dowry articles were claimed by the complainant, cannot reflect on the allegations of
cruelty levelled by her against the accused, since there is no dispute that some articles
were returned after she approached the authorities and lodged an FIR. There are welldefined limits of power of the Court, it can interfere and set aside an order on charge if
the trial Court misdirects itself on the facts or law, as to its jurisdiction. I am satisfied
that such is not the case here.
13.

For the above reasons, the petition has to fail; it is accordingly dismissed without

any orders as to costs.

MARCH 05, 2007
as

CRL.REV.P-92/1998

S. RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE

7 OF 7

