*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

I.A. 12288/2007
IN CS (OS) 2099/2007
Reserved on : 8th January, 2008
Date of decision : 8th February, 2008

VANDANA SHARMA

.... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Abhay Kushwaha with Ms. Abhigya and
Mr. Pradeep Kumar Dubey, Advocates

VERSUS
ANKUR SHARMA

..... Defendant
Through : Mr. Sanjeev Bahl, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

ORDER
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

This order will dispose off IA No: 12288/07 in CS (OS) No. 2099/2007, in which

the Applicant/ Plaintiff seeks relief under Order 39 Rule1& 2, restraining the Defendants/
Non applicants from interfering with her exclusive possession of the first floor portion as

I.A. 12288/2007 IN CS (OS) 2099/2007

also the joint possession the ground/mezzanine floor, Barsati portion of the Property
bearing No.166/E Kamla Nagar Delhi( hereafter “suit property”).

2.

The facts relevant for the present purposes are as follows:

The suit property was owned by Late Shri Om Prakash Sharma who died intestate on 16th
May 1999, the Plaintiff and Defendant, being his daughter and son, are the only legal heirs
with respect to the said property. Their mother predeceased the father on 10 th August 1983.
The suit property consists of a ground floor portion, first floor, second floor, and a Barsati
portion. According to the Plaintiff, the ground floor and the mezzanine portion are in the
joint possession of the Plaintiff and Defendant and are rented out along with the barsati
floor, which is also in their joint possession. The first floor and the second floor, the
Plaintiff submits, are in possession of the Plaintiff and Defendant respectively.

3.

It is submitted by the Plaintiff that the Defendant moved into the second floor of the

aforesaid property along with his family in late 2006.

She avers that since then the

Defendant has been harassing her and also interfering with her peaceful enjoyment of the
property. She submits that over the past two years she has been demanding that the suit
property be partitioned and she be given ownership of the first floor along with the joint
ownership of the barsati floor, ground floor and mezzanine floor, and that the Defendant
could take the second floor alongwith the joint ownership of the barsati floor, ground floor
and mezzanine floor. She avers that the Defendant has been unrelenting and that he has
been disturbing her exclusive use of the first floor of the said property. She also claims the
I.A. 12288/2007 IN CS (OS) 2099/2007

Defendant has been over the years, collecting rents from the Barsati floor and has not
divulged any accounts or given her share of the profits. She also alleges that the Defendant
has resorted to physical violence on her and her family members on a number of occasions
and that she also complained to the police in this regard.

4.

Constrained by the acts of the Defendant, the Plaintiff avers that she filed the present

suit for declaration, partition, permanent injunction, rendition and settlement of accounts
with respect to the aforesaid property. She also filed the present application for restraining
the Defendant from interfering with her exclusive use of the first floor.

5.

The Defendant/respondent denies allegations in the plaint and in the subsequent

application as false, and denies that any sort of physical violence or harassment has been
resorted to. He further avers that notional partition of the property took place in the year
1999 itself, after the death of their father, and that he had become owner of three fourth
share of the property. He further avers that only one room on the first floor of the said
property is in exclusive possession of the Plaintiff whereas the drawing, kitchen and dining
rooms are in common use of the Plaintiff and Defendants. He also submits that the rest of
the property is in his exclusive possession. He further avers that the Plaintiff has not
disclosed relevant details of prior suits filed in respect of the aforesaid property. He alleges
that the present suit is instituted with malafide to abuse the judicial process and coerce him in
to paying money to the Plaintiff. Moreover, he submits that he is in joint possession of the

I.A. 12288/2007 IN CS (OS) 2099/2007

kitchen and dining cum drawing room and that he would put to inconvenience if the
injunction order sought for is granted as there is no kitchen in the second floor.

6.

The behest of the Defendant this Court on 14th November 2007 had appointed Ms.

Roohi Kholi, Advocate as a Local Commissioner, to visit the suit property and report as its
nature of the property, number of rooms, the occupants in each floor and also directed her
to file a detailed sketch plan alongwith photographs. The Local Commissioner submitted her
report on 26th November 2007 had recorded that there was in fact only one kitchen
common to the first and second floor. The detailed sketch plan and the photographs
submitted by the local commissioner as annexures to the report also indicate that there only
one kitchen common to the two families living in the said property.

7.

It is settled law that for the purposes granting interim injunction, the applicant must

show she has prima facie case with respect to the suit, the balance of convenience lies in
granting injunction and irreversible harm would be caused to the applicant in the event
injunction is not granted. In the present case even if it is assumed at this stage that the
Plaintiff has a prima facie case, it is not possible to infer from the material on record that the
balance of convenience lies entirely in her favour. The photographs filed by the Defendant
in his reply to the application allege that his family is in joint possession of the first floor of
the suit property.
8.

It is evident from the report of the Local Commissioner that the only kitchen

available for both families is situated in the fist floor. The joint possession and use of this
I.A. 12288/2007 IN CS (OS) 2099/2007

kitchen is further evidenced from the complaint filed by the Plaintiff at the Police Station
Roop Nagar Police Station, a copy of the complaint has been filed by her as Annexure ‘P-1’
to the application.

9.

The Local Commissioner’s report further shows that three rooms, and a drawing

room exist on the first floor. The sketch of the entire building have been produced along
with the Local Commissioner’s report. It endorses the defendant’s version about a common
Kitchen for the first and second floor. However, the report further shows that at the time
of the Commissioner’s visit, two rooms on the first floor had locks placed by both parties.
In the circumstances, there is a strong probability of the defendant having sought to disturb
the plaintiff’s possession in respect of these two rooms. The defendant does not deny her
possession of one room, and also common use of the Kitchen.

10.

In the above circumstances, though the plaintiff has, in my opinion, not made out a

prima facie case for exclusive possession of the entire first floor, yet she has demonstrated
her possession of the three rooms, apart form the use of the kitchen, and entry to the first
floor through the drawing room. Irreparable hardship would ensue if an appropriate interim
order is not granted to her. The balance of convenience too lies in her favour.

11.

For the above reasons, the defendant is hereby restrained from disturbing or

preventing the plaintiff in the use and exclusive possession of the three rooms on the first
floor of the premises. He is also restrained from preventing the plaintiff’s joint use of the

I.A. 12288/2007 IN CS (OS) 2099/2007

Kitchen, in the first floor, as well as her access to the premises through the drawing room,
during the pendency of the suit.

12.

The application is allowed in the above terms.

Dated: 8th February 2008

I.A. 12288/2007 IN CS (OS) 2099/2007

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

