*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

OMP 155/2006
Reserved on : February 7, 2008.
Date of Decision : April 7, 2008
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI
........Petitioner
Through Ms. Smita Shankar, Ms. Gurupyari
Dwivedi, Advocates
versus

M/S. CONCRETE INDIA LTD.
.....Respondent
Through Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Advocate
CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

In this petition, under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

(hereafter called “the Act”), the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (hereafter referred to as
“the MCD”) challenged an Award of the Arbitral Tribunal (hereafter called “the
impugned Award”) dated 31.12.2005. The impugned Award allowed claims against the

OMP 155/2006

1 of 15

MCD.

The facts are brief and broadly undisputed. The MCD awarded a contract for

construction of the school building at Sri Nagar near Rani Bagh, Keshav Puram through a
work order dated 15.12.1995 to the respondent (hereafter variously referred to as “the
claimant" and "the contractor”).

According to the agreement, the work had to be

completed within 18 months i.e. 24.6.1997. The work, however, was completed on
16.11.1998. The contractor claimed certain amounts and the dispute was referred in
terms of the agreement to arbitration. The Arbitrator entered upon his reference on
21.11.2000. The impugned Award was made thereafter. The MCD objected to the
Award on the ground that it is opposed to public policy and is patently illegal in so far as
it accepts the contractor's claim quantified in Claim No.1 (Rs. 4,08,546/-), Claim No. 4
(Rs. 6,00,082), Claim No. 5 (Rs. 4,68,264/-) and Claim No. 10 (interest at 18% per
annum) from the award till realization of the amount.
2.

The MCD objects to the acceptance of Claim No. 1 i.e. payments of amounts on

account of escalation clause during the extended period of contract. Clause 10 CC of the
contract had enabled the contractor to claim escalation in certain costs during the
subsistence of the contracts such as price of specified material, wages, fuel costs etc. It is
claimed that the contractor was paid those escalation charges during the subsistence of
the contract. The MCD alleges that such escalation can be paid beyond the contractual

OMP 155/2006

2 of 15

period only if the extension of time is finally approved by the competent authority
without claiming compensation. The MCD alleges that in this case no such approval
was granted by the competent authority; the contractor was granted only provisional
extension of the time. According to the MCD, compensation/penalty was levied—a fact
brought to the notice of the Arbitrator. It is also contended that the contractor was bound
to prove actual incurring of escalated expenses; these were incurred only during the
agreed period of contract. The respondent failed to discharge this burden—it did not
produce any document or material in support of the escalation claim for the extended
period.

Having accepted changes in the parameter of work such as alteration of

architectural drawings etc., after finalization of the tender, but before entering into an
agreement, unequivocally, the contractor could not complain of increase in work and
was bound by the schedule of rates.
3.

It is next contended that the Award discloses a patent illegality as it allows Claim

No.4. In this claim, the contractor had alleged that its tools, machinery, workers and
labour were kept idle for 1 year 4 four months and 22 days. It has alleged that site was
unavailable due to the existence of a pre-fabricated structure which had to be dismantled.
The contract to dismantle them had been awarded to someone else. According to the
contractor, the clear site was handed over to it only after eight months from the due date

OMP 155/2006

3 of 15

of commencing/start of work. The claimant had also alleged that there was shortage of
cement. The Arbitrator awarded the sum of Rs. 6,00,082/- due to idle machinery and
labour for that eight month period. While doing so, the Arbitrator relied upon entries in
the Hindrance Register and held that the MCD itself admitted to obstructions in various
forms for a period 379 days.
4.

The findings on claim No. 4 are challenged on the ground that the Arbitrator

committed an illegality in relying only on the Hindrance Register which at best is a
pointer and cannot be understood to disclose conclusive proof of obstruction at the site.
It is averred that the claimant did not produce any other material and on the contrary the
MCD had attempted to rely on evidence which was examined by the Arbitrator but
ignored. It is also alleged that the Hindrance Register shows a total hindrance of 349
days and not 379 days. Reliance is placed upon extracts of the Cement Register to show
that materials were issued to the contractor on several dates.
5.

The MCD attacks the findings on Claim No. 5 as completely opposed to law and

disclosing a patent illegality. It is averred that the contractor completed his work after
provisional extension of time. The MCD did not terminate the contract and no part of the
work was left un-executed. It is alleged that in such cases, the contractor should establish
that had he received the amount due, he could have utilized if for some other business for

OMP 155/2006

4 of 15

which he would have earned profit. Unless such plea is established, the claim of loss of
profit should not be granted.
6.

The contractor in its reply refutes the attacks to the award as unfounded. It alleges

that the Award is a well reasoned one and based on the materials on record. The Clause
10-CC is a part of the contract and the Arbitrator was not justified in segregating the two
periods i.e. contractual period and the extended period in its application. The contractor
denies the contention about its dis-entitlement to the payment under that condition or that
it was levied compensation at 1%. It alleges that the condition was correctly applied after
due interpretation.
7.

The contractor relies upon the Award to say that the findings on Claim No. 4 were

perfectly justified and reliance placed on the Hindrance Register was sound.

It is

generally contended that the other findings on damages, on loss of profitability and on the
interest, are sound and cannot be characterized as patent illegalities, or containing factors
that can persuade the Court to interfere with the Award under Section 34 of the Act.
8.

Ms. Smita Shankar, learned counsel relied upon the text of clause 10-CC and

contended that the said condition applies in the first instance only during the contract
period; the MCD had undoubtedly made the payment for such period. It was contended
that escalation charges were payable for the extended period only upon approval by the

OMP 155/2006

5 of 15

competent authority.

In this case, only provisional extension was granted to the

contractor. She relied upon the letter dated 10.3.1998 in support of the contention.
Counsel submitted that this being provisional, and the contractor having accepted it, he
could not claim any amount towards escalation in the absence of un-conditional
acceptance. Learned counsel also relied upon the noting dated 18.10.2005, approved by
the competent authority subsequently that the extension of time was granted upto
16.11.1998 with levy of 1% compensation.
9.

As regards the Award in respect of Claim No.4, counsel contended that the dis-

proportionate weight attached to the Hindrance Register in the Award was not justified.
It was contended that even the finding that the site could not be utilized for the work for
379 days is factually incorrect as a bare reading of the register would show that actually
the delay which could be attributed was 349 days. Counsel contended that no evidence
was produced by the contractor in support of the contention that the work had halted
completely.

No details were produced nor was any evidence led about when tools and

machineries and staff were kept idle. It is contended that entries occurring in Items 3 to 5
of the extract of the Hindrance Register, which is a part of the record show that the work
could not have come to halt. In support this, counsel relied upon entries in the Cement
Register and the Measurement Book (MB) to say that the work had been carried out

OMP 155/2006

6 of 15

when earth work such as digging etc. took place. Learned counsel placed considerable
reliance on the fact on three separate dates cement was issued to the contractor which
itself evidences that work was possible.
10.

Learned counsel attacked the Award on as Claim No. 5 i.e. loss of profitability. It

was contended that loss of profit is normally allowed only in cases where the contract is
rescinded or where work is less than what is contracted for is accepted. Here, there was
un-executed portion of the work justifying the contractor to claim amounts for the
extended period. Learned counsel relied upon the decision of this Court in Delhi Jal
Board vs. Subhash Pipes Ltd., 2005(2) Arb. L.R. 213 (Delhi); M/s. A.T. Brij Paul Singh
& Bros. v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1984 SC 1703; Dwarka Das vs. State of Madhya
Pradesh, AIR 1999 SC 1031 and the decision of the Supreme Court in Bharat Coking
Coal Ltd. vs. L.K. Ahuja, 2004 (5) SCC 209.
11.

Ms. Anusuya Salwan, learned counsel for the contractor submitted that the finding

of the Arbitrator was well reasoned and should not be interfered with. It was submitted
that after accepting the work in November 1998, it is not open to the MCD to allege that
extension of time was not granted in terms of contract to dis-entitle the respondent from
the benefit of Clause 10-CC. She relied on the text of the said condition and submitted
that the interpretation sought to be placed by the MCD is unsupportable in law. Learned

OMP 155/2006

7 of 15

counsel also contended the question of competent authority levying any compensation for
the extended period thereby depriving the benefit of escalation and wages and costs,
cannot be now raised as no such material was placed on the record in arbitration
proceedings; in any event the noting sought to be relied is of the year 2005.
12.

Learned counsel relied upon the findings of the Arbitrator to say that the Award

on claim No. 4 was based on the materials available in the proceedings. It was contended
that the Hindrance Register was as good as a piece of evidence as any, since it contained
signatures of the nominated

representatives of MCD on a daily basis. In preferring to

given importance to this document, the Arbitrator did not fall into any error warranting
interference with his Award. Learned counsel contended that issue of material or entries
in the Measurement Book could not be construed as prejudicial to the claim for cost of
idle equipment, machinery and labour. It was contended that in this case a clear site was
to be given for construction. Such a clear site was not available for a long period as prefabricated materials were lying there. Merely because cement was issued from time to
time to enable the contractor to stack it and commence operation upon the availability of
site could not foreclose his claim No. 4.
13.

Learned counsel contended that the Arbitrator did not commit any error in law in

awarding damages for lost of profitability. This was based on standard practices of the

OMP 155/2006

8 of 15

trade. Learned counsel relied on the decision reported as P.C. Sharma & Anr. v. Delhi
Development Authority, 2006 III AD (Delhi) 357 and Narayan Das R. Israni vs. Delhi
Development Authority, 2005 VIII AD (Delhi) 556 to say that his loss of profit is a
perfectly justifiable in an Award adjudicating claims on construction contracts even
where the period for performance is extended. Learned counsel relied upon judgment
reported as Mcdermott International Inc. vs. Burn Standard Co. Ltd. & Ors., 2003 (5)
SCC 505 to say that if the Arbitrator, takes a plausible view even if not completely sound
in law, the Court should not interfere with unless patent illegality appears on the fact of
the record. It was contended that with the decision in Subhash Pipe (supra), the scope for
interference under Section 34 has been limited.
14.

Clause 10-CC of the contract reads as follows:
"Clause 10 CC : If the prices of materials used and the material
supplied or services rendered at fixed priced by the department in
accordance with clause 10 and from 27 and clause 28 of General
condition before and/or wages of labour required for execution of the
work increase, the contractors all be compensated for such increase as
per provisions detailed below and the amount of contractor shall
accordingly be valid, subject to the condition that such compensation
for escalation in prices shall be available only for the work done
during the stipulated period of the contract, including such period for
which the contractor validity is extended under the provisions of clause
5, of the contract without any action under clause-2, and also subject to
the condition that no such compensation shall be payable for the work
for which the stipulated period of completion of 6 months or less."

OMP 155/2006

9 of 15

15.

A reading of the above clause shows that it applies not only during the contract

period, but also the extended period; the conditions being that extension is
“without any action under clause-2, and also subject to the condition that
no such compensation shall be payable for the work for which the
stipulated period of completion of 6 months or less."

An attempt was made on behalf of the MCD to say that the extension in
this case was not given by the competent authority, or that the order granting it was
provisional. Here, the materials show that the letter categorically stated that extension
was being given; though it used the word provisionally, MCD did not show that the letter
was ever withdrawn, or the decision disapproved; the attempt made now, in 2005 was to
show existence of some office notings to say that compensation to the extent of 1% was
proposed, and approved. However, it is not even the petitioner (MCD’s) case that such a
decision was communicated to the contractor or implemented.
16.

In view of the wording of the clause and the fairly straightforward interpretation

placed on it by the arbitrator, this court is unable to accept the contention that such
determination and acceptance of the first claim is a patent illegality, or such as to attract
the odium of being contrary to public policy. The interpretation placed on the clause is
certainly plausible; even reasonable. The MCD was beneficiary to the completion of

OMP 155/2006

10 of 15

work during the extended period; it did not object to the extension, or make any
contemporaneous reservation under Section 55 of the Contract Act. The MCD’s
contention about segregating the two periods – one, contractual when the claimant would
be entitled to escalated costs, and the other, extended period, where he would get such
costs only if higher costs are proved, strains logic; it introduces different burdens of proof
for interpreting the same condition. The objective of the condition is compensatory, i.e to
ensure that the rise in costs of certain inputs is neutralized by an agreed formula. The
interpretation suggested by the MCD nowhere achieves that objective; it creates an
artificial distinction between two situations, despite the underlying fact situation being
the same. In the circumstances, the award, as far as it allowed Claim No. 1 cannot be
called patently illegal.
17.

As far as Claim No. 4 is concerned, the impugned award went by the Hindrance

Register which was undeniably signed by the MCD’s representatives, on a daily basis.
The object of that document is to record, on a daily basis, whether the progress of the
work on site was hampered (or “hindered”) for any reason. The MCD admits that 349
days have been shown as idle, on account of hinderance of some kind; yet it denies the
claim. The basis of this denial is that the petitioner got cement issued on certain dates,
which had been recorded in the hindrance register; it is claimed that this shows that work

OMP 155/2006

11 of 15

was done, and therefore, capable of being done.
18.

The approach of the arbitrator on this head, in this court’s opinion, cannot be

faulted as unreasonable. The hindrance register was an agreed document, specifically
meant to show if, and what kind of hindrances existed to hamper the work. The arbitrator
allowed 379 days as admissible to calculate the cost of idle labour, machinery and
equipment. The MCD states that it has issued cement to the contractor on some dates.
There might have been some entries in the cement register; yet those cannot be
conclusive to displace the existence of some obstruction to the work, at site. The work
required handing over of the site, without any obstruction. The site actually had some
prefabricated materials. In these circumstances, unless the entire clear site had been
handed over, the claimant could not have started its work. The issuance of cement, on
certain dates, does not prove that work was being done on those dates; it is evidence to
the fact that cement was issued, perhaps in preparation of the impending work;
conceivably to stack it so as to avoid loss of time later. The arbitrator’s determination in
this regard is hardly illegal; certainly it is not a patent illegality warranting interference
with the award.
19.

As far as the claim for loss of profit was concerned, the contractor had demanded

it, on account of the probable profit he would have made, if the contract had been

OMP 155/2006

12 of 15

completed and he had been paid in time. The arbitrator had awarded escalated costs for
the various items such as labour cost, increased fuel and other expenses. Therefore, prima
facie the contractor had not been put to loss. The claim for compensation due to idle
labour and equipment cost/ rent too was accepted. If the claimant wanted amounts
towards loss of profit, it had to prove such loss. Unlike most cases, where damages or
compensation is claimed for breach of contract here the contractor is seeking damages for
extension of contract and the loss of opportunity to put the money, if it were received on
time. Apart from imponderable factors which control such anticipated profits, the claim
would be tenuous and vague unless the claimant actually proves its losses.
20.

In Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v. L.K. Ahuja,(2004) 5 SCC 10 the Supreme Court

held that :
“24. Here when claim for escalation of wage bills and price for materials
compensation has been paid and compensation for delay in the payment of the
amount payable under the contract or for other extra works is to be paid with
interest thereon, it is rather difficult for us to accept the proposition that in
addition 15% of the total profit should be computed under the heading “Loss or
Profit”. It is not unusual for the contractors to claim loss of profit arising out of
diminution in turnover on account of delay in the matter of completion of the
work. What he should establish in such a situation is that had he received the
amount due under the contract, he could have utilised the same for some other
business in which he could have earned profit. Unless such a plea is raised and
established, claim for loss of profits could not have been granted. In this case, no
such material is available on record. In the absence of any evidence, the
arbitrator could not have awarded the same. This aspect was very well settled in
Sunley (B) & Co. Ltd. v. Cunard White Star Ltd.5 by the Court of Appeal in
England. Therefore, we have no hesitation in deleting a sum of Rs. 6,00,000
awarded to the claimant.”

OMP 155/2006

13 of 15

Now, in this case, there is no question of damages or compensation in the normal sense
as understood, having occurred. The contract was performed; extension was granted and
the contractor accepted the extension, when granted. At that stage, the contractor did not
exercise its right to say that the extension was being accepted subject to its right to claim
damages, under Section 55 proviso of the Contract Act. Undeniably the parties agreed to
extend the time. The contractor also did not issue notice demanding such compensation
at any stage after performance. The contractor also did not adduce evidence to show that
the said amounts would have been invested, and might have fetched a particular amount
as returns. It is only in the latter event, i.e proof of such denial of reasonable return on the
consideration being paid in time, the arbitrator or court would be within its right to award
loss of profit compensation. The Petition is allowed partly, to that extent.
21.

Having considered the materials, this court is of the opinion that the contractor

cannot claim amounts towards loss of profit. The award no doubt is based on a formula,
to calculate probable loss of profit. Yet, in the absence of some material justifying
application of that formula, this court is of opinion that the impugned award is
unsustainable on that score. The finding, bereft of evidence and containing award in
Claim No. 5 for loss of profits, therefore, is plainly and patently illegal. It requires to be
set aside to that extent.

OMP 155/2006

14 of 15

22.

The court does not see any reason to make a departure as regards the rate of

interest granted. Being a commercial transaction, the higher rate of interest is neither
opposed to public policy, nor patently illegal.
23.

In view of the above discussion, the present petition succeeds in part. The award,

to the extent it directs payment of Rs. 4,68,264/- to the contractor, on account of loss of
profit, cannot be sustained; it is therefore, set aside. Subject to the above, the petition has
to fail. It is accordingly, directed that the award to the extent it allows Rs. 4, 68, 264/- is
hereby set aside. The petition is allowed partly, to that extent.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
April 7 , 2008
'dkg'

OMP 155/2006

15 of 15

