*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : February 18, 2008
Date of Decision : March 3rd, 2008.

+

I.A. 7640/2007 in CS (OS) 1956/2006

CHANDER MOHAN CHADHA & ORS.

.... Plaintiffs
Through Mr.L.K. Garg, Advocate

versus
SINGER INDIA LTD.

.....Defendant
Through Mr. Deepak Sabharwal, Mr. Shantanu Kumar,
Advocates

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

The question which arises for determination in the present application is

whether the present suit, so far as it concerns the first defendant cannot be

I.A. 7644/2007 in CS (OS) 1956/2006

1 of 7

proceeded with since it is a sick company, under provisions of the Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act (hereafter called “SICA”). The first
defendant says that it filed an application under Section 22 of the said
enactment before the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR);
on 17-8-2005, it was declared a sick company. It therefore alleges that the
present suit, for recovery of amounts, allegedly due and payable as mesne
profits/ damages for use and occupation of erstwhile tenanted premises, from
it, by the plaintiff, cannot be continued, and have to be stayed.
2.

Section 22 of SICA reads as follows:
“22. Suspension of legal proceedings, contracts, etc.—(1) Where in
respect of an industrial company, an inquiry under Section 16 is pending
or any scheme referred to under Section 17 is under preparation or
consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under implementation or where
an appeal under Section 25 relating to an industrial company is pending,
then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1
of 1956), or any other law or the memorandum and articles of association
of the industrial company or any other instrument having effect under the
said Act or other law, no proceedings for the winding up of the industrial
company or for execution, distress or the like against any of the properties
of the industrial company or for the appointment of a receiver in respect
thereof and no suit for the recovery of money or for the enforcement of any
security against the industrial company or of any guarantee in respect of
any loans or advance granted to the industrial company shall lie or be
proceeded with further, except with the consent of the Board or, as the
case may be, the Appellate Authority.”

3.

The plaintiff, which contests the application, and urges that the

proceedings in the suit should continue, relies upon the judgment of the
Supreme

Court

in

Deputy

Commissioner

Tax

Officer

v.

Corromandal

Pharmaceuticals, AIR 1997 SC 2027 to say that the requirement of debt being

I.A. 7644/2007 in CS (OS) 1956/2006

2 of 7

reflected in the sanctioned scheme is a necessary condition to stay the
proceedings. Since in this case, the present debt was not reflected in the
sanctioned scheme or proposals, the suit could not be stayed, and should be
continued.
4.

It was contended that in view of the decision in Sirmor Sudburg Auto Ltd

–vs- Kuldip Singh Lamba 67 (1997) DLT 870, the suit cannot be stayed. The
court relied upon the ruling of the Supreme Court in the case of Shree
Chamundi Mopeds Ltd. to say that so far as the relief of eviction is concerned
the suit is not liable to be stayed. Despite the word ‘proceedings’ being given a
liberal meaning, it would not cover proceedings for eviction of the tenant,
though it may be a sick Company for it is neither a proceeding for winding up
of the Company nor for execution, distress or the like. Counsel submitted that
this court held, however that so far as recovery of amounts were concerned, the
court held that if the debt or amount was not included in any scheme before
the BIFR, it could be proceeded with in other proceedings. The court had held
as follows:
“12. Still question would arise what the defendant objector has to show in
order to successfully make out a case under Section 22(1) of the Act. The
question was examined very recently by their Lordships of the Supreme
Court in Deputy Commercial Tax Officer v. Corromandal Pharmaceuticals,
1997 3 AD SC 713. The petitioner-Company was an assessed to sales tax
assessed for the years 1992-93 and 1993-94 by orders dated 3.1.1994
and in 1995 respectively. A scheme under SICA was sanctioned by the
BIFA on 19.11.1990. Recovery proceedings for the sales tax were assailed
and stay was sought under Section 22 of the Act. The revenue contended
that as the arrears of sales tax in question were related to the period after

I.A. 7644/2007 in CS (OS) 1956/2006

3 of 7

sanctioned scheme was brought under implementation, Section 22 of the
Act was inapplicable and could apply only in respect of sales tax dues
included in the sanctioned scheme. Their Lordships upheld the contention
of the revenue and formed an opinion that Section 22(1) should be read
down. Their Lordships held:
“Any step for execution, distress or the like against the properties of
the industrial Company other of similar as steps should not be
pursued which will cause delay or impediment in the
implementation of the sanctioned scheme. In order to safeguard
such state of affairs, an embargo or bar is placed under Section 22
of the Act against any step for execution, distress or the like or other
similar proceedings against the Company without the consent of the
Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority. The language
of Section 22 of the Act is certainly wide. But, in the totality of the
circumstance, the safeguard is only against the impediment, that is
likely to be caused in the implementation of the scheme. If that be
so, only the liability or amounts covered by the scheme will be taken
in, by Section 22 of the Act. So, we are of the view that though the
language of Section 22 of the Act is of wide import regarding
suspension of legal proceedings from the moment an inquiry is
started, till after the implementation of the scheme or the disposal of
an appeal under Section 25 of the Act, it will be reasonable to hold
that the bar or embargo envisaged in Section 22(1) of the Act can
apply only to such of those dues reckoned or included in the
sanctioned scheme.”
In view of the above decisions and submissions, it was urged that the present
suit could be proceeded with.
5.

This position was contested on behalf of the defendant No. 1. Its counsel

contended that the plain words of Section 22 constitute a bar on the
maintainability of the present suit, as far as the proceedings before BIFR are
pending. He also submitted that in the Corromondel case, the only proposition
which emerged that statutory debts like sales tax, etc. which the Sick
Industrial Company is capable and obliged to collect after the date of the

I.A. 7644/2007 in CS (OS) 1956/2006

4 of 7

sanctioned scheme belong to the Revenue. He also relied upon a decision of
this court in National Textile Corporation –vs- Shri Ramesh Chander Puri ( CR.
No. 449/2002 decided on 8-5-2002) in support of the submission that the
present suit is not maintainable, so long as permission of the BIFR is not
secured. In the subsequent judgment of the Supreme Court in Tata Davy Ltd.
v. State of Orissa and Ors., (1997) 6 SCC 669, in para 13 the court explained
Corromondal as follows:
“The Corromandal Pharmaceuticals judgment dealt with a sick industrial
company which was unable to collect amounts like sales tax after the date
of the sanctioned scheme. This Court said: ‘Such amounts like sales tax,
etc., which the sick industrial company is enabled to collect after the date
of the sanctioned scheme legitimately belonging to the Revenue, cannot be
and could not have been intended to be and could not have been intended
to be covered within Section 22 of the Act.’ It added that the issue that had
arisen before it had not arisen in the case of Vallabh Glass Works. It did
not appear there from or from any other decision of this Court or of the
High Courts ‘that in any one of them, the liability of the sick dealt with
therein itself arose, for the first time after the date of sanctioned scheme.
At any rate, in none of those cases, a situation arose whereby the sick
industrial unit was enabled to collect tax due to the Revenue from the
customers after the `sanctioned scheme’ but the sick unit simply folded its
hands and declined to pay it over to the Revenue, for which proceedings
for recovery had to be taken’. Clearly, the facts in the Corromandal
Pharmaceuticals case differ from the facts of the Vallabh Glass Works
case
and those before us. The reference to the Corromandal
Pharmaceuticals case is, therefore, inapposite.”
6.

The object of Section 22 of SICA, precluding institution of a suit for the

recovery of money apparently is to keep in abeyance legal proceedings,
contracts etc. which have the effect of impeding revival of the sick company or
adding to its liabilities. This condition, regarding stay of suits for recovery of
money was introduced by an amendment Act in 1994. It has to be

I.A. 7644/2007 in CS (OS) 1956/2006

5 of 7

harmoniously interpreted to advance such an object. If the contention of the
plaintiffs were to be accepted, though eviction proceedings can be allowed to
continue, and be decreed, a land lord can still bring about fresh action for
recovery of amounts, without reference to the pre-existing liability of the lessee
tenant. The nature of such suit, i.e one for recovery of amounts, does not cease
to be so, merely because the character of liability was founded on property at
one point of time. This understanding is strengthened by two subsequent
decisions of the Supreme Court, in Real Value Appliances Ltd. v. Canara Bank
[1998] 5 SCC 554 where it was held that the inquiry under Section 16 of the
SICA
"must be treated as having commenced as soon as the registration of the
reference is completed after scrutiny and that from that time, action
against the company's assets must remain stayed as stated in Section 22
till final decision is taken by the BIFR".
That ruling was affirmed in Rishabh Agro Industries Ltd. v. P.N.B. Capital
Services Ltd. [2000] 5 SCC 515; it was clarified that Section 22 would be
attracted even after a winding up order is issued.
7.

In the present case, undisputedly the previous suit led to passing of a

decree against the defendants; the suit property was vacated. In the meanwhile
the first defendant sought a reference under SICA; the present suit was filed to
recover amounts said to be outstanding and payable to the plaintiff, for the
period it occupied the premises. The nature of the suit is therefore, not one for
recovery of possession; it is plain and simplicitor, one for recovery of money,

I.A. 7644/2007 in CS (OS) 1956/2006

6 of 7

whatever be the basis for the claim. In these circumstances, the suit, so far as
it concerns the first defendant, is clearly covered by Section 22.
8.

In view of the above circumstances, the application has to succeed, as far

as the first defendant is concerned. It is accordingly stayed. However, it is open
to the plaintiff to seek liberty of the BIFR for continuing with the present suit.
9.

The application, IA 7644/2007 is accordingly allowed in the above terms.

No costs.

DATED: 3rd March, 2008

S. RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE

I.A. 7644/2007 in CS (OS) 1956/2006

7 of 7

