*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : 11th October, 2007.
Decided on : 7th January, 2008.
W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

+

M/S TIFFINS BARYTES ASBESTOS AND PAINTS LTD.
..... Petitioner
Through:Mr. K.N. Kataria, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. K.P. Man, Advocate.
versus
UOI

& ANR.
..... Respondents
Through:Mr. Suresh Kait with Mr. V.K. Singh with
Mr. Yogesh Verma for UOI.
Mr. D. Rama Krishna Reddy for R-2/State of A.P.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

These two writ petitions were heard together, as during earlier

hearings, it had been submitted that similar questions of law had to be
considered. The same company filed these petitions.
2.

The facts in WP (c) 2018 of 1985 are as follows. The petitioners

are a limited company under the Indian Companies Act and have their
Head Office at Andhra Chamber Building, 127, Angappa Naick Street,

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

1 of 17

Post Box No.73, Madras. The Petitioner was established more than 50
years ago and is involved in mining and exporting minerals.
3.

The Petitioner, in 1941, was granted a mining lease for Barytes in

Vemula

village,

Pulivendala

Taluk,

Cuddappah

District,

Andhra

Pradesh. The second Respondent (hereafter “the Government of
Andhra Pradesh”), in 1961 renewed the license for a period of twenty
years, up to 1981. In May 1980 the Petitioner applied for a second
renewal. Since the State Government did not dispose of the Company’s
application within six months, the petitioner company filed a revision
with the first Respondent (hereafter “the Central Government”),
against the deemed rejection.

The Central Government on 22 nd

January 1981 accepted the revision application and set aside the
deemed rejection by the State Government and directed the State
Government to pass final and speaking orders expeditiously on merits.
4. The State Government on 24th June 1981 rejected the second
renewal application of the Petitioner on the ground that the Director of
Mines & Geology had reported that the Petitioner had so far produced
only 2903 MT for 40 years, which was incommensurate with the leased
area. Further, it was also reasoned that Condition V to Para 2 of the
letter of the Central Government dated 10th September 1980 was not
complied with, and that the area applied for renewal was not
contiguous and thus contrary to Section 6 (i) (c) of the Mines &
W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

2 of 17

Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act, 1957 (hereafter “the Act”).
It was also held that the Director of Mines & Geology had,
recommended rejection of the second renewal application of the
Petitioner.
5.

Being aggrieved by this order, the Petitioner company filed a

revision dated 21st September 1981with the Central Government,
whereby it pleaded inter alia, that the production figure 2903 M.T.
shown in the Petitioner’s application is the quantity of the mineral
produced during the past three years only, since the production figures
of the earlier period were unavailable; that the Petitioner has proved
an ore reserve (which was uncovered 69 ft below the surface level) of
4000 MT by exploration and development by underground methods, by
incurring substantial costs and that if the renewal was denied they
would be unable to exploit this ore reserve which was developed by
them at a huge cost and great effort. Further it also averred that all the
plots of the leased area lie nearby though were not contiguous and
being an old mining company they had the requisite technical
personnel and machinery to operate the mines scientifically.
6.

The Central Government stayed the granting of the area for

mining pending the revision and called for the comments of the
Government of Andhra Pradesh in relation to the revision application,
in response to which the latter reiterated the grounds on which the
W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

3 of 17

renewal was rejected.

Replying to the grounds taken by the

Government of Andhra Pradesh, the Petitioner submitted that their
total during the 40 years period was 34,624 MT and that the State
Government had approved the development of the 400 MT mine below
a depth of 60 ft from surface, by investing substantial financial
resources. Therefore, the huge excavation made by them, they
submitted, was itself a testimony of their interest and efforts for
developing the mine by systematic way. Thus the allegation of the State
Government that the company was seeking a monopoly is not true and
even though the mines were not contiguous, they are within one
kilometer of each other. The company also contended that the
production obtained from their other leased area is not sufficient for
feeding their mill as the deposits are vein type and the mines have
gone very deep. Further, that the renewal of this lease is essential for
exploiting the mineral already proved by them at a huge cost and to
develop the mine further for feeding their mill.
7.

The Central Government through its order dated 1st August

1982, set aside the order of the State Government and remanded the
case to them for fresh orders on merits after finding out the authentic
production figures for the first renewal period and judging, in
consultation with the Indian Bureau of Mines, as to whether the
production figure is commensurate with the leased area. Thereafter,
W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

4 of 17

the Petitioner represented to the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh that
the mine was not investigated by any Central Govt. or State Govt.
agencies to prove the reserves and that the Petitioner has gone to a
depth of 150 feet from surface by trenching and petting in a systematic
and scientific manner.

Further, that the production had increased

consequent to the development of the mine and that royalties due to
the Government have been paid completely. They also submitted that
they had negotiated with Russian firms for the export of White Barytes
powder on large scale; in the past they have exported bulk quantity of
barytes powder to foreign countries and got awards continuously for
three years from the Central Government.
8.

On 25th March 1983 the Government of Andhra Pradesh rejected

the Petitioner’s request for the second renewal primarily on the basis
of the recommendations given by the Indian Bureau of Mines (“IBM”).
The Petitioner then filed a revision petition dated 6th June 1983 with
the Central Government reiterating the earlier grounds and refuting
the findings of the IBM, stating that the estimated reserves of the
leased areas reported by the IBM are only presumptive figures and not
based on any detailed investigation by putting more holes. In relation
to the non-contiguous areas they submitted that section 6(1) (c) of the
Act applied to only fresh grants and not to renewals. Further, they
submitted that the IBM never pointed out during the 40 lease years
W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

5 of 17

that the company’s production was not commensurate with the leased
areas through several officials visited the area several times. However,
the Central Government by order dated 28th September 1984 rejected
the revision application of the Petitioner on the basis of the
recommendations of Indian Bureau of mines. It is this order of the
Central Government that is challenged in the writ petition. WP (c) 2018
of 1985.
9.

Mr. K.N. Kataria, learned senior counsel, urged that the

impugned order of the Central Government, upholding the rejection by
the State of Andhra Pradesh, was illegal and unjustified. It was urged
that the petitioner was never afforded a proper opportunity to meet the
contents of the so-called report of the Bureau of Mines, which were not
made available to it. The decisions therefore, were opposed to
principles of natural justice.
10.

Counsel urged that in any case, the authorities below fell

into error in overlooking the facts and figures supplied by the
petitioners, which established that it had worked the mines optimally
for the period of three years immediately preceding the application. In
fact, for the forty-year period of the lease, a total of 34,624, MT had
been mined and extracted by the petitioners, a figure which was wholly
ignored at the time of consideration of its application. Equally, the
substantial

investment

made

by

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

the

petitioner,

and

the

6 of 17

State

Government and the revisional authority, wholly ignored its export
commitments to Russian firms, at that time.
11.

Learned counsel submitted that the impugned orders are

contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Madhya

Pradesh Industries v. Union of India AIR 1966 SC 671 that Rule 55 of
the Mineral Concession Rules, framed under the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Act, provides that no order shall be
passed against any applicant unless he has been given an opportunity
to make his representations against the comments, if any, received
from the State Government or other authority. It was urged that the
petitioner was denied effective hearing because it could not refute the
contents of the report of the Bureau of Mines, which played such a
prominent part in the impugned orders.
12.

The counsel for respondents urged that the petition is

unmerited. The petitioner is seeking to create a monopoly in barytes
mining. It was urged that with the amendment to the Act, after 1960,
one relevant factor that had to be considered by the authorities, at the
time of granting mining leases, was

whether the areas

were

contiguous. If they were non-contiguous, then by virtue of Section 6(1)
(c) the lease could not have been renewed. It was also urged that the
primary responsibility of establishing that the mineral had been
exploited to the best interests of all concerned, lay with the petitioner,

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

7 of 17

which did not discharge the onus. Thus, it could not complain of any
irregularity or arbitrariness in regard to the refusal to renew the lease.
13.

The Act was brought into force in 1957; by Section 2, the

Parliamentary declaration of expedience, in the public interest that the
Union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the
development of minerals to the extent provided under the Act has been
made.

Section 4 enacts that reconnaissance, prospecting or mining

operations can be started only after obtaining a lease. Section 5
specifies the eligibility for grant of inter alia, mining leases, and the
considerations that have to be kept in mind by the State authorities.
Section 6 that is material for the present purpose (and was amended in
1960) reads as follows:

“6. (1) No person shall acquire in respect of any mineral or
prescribed group of associated minerals [in a State] –
(a) one or more prospecting licences covering a total area
of more than twenty-five square kilometres; or
[(aa) one or more reconnaissance permit covering a total
area of ten thousand square kilometres:
Provided that the area granted under a single
reconnaissance permit shall not exceed five thousand
square kilometres; or];
(b) one or more mining leases covering a total area of more
than ten square kilometres;
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that
in the interests of the development of any mineral, it is
necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded by it,
in writing, permit any person to acquire one or more
W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

8 of 17

prospecting licences or mining leases covering an area in
excess of the aforesaid total area;
[(c) any reconnaissance permit, mining lease or
prospecting licence in respect of any area which is not
compact or contiguous;
Provided that if the State Government is of opinion that in
the interests of the development of any mineral, it is
necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, permit any person to acquire a reconnaissance
permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in relation to
any area which is not compact or contiguous;]
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person acquiring by, or in
the name of, another person a [reconnaissance permit,
prospecting licence or mining lease] which is intended for
himself shall be deemed to be acquiring it himself.
(3) For the purposes of determining the total area referred to in
sub-section (1), the area held under a 4[reconnaissance permit,
prospecting licence or mining lease] by a person as a member of
a co-operative society, company or other corporation or a Hindu
undivided family or a partner of a firm, shall be deducted from
the area referred to in sub-section (1) so that the sum total of the
area held by such person, under a [reconnaissance permit,
prospecting licence or mining lease], whether as such member or
partner, or individually, may not, in any case, exceed the total
area specified in sub-section (1).”
14.

In this case undoubtedly the State was satisfied that the

petitioner’s claim merited consideration, initially. It, therefore, granted
the lease in 1941. That was also renewed in 1961. The question
therefore, is whether the State was bound to renew/ re-grant the
license for another twenty-year period.
15.

The background to the Act is that it was enacted pursuant

to the legislative entry in the Union List, i.e Entry 54, to the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution of India; it was with the objective of
W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

9 of 17

regulating all mining activity in the country. This was further to anxiety
that an unscientific and unregulated exploitation of the mineral wealth
would cause incalculable public injury. While considering applications
for mining activities, all relevant factors are to be taken into account,
including the area or areas, the existence of mining, the potential, the
scientific basis adopted or revealed by the applicant and also other
considerations outlined in the rules, ie. equitable distribution of
opportunities. In case the applicant has been the recipient of a previous
largesse, in the form of a lease or prospecting license, etc, the track
record of the concerned party would also be an important element in
the decision making process.
16.
granted;

No doubt, the petitioner’s initial application was not
the

revisional

authority

remanded

the

matter

for

reconsideration, by the State. The latter, by its second order, rejected
the application; this was upheld in revision. The authorities below were
considerably influenced by the report of the Indian Bureau of Mines,
which had stated that according to the figures, the petitioner had
mined only 2903 MT during its forty-year lease period. The petitioner
had initially stated that this figure pertained only to the three years
preceding the application and that it did not possess figures for the
previous years. Yet, later, without any explanation or justification, it
urged that the production figures for the entire 40-year period were

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

10 of 17

34,624. It sought to discount the report of the Indian Bureau of Mines.
The state contested this; it also urged that the two blocks for which
leases were sought were non-contiguous and contrary to Section 6 (1)
(c); besides allowing the petitioner’s request would amount to
conferring a monopoly upon it.
17.

It is now well established that judicial review against

administrative or quasi-judicial orders are available if the decision or
order discloses illegality, irregularity in procedure, unfairness, or lack
of bona fides. Rarely, if ever do the courts enter upon the merits of the
decision, unless it is proved that the decision was such that no
reasonable man placed in such a circumstance could have taken it. In
the case of quasi-judicial orders, the court’s powers are more
circumscribed. The scope of interference was outlined in a judgment of
the Supreme Court, Supreme Court held, in Surya Dev Rai v. Ram

Chander Rai,(2003) 6 SCC 675 as follows:
“…(5) Be it a writ of certiorari or the exercise of supervisory
jurisdiction, none is available to correct mere errors of fact or of
law unless the following requirements are satisfied: (i) the error
is manifest and apparent on the face of the proceedings such as
when it is based on clear ignorance or utter disregard of the
provisions of law, and (ii) a grave injustice or gross failure of
justice has occasioned thereby.
(6) A patent error is an error which is self-evident i.e. which
can be perceived or demonstrated without involving into any
lengthy or complicated argument or a long-drawn process of
reasoning. Where two inferences are reasonably possible and the
subordinate court has chosen to take one view, the error cannot
be called gross or patent.
(7) The power to issue a writ of certiorari and the supervisory
jurisdiction are to be exercised sparingly and only in appropriate
cases where the judicial conscience of the High Court dictates it
W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

11 of 17

to act lest a gross failure of justice or grave injustice should
occasion. Care, caution and circumspection need to be exercised,
when any of the abovesaid two jurisdictions is sought to be
invoked during the pendency of any suit or proceedings in a
subordinate court and the error though calling for correction is
yet capable of being corrected at the conclusion of the
proceedings in an appeal or revision preferred thereagainst and
entertaining a petition invoking certiorari or supervisory
jurisdiction of the High Court would obstruct the smooth flow
and/or early disposal of the suit or proceedings. The High Court
may feel inclined to intervene where the error is such, as, if not
corrected at that very moment, may become incapable of
correction at a later stage and refusal to intervene would result
in travesty of justice or where such refusal itself would result in
prolonging of the lis.
(8) The High Court in exercise of certiorari or supervisory
jurisdiction will not convert itself into a court of appeal and
indulge in re-appreciation or evaluation of evidence or correct
errors in drawing inferences or correct errors of mere formal or
technical character.”
18.

The facts show that the petitioner had enjoyed the benefit

of a lease, which was further renewed for 20 years; the period ended in
1981. The authorities principally were guided by the Indian Bureau of
Mines’ report that the mines were under exploited; they also felt that
awarding a lease for another period would only confer a monopoly
upon the petitioner. The petitioner does not dispute that in its
application, the figure of 2903 MT was shown; yet its later explanation
is that this was for the three year period preceding the request, as
previous figures were unavailable. In another apparent inconsistency,
it later averred that the mines were exploited and an amount of 34, 624
MT had been extracted. The authenticity of these claims were gone
into, on remand by the State and more importantly, by the Central
Government, in revision. Therefore, this court, in the absence of any

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

12 of 17

manifest irregularity with the approach of the revisional authority’s
order, cannot re-appreciate facts. Certainly these were relevant
considerations that had to be taken into account, while examining the
request for extension and re-grant of lease. As regards the complaint
that the report of the Indian Bureau of Mines was not made available,
that cannot be a determinative factor, because this was precisely the
scope of remand; the petitioner got the opportunity to contest its
contents, and produce whatever figures it wished to rely upon.
19.

In view of the above findings, this court finds that the

petition is unmerited.
20.

The facts in WP (C) 2356 of 1990 are that the Petitioner

was granted a mining lease for Barytes originally in 1934 for 20 years.
This was renewed for a further period of 20 years in 1961. The
Petitioner applied for the second renewal through an application dated
20th March 1978. Since the Government of Andhra Pradesh did not
pass the orders within the stipulated period and the petitioners
preferred a revision to the Central Government against deemed
rejection. The Central Government through an order dated 1st
November 1980 directed the State Government to pass final and
speaking orders on the merits within 200 days. The State Government
through an order dated 29th April 1983 granted second renewal to the

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

13 of 17

petitioner of only 12.43 acres out of the 55.51 acres in Vemula village,
on the ground that the Indian Bureau of Mines found that the Petitioner
had not worked the mines to the full capacity and their performance in
the field of exploration and exploitation was unsatisfactory.
21.

The Petitioner, thereafter, preferred a revision before the

Central Government, where, it submitted that the allegation of the IBM
that the Petitioner has not worked the mines to the full capacity is false
and that they have invested money and resources to develop the mine.
They averred that the IBM during its earlier visits never pointed the
under utilization to them. Further, the finding of the IBM is completely
presumptuous and misleading since they never carried out any
exploration and investigation to substantiate its findings of under
utilization. They also alleged that they were not given a hearing when
the area for mining was reduced to one fourth the original size.
Further, they submitted that they have a pulverizing plant at
Cuddappah and the reduced lease is not sufficient for feeding the
above factory. They have invested huge sums on exploration and
development of the remaining portion of the lease area under question,
and requested grant of the renewal of the entire area of 55.51 acres.
22.

The respondent No.1, by its Final Order NO.487/84 dated

03.08.1984 conveyed through letter No.1/516/83- MIV dated 14.8.84
rejected the revision application of the petitioner mainly on the basis of

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

14 of 17

the report of Indian Bureau of Mines. The petitioners allege that they
thereafter started working the mines but found that keeping in view
the capacity of the pulverizing plant it was not economical at all. They
represented and were given the assurance that their representations
would

be

considered

sympathetically

and

favourably.

The

representations were made 2/3 times every year and the last such
representation was made about two months back.
23.

It is alleged that the State Government has only been

giving assurances as stated above, but has not given any concrete
answer. Because of the conditions it is thus imperative that the second
lease should be for the whole area of 55.51 acres and not for the
reduced area of 12.43 acres. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid final
Order No.487/84 dated 03.08.84, the petitioner has filed the present
petition, for a direction that the lease should be for the whole area of
55.51 acres, and not the reduced area of 12.43 acres.
24.

In this case too, as in WP (c) 2018 of 1985, the authorities

were persuaded to issue orders on the basis of the report of the Indian
Bureau of Mines. Here, the petitioner had been granted the initial lease
in 1934. Its request for renewal of the entire area was initially rejected
in 1980; thereafter the request was acceded to partially in 1983, to an
extent of 12.43 hectares. It felt aggrieved about the refusal of grant for
the balance area and preferred a revision petition, which was rejected

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

15 of 17

as far back as on 3-8-1984. The petitioner chose not to challenge it, but
worked the mines and approached the court in 1990. The averments
disclose that the petitioner was not essentially aggrieved by the terms
of the order, as it started to work the mining lease. It feels aggrieved
by the reduced extent of the grant. In the decision reported as

S.S.Rathore –vs- State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1990 SC 10, it was held
that petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution, or claims, in
respect of statutory or official orders, which are final in nature, cannot
be stretched to extend limitation by referring to repeated unsuccessful
representations not provided by law. Thus, plainly the petition is hit by
the doctrine of laches. Besides, the petitioner has acquiesced to the
order, to the extent of the grant and even started mining operations.
25.

Even on the merits, the petition does not disclose any

illegality, irregularity or lack of bona fides by the authorities below.
The considerations which weighed with the State in refusing the lease,
for the entire area, and upheld in revision, were germane and relevant;
they cannot be declared as illegal or manifestly unreasonable, on an
application of judicial review parameters. Consequently, this petition
too, is without merits.

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

16 of 17

26.

In view of the above findings, both petitions, ie. WP(C)

2018 of 1985 and WP (C) 2356 of 1990 have to fail; they are dismissed.
Rule discharged. No costs.

( S. RAVINDRA BHAT )
JUDGE
January 7, 2008.

W.P.(C) 2018/1985 & W.P.(C) 2356/1990

17 of 17

