*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CS(OS) 1254/2004
Reserved on 26th March,2008
Pronounced on 7th April, 2008
LALIT KUMAR SETH
..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Manish Vashisht, Advocate
with Mr. Sameer Vashisht, Advocate
versus
S.R.SETH

..... Defendant
Through Mr. Jeevesh Nagrath, Advocate for D-4 and D-5.
Mr. J.C. Mahendroo, Advocate for D-1 to D-3.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:

1.

This order will dispose of issue Nos. 3 and 6 which were heard on 26.3.2008 as

preliminary issues.
2.

The brief facts necessary for this purpose are that the plaintiff, who is

CS(OS) 1254/2004

1 of 19

son of the first defendant, has claimed a decree for partition of his share is his deceased
mother's share in the property being H-17, Maharani Bagh, First Floor; or in case such
share is impartible in metes and bounds, a direction to auction the property inter se
parties and distribute the sale proceeds among them; a decree for

rendition of

accounts in respect of 966 Equity Shares of M/s Larsen and Tourbo and a decree for
restraining defendant Nos. 1 to 3 from interfering with the plaintiff's use, occupation
and enjoyment of the portion in his possession, have been sought.
3.

According to the suit averments, the plaintiff and defendant Nos. 2 to 5 are

sons and daughters of the first defendant. The plaintiff and defendant No.3 had filed a
suit for declaration i.e. 688/1969 before the Senior Sub Judge, Delhi claiming that the
suit property i.e. C-74 (old) i.e. 17-H (new), Maharani Bagh, New Delhi (hereinafter
called "suit property") belonged to, and was constructed with Joint Hindu Family
(HUF) funds and that it had been orally partitioned amongst the parties on 01.4.1968.
The plaintiff avers that in the said suit the allocation regarding oral partition of the
property was in the following manner:(a )

Plaintiff 's Share (present Plaintiff and Shri Vinod Kumar Seth Defendant

No.3)
Ground Floor complete, Right Hand Garage and servant room over it with
CS(OS) 1254/2004

2 of 19

lawns (shown in red)
( b)

Defendant No.2 and 3 (Smt. Bhagwati Devi, Mother of the Plaintiff now

deceased and Shri Anil Kumar Seth Defendant No.2 in the present suit):
First Floor Complete and Barsati Floor complete, left hand garage and servant
room over it shown in yellow, together with the right of passage from the main
entrance and use of stair cases for going on the first floor and barsati
c)

Defendant No.1 (Shri Salig Ram Seth, Father of the plaintiff)
Drawing Cum Dining, Kitchen, Verandah, Latrine on second floor and two

bedrooms, verandah and bath on third floor over the garages together with the right of
passage from the main entrance as well as in the back shown in brown color.
( d)

Joint share of Plaintiffs and Defendants No. 2 and 3 Bath cum

Latrines attached with garages, servant quarters and also kitchen and
verandah attached with the servant quarter over the garages shown in green
colour.
4.

The suit property is a 800 sq. yards plot on which a building which comprises

ground, first floor and Barsati Floors are said to exist. On 17.10.1969 the suit was
decreed in terms of an oral partition. The said decree reads as follows:“to the effect that the partition effected between the parties to the
CS(OS) 1254/2004

3 of 19

suit in respect of Joint Hindu Family property No. C-74, (Old),
17H (New), Maharani Bagh, New Delhi on 01.04.1968 and
physical possession taken by the respective parties to their
shares delineated in the plan annexed and agreement regarding
payment of property taxes, income taxes, wealth taxes etc. and
also water and electricity charges is perfectly legal and binding
on the parties; and Plaintiffs are the exclusive owners with
possession in equal shares as per the said partition of the
portion shown in colour red in the plan attached i.e. Ground
Floor complete, right hand garage and servant room over it with
lawn and similarly it be held that Defendant No.1 is the owner
with possession of portion shown in Brown colour in plan i.e.
dinning cum drawing, kitchen, Verandah, latrine on second
floors and two bed rooms, verandah and bath on third floor over
the garages with the right of passage from the main entrance as
well as in the back and the Defendant Nos. 2 and 3 are owners
with possession in equal shares of the portion shown in yellow
colour in the plan attached i.e. first floor complete and barsati
room complete, left hand garage and servant room over it,
together with the right of passage from the main entrance and
use of stair cases for going on the floors and barsati, and portion
in the joint possession shown in green colour in the plain i.e.
bath cum latrines, attached with garage, servant quarters and
also kitchen and Verandah attached with the servant quarters
over the garage; and that each one of the party responsible for
the payment of property taxes, income taxes, wealth taxes etc.,
and also water and electricity charges etc for their respective
shares be and the same is hereby passed in favor of the Plaintiff
and against the Defendant.”

5.

The plaintiff has filed a sketch plan of the property similar to what was

allegedly passed in a decree of 17.10.1969. He further claims that the decree attained

CS(OS) 1254/2004

4 of 19

finality.

The plaintiff relied upon a Memorandum of Partition dated 27.10.1981

allegedly arrived at amongst the members of the HUF and duly signed on his behalf
through General Power of Attorney as well as defendant Nos. 1 to 3 and his mother
Smt. Bhagwati Devi Seth. She died intestate on 25.3.2003.
6.

The plaintiff claims to be in possession of the barsati floor measuring 400 sq.

feet in area allegedly permitted to be used by him during the life time of his mother. It
is claimed that the remaining half portion of the property which fell to the exclusive
ownership of the plaintiff's deceased mother is with the second defendant. According
to the plaintiff, the second defendant tired to damage the suit property by making
major changes which are impermissible in law leading to filing of Suit No. 158/2004
for permanent injunction against the said defendant, which is pending. The plaintiff,
in these circumstances, claims his share out of his mother's share i.e. 1/5th share as
well as the share in another property at Patiala as well as a share in the equity shares
of M/s Larsen and Turbo.
7.

The defendant Nos. 1 to 3 in their common written statement allege that the

suit property is solely and exclusively owned by the first defendant, the plaintiff's
father and that the latter along with defendant Nos. 2 and 3 were permitted to stay in it
as licensees, being his sons without creating any title or interest in their favour. The
CS(OS) 1254/2004

5 of 19

suit property is the first defendant's self-acquired asset. The first defendant claims that
he was a member of Maharani Bagh Cooperative house Building Society Ltd (“the
society”) and a plot was allotted to him for which a Perpetual Sub-Lease dated
14.5.1965 was executed. In terms of the said lease deed, he i.e. the first defendant,
could not sell, transfer, assign or otherwise part with the possession of the whole or
any part of the residential plot in any form or manner, benami or otherwise to a person
who was not member of the Lessee Society.
8.

The defendants also state that the plea regarding existence of HUF and the

averments to the extent it is based on decree passed in the previous suit No. 688/1969
is not tenable, by a reason of Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 which requires
compulsory registration of such instruments. It is alleged that the document relied
upon i.e. decree or the partition upon which the decree is based is an unregistered
document and therefore could not create any interest or title in the plaintiff's favour by
virtue of Section 17and 49 of the Registration Act.

It is also claimed that the said

decree cannot be given effect to as it did not implead the Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) and the Society who were necessary and affected parties.
9.

After considering the submissions this court framed issues on 8.11.2005. The

order of that day stated that Issue No. 6 would be treated as a preliminary issue. When
CS(OS) 1254/2004

6 of 19

the matters were being heard, learned counsel also agreed that issue No.3 in addition,
could be treated as preliminary issue and a common order in that regard could be
made. Accordingly, counsel for the parties were heard on 26.3.2008, on both those
issues.
10.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff relied upon the decree of the Civil Court dated

17.10.1969 and submitted that it did not create any new rights but recognized and gave
cover to a

pre-existing arrangement,

which was presented before the Court in the

form of a compromise. Statements of the counsel on behalf of the defendants i.e. on
behalf of the first defendant as well as Smt. Bhagwati Devi and Sh. Anil Seth were
recorded on 10.10.1969. The Court expressly recorded that the defendants did not
contest the suit and it was accordingly decreed. Learned counsel contended that the
decree of the court drawn pursuant to the order reveals that partition had been effected
on 1.4.1968 and physical possession had been taken by the respective parties in regard
to the shares delineated in the plaint. That agreement was also part of the record and
after being satisfied the court decreed the suit. In the circumstances neither any
document nor the decree created new rights but merely recognized existing rights. As
a consequence there was no question of the decree requiring registration.
11.

Learned counsel relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court reported as

CS(OS) 1254/2004

7 of 19

Som Dev and others Vs. Rati Ram and Another (2006) 10 SCC 788 as well as Kalyani
(dead) by LRs. Vs. Narayanan and others, AIR 1980 SCC 1173. It was submitted that
the court recognized that the manifestation of intention to separate and to partition can
be inferred in different ways. This may include issuance of notice or filing of a suit;
as long as it goes as an intimation to other members of the joint family, a severance
can be deemed. It was contended that a decree based on admission, recognizing a preexisting right under a family arrangement, is not compulsorily registrable in terms of
Section 17 or 49 of the Registration Act. In addition to the judgment in Som Dev, the
plaintiff relied on S. Noordeen Vs. V.S. Thiru Venkita Reddiar, (1996) 3 SCC 289 and
submitted that only compromise decrees

which create new rights in respect of

properties for which parties did not possess rights earlier, are compulsorily registrable
under Section 17 (2 ) (vi) of the Registration Act.
12.

It was also urged that the defendants are estopped from contending about

unenforceability of the decree of declaration and the partition embodied in it, as it has
been unchallenged and remained undisturbed. So long as the decree is not set aside in
any manner known to law, the declaration subsists; the parties i.e. the first defendant
and the plaintiff (and the others claiming through the deceased mother of the plaintiff),
and her heirs are bound by it.
CS(OS) 1254/2004

8 of 19

13.

On the question as to whether the property is a benami transaction and

therefore hit by provisions of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1986 is
concerned it was contended that no such plea was set up by the plaintiff. In any event
the shares in the property had vested with the plaintiff as far back in 1969, much
before the enactment.
14.

Counsel for the defendants- applicant, on the other hand, contended that the

decree cannot be given effect to as it sought to deal with a perpetual sub lease that was
impartible in its terms. The terms of the perpetual lease deed clearly mentions that
allocation or any form of transfer was prohibited. The decree set up by the plaintiff
sought to achieve exactly could not have been done.

To compound the error,

necessary parties such as the DDA and the Society (which was the main lessee) were
not impleaded.
15.

It was contended on behalf of the defendant that the execution of the

conveyance deed on 24.3.2000 exclusively in favour of the first defendant, there was a
complete change in the circumstances. This gives a lie to the plaintiff's claim so far
as it is founded on the decree of 1969.
16.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court reported as

Bankey Bihari Vs. Surya Narayan 2004 (11) SCC 393 and C.T. Ponnappa Vs. State of
CS(OS) 1254/2004

9 of 19

Karnataka 2004 (11) SCC 391 as well as Bhoop Singh Vs. Ram Singh (1995) 5 SCC
709 to say that a declaratory decree in respect of immovable property, stating that a
party to the litigation would be the owner in possession had to be compulsorily
registered.

He relied upon on para 18 of the said judgment. Learned counsel also

relied upon the judgment reported as Kasturi Lal Jain Vs. Inder Prakash Jain &
Others 1997 VI AD (DELHI) 179 in support of the submission that where the terms of
a lease place restriction on the power of the sub- lessee to transfer it without consent of
the lessor, the latter has the right to re-entry.
17.

Learned counsel next contended that a plain look at the decree relied upon

would show that it decided nothing and that the plaintiff had no absolute right to claim
a declaration. The suit and the subsequent decree were attempts to circumvent
provisions of the Stamp Act on a partition deed and the court would be acting well
within its right to ignore such a judgment which is not binding for many reasons. In
support of this argument, he relied upon a judgment reported as Mrs. Santosh
Sachdeva Vs. Mr. Yog Raj, ILR (1980) I Delhi.
18.

It was lastly urged that the plaintiff in the other pending suit described the

second plaintiff as a licensee and that the said claim does not any-where mention a
partition or the decree of 1969. In these circumstances, the said decree and the
CS(OS) 1254/2004

10 of 19

alleged partition said to have been embodied in it having no force in the eye of law and
are not binding.
19.

The two issues requiring decision i.e. issue Nos. 6 and 3 read as follows:6.

Whether the decree dated 17.10.1969 passed in
suit No. 688/1969 is not binding on the defendants
as alleged in the written statement?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is barred under
the provision of Benami Transaction Act, if so, to
what effect?
OPD.
Issue No. 6:
20.

Three arguments were made on behalf of the defendant applicants to say that

the decree of 17-10-1969 was not binding upon them. The first relates to its
inadmissibility and unenforceability on the ground of non-compliance with Sections
17 and 49 of the Registration Act.
21.

Section 17(1) of the Act provides that the document shall be registered if the

property in which they relate is an instrument or non-testamentary instruments which
purport or operate to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or
in future, any right, title or interest, whether vested or contingent, of the value of one
hundred rupees and upwards, to or in immovable property. Sub-section (2) enacts an
exception. It reads as follows:
CS(OS) 1254/2004

11 of 19

"Nothing in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) applies to (vi) any decree or order of a court except a decree or order expressed to be made on a
compromise and comprising immovable property other than that which is the subjectmatter of the suit or proceeding."
22.

In Somdev (supra), the Supreme Court, after considering several previous

decisions, held that:

“We shall now advert to Section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908. Sub-section
(1) specifies what are the documents that are to be registered. An instrument of
gift of immovable property, an instrument which purports to create, declare,
assign, limit or extinguish, whether in present or in future any right, title or
interest in immovable property, the value of which exceeds Rs. 100/-, any
instrument which acknowledges the receipt or payment of consideration on
account of the creation, declaration, assignment, limitation or extinction of any
right title or interest, leases of immovable property from year to year or for a
term exceeding one year and instruments transferring or assigning any decree
or order of court or any award where such decree or order or award operates
to create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish any right, title or interest in
immovable property, the value of which exceeds Rs. 100/-. Sub-section (1A)
provides that agreements for sale to be used to claim protection of Section 53A
of the Transfer of Property Act entered into after 24.09.2001 require
registration. Sub-section (2) excludes from the operation of clauses (b) and (c)
of sub-section (1) of Section 17, the various transactions described therein
under various clauses. We are concerned with clause (vi) therein. We shall set
down that provision for convenience :
"Any decree or order of a Court except a decree or order expressed to
be made on a compromise and comprising immovable property other
than which is subject matter of the suit or proceeding".
It may be noted that going by clause (vi), a decree or order of court need not
be registered on the basis that it comes within the purview of Section 17(1)(b)
or 17(1)(c) of the Act as an instrument purporting to or operating to create,
CS(OS) 1254/2004

12 of 19

declare, assign, limit or extinguish any right, title or interest in immovable
property. It may further be seen that a compromise decree also does not
require registration in terms of clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of Section
17 of the Registration Act unless that decree takes in immovable property
valued above Rs. 100/-, that is not a subject matter of the suit or the
proceeding giving rise to the compromise decree. In other words, only if the
compromise also takes in any property that is not the subject matter of the suit,
it would require registration. If the compromise is confined to the subject
matter of the suit, it would not. It may be noted that Section 43 of the
Registration Act of 1864 and Section 41 of the Registration Act of 1866
provided that when any civil court should by a decree or order, declare any
document relating to immovable property, which should have been registered,
to be invalid or when any civil court should pass a decree or order affecting
any such document and the decree or order should create, declare, transfer,
limit or extinguish any right, title or interest under such document to or in the
immovable property to which it relates, the court should cause a memorandum
of the decree or order to be sent to the Registrar within whose district the
document was originally registered. But these sections were omitted while
enacting the Registration Act of 1871. But in the Specific Relief Act, 1877,
Section 39 was introduced providing that where an instrument is adjudged
void or voidable under that section and ordered to be delivered up and
cancelled, the court should send a copy of its decree, if the instrument has been
registered under the Registration Act, to the officer in whose office the
instrument had been so registered and such officer should note on the copy of
the instrument contained in his books the effect of its cancellation. But under
the 1887 Act, decrees and orders of courts and awards were exempted from
registration. They were also not mentioned in Section 18 which related to
documents of which registration was optional. Sargent, CJ in Purmananddas
vs. Vallabdas (ILR 11 Bombay 506) explained the position as follows :
"The application (for execution) was refused on the ground that the
decree was an instrument, which created an interest in immovable
property, and could not be given in evidence for want of registration.
Provision was made for the registration of such a decree by Section 42
of Act XX of 1886, but that section was not re-enacted in Act VIII of

CS(OS) 1254/2004

13 of 19

1871. If, therefore, it required registration under the Act, it could only
be as an 'executed instrument' under Section 17, a description which is
scarcely applicable to a decree..’”

23.

In S. Noordeen (supra) the Supreme Court held that immovable properties

whose sale was impugned were not properties other than the subject-matter of the suit
or proceedings; they were therefore not required to be registered. Similarly, in
Amteshwar Anand –vs- Virender Mohan Singh 2006 (1) SCC 148 it was held that
courts should lean in favour of family arrangements and as long as the document itself
does not create rights, but records past events relating to arrangements about such
property and the property is subject matter of the suit, the court cannot reject it on the
ground that it is unregistered.
24.

Today, there is no dispute about the existence of the decree, to which the

plaintiff and the defendant were parties. The content of the suit too, was the same
property; it is also not disputed that the decree was issued upon statements made on
behalf of the defendants; they did not oppose the plaint averments. The decree has
attained finality. Therefore, the argument about its unenforceability on the ground of
its not being registered is insubstantial and unfounded.
25.

The second objection to enforceability of the decree was that two necessary

CS(OS) 1254/2004

14 of 19

parties were not impleaded, i.e the DDA and the society. No doubt, the deed of SubLease to which the first defendant is a party was issued by the DDA. The society is the
lessee. However, the argument about their not being parties does not detract from the
efficacy and binding nature of the declaration issued by a competent court; the
declaration continues to subsist, and bind the defendant. As between the parties to the
litigation, the decree is binding; it creates issue estoppels in regard to matters declared.
It is a judgment in rem regarding the status of the parties and the property vis-à-vis
each of them. The effect of such a declaration was explained by the Supreme Court, in
its judgment reported as Satrucharla Vijaya Rama Raju –vs- Nimmaka Jaya Raju
2005(9) JT 545 in the following words:

“A judgment in rem is defined in English Law as "an
adjudication pronounced (as its name indeed denotes) by
the status, some particular subject matter by a tribunal
having competent authority for that purpose". Spencer
Bower on Res Judicata defines the term as one which
"declares, defines or otherwise determines the status of a
person or of a thing, that is to say, the jural relation of the
person or thing to the world generally".

26.

As regards the question of the decree being contrary to the terms of the lease

which prohibits partition or alienation is concerned, that can hardly be urged as a
ground for invalidating a judgment which has become final. No law, rule or decision

CS(OS) 1254/2004

15 of 19

that such partition, giving effect to a court decree amounts to “transfer” amongst
family members, inviting the wrath of the Lessor, to determine the leasehold rights or
re-enter the property was shown. In any case, the existence of such an option alone
cannot persuade the court to infer that the decree relied upon is void or a nullity
relieving the defendants from its operation.
27.

In view of the above discussion, Issue No. 6 is held in favour of the plaintiff

and against the defendant; the decree dated 17-10-1969 is valid and binding against the
latter.
Issue No. 3
28.

Section 4 of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1986 reads as follows:
"4. Prohibition of the right to recover property held benami. - No
suit, claim or action to enforce any right in respect of any property
held benami against the person in whose name the property is held
or against any other person shall lie by or on behalf of a person
claiming to be the real owner of such property.
(2) No defence based on any right in respect of any property held
benami, whether against the person in whose name the property is
held or against any other person, shall be allowed in any suit,
claim or action by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real
owner of such property.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply, (a) where the person in whose name the property is held is a
coparcener in a Hindu undivided family and the property is held

CS(OS) 1254/2004

16 of 19

for the benefit of the coparceners in the family; or
(b) where the person in whose name the property is held is a
trustee or other person standing in a fiduciary capacity, and the
property is held for the benefit of another person for whom he is a
trustee or towards whom he stands in such capacity."

29.

The defendant’s counsel urged that the claim is barred by the above provisions,

as the relief sought is a partition decree in respect of property which belongs to the
first defendant; it is also urged that a conveyance deed was executed by the DDA, in
terms of which, the said defendant is absolute owner. The plaintiff’s position is that the
decree of declaration was made in 1969, before the coming into force of the Act and
that in any case, no declaration or relief is sought that the first defendant is a benami
owner on behalf of the plaintiff.
30.

Section 2(a) of the Act defines " benami transactions" as any transaction in

which property is transferred to one person for a consideration paid or provided by

another person. Sections 3(1) and (2) read as under:

"3. (1) No person shall enter into any benami transaction.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to the purchase of
property by any person in the name of his wife or unmarried
daughter and it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved,
that the said property had been purchased for the benefit of the
wife or the unmarried daughter."
CS(OS) 1254/2004

17 of 19

In R. Rajagopal Reddy v. Padmini Chandrasekharan (1995) 2 SCC 630 the Supreme
Court, while interpreting the purport of the Act, held that it did not have retrospective
operation, in the following terms:
“clear legislative intention is seen from the words 'no such claim,
suit or action shall lie', meaning thereby no such suit, claim or
action shall be permitted to be filed or entertained or admitted to
the portals of any court for seeking such a relief after coming into
force of Section 4(1)."

The above decision has been followed in other judgments (See Probodh Chandra
Ghosh v. Urmila Dassi (2000) 6 SCC 526 C. Gangacharan v. C. Narayanan (2000) 1
SCC 459 and G. Mahalingappa, V. G. M. Savitha 2005-(006)-SCC -0441)
31.

The plaintiff in this case is not seeking a relief that he is the real and true owner

of the property; he is asserting his right to a share in his mother’s share; it is founded
partly on the decree of 17-10-1969. The correctness or soundness of that claim is a
matter of trial; however in the absence of any relief that he is the real and true owner
(“benami”) it cannot be said that provisions of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition)
Act, 1986 would apply. The issue is therefore answered against the defendant; the suit
is not barred by provisions of that Act.

CS(OS) 1254/2004

18 of 19

CS(OS) 1254/2004

The court has today decided Issue Nos. 6 and 3. List the suit for further
proceedings before court, on 28th April, 2008.

APRIL 7th 2008
pkv

CS(OS) 1254/2004

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J

19 of 19

