*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : 26th March, 2008
Date of Decision : 4th April, 2008.

+
CS(OS) 2076/2007
SMT. KANAN BAKSHI

..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Ajay Kumar, Advocate.

versus
SH. ATUL BALI AND ORS.
..... Defendants
Through Mr. Sunil Naveet, Advocate
for defendant Nos. 1 & 2.
Coram:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

The Plaintiff seeks a decree for partition for dividing the suit property in

which she claims a 2/3, shares and states that the balance 1/3 share belong to
Defendants 1 & 2.
2.

The facts as set out in the plaint are that one Nand Kishore Datta, the

Plaintiff's father had purchased Plot No.104, Block B-1, Janak Puri, New Delhi,
measuring 126 sq.mtrs., through Perpetual leave deed dated 5.6.1969, through
the Delhi Development Authority(DDA).

During his life time Shri Datta

constructed a three storied structure on the plot. The said Sh. Datta was married

CS(OS) 2076/2007

1 of 15

to Ms. Shiv Kumari Datta. They had two children namely, the Plaintiff and one
Ms. Kamini Bali.
3.

Sh. Nand Kishore Datta died on 28.4.2004. Ms. Kamini Bali, one of his two

daughters, had pre-deceased him having expired on 12.8.2002.

Said Nand

Kishore Datta died intestate. The Plaintiff claims in Paragraph 4, inter alia, as
follows:
“That, after the death of late Sh. Nand Kishore Datta the mother of
plaintiff i.e., Smt. Shiv Kumari Datta relinquished her share in the
aforesaid property in the favour of the plaintiff vide her registered
th
relinquishment deed dated 28
May 2004, which was duly
registered with the Registrar of assurances, Sub Division II, West
District Delhi, vide registered No.9825, in additional Book No.I,
th
Vol.No.11591, pages from 70 to 71 on 28 May 2004. On the basis
of said relinquishment deed and the affidavit and other documents
filed by plaintiff and her mother, the aforesaid property mutated by
the defendant No.3 in the name of plaintiff. It is relevant to
mention here that alongwith her application for mutation, the
th
Plaintiff also filed an affidavit dated 10
June 2004 and
Indemnity Bond dated 28/5/04. Wherein, she declared that late
Sh. Nand Kishore Datta is survived by only two legal heir i.e the
plaintiff and her mother. The said affidavit was sworn by the
plaintiff under the mistaken advice that since her sister died
during the life time of her father, therefore, the plaintiff and her
mother are the only legal heirs with respect to the immovable assets
of Late Sh. Nand Kishore Datta.”
The Plaintiff thereafter avers that her assumption was wrong since she became
aware that by Section 10 of the Hindu Succession Act, the late Shiv Kumari
Datta could have only 1/3 right on the death of Nand Kishore Datta.

It is,

therefore, claimed that the Defendants being the sons of pre-deceased defendants
are entitled to 1/6

th

share. The Plaintiff further avers as follows:-

“However, under the mistaken advice the plaintiff
applied for mutation of this property in her name with
the DDA under the presumption that except the
plaintiff and her mother there is no other legal heir
survive on the date of mutation in her favour. In fact,
throughout this, the plaintiff was under the constant

CS(OS) 2076/2007

2 of 15

belief that in case of demise of her father only the
plaintiff, her sister and mother are the only legal heirs.
Since, plaintiff sister was pre-deceased by the time her
th
father expired on 28 March 2004. Therefore, on the
nd
date of filing of mutation application on 22
June
2004, there was no other legal heir's of the deceased
Late Sh. Nand Kishore Datta, except, the plaintiff and
her mother Smt. Shiv Kumari Datta, who also expired
after the mutation of this property in favour of
th
plaintiff on 6 Feb. 2005.”
4.

On the basis of the above affidavit it is averred that the Plaintiff applied

for conversation of the property into free-hold which was permitted by the DDA
and the Conveyance Deed was executed on 31.5.2007. The Plaintiff also alleges
that during the life time of Smt. Shiv Kumar Datta the Defendants had not raised
any disputes concerning mutation of the property in her name and that they
started objecting to the mutation after death on of Shiv Kumari Datta, 6.2.2005.
It is alleged that the Defendants complained to the DDA, about legality of the
mutation and the latter caused a notice to be issued on 19.7.2007 for determining
the lease deed and for cancellation of mutation. The Plaintiff further alleged that
in her reply to the DDA on 3.8.2007, she admitted to mistaken advice and did not
want to deprive the Defendants of their legal entitlements. It is further alleged
that Shiv Kumar Datta did not want to give any share or rights in the suit
prperty to the Defendants due to the conduct of their father, i.e the husband of
late Smt. Kamini Bali.
5.

The Plaintiff claims to be occupying the first and second floor of the house;

the ground floor is in the occupation and possession of the Defendants. It is
claimed that the Plaintiff is entitled to 2/3

rd

share in the property; the cause of

action to file to file the suit is alleged to have arisen on 11.6.2007 when the
Defendants complained to the DDA against the mutation and it subsequently

CS(OS) 2076/2007

3 of 15

arose on 19.7.2007 when the DDA issued show cause notice for cancellation of the
lease. A decree of partition dividing the house property in the ratio of 2/3
share of the Plaintiff and balance 1/3

rd

rd

in the

in favour of the Defendants is, therefore,

sought; the consequential decree for permanent injunction was also sought
against the DDA for cancelling the lease deed. However, that relief was given up
and the DDA was deleted from the array of parties.
6.

The Defendants in their common written statement alleged that the suit is

an abuse of law, having been filed with ulterior motives. It is also allege that the
Plaintiff

has

concealed

material

facts.

The

Defendants

impeached

the

relinquishment deed dated 25.5.2004 as being a nullity and unenforceable as
Smt. Shiv Kumari Datta was not owner of the share of the suit property and,
therefore, not entitled to relinquish it in favour of the Plaintiff.
7.

It is also alleged that since the relinquishment deed did not have any legal

validity the subsequent events like mutation/conversion etc. also deserved to be
ignored.

It is alleged that the Plaintiff in presenting in affidavit claimed to be

the exclusive owner of the property and after making such declarations, and
eventually succeeded in securing mutation, thus showing her ill-intention. The
Defendants, therefore, dispute that the Plaintiff ever had any intention of
conceding their share. They further claim 50% of the suit property.
8.

The defendants also allege that the Plaintiff, despite being aware about

the occupation of the ground floor by them and their parents for the last 30 years
or more, kept them in the dark about the true state of affairs and on the other
hand, alleging mistaken advice proceeded to claim the entire property.

It is

stated that had it not been by sheer providence when the defendants became
aware of the communication addressed by the DDA, the Plaintiff would have

CS(OS) 2076/2007

4 of 15

sought to take advantage of her false declarations. The defendants further state
that the allegations against their father are baseless. They also rely on the reply
by the Plaintiff to the show cause notice issued by the DDA where she did not
advert about their mother i.e her late sister, a legal heir of the original lessee in
class I of the Schedule to the Hindu Succession Act and instead made false
allegations.
9.

The Defendants deny the Plaintiff's entitlement to 2/3

rd

share and for

these reasons allege that the suit is liable to be rejected as not disclosing any
cause of action.
10.

In support of the suit the Plaintiff filed a copy of the Perpetual Lease deed

dated 5.6.1969 and a copy of the Relinquishment Deed executed by late Shiv
Kumari Datta; a copy of the registered Indemnity Bond executed by her on
28.5.2004, a copy of the affidavit dated 10.6.2004 executed by her and filed with
the DDA, a copy of the Occupancy Certificate dated 12.10.1972 issued by the
DDA; a copy of show cause notice issued to the Plaintiff on 19.7.2007 by the DDA
and the reply to the said show cause notice by her.
11.

On 26.3.2008 counsel for the parties submitted that only two issues arise

for determination and that the Court could dispose of the suit at this stage after
considering their arguments.

Counsel also stated that there was no need to

record oral evidence. Accordingly the said two issues were framed as follows:1.

Whether the suit is not maintainable in law, as claimed by

the defendant?;
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of partition and,
if so, to what share?
FINDINGS
Issue No. 1

CS(OS) 2076/2007

5 of 15

12.

It is contended on behalf of the defendant that the present suit is not

maintainable because the plaintiff has approached this Court with unclean
hands.

Counsel for the defendant placed considerable reliance upon the

documents filed with the suit. It was submitted that the plaintiff had a dishonest
intention of depriving the defendants of any share in the property.

As a

consequence, she engineered a situation whereby her late mother, on being
convinced that she had a half share in the property, relinquished it in favour of
the plaintiff. The reality, however, was that the plaintiff's mother -- who also
happened to the grandmother of the defendants and the mother of their mother, -possessed only one third share in the property. The plaintiff succeeded in her evil
designs to secure a document and sought for its effectuation by applying to the
DDA and securing mutation of the property, claiming to be the sole owner
entitled to all the rights.
13.

Learned counsel for the defendant urged that the suit does not disclose

any cause of action as the plaintiff is a wrongdoer. He relied upon the paragraph
in the plaint and submitted that the reason for approaching the Court is palpably
false; it can never be called as a legitimate cause of action. Counsel submitted
that the excuse given by the plaintiff about her becoming aware of the real rights
of the defendants, cannot be accepted because it is completely inconsistent with
her assertion, contained in the affidavit. Indemnity Bond, and reply to show
cause notice furnished to the DDA. In all these, the stand taken by her was that
she alone was sole owner of the property on the basis of her pre-existing right and
the relinquishment deed, executed by her late mother.
14.

It is submitted that the plaintiff cannot be permitted to commit fraud on

the basis of an alleged mistaken advice; Learned counsel submitted that
ignorance of law is no excuse or a defence for a wrongdoer. Counsel submitted

CS(OS) 2076/2007

6 of 15

that the connivance and fraud played by the plaintiff is evident from the entire
chain of events which cannot be overlooked by this Court by accepting her plea
about mistaken advice. The plaintiff was aware that her mother was not owner of
50 per cent share in the property; she could therefore not have validly claimed to
be full owner of the entire property, knowing full well that the defendants, who
are children of a pre-deceased heir to the property, had an equal share in it. It
was submitted that these facts show that the plaintiff's intention was to somehow
deprive the defendants of any rights to the property, in spite of her awareness
about their occupation and possession of the ground-floor in the property for the
past 30 years or so. It was submitted that one of the cardinal rules of law is that
the judicial process cannot be abused by a canny litigant and that fraud unravels
all transactions. Having played fraud on the defendants, the plaintiff cannot now
seek the aid of the court to claim so-called legal rights.
15.

Mr. Ajay Kumar, counsel for the plaintiff denied the submissions on behalf

of the defendant. He submitted that the suit is maintainable and discloses a
triable cause of action. Whatever may have been the plaintiff's understanding
about the extent of a share, previously, in the property, the moment she came to
know the true extent of her entitlements, she asserted it and seeks partition of
the property on that basis. Counsel stated that allegations about fraud and
wrongdoing are utterly baseless and without foundation. In every partition suit
between co-owners claiming rights as against each other, the court has to
determine the extent of each one's shareholding and make appropriate orders for
the sale of such property. The question of the court rejecting the suit on alleged
grounds of fraud or misrepresentation does not arise. Learned counsel submitted
that the plaintiff never intended to exclude the defendants rights. The only
question which the court has to address itself is inter se shares of the parties to

CS(OS) 2076/2007

7 of 15

the suit, properties.
16.

From the facts adverted to earlier, it is amply clear that the plaintiff, her

mother and the defendants mother, belonged to the family of the original Lessor,
i.e late Nand Kishore Datta. During his lifetime, the defendant’s mother, his
daughter died. Soon thereafter, Nand Kishore Datta also died. Upon his death,
the suit property devolved into three equal shares. One went to his widow, who
at that time was alive; one third went to the plaintiff and the other devolved on
the defendants equally, as heirs of a predeceased daughter.
17.

The heirs of Nand Kishore Datta thus had joint interest in the property,

under law. In such circumstance, the plaintiff’s conduct, howsoever reprehensible
– even assuming the allegations of wrongdoing on her part to be true – cannot yet
deprive her the share which she would be entitled to, or the right to get it
determined, in accordance with law.
18.

One of the cardinal principles of law governing co-sharers of family

property in India is that the institution of a partition suit by a member of the
family, is an unequivocal intimation of the intention to separate. The filing of the
suit signifies the severance. A decree then becomes necessary for working out the
results of such severance and for allotting definite shares, as change of status of
the plaintiff a co-owner with separate interest in the joint property is brought
about.

(Girja

Bai

–vs-Sadashiv

AIR

1916

PC

104;

Ramamurthy

–vs-

Venkatasubbarayudu AIR 1954 AP 34).
19.

For the above reasons, the court is of the opinion that the issue has to be

answered in favour of the plaintiff; the suit is maintainable.

Issue No. 2
20.

For a proper appreciation of this issue, it is necessary at this stage to

CS(OS) 2076/2007

8 of 15

notice the relevant documents. The relinquishment deed was executed by the
plaintiff’s mother; it reads as follows:
“RELINQUISHMENT DEED
Whereas the Late Shri Nand Kishore Datta S/o Late Sh. Brij
Lal Datta R/o B-1/104, Janakpuri9, New Delhi- 110 058,
(hereinafter called the Allottee/ Leasee had been allotted plot
bearing No.104, Block- B-1, situated at Janakpuri, New Delhi
(hereinafter called the Allottee/lease had been allotted plot bearing
No.104, Block –B-1, situated at Janakpuri, New Delhi (hereafter
called the plot) vide letter No. F-6(142) 68 LAB (R), Vide perpetual
Lease Deed regd. At Sl. No.2588, in Addl. No.1, Volume No. 24 on
pages 1780 to 175 on 23.06.1969 before the Sub –Registrar, Delhi.
And Whereas the allottee/Leaseee had died on 28.03.2004, At
Amar Lila Hospital, Jankpuri, New Delhi, and is survived by the
following legal heirs:Sr. No. Name

Relationship
Residential Address
With the deceased
____________________________________________________________
1. Smt. Shiv
Kumari Datta
New Delhi -58
2. Mrs. Kanan
Bakshi
New Delhi-58

Age

77 yrs

Wife
B-1/104, Janakpuri

42 yrs.

Daughter

B-1/10, Janakpuri,

And Whereas ½ (50%) share in the plot has devolved upon the
Releasor upon the demise of the allottee/ lessee.
And whereas the Releasor (s) wishes/wish to relinquish his/their
share in the plot as mentioned herein above in favour of Mrs. Kanan
Bakshi W/o Rajinder Kumar Bakshi D/o Late Sh. Nand Kishore
Datta who is also the legal heir of the allottee/lease.
Pursuant to her wish mentioned above, the Releasor hereby release a
relinquish all her share in the plot the hereby declares and affirm (s)
that she or her heirs, successors, executor and administrators shall
have no claim, right or interest in the plot and the same shall vest
absolutely in Mrs. Kanan Bakshi W/o Rajinder Kumar Bakshi and
D/o Late Nand Kishore Datta the releasee.”
21.

After the death of Smt. Shiv Kumari Datta, the plaintiff filed an indemnity

CS(OS) 2076/2007

9 of 15

bond, as well as an affidavit while claiming mutation of the property; she has
produced them. The indemnity bond reads as follows:
“INDEMNITY BOND
Whereas in the re cords of the lessor the land bearing plot No.104,
situated in Janakpuri, New Delhi – 58, Block No.1 of the residential
scheme, New Delhi and measuring 126 sq. mtrs. Stand in the name
of my father Shri Nand Kishore Datta by virtue of perpetual lease
deed registered as document No.2588 entered in Addl. Book NO.1,
Volume No.1994 at pages 170 to 175 on 23.06.99 with the SubRegistrar, New Delhi, New Delhi vide letter No. F-6(142)68
LAB(R)/
And Whereas my father the said Shri Nand Kishore Datta
died on 28.03.2004 leaving behind the following legal heirs :Sr. No. Name
Age
Relationship With
Residential
Address
the deceased
____________________________________________________________
1. Smt. Shiv 77 yrs
Kumari Datta
New Delhi -58
2. Mrs. Kanan
Bakshi
42 yrs.
New Delhi

Wife
B-1/104, Janakpuri

Daughter

B-1/10, Janakpuri,

He had not left any Registered/unregistered WILL.
And whereas I am now the sole claimant to the said land and have
filed an affidavit to that effect.
And Whereas on my application to the lessor to substitute in its
records my name in place of the name of my father deceased
Lessee/allottee Shri Nand Kishore Datta in respect of the said land,
the Delhi Development Authority has agreed to do so my first
executing Bond to Indemnity the Lessor against all losses or
damages which it may sustain by reason of any claims which may
be set up by other persons claiming to be the heirs of my deceased
Father’s Shri Nand Kishore Datta.
Whereas in consideration of the aforesaid agreement, the Executant
Mrs. Kanan Bakshi W/o Sh. Rajinder Bakshi D/o Late Sh. Nand
Kishore Datta R/o B-104, Janakpuri, New Delhi – 58 and her legal
hiers, successors, executors and administrators jointly and severally
undertake to keep lessor harmless and indemnified against all
claims whatsoever against the aforesaid plot of land or in respect

CS(OS) 2076/2007

10 of 15

thereon together with all interest, loss, damages, penalty, action an
d demand and cost of all kind, whatsoever arising out of this
transfer/mutation.”
The affidavit, filed on the same date with the DDA, is extracted below:
“

AFFIDAVIT

1.
That Shri Nand Kishore Datta aged 42 years R/o B-1/1-4,
Janakpuri, New Delhi – 58 was allottee/ Lessee of Plot No.104
Block No.1, in Janakpuri, New Delhi New Delhi – 110 058 vide
letter No. F-6(142)68 LAB (R) vide perpetual lease deed dated
23.06.69 in Addl. Book No.1 Regd. As No.2588 Volume No.1094 at
Pages 170 to 175.
2.
That Shri Nand Kishore Datta S/o Sh. Brij Lal Datta was
my father.
3.
That the said Shri Nand Kishore Datta had died on
28.03.2004 at Amar Lila Hospital, New Delhi without leaving any
will.
4.
That said Late Shri Nand Kishore Datta is survived by the
following g legal heirs :Sr. No. Name

Age Relationship With
Residential
the deceased
Address
____________________________________________________________
1. Smt. Shiv
Kumari Datta
New Delhi -58
2. Mrs. Kanan
Bakshi
New Delhi
5.

77 yrs

Wife
B-1/104, Janakpuri

42 yrs. Daughter

B-1/10, Janakpuri,

That the mother of the deceased allottee/lessee is not alive.

6.
That I shall abide by the terms and conditions of
allotment/sub-lease deed/ lease deed.
7.
That I shall abide by the terms and condition s of mutation,
in case it is found out that the same had been obtained by fraud,
mis-statement or concealment of facts.
8.
That said property/plot No. B-1/104, Janakpuri, New Delhi
– 58 is at present free from all encumbrances and had been
mortgaged earlier for which NOC/redemption deed is being
submitted.”

CS(OS) 2076/2007

11 of 15

22.

The argument on behalf of the plaintiff is that the late Shiv Kumari Datta

had no doubt mentioned about her understanding that her share in the property
was 50%. Though that was an erroneous understanding, yet her intention was
clear enough; she wanted her “share” whatever be it, to devolve on the plaintiff.
The plaintiff’s counsel further argues that even though she had mentioned in the
affidavit to the DDA and indemnity bond, that she was exclusive owner of the
entire property, however, as soon as she became aware of the true state of affairs,
she has approached the court, and seeks only two third share of the property. It
was contended that the court should always construe a document in such a
manner so as to give effect to the intention of the person executing it. If that
approach were to be adopted, the intention of Late Shiv Kumari Datta to give her
share to the plaintiff should be respected and a decree should be drawn in that
regard.
23.

The relinquishment deed recites that the releaser, i.e Shiv Kumari Datta

and the plaintiff were the only heirs of the deceased Nand Kishore Datta. Yet the
fact remained that upon his death, the said Lessor had other heirs. The plaintiff
and Shiv Kumari Dutta were two heirs; the others were the children of his predeceased daughter, ie.the defendants in this case. Now, by virtue of Section 8 of
the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereafter “the Act”) the defendants, being Class
I heirs (son of a predeceased daughter) of Nand Kishore Datta, were also heirs
and entitled to their deceased mother’s 1/3 share, equally, by operation of Rule 3
of the Distribution of property amongst heirs in Class I of the Schedule, according
to Section 10. Therefore, the late Shiv Kumari Datta could not have dealt with
property which was clearly not owned by her.
24.

The intention of late Shiv Kumari Datta is apparent from the following

statement in the relinquishment deed:

CS(OS) 2076/2007

12 of 15

“And Whereas ½ (50%) share in the plot has devolved upon
the Releasor upon the demise of the allottee/ lessee.
And whereas the Releasor (s) wishes/wish to relinquish
his/their share in the plot as mentioned herein above in favour of
Mrs. Kanan Bakshi W/o Rajinder Kumar Bakshi D/o Late Sh.
Nand Kishore Datta who is also the legal heir of the allottee/lease.”
She chose to relinquish and give all her rights in respect of the property on this
understanding. The subsequent condition binding all her successors, assigns etc
merely manifested her intention to release her “share in the plot as mentioned
herein above” in favour of the plaintiff.
25.

It is a fairly well settled principle of law that the Court while interpreting

a document must read it as a whole in order to ascertain the intention of the
creator. A stray sentence or some condition cannot be used or given effect in
isolation, in a manner that frustrates the intent so discerned. Reliance in this
regard may be placed on Vidhyadhar v. Manikar, AIR 1999 SC 1441, Biswanath
Prasad Singh v. Rajendra Prasad Singh, (2006) 4 SCC 432 and BK Muniraju v.
State of Karnataka (CA. 1320/2008 decided on 15th February 2008 by the Supreme
Court). Unlike a Will, where the court has an obligation to save a bequest as far
as it is possible, in the case of a transfer of property inter vivos, the validity of the
document has to be gauged in its own terms.
26.

In IRC –vs- Raphael 1935 AC 96, it was held that:
“ It must be remembered at the outset that the court, while it seeks to give
effect to the intention of the parties, must give effect to that intention as
expressed, that is, it must ascertain the meaning of the words actually
used.”

27.

Courts have also evolved the principle that what is granted cannot be

taken away. A clear disposition in an earlier clause cannot be withdrawn and cut
down by a later clause. (Sahebzada Mohd. Kamgarh Shah v. Jagdish Chandra
Deb (1960) 3 SCR 604; Ram Kishore Lal v. Kamal Narain AIR 1963 SC 890 and

CS(OS) 2076/2007

13 of 15

Forbes v. GIT (1922) 1 AC 256)). Properly applied, this would mean that the
intention of the releaser to deal with 50% of the property could not have been cut
down by the later clause. The intention was always to deal with, and relinquish
the share, as known to Shiv Kumari Datta.
28.

If one considers the facts of this case from the above perspective, it is clear

that the content of the relinquishment by late Shiv Kumari Datta had to be read
in its own terms; she clearly meant to give a 50% share to the plaintiff. The
plaintiff too knew that to be the extent of her share, and wrote to the DDA in at
least two documents, i.e an Affidavit and Indemnity Bond. These are contrary to
the position taken now, that the late Shiv Kumari Datta’s deed should be
construed as to mean her intention to give only what she had. Clearly, that
construction is not possible.
29.

In the light of the above discussion, it is clear that upon the death of Nand

Kishore Datta, the estate devolved in three parts; one part each falling to the
share of the plaintiff and Shiv Kumari Datta and the other, in two equal shares
devolving on the defendants. Shiv Kumari Datta could not have dealt with the
defendant’s property; the property was undivided and therefore, they had equal
rights over the whole plot. The relinquishment deed however purported to
transfer part of their share, which was clearly impermissible. The intention of the
releaser was premised on her understanding that the defendants were not heirs,
which was mistaken; they had a share equal to hers. Whether she would have
acted otherwise if the true state of affairs were known to her is a matter of
speculation, but for purposes of this suit it is sufficient to note that such a
possibility existed. In any case, she could not have dealt with their share; the
relinquishment deed therefore could not operate to convey any title to the
plaintiff. Consequently upon her death, the plaintiff and the defendants became

CS(OS) 2076/2007

14 of 15

entitled to her 1/3rd share equally; the result is that both are entitled to a half
(1/2) share each in the property. The issue is answered accordingly.
RELIEF
30.

In the light of the above discussion, the plaintiff is entitled to a half share

in the property. The defendants are also entitled to a half share, devolving
equally on each of them, to the suit property.
31.

Accordingly this court issues a preliminary decree in the above terms,

whereby the plaintiff is entitled to one half share in the suit property; the
defendants shall be entitled to the other half, in equal proportion. Shri Ajay
Kumar Agarwal, Advocate, Chamber No. 346-A, Delhi High Court (Mob.
9810292253 is appointed as Local Commissioner to conduct an inquiry and report
to the court as to the feasibility of partitioning the property, in the above terms,
by metes and bounds. The fee of the Local Commissioner is tentatively fixed at
Rs. 30000/-. The Commissioner shall submit his report, after ascertaining the
views of the parties, and inspecting the property, within 8 weeks. Let a decree in
the above terms be drawn.
32.

List on 22.7.2008 for considering the report of the Local Commissioner.
Order Dasti.
(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

APRIL 04 , 2008

CS(OS) 2076/2007

15 of 15

