*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl. Rev. P. No.897-902/2006
Reserved on :July 27, 2007
Decided on : August 3,2007
HARINDER SINGH & ORS.

..... Petitioners
Through Mr. Jitendra Sethi,

Advocate
versus
STATE

..... Respondent
Through : Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for State

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.
The present criminal revision petition challenges the order on charge dated
18.9.2006 by the Learned ASJ. Charges were framed under section 302/34, 406/
304B/ 498A/ 34 of the Indian Penal code. ( IPC) against the accused, including the
Petitioners here.
2.

The brief facts necessary to decide this present petition are as follows:

Crl. Rev. P. No.897-902/2006

1 of 6

One Sh. Bhupinder Singh (hereafter “the Husband”) and Smt.
Sashi(hereafter the deceased) were married on 24.5.2002 and a son was later born
out of the wedlock. The husband was posted with the Delhi Police in its Security
Department. The couple were residing in their official accommodation at Police
lines, Narela along with their son and the husband’s younger brother Vijay.
3.

The Petitioner is an uncle of the husband. The deceased died an unnatural

death on 29.4.2005 in the matrimonial home and the post mortem report opined the
death could be homicidal in nature. The husband was thereafter arrested and since
then he is in custody.
4.

After the death of the deceased an inquest was conducted by the Ld. S.D.M

and statements of Sh. Chandervir Singh and Smt. Kamla(parents of the deceased),
Smt. Birla and Sh. Dharmavir(the Mausi and Mausa)of the deceased were
recorded. Those statements mentioned that the deceased was living happily with
her husband at Delhi; there was no harassment of any kind and they did not suspect
the husband and the others for their daughter’s death.
5.

According to the prosecution, on 30.06.2005, two months after the

husband’s arrest statements under section 161 Cr.P.C of the deceased’s parents,
her mausa and mausi were recorded. They leveled the allegations of harassment
caused to the deceased by her husband and the Petitioners for the reason that her

Crl. Rev. P. No.897-902/2006

2 of 6

son’s features did not match with that of his father’s. The husband was doubting
the deceased’s character. The earlier statement was said to be made under the
influence of the Petitioners. They allegedly were not allowed to see their
daughter’s body and were made to believe that she had committed suicide.
6.

The learned counsel for the petitioner urged that it is a fact that the husband

and the deceased were residing together at their separate residence in Delhi and the
other Petitioners were not present there at the time of the incident. There is no
statement from any one to that besides the husband, there was any support to him
in the crime so as to invoke the provisions of Sec.201/34 IPC. Learned counsel
contended that there were no specific allegations to show that the Petitioners had
tortured or harassed the deceased for dowry “soon before” her death. He further
contended that even the subsequent statements recorded do not contain specific
allegations against the Petitioners. It was submitted that the statements of the
neighbours recorded who did not dispute that the couple lived happily.
7.

Counsel submitted that the deceased’s family has falsely implicated the

Petitioner’s family. The husband’s unmarried sister Lalitha and married Sister Rita
and her husband ,residents of Baghpat, U.P , who are living separately were also
implicated in the case by making frivolous allegations against them.
8.

The trial court framed charges against the Petitioners for committing the

Crl. Rev. P. No.897-902/2006

3 of 6

offences punishable under section302/34, 304B, 498A, 406, 201, 34 Indian Penal
Code. The extracts of the order dated 18.9.2006 are as follows;

“Charges can be framed on grave suspicion alone. In
the present case, admittedly the statements u/s 161
Cr.P.C and the supplementary statements too, make
out a case against all the accused persons for the
offences punishable u/s 304B, 498A/34 IPC. The
arguments that there is no evidence of cruelty soon
before death carries no weight as the deceased and
her husband are stated to have shifted to the official
quarter only a few months before the occurrence.
Therefore, offence u/s 304B/ 498A and sec.406 r/w 34
IPC is made out against all the accused persons.
Alternatively charge u/s 302 r/w Sec. 34 IPC may also
be framed since the post mortem report records cause
of death to be homicidal. Since, an attempt has been
made to give impression of suicidal death to a
homicidal death and also because scene of crime has
been disturbed, charge u/s 201/34 IPC is made out
against the accused persons”.
9.

The Post mortem report of the deceased recorded that “Postmortem hanging

and ante mortem struggle/assault. Mode of death homicide where possibility of
creation of scene suggestive of suicidal scene exists.”

10.

I have considered the submission of parties and examined the materials on

record. No doubt, when the First Information Report was lodged, no allegations

Crl. Rev. P. No.897-902/2006

4 of 6

were leveled against the accused. However, in supplementary statements, recorded
after the arrest, of the husband, instances of cruel behavior and dowry demands
were made. Two features stand out here. One, the couple lived with the husband’s
family until a few months before the incident . The husband was a police officer.
The initial statements of witnesses recorded by the police, were before his arrest.
The supplementary statements were recorded after the arrest. These facts become
significant, because at this stage the apprehension voiced by the witnesses was that
his presence and influence inhibited them from making free statements. This
factor cannot be discounted.
11.

The argument that no specific allegations were made against the accused, or

that they were afterthoughts, to my mind, cannot apply in the case of the husband’s
mother and paternal uncle (Petitioner Nos1 and 2). The petitioner lived with the
deceased. Although the first petitioner did not live in the same house, he
apparently lived close by; he allegedly used to taunt the deceased. The
supplementary statements further alleged that the mother-in-law and first petitioner
used to harass the deceased. In these circumstances, on an overall conspectus of
the facts, the order on charge so far as it concerns those two accused. Petitioners,
cannot be faulted. This is a case where the death occurred within the seven year
period after marriage; the presumption under Section 113-B applies

Crl. Rev. P. No.897-902/2006

5 of 6

12.

Petitioner No. 3 and 4 are the brother and unmarried sister of the husband;

petitioners 5 and 6 are the married sister and brother-in-law of the husband. As far
as these accused are concerned, at the highest, the allegations are general and
vague. In fact, the fifth and sixth respondent lived in a different place. On
circumstances, there does not appear to be anything material to hold that there is
“grave suspicion” about their involvement in the alleged crime.
13.

In view of the above discussion, the petition has to partly succeed, so far as

petitioner Nos. 3 to 6 are concerned. The impugned order charging them for the
offences is set aside. The order as far as it relates to petitioner Nos 1 and 2, is
hereby affirmed. The petition is, therefore, partly allowed to the above extent.

August 3,2007

Crl. Rev. P. No.897-902/2006

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

6 of 6

