39
*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994
April 7, 2008

1.

CS(OS) 1925/1994
KERLA STATE CONSTRUCTION CORPORATION LTD.
F+ ..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. S. Balakrishnan, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. I.C. Kumar, Mr. Sri Narain Jha, Advocates
versus
THE PROJECTS & EQUIPMENT CORPN.OF INDIA
..... Defendent
Through Mr. R.K. Watel, Advocate

2.

CS(OS) 1401/1994
KERLA STATE CONSTRUCTION CORPORATION LTD. F+
.... Plaintiff
Through Mr. S. Balakrishnan, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. I.C. Kumar, Mr. Sri Narain Jha, Advocates
versus
THE PROJECTS & EQUIPMENT CORPN.OF INDIA
..... Defendent
Through Mr. R.K. Watel, Advocate
CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
I.A. 11992/1994
1.

These proceedings are under Sections 30/33 of the Arbitration Act, 1940; they question an

interim Award made on 12th May, 1994, by the Arbitrators.
CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

1 of 10

2.

The facts are that the respondent successfully offered to execute a work contract, in response to

a global tender by the Government of Libya. The contract was awarded on 6 th December, 1979. On
29th January, 1980, the claimant, a Public Sector Undertaking of the State of Kerala, entered into an
agreement

with the respondent to work as its associate in regard to execution, completion and

maintenance of the work that were part of the main contract between the Government of Libya and the
objector/respondent which is also a Public Sector Undertaking but of the Central Government.
3.

The agreement between the parties contained an arbitration clause which reads as follows:
“12.1 If at any time any question, disputes or difference whatsoever shall arise
between the First Party and the Second Party upon or in relation or in connection with
this Agreement, either party shall forthwith give to the other party notice in writing of
the existence of such question, dispute or difference. The First Party and the Second
Party shall use their reasonable endeavours to settle between themselves any dispute
which may arise.”
12.2. All questions disputes and differences which may arise between the First Party
and the Second Party which cannot be settled amicably between them as to the intent or
meaning of this Agreement, the respective rights and obligations of the parties hereto or
any act, matter of thing done or to be done under this Agreement or in relation thereto
shall be settled by means of Arbitration, by two Arbitrators, one to be appointed by
each Party to the dispute and the Arbitrators shall, before taking upon themselves the
burden of reference, appoint an umpire. If the Arbitrators cannot agree on the Award,
the matter shall be referred to the Umpire. The Arbitration shall be conducted at New
Delhi in accordance with the Indian Arbitration Act and Rules made thereunder.”

4.

Certain disputes apparently arose and the petitioner claimant sought reference.

Arbitrators, one nominated by either party, entered upon reference.

Two

The claimant presented its

statement of claims; after receiving it the respondent apparently filed a counter claim. At that stage, the
claimant objected to the maintainability of the counter claim inter alia on several grounds, including
CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

2 of 10

that of limitation, maintainability and also that since no demand had been made under the arbitration
clause and no notice under Clause 12.2 has been issued, the claim was not adjudicable.
5.

The Arbitrator, framed five preliminary issues on 4.8.1991. These were in the following terms:
“

1. When did the breaches of contract on the part of Respondent arise as
causes of action accruing to the Claimant for making Reference to
Arbitration under S. 37(3) read with S. 37(1) of the Arbitration Act?
2. When did the breaches of Contract on the part of the Claimant arise giving
rise to causes of action for the counter-claims (or set-offs) made the
Respondent against the Claimant for making Reference to Arbitration in
terms of S. 37(3) read with S. 37(1) of the Arbitration Act?
3. Is any claim or the claims barred by Limitation under Article 55 of the
Schedule to the Limitation Act?
4. Is any counter-claim or counter-claims barred by Limitation under Article 55
of the Schedule to the Limitation Act?
5. Are the counter-claims entertainable in this Reference made by the
Claimant?”

6.

The Arbitrators held that findings on preliminary issues 1 & 3 could be rendered after

considering the evidence, to be led in the further course of the proceedings. So far as preliminary
issues 2 and 4 were concerned, the Arbitrators held that the counter claims of the respondent were
within the time prescribed. The 5th preliminary issue was, however, held against the respondent. It is
in respect of those findings, (which led to rejection of the counter claim), that these objections have
bee preferred.
7.

The Arbitrators noted in para 46 of the interim Award that the question of maintainability of the

CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

3 of 10

counter claim had several nuances i.e. “difference facets”. The Arbitrators listed at least three such
distinct aspects arising from the issue. It was then noted in significantly enough in para 47 as follows:
“47. The plea of the claimant, on which this issue is based, does not encompass all
the facets of the question of maintainability. The claimant, for example, does not
dispute the maintainability of the counter-claim on the ground that the counter-claim
does not arise out of the Agreement, or is not connected with the agreement, or does not
arise out of the agreement. It is also not urged that the counter-claim is outside the
terms of reference, or the order of reference, and are, therefore, not maintainable.
There is also no express plea that they are not maintainable because having never been
raised, before the reference, had not matured into a “dispute or difference”, within the
meaning of the Arbitration act, and the arbitration Agreement. This aspect may,
however, be implied from the contention that the “demand” had not been made. The
limited aspect of maintainability, which is expressly raised by the claimant, is that the
counter-claim cannot be entertained in the “present reference” because respondent did
not satisfy the condition precedent to any claim being made in arbitration and that
conditions precedent is contained in clause 12.1 of the Agreement, and, inter alia,
obliges the parties to give “prior notice” of their claim to the other party.”
8.

The Arbitrators thereafter proceeded to analyze Clause 12.1 and rendered their findings in paras

52 and 53, after concluding that since no distinct demand had been made by the respondent counter
claimant under Clause 12.1 it was not open to it to prefer counter claims in the course of arbitration
proceedings initiated at the instance of the claimant/petitioner. The analogy to order VIII Rule 6-A
Civil Procedure Code was turned down.
9.

Learned counsel for the objector submits that the Arbitrators committed a manifest error in

reading, in the mechanism of Clause 12.1, as a pre-condition for operation of Clause 12.2. According
to him the said two clauses of the contract are separate and independent of each other. While 12.1 casts
an obligation on the parties to endeavour at a settlement, Clause 12.2 was the agreed dispute resolving
CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

4 of 10

mechanism. In its terms “all disputes” had to be resolved through arbitration.
10.

Learned counsel relied upon several rulings including the judgment of this Court reported as

C.L. Misra vs. Nehru Bhavan Trust & Ors., AIR 1991 Delhi 39 which had in turn relied upon a
previous decision reported as Laminated Packings v. Union of India, 1983 Rajdhani LR (Notes) 8. In
that case, it was held that once disputes are referred to arbitration, the opposite party has a right to
prefer its counter claim. Learned counsel for the objector also relied upon a decision of the Supreme
Court reported as Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. vs. Amritsar Gas Service and Ors., (1991) 1 SCC 533
where it was held that the occasion to make a counter claim in the written statement can arise only after
an order of reference is made.
11.

Learned counsel submitted that having been satisfied about the maintainability vis-a-vis the

question of limitation, and also having expressly recorded that the claimant did not dispute
maintainability of the counter claim on the ground that it does not arise out of the agreement nor was
connected with it or was outside the terms of reference, the Arbitrators should not have taken upon
themselves to decide the issue of maintainability by constraining pleadings through implication as it
were. He heavily relied upon the observations in para 47 and submitted that in the circumstances of
this case, the Arbitrators should not have implied, by interpreting the word “demand” , that the counter
claim was not specifically made prior to the reference to the arbitration and, therefore, could not be
entertained.
12.

Learned senior counsel for the petitioner on the other hand urged that the pre-condition to

CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

5 of 10

every valid arbitration or even a claim is the existence of a dispute. He relied upon Clause 12.1 and
contended that the respondent/objector, at no stage prior to the reference, had demanded any amount
which it ultimately counter claimed. Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of the Madhya Pradesh
High Court reported as Dilip Construction Co. v. Hindustan Steel Ltd., AIR 1973 MP 261. In that case,
the Court held as follows:
“The principles deducible from these authorities are-(i) The existence of a difference or dispute is an essential condition for the
arbitrator's jurisdiction to act under an arbitration clause in an
agreement;
(ii) the jurisdiction of an arbitrator depends not upon the existence of a claim
or the accrual of a cause of action, but upon the existence of a dispute. A
dispute implies an assertion of a right by one party and repudiation
thereof by another;
(iii)A failure to pay is not a difference, and the mere fact that a party could
not or would not pay does not in itself amount to a dispute unless the
party who chooses not to pay raises a point of controversy regarding, for
instance, the basis of payment or the time or manner of payment.”
13.

Learned counsel next relied upon the judgment reported as Bhagawati Oxygen Ltd. vs.

Hindustan Copper Ltd., AIR 2005 SC 2071. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner also relied upon
the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as State of Rajasthan vs. Nav Bharat Construction Co.,
(2006) 1 SCC 86. He relied upon the observations of the Court to state that the arbitral Tribunal or the
umpire—in that case the latter can decide only disputes referred and could not travel beyond it.
14.

The factual narrative reveals that disputes between the parties stern from a contract entered into

CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

6 of 10

between them in 1980. The disputes were referred to arbitration in 1991. The respondent, which the
main contractor filed its counter claim, after the petitioner preferred its claims in arbitration. This was
objected by the petitioner/claimant as not maintainable along with several other objections.

An

advertence to the findings on issue No. 5 in the interim Award impugned in the present case would
reveal that most of the issues were held in favour of the respondent objector, particularly, those relating
to limitation and other questions of maintainability. However, the narrow ground which persuaded the
Arbitrators to hold against the respondent's counter claim was that no separate or distinct demand had
been made and that no reference of those alleged disputes had been sought, for resolution through
arbitration; therefore, the counter claim could not be adjudicated.
15.

The findings in para 47 of the impugned interim award in the opinion of the Court make

interesting reading. The Arbitrators construed the nature of objections articulated by the petitioner
claimant. On most a counts, those objections were overruled. However, the Arbitrators felt compelled
enough to examine that the nuances and facets of the expression “demand” and further imply that since
no specific demand for any amount or dispute had been sought or made by the respondent, they had no
jurisdiction to examine the counter claim.
16.

The decision cited by the objector, particularly, the two decisions of this Court as well as the

Supreme Court judgment in Amritsar Gas Service and Ors. are a clear pointer to the principle that if
disputes exist between the parties, the Arbitrators derive their jurisdiction to examine and adjudicate
upon them. This, of course, subject to other well settled and well defined exceptions such as limitation,
CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

7 of 10

etc. The expression “ all disputes” which is otherwise a widely accepted contractual norm and is
factored into most arbitration agreements is in the opinion of the Court of sufficient amplitude to admit
of all claims of the parties subject to other provisions of law. The petitioner contended —an argument
which found favour with the Arbitrator—that in the absence of a notice under Clause 12.1 or endeavour
(by parties) to settle specific disputes which were later founded in the counter claim, the respondent
could not have approached the Arbitrator with their own claims, in reference made primarily at the
instance of the claimant.
17

Though seemingly attractive, the argument has to be seen in the backdrop of the other

conditions. Clause 12.1 is no doubt a part of the dispute resolving mechanism yet it is more in the
nature of the obligation to explore attempts to settle (in the first instance) differences between the
parties.

However, Clause 12.2 has been cast imperative terms. It enjoins the parties to refer their

disputes to arbitration. In fact, both parties are given the choice to appoint one of their nominees as
their Arbitrator. In this case both exercised this option. There is nothing in the language of Clause
12.2 either express or through necessary implication to import the necessity of a notice, under Clause
12.1 or any other condition, as has been inferred by the Arbitrators in this case to set into motion the
disputes resolution mechanism, by one party, independently of the other parties recourse to arbitration.
All questions, disputes and differences naturally imply existence of some differences of opinion
between the parties. One cannot ignore is that the expression “all questions, disputes and differences”
may include a wider spectrum of disputes and not be confined to what is demanded, by one party. For
CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

8 of 10

instance, if certain disputes and differences are to put to one party and either not expressly rejected or
commented they can arguably be described as un-resolved disputes. Likewise, there can be possibly a
situation where the one party refer demands and obtain a reference of its disputes to arbitration. In its
defence, the respondent/opposite party could well discover or choose to come forward with its claims
which it had not been articulated till then or which could be set off in response to the claim.
18.

From the above, it may be seen that the necessity of separate demand for arbitration would

perhaps vary from circumstance to circumstance having regard to the contents of the counter claim or
disputes. It is quite possible for a party in the first instance not to seek reference of its disputes, guided
by the nature of the dispute or the quantum. However, having been arrayed as a party and made an
answer to a possible

demand it may well choose to raise its disputes. Therefore, on an overall

construction of Clause 12.2 it cannot be said that the necessity of demand in its terms was imperative
and that the absence of a specific notice for settling the disputes precluded a counter claim in
arbitration.
19.

In the opinion of the Court having concluded on almost of the issues in favour of the

maintainability of respondent's counter claim the arbitrators fell into a manifest error in taking upon
themselves the task of exploring the meaning of “demand” and implying that in the absence of a clear
demand no counter claim was maintainable. To that extent the impugned interim award discloses an
error which would fall within the parameters of the Court's jurisdiction under Section 30 and 33.
20.

Before conclusion, one cannot help but commenting on the peculiar facts of this case. The

CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

9 of 10

contract here was entered into in 1979; disputes were referred in 1991, the interim Award was made in
1994 and the correctness of that Award has now been decided 14 years later. This is exactly what the
Arbitration Act either in its earlier version or the later enactment ostensibly sought to avoid.
Interlocutory motions, argued for years, leading to hyper-technical construction of pleadings, and
findings inevitably resulting in layers of multifarious litigation were evils sought to be avoided, but
what was exactly achieved. The result is that 17 years have passed by and the objective for entering
into an arbitration agreement--swift and in expensive resolution of disputes, is nowhere in sight.
21.

In view of the above findings, I.A. 11992/1994 has to succeed; it is therefore allowed In the

circumstances of this case, the claimant petitioner M/s. Kerala State Construction shall bear the costs of
these proceedings, quantified at Rs. 50,000/-. All rights and contentions of the parties on the merits of
the disputes on which the Arbitrators have not pronounced their findings are hereby reserved and kept
open.
22.

CS(OS) 1925/1994 and CS(OS) 1401/1994 are disposed of in the above terms.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
APRIL
dkg

07, 2008

CS(OS) 1925/1994 AND CS(OS) 1401/1994

10 of 10

