IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006
Reserved on: 26.4.2007
Decided on: May 4, 2007.
RAM DAYAL MEENA & ORS.
……PETITIONERS
Through: Mr. K.K. Sud, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Neeraj Jain, Mr. Anupam Mishra, Mr. Sanjeev
Goyal, Advocates
Versus
State

…...RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. V.K. Malik, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT:
1.
This Criminal Revision Petition is preferred against an order of charge dated
19-10-2006 of the learned Additional Sessions Judge (“the trial Court”) under Sections
498-A/ 304-B/34 Indian Penal Code (“IPC”).
2.

The first Petitioner (hereinafter referred to as “husband”) and Smt. Vidya Meena

(hereinafter referred to as “the deceased”) were married on 4.5.2004. No children were
born out of the wedlock. The other Petitioners are the father, brother and brother-in-law
of the husband; they shall be referred to as such. They Petitioners are members of a

CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

1 of 11

Scheduled Tribe community from Rajasthan. The husband at the time of marriage was
employed as a Lower Division Clerk (LDC) with CBI and posted at Jodhpur.
3.

The deceased committed suicide by hanging herself from a ventilator on

26.7.2005. The Petitioners allege that on that day, the deceased’s parents did not make
any statement to the police; they sought time till the postmortem was conducted. They
joined inquest proceedings and their first statement was recorded four days after the
incident i.e. on 30.7.2005. A supplementary statement was recorded on 2.9.2005 almost
a month after the first statement was recorded. Based on this statement, the FIR was
registered and the order on charge was passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge.
4.

The parents of the deceased in their preliminary statement dated 30.7.2005 stated

that at the time of marriage a sum of Rs.8 lakhs was demanded, which later on settled for
Rs.5 lakhs. The amount was paid to the Petitioner by availing a loan of Rs.30,000/- from
ECC-Corporation Bank and Canara Bank. They stated that their daughter lived happily
with her husband, except for sometimes when she was beaten up, tortured and
pressurized to take up a job by him. They alleged that their daughter was killed by her
husband.
5.

The supplementary statement was made on 2.9.2005. It was then alleged by the

deceased’s parents Shri Giriraj Prasad Meena and Smt. Sushila Meena and the brother
Mr. Arvind Kumar that the deceased had called up on the day of the incident and she had
tried saying something; the husband snatched the phone from her and did not let her
speak. It was also stated that the husband taunted the deceased that “D-Grade” articles
were given as dowry. They stated that at the time of marriage Rs.5 lakhs clothes,
CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

2 of 11

furniture and jewellery was given, yet the deceased was harassed and asked to bring Rs.3
lakhs more as dowry. She was threatened that if the dowry demands were not met with
she would face dire consequences. The deceased’s brother, Arvind Kumar, stated that his
sister had complained to him in June 2004, barely two months after marriage that she was
harassed for dowry but she was advised to adjust and live with the Petitioner. Again in
July 2005 the deceased called her brother on phone and informed him that she was beaten
up and threatened for dowry.
6.

The husband states that the couple lived happily after marriage. It was urged on

his behalf that the couple were initially residing in their official quarter at CBI Colony,
Jodhpur. He was later transferred to Delhi where he rented premises in Palam Colony. It
was argued that the deceased was an educated lady, and therefore he wanted her to take
up employment; he had tried in several organizations like Delhi Metro Corporation and
State Bank of India.
7.

It was contended that the petitioner wanted the deceased to take a job so as to

improve their social status. He had encouraged her to pursue higher education and had
enrolled her for Teacher’s Training Education as well as B.Ed course. The application
for the course was made to Maharishi Dayanand University and a deposit of Rs.19,400/was paid.
8.

It was further urged that the petitioner had opened a joint D-Mat Account, and

also included her name in the CGHS Card from where she was getting her medical
treatment. He states that the deceased was a nominee for the Petitioner’s terminal
benefits.
CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

3 of 11

9.

It was contended by learned counsel for the petitioners that the allegations

regarding dowry harassment and cruelty were vague and general. The husband being a
low ranking employee in the CBI, was encouraging the deceased, a highly qualified girl,
to seek employment. He also helped her to enroll for further courses of study, according
to her request. His bona fide intentions could be gathered from the fact that all securities
were kept in his name as well as D.Mat Account jointly with the deceased. The deceased
was invariably named as the second or joint holder. In reality the problem was some
thing else. Counsel urged that the deceased was always under the impression that the
petitioner was infertile/sterile and as a result insist that he should get himself examined.
This was because she had not conceived after the marriage.
10.

Senior counsel next urged that the totality of the circumstances has to be seen and

not merely the highlighted allegations leveled by the deceased parents and brother. It was
contended immediately upon being informed about the death, the parents of the deceased,
namely, the father Giriraj Prasad Meena, the mother Susheela Meena were both present
but they declined to make any statement. They got their statement recorded only on
30.7.2005 when certain general allegations concerning the deceased being asked to live
in the village and do house-hold chores were made.

The statements had clearly

mentioned about the couple living together from February, 2005 onwards in New Delhi
after the husband was transferred there. It was contended that the allegation of the
deceased’s father having paid Rs.5 lakhs as dowry is to be seen in the context of the fact
that both families belong to a poor strata of society and were from the same community.
The deceased’s father had in fact stated that he had obtained a loan of Rs.30,000/- for the
CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

4 of 11

purpose of marriage.
11.

Learned counsel urged that the most contemporaneous evidence at best were the

statements of the parents of the deceased and the other two statements of independent
witnesses ie neighbours. In fact one of them clearly stated that they had never seen the
couple quarreling.

It was submitted that in these circumstances the subsequent

statements recorded on 2.9.2005, including statements of the deceased’s mother, sisterin-law, father and brother sought to build a new story. The statement of Arvind Meena,
brother of the deceased for the first time sought to give details about amounts given as
dowry and also alleged for the first time involvement in the act of demand for dowry after
the marriage, some time in June-July, 20043.
12.

Counsel contended that one of the essential ingredient for a valid charge under

Section 304-B Indian Penal Code (IPC) is that death under the circumstances spelt out
should have occurred and it should be shown that soon before the death of the woman,
she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by the husband or relatives or in relation with
any demand for dowry.
13.

Learned counsel contended that taken in totality there was insufficient evidence to

lead to any suspicion much less gave suspicion about the commission of offences under
Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC by the petitioners. He relied upon the judgments of this
Court reported as Smt. Deepa Bajwa Vs. State 115(2004) DLT 202; Bhagwanti Vs. State
2002(1) JCC 127; Savitri Devi Vs. Ramesh Chand 2003 (2) JCC 881; and Majhar @
Pappu Vs. State 96 (2002) DLT 566.
14.

It was contended that as far as the so-called acts of cruelty attributed to the

CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

5 of 11

husband were concerned, they were only allegations having persistently demanded the
deceased wife to take up employment and that she had not performed domestic chores
while visiting Jodhpur. These learned counsel contended by no stretch of imagination
could be characterized as harassment or cruelty, for the purpose of extracting dowry. The
desire to improve one’s conditions, particularly in the light of the wife’s educational
attainments, was not unreasonable; similarly having regard to the Indian context
whenever the couple visited a village, if the husband asked the wife to assist in the
performance of the house-hold duties, that could not constitute cruelty.
15.

The petition was resisted by the State. Learned counsel contended that at the

stage of framing charges, the Court cannot meticulously examine the probative value of
the evidence. It has to be satisfied reasonably and, prima facie, that the evidence points
out to grave suspicion.
16.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as

Alamgir Saini Vs. State of Assam 2003 SCC (Crl) 1447 and submitted that the recording
of statements subsequent to the event; in certain kinds of offences is not unnatural and
that in cases relating to dowry deaths, the Court has indicated that such supplementary
statements cannot be fatal to the prosecution case. Learned counsel relied upon the
judgment also to say that different persons react differently under pressure or in times of
certain grief. Such emotional trauma inhibits the immediate outpouring of reasons. He
also relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court as Ram Badan Sharma Vs. State of
Bihar AIR 2006 2855. Reliance was also placed upon Rajbir Singh Vs. State of U.P.
2006(2) Crimes 1 SC to say that the Court has to examine the totality of the
CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

6 of 11

circumstances and not be weighed down by one or few circumstances. Learned counsel
lastly contended that in this case death occurred within a very short span after marriage
and that the presumption enacted by Section 113(b) of the Evidence Act would squarely
applied.
17.

The factual narrative is indicative of couple having been getting married on

4.5.2004. The husband was working in the CBI as a Lower Division Clerk at Jodhpur.
Apparently, they lived together there till February 2005 when the husband was
transferred to Delhi. They took up residence there. The death occurred on 26.7.2005; no
statement was recorded immediately by any of the deceased’s relatives. Apparently they
withheld making the statement till the post-mortem was conducted. On 30.7.2005, the
deceased’s parents recorded statements. Both of them consistently mentioned about
dowry demand of Rs.8 lakhs at the time of marriage by the husband whereas the amount
spent was Rs.5 lakhs. The other common feature of the two statements was that no other
relative was involved. Both the parents suspected the husband of having murdered the
deceased. Much later, on 2.9.2005 four other supplementary statements were recorded.
They sought to improve the version given earlier, for the first time stating the names of
petitioners 2-4 as “also talked about fulfillment about demand of dowry”. The main
allegation in this regard is contained in the statements of Arvind Meena, who stated on
2.9.2005 that after reaching Jodhpur, the husband harassed the deceased, made demands
for dowry and also threatened to be more cruel to her. He also alleged that on several
occasions the deceased complained about the husband demanding the balance of Rs.3
lakhs. Additionally he mentioned about the husband beating up the wife publicly during
CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

7 of 11

a party at Jodhpur and even telephoning him and threatening to divorce the deceased and
sending her back later.
18.

The statement of the brother Arvind Meena mostly concerns incidents of cruelty

meted out by the husband. In one stray sentence without mentioning any period or date,
he, coincidently mentioned about the petitioners 2-4 also wanting to fulfill dowry
demands.
19.In this case undoubtedly the death of the woman took place within seven years and
there are strong circumstances by way of statements made in the immediate aftermath
of the death, on 30.7.2006 as well as in the latest statement about the husband having
treated her with cruelty, physically and also made demands for dowry. To that extent
the two sets of statements, recorded in July 205 and September 2005 corroborate each
other. However, when it relates to involvement by other relatives the statements of
the parents of the deceased is very specific; to a pointed query on 30.7.2005 i.e. four
days after the death, the answer is in the negative whereas in the subsequent
supplementary statements of the prosecution witnesses a general and vague allegation
of involvement in the dowry demand by the petitioners 2-4 has been made.
20.The offence of dowry related cruelty are generically different from others. The special
nature of these offences, social compulsion to eliminate the practice of dowry, inform
the rationale underlying Sections 498-A and 304-B.

Section 113-B, Evidence

underscores the legislative intention further. It has also been recognized that in some
cases, there can be an overlap between the two offences. Nevertheless, the general
principles which courts have to follow while framing charges, under Sections 227-228
CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

8 of 11

have not been radically altered; they continue to be the “prima facie” test, based on
materials available, whether “grave suspicion” of the accused committing the offence,
exists (See Union of India Vs. Prafula Chanddra Samal AIR 1979 Sc 366).

While

considering the order on charge the Court has to be sensitive to the rule that if two
reasonable views about the guilt or innocence of the accused are possible and can be
taken, the one leaning in favour of accused is to be preferred, in support of his
discharge. (Refer Dilawar Babu Kurane Vs. State of Maharashtra AIR 202 SC 564).
21.

The above factual analysis would show that the consistent thread of allegations

point to grave suspicion about the petitioner-husband’s involvement in the perpetration
of cruelty and as also cruelty, in connection with demand for dowry. The parents of the
deceased spoke with less particulars but nevertheless clearly mentioning the role of the
husband as demanding dowry. Therefore, the charges as framed by the trial Court so far
as he is concerned, are justified under Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC.

As far as the

involvement of the other relatives, namely father, uncle and brother of the husband are
concerned, the evidence here is vague, sketchy and unspecific. It has been held in several
decisions that while framing the charges, under Section 498-A there have to be specific
allegations of cruel behaviour. Likewise, the Court has to be careful, in framing the
charge under Section 304, in view of the presumption raised under Section 113. That
presumption would arise only on proof of the following essential circumstances:(i)

Whether the woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by the

concerned accused, ie the relative;
(ii)

Whether such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with any

CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

9 of 11

demand of dowry ;and
(iii)
22.

Whether such cruelty or harassment was soon before here death.

The Supreme Court has in the decision reported as Hira Lal Vs. State 2003 (109)

Crl. LJ 3711 held that the expression “soon before” would normally imply that the
interval should not be much between the concerned cruelty or harassment and the death
in question. There should be a proximate and live link between the effect of cruelty,
abuse of dowry demand and the concerned death. If the alleged incident of cruelty is
remote, in point of time and has become stale so as not to justify the mental equilibrium
of the woman, that would be of no consequence.
22.

In this case all sets of statements undoubtedly implicated the husband of both

cruelty and cruel behaviour for dowry on different occasions. In that sense there was a
live and proximate link between the death and the demands. However, such elements are
conspicuously lacking both as regards the charge under Section 498-A IPC and Section
304-B IPC so far as the relatives of the husband ie 2nd, 3rd and 4th petitioners are
concerned. At best their role is said to have been supportive of the husband perhaps
apparently at the time of marriage or soon thereafter. There is no specific mention of
dates or any conducts of cruel behaviour attributed to him. Another singular future is that
the mother-in-law of the deceased has no where been informed as a culprit. In these
circumstances, I am satisfied that there exists no evidence or material, pointing at the
grave suspicion or constituting prima facie material to warrant charges against the said
petitioner-accused.

Even if the materials are said to exist they are scanty and

contradictory – as a result they are entitled to be benefit of discharge, on a fair application
CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

10 of 11

of the ratio in Kurane’s case.
23.

For the above reasons, the petition has to succeed partially. The revision so far as

it concerns the first petitioner is rejected.

However, the revision of petitioner 2-4

deserves to succeeded. It is accordingly allowed. The charges framed against the said
petitioners 2-4 are set aside.
24.

The petition is allowed in the above terms.

May 04, 2007
MLB

CRL.REV.P. 791-801/2006

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

11 of 11

