•

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Review Petition 418/2007
IN
W.P.(C) 17455/2006
Reserved on January, 14th , 2007
Delivered on February 4,th 2008

NEERA DADHWAL

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Tarique Siddiqui, Advocate
versus

DEEPAK PAINTAL AND ORS.

..... Respondents
Through Mr. J.S. Rupal, Advocate

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

The Petitioner had invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court and claims a direction to

admit her the fifth semester of the LLB Course, conducted by the Delhi University. In these
review proceeding, she seeks modification and recall of the judgment of this court, dated 20 th

R. P. No.418/07 in W.P.(C) 17455/06

1

August, 2007 (hereafter “the main judgment’).

2.

The Petitioner enrolled herself in the Campus Law Centre, University of Delhi in the year

2004. The course has six semesters and 30 subjects have to be cleared by the end of the 6th
semester. A student has to clear 15 out of 20 subjects to qualify for admission to the fifth
semester. The petitioner had 61% of attendance and according to Ordinance VII, of the Statutes
and Ordinances the Dean/Professor in charge has the power to condone the attendance since she
was working for the institution. She had alleged about not being issued a roll number to appear in
the first paper; she was sent back from the institution without being allowed to give her exam.
The Petitioner was issued roll number for the second examination, a few minutes of the
commencement of her exams. She averred that she cleared two out of the four subjects, in which
she was allowed to appear. She submitted that in the result it was shown that she has passed or
qualified in 14 subjects out of 19 but actually it is 14 subjects out of 17 as the other 2 papers
were disturbed by the Respondents.

3.

In the main judgment, after recording the rival contentions and pleadings, the writ

petition was disposed, on the basis of the following findings:
9. The undisputed case is that the petitioner had about 61 per cent
attendance. The norm, stipulated by Ordinance VII 8 (a) is 66 per cent of
lectures on each of the subjects as also moot courts and practical training
course. Appendix II to Ordinance V (2) and VII prescribes that a law
student, to be promoted to fifth semester, should have passed at least in
15 out of 20 papers.
R. P. No.418/07 in W.P.(C) 17455/06

2

Ordinance

VII

(8)

(a)

reads

as

follows:

“8 (a) “ The student shall be required to put in minimum attendance of 66
per cent of the lectures on each of the subjects as also at the moot courts
and practical training course. ”
Provided that in exceptional cases for reasons to be recorded and
communicated to the Bar Council of India, the Dean of the Faculty.
of Law/Professor-in-charge of the Law Centre may condone
attendance short of those required by this Rule, if the student had attended
66 per cent of the lectures in the aggregate of the semester examinations.
Provided further that no personal shall be deemed to have satisfied
the required conditions in respect of his instructions unless, in addition to
the requirements regarding attendance and other conditions, he has
appeared and satisfied by his performance the Professor-in-Charge of the
Law Centre in such test, written and /or oral, as may be held by him in hi
discretion. The Professor-in-Charge shall have, ands shall be deemed
always to have had, the power to detain a student in the same class in
which he has been studying or not to sent him up for the University
Examination, in case he did not appear at the t est/s aforesaid or his
performance was not satisfactory.
The Professor-in-Charge of the Law Centre shall have power to
strike off the name of a student who is grossly irregular in attendance in
spite of warning, or, when the absence of the student is for such a long
period that he cannot put in requisite percentage of attendance.”
Appendix II to Ordinance V (2) & VII is as follows:
“A student of the First, Third, and Fifth Term will be promoted to the
Second, Fourth and Sixth Term respectively, irrespective of the number of
courses in which he/she has failed to pass or failed to appear in the First,
Third or Fifth Term Examination: Provided that he or she has not been
detained on account of shortage of attendance in First, Third or Fifth
Term Examination, as the case may be.

R. P. No.418/07 in W.P.(C) 17455/06

3

Provided further that no such student shall be admitted to the Third or
Fifth Term unless he/she has passed in at least five courses offered by
him/her for the First and Second Term Examinations taken together in
case of promotion from I year to II year and in at least fifteen courses
offered by him/her; for the First, Second, Third and Fourth Term
Examination taken together in case of promotion from II year to II year of
the LLB course.
Note:- The students eligible for admission to III/V Term must seek
admission not later than two weeks from the date(s) of announcement of
the results of LLB II/IV Term Annual Examinations or within one week of
commencement of classes, whichever is later, failing which they will
forfeit their right to be admitted to III/V Term.”
10.
The petitioner's allegation is that she could not attain the 66 per
cent minimum attendance criteria, as she was asked to participate in
student union activities; she also attended moot courts and legal aid
camps. She has relied upon certificates issued by the Legal Aid Society, of
the Campus Law Centre about her active participation in legal aid
programmes and also other documents showing involvement in students
union activities. As far as her clearing 14 out of 17 subjects is concerned,
although the allegation that she was permitted to appear late in some
exams, and not permitted to appear in paper XVI (Constitutional Law – II)
is denied, yet during the hearing, she produced the response of the
Principal Information Officer of the Campus Law Centre under the Right
to Information Act, 2005.
11. The petitioner had sought information about the seating plan for
students attempting in all the subjects of the fourth semester;
Constitutional Law, paper- XVI was the subject of examination on
01.05.06. The seating plan for room No. 26 indicated that 55 students had
attempted the examination. The petitioner's role number i.e. 60856, did
not find mention in that examination hall; indeed it does not find mention
in any other examination hall for that paper. What has, therefore, been
established is that the petitioner lost the opportunity to appear in one
paper. She was admittedly marked “absent” in that paper. To that
extent, her grievance of not being permitted to appear in all the papers

R. P. No.418/07 in W.P.(C) 17455/06

4

seems well founded. As regards the complaint that she was permitted to
appear but later on in some other subjects, there is no evidence to
establish that. Similarly, in the representations addressed by her on
17.10.06 and later, she has not complained that attendance was wrongly
withheld. In these circumstances, the only grievance which can be
considered by the Court is whether the respondents acted with
justification in proceeding to detain her at the end of the fourth semester
examination.
12.
After the filing of this writ petition, this Court had permitted the
petitioner to appear in the fifth semester (Suppl.) examinations conducted
in May-June, 2007. The Court had also directed that the results would
not be declared till further orders and that no special equities would arise
in her favour by the permission to appear in the examinations
13. The above facts and attendant circumstances would disclose that the
petitioner fell marginally short of minimum attendance requirement spelt
out by the Ordinance. There is some documentary evidence in support of
her claim that a claim of having participated in legal aid camps and cocurricular activities of the students' union. Apparently, the respondents
have not given credit for it; in any case, the petitioner fell short of
attendance by nine classes. At the same time, she was also not permitted
to appear in all the examinations – the response to the query made by her
under the Right to Information Act, indicated that her role number was
not included in the seating plan for that examination on 01.05.06. In
these circumstances, the respondents' action in marking her absent cannot
be justified. I am, therefore, of the considered opinion that the petitioner's
results for the fifth semester examination should be declared forthwith.
However, this cannot automatically mean that all attendance
th
requirements have to be give a go by. She was not admitted to the 6
semester examination. She approached this Court on 21.10.06 and was
unable to secure an interim order. In these circumstances, although this
Court has got wide powers under Article 226 of the Constitution, such
powers should be exercised with circumspection having regard to the
express statutory conditions and the attendant circumstances. In this
case, the issue is one of attendance norms. If this Court, at this stage

R. P. No.418/07 in W.P.(C) 17455/06

5

th
were to permit the petitioner to appear in the 6 semester without having
been admitted to it, it would be violating the attendance requirements and
all other conditions.
14. In the above circumstances, following directions are issued:
1. The Faculty of Law, namely, the third respondent shall declare the
results of the fifth semester examination (Suppl.) in which the petitioner
appeared, within a week from today;
2. The petitioner shall admitted to the fifth semester. It shall be open to
her to appear in the examinations/tests conducted by the respondents in
respect of the subjects which she has not cleared in accordance with the
Ordinance and statutes;
3.

The petitioner shall be permitted to make up the deficiency of
th
attendance if any in the fifth semester and shall be admitted to the 6
semester at the end of the present term, in January, 2008. Thereafter,
subject to her fulfilling the attendance norms and other conditions, she
th
shall be permitted to appear in the 6 semester examinations.
The petition is disposed off in terms of the above directions. No costs.”

5.

The limited review sought by the petitioner now is that the court should correct direction

Para 14 (2) so as to clarify that the petitioner should be admitted to the sixth semester, instead of
the fifth semester. It is contended that this is necessary, because the respondents have now
declared the fifth semester examination, which showed that she secured 240 out of 500 marks in
the III term and 260 out of 500 marks, in the fifth term. The petitioners also adverts to her
approaching the Division Bench of this court, in an appeal, which was rejected and later,

R. P. No.418/07 in W.P.(C) 17455/06

6

appealing to the Supreme Court, by special leave. The Supreme Court permitted her to withdraw
the petition and file the present review petition.

6.

The review petition is opposed by the respondent; its counsel alleges that the petitioner

did not disclose to the Supreme Court, that she was permitted to appear in the fifth semester
examination without granting equities. He relied on the order of 4 th May, 2007, whereby this
court had allowed her to appear in the fifth semester examination, without creation of any special
equities. He also submitted that a similar request for correction of the order was made through an
application, i.e CM 12294/2007, after delivery of judgment; after some hearing, it was permitted
to be withdrawn, on 5th September, 2007.

7.

This court has carefully considered the pleadings in the writ petition as well as the main

judgment, and the subsequent order, dated 5th September 2007. The findings disclose that the
court was conscious about the restricted nature of the right to appear in the fifth semester
examination; it was not to create any special equities. After analyzing all the relevant ordinances
and statutes, the court noted that attendance norms have to be fulfilled for each semester. The
legitimate grievance on which directions were issued was the respondents action in not
permitting the petitioner to appear in one paper. However, the court consciously held that no
inference could be drawn about her having attended fifth semester, or fulfilled the norms in that
regard:

R. P. No.418/07 in W.P.(C) 17455/06

7

“However, this cannot automatically mean that all attendance
th
requirements have to be give a go by. She was not admitted to the 6
semester examination. She approached this Court on 21.10.06 and was
unable to secure an interim order. In these circumstances, although this
Court has got wide powers under Article 226 of the Constitution, such
powers should be exercised with circumspection having regard to the
express statutory conditions and the attendant circumstances. In this
case, the issue is one of attendance norms. If this Court, at this stage
th
were to permit the petitioner to appear in the 6 semester without having
been admitted to it, it would be violating the attendance requirements and
all other conditions.”
In the above background, the petitioner was permitted admission in the fifth semester, and not in
the sixth semester. There is no material to suggest that she fulfilled the attendance norms for the
sixth semester, and had attended the requisite number of classes in the fifth semester. In the
absence of any such material, the court cannot view the main judgment, sitting in review
jurisdiction, as an appellate forum.

8.

In the above circumstance, no case for review has been made out. The review petition is

accordingly dismissed.

Dasti under the signature of the Court Master.

DATED: 4th February, 2008

R. P. No.418/07 in W.P.(C) 17455/06

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

8

