12
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 657/2005
April 19, 2007
GEETA PANDEY

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Rajat Aneja, Advocate

versus
MAYA PANDEY & ORS
..... Respondents
Through Mr. Dhanbir Singh, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

The present revision petition is directed against an order of the Additional

Sessions Judge dated 25th May, 2005. By that order, the Court allowed the revision of
one of the accused, namely, Maya, who had been charged under Section 406 IPC.
2.

The State's revision, in so far as it pertained to discharge of the offences under

Section 406 IPC against all the three accused, namely, Maya, Rekha and Ganga was
dismissed. The present petition has been preferred by the complainant wife.
3.

The facts are that the marriage of the parties took place on 7th February, 1999.

Two male children were born out of the wedlock when the couple lived together. It is
CRL.REV.P. 657/2005

1 of 5

alleged that on account of acts of cruelty and dowry harassment, the petitioner
complainant was compelled to move out of the matrimonial home on 17.5.2002. The
matter was reported to CAW Cell on 3.5.2002 and it led to lodging of the First
Information Report on 8.8.2002.
4.

Mr. Aneja, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the discharge of the

three sisters-in-law named in the preceding paragraph was unjustified. He relied on the
allegations in the statement recorded before the Police at the earliest opportunity, namely,
8.8.2002. Learned counsel urged that in one incident, the accused/respondent Maya
clearly was implicated of physical abuse i.e. spilling of milk and also slapping the
complainant. He took me through other allegations such as the petitioner's name, despite
her status of married woman, not being recorded in the ration card of the family; all the
articles of jewelleries kept in the matrimonial home after her leaving the same despite her
request that it be returned to her and frequent acts of cruelty perpetrated by the husband
on account of liquor as well as by other relatives. He also relied on some statements to
say that threats were held out by the family members including the accused sisters-in-law
in the event of her recording true facts to the police. Lastly, it was contended that the
accused sisters-in-law and the other accused had to be charged of the offences because all
allegations, read cumulatively relate to cruelty on their part and, therefore, the trial court
as well as the revisional court fell into error in not charging them of that offence.
5.

Learned counsel next relied upon the supplementary statement recorded by the

complainant petitioner on 17.2.2004 to say that there were specific allegations that when
the complainant/petitioner went back to the matrimonial home sometime in 2003 to
CRL.REV.P. 657/2005

2 of 5

secure her jewellery, the accused, particularly, her sisters-in-law resisted and denied her
access. It was contended that these clearly spelt out the ingredients of the offence under
Section 406 IPC.
6.

Mr. Dhanbir Singh, learned counsel for the respondent accused, who were

discharged, contended on the other hand that the scope of the proceedings before the High
Court was extremely narrow. The Court is confronted with views about the correctness
of the approach as to whether the accused were at all culpable of the offences. The trial
court had refused to charge the two accused, namely, Rekha and Ganga. The State's
revision was dismissed. Therefore, the second revision, in these circumstances, under
Section 393(3) was barred.
7.

In any event, learned counsel contended that even if the courts were assumed to

possess jurisdiction under Section 482, there are not exceptional features, emerging from
the materials to warrant interference with such views. As far as the accusations against
Maya are

concerned, her revision to the Additional Sessions Judge, was correctly

allowed. The Court, he submitted, correctly inferred that the solitary allegation about
slapping and spilling of milk made against her had nothing to do with the dowry demand
and that in any event same did not amount to cruelty. Learned counsel contended that in
respect of the offence under Section 406 the accused were correctly is discharged since
the courts were of the view that the materials pointed to entrustment of the dowry items
and jewellery articles to the parent-in-law and, the sisters-in-law were nowhere mentioned
in the statement. Learned counsel contended that the last statement recorded by the
complainant was made at the fag end of the investigation just before the charge sheet was
CRL.REV.P. 657/2005

3 of 5

filed and that appears to be the sole basis for roping the offence under Section 406 IPC.
8.

I have considered the materials on record. The learned Additional Sessions Judge

in the impugned order observed that it is not every harassment or every type of cruelty
that would attract Section 498A IPC. The court considered the materials on record and
concluded that the trial court was swayed by the statement that Maya, one of the sistersin-law, who apparently was a young and unmarried woman at that stage abused the
complainant and spilled some milk when water was thrown on her face. This single fact,
however, was no different from the other allegations levelled against the two accused
sisters-in-law who had been discharged, namely, Rekha and Ganga.
9.

The allegations contained in the statement on 8.8.2002 and 17.2.2004, which in

my considered opinion, are most material, at best general are in nature. They do not point
to any specific act of cruelty, perpetrated by the sisters-in-law. The revisional court
proceeded to set aside the order so far as it pertained to Maya; the State has chosen not
carry that order further. So far as the offence of Section 406 is concerned, on of the
foundational premises is the factum of entrustment, the revisional court held and in my
view correct that the statements made by the petitioner only pointed to enstrustment of
the articles with the parents-in-law and not either one of the sisters-in-law.

The

allegations made with regard to withholding of the rings was recorded on 17.2.2004. It is
also on record that the complainant wife received Rs. 1 lakh during the pendency of the
proceedings.
10.

As observed in the preceding paragraph, revisional proceedings under Section 397

are not maintainable to test the revisional court's order. However, in such circumstances,
CRL.REV.P. 657/2005

4 of 5

if the court is convinced that the materials before it point to miscarriage of justice, it is
always open to it to secure the ends of justice as it were by exercising inherent
jurisdiction under Section 482.

The parameters of such jurisdiction are extremely

circumscribed and far too well defined; tyh\\hey cannot be invoked here.
11.

Having considered the materials on record and in view of the above discussion, I

am of the view that no interference with the impugned order is called for.
12.

The revision petition is accordingly dismissed.
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J

APRIL 19, 2007
dkg

CRL.REV.P. 657/2005

5 of 5

