* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994
Reserved on : 10.01. 2008
Date of decision : January 14th, 2008

NEELAM SINGH

..... PLAINTIFF
Through: Mr. Anil K. Kher, Sr. Advocate,
with Mr. P.K. Mohapatra, Advocate

:: VERSUS ::
APAR REAL ESTATE

… DEFENDANT
Through : Mr. A.N. Haksar, Advocate
with Udain Jain and Kr. Shashank, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat :
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT:
1.

In these proceedings, directions to file arbitration agreement and refer the

disputes for adjudication have been sought.

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

1

2.

According to the Petitioner, two agreements were entered into by her with

the Respondent in respect of property known as “Clifton, Ayarpatta”, Nainital
measuring about 3346 sq.meters. The Respondent agreed to sell half portion of
the said plot (hereafter referred to as “the Property”), develop it, re-construct it
into cottages, thereafter divide them equally between the Petitioner and itself. It is
averred that pursuant to discussions an agreement was entered into between
parties on 9.9.1993 where the Respondent agreed to sell half of the area of the
land and one half of the existing structures on the plot for a total sale
consideration of Rs.9.5 lakhs. The Petitioner paid Rs.6 lakhs. It is averred that no
partition of the property was ever done and that the Respondent started
dismantling the existing cottages and other constructions; it also started reconstructing two cottages and completed one. Alleging that the Respondent was
trying to sell the said cottages and that in the absence of the partition of the
property in compliance with the Agreement between the parties, the Respondent
could not deal with it as was sought to be done, the present petition under Section
20 was filed.

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

2

3.

It is also alleged by the Petitioner that the Respondent failed to comply

with terms and conditions agreed by the parties on 9.9.1993 and did not secure
sanction for the Plans to construct upon the property; it did not also furnish
accounts. The Petitioner relies upon Clause 16 of the Agreement to say that the
disputes are to be resolved through arbitration. It is alleged that the cause of
action arose against the Respondent due to its failure to obtain sanctions of the
plans for construction of the proposed cottages and also upon its dismantling the
existing cottages and seeking to re-construct them.
4.

The Respondent in its reply disputes that there is arbitration agreement

between the parties. It is also alleged that a claim for specific performance of
Agreement to Sell cannot be referred to arbitration, in the absence of any
arbitration agreement. It is further alleged by the Respondent that the Petitioner
has not properly disclosed material facts and that the Agreement to Sell dated
9.9.1993 is neither binding nor operative against the Respondent. It is alleged that
the Petitioner did not make the payments as stipulated in the Agreement to Sell on
9.9.1993; it was liable to pay Rs.9.5 lakhs towards the part consideration on or
before 31.12.1993 on which event the Agreement to Sell and subsequent
agreement, for development, were to become operative. It is claimed that the
CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

3

Petitioner paid only Rs.6 lakhs into installments of Rs.3/- lakhs each as on
1.10.1993 and failed to pay the balance amounts of Rs.3 lakhs.

5.

The Respondent claims that the agreement cannot also be enforced

because it does not place the parties in an equal footing and bargain is
unconscionable and oppressive.

6.

The Respondent alleges that originally land was purchased on 4.7.1991 for

Rs.14 lakhs and that it actually costs Rs.17 lakhs. The Petitioner thereafter agreed
to join the project and entered into contract containing terms and conditions on
9.9.1993. According to that agreement the Petitioner was to spend amounts
equivalent to what Respondent had spend on the land and its development after
which the parties would contribute equally and raise constructions to finalise the
project “Cliftons Oaks”. The Petitioner did not pay any amount towards the
project despite various demands; it was delayed resulting in heavy losses to the
Respondents. It is claimed that the Respondent had to continue its activities on its
own and spend a further further sum of Rs.20 lakhs. It is also alleged that the
Respondent has already built two cottages and another structure and spend a sum
CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

4

of Rs.30 lakhs towards the work.

7.

The documents filed by the parties disclose that they entered into two

agreements on 9.9.1993. The first is an agreement to sell, signed at NOIDA. It
recites that the Respondent is owner of the property and agreed to sell to the
Petitioner half of the existing construction for a total consideration of Rs.9.5
lakhs. The further recital contains stipulations about the time by which the said
amount was to be paid; the last instalment of Rs.3 lakh was payable on or before
31.12.1993.

The balance consideration of Rs.50,000/- was payable by the

Petitioner at the time of execution and registration of the sale deed. In lieu of this
consideration the Respondent agreed to sell the land to the Petitioner. The first
agreement also states that the Petitioner joined the Respondent
“to have joint possession of the said property (including structures
and utilities thereunder) measuring 4000 sq.yds and henceforth
both parties have co-possession of the said property and shall be
deemed as go-owners (subject to full payment of consideration by
the second party as per its agreement) notwithstanding the
pendency in registration of sale deed to be executed by the first
party in favour of the second party in performance of this
agreement.”
The first agreement also contains the following condition :-

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

5

“That the first party admits that after the execution of this
Agreement to Sell and handing over the possession of the said
land to the second party, it has left with no absolute right, title
and/or interest in the said land except as co-owners and the
second party has become co-owner of the said land but none of
the parties to this agreement can transfer its/her share to the
third party without mutual concern and plan.”

8.

On the same date i.e 9.9.1993 another agreement was entered into in New

Delhi in respect of the said property. This agreement notices the execution of the
first agreement and states that the Petitioner had acquired 50% ownership right in
the said Bungalow plot. Clause 16 (of the second agreement) reads as follows:

“all disputes and differences between the parties hereto regarding
interpretation, meaning or effect or a part of this agreement all
with regard to performance or non-performance of any part of this
agreement or with respect to claim or demand or of any party
against the other in terms of this agreement either contingent or
currently operative shall be referred to the sole arbitrator to be
decided mutually and failing this, the sole arbitrator shall be a
person provided by the Court having territorial jurisdiction. ... for
the removal of doubts, it is expressly agreed, declared and
recorded by and between the parties hereto that the arbitrator
shall be entitled to decide the matters whether of law or
otherwise........”
9.

The Respondent has filed copies and translations of the judgment of the

Additional District Judge, Nainital in a Civil Suit filed by it namely, the Civil Suit

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

6

No.75/1998. It had claimed injunction to restrain from entering possession of the
property in the suit. The Respondent had alleged that it was exclusive owner of
the property and that the Petitioner unauthorisedly and forcibly took over
possession of one cottage and that the two agreements executed on 9.9.1993 were
not binding. The Additional District Judge after a trial by his judgment and order
dated 17.7.2003 dismissed the suit after rendering findings against the
Respondent. During the pendency of those proceedings, the Petitioner filed an
application under Section 34 of the Act for stay of proceedings, alleging existence
of arbitration agreement between the parties. That application was rejected.

10.

The parties to these proceedings have filed affidavits of evidence that

reflect the contents of their pleadings.

11.

Mr. Anil Kher, learned senior counsel for the Petitioner submitted that on

a consideration of the second agreement the only conclusion the Court can draw is
that the parties agreed to resolve the differences through arbitration. With the
execution of the first agreement, the Petitioner became co-owner of the property
to the extent of 50% and also entered into joint possession with the Respondent.
She had also paid substantial consideration and the balance amount of Rs.3 lakhs
CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

7

was deposited in Court. The respondents failed to obtain clearance including
from Income Tax authorities, sanction of plans for construction from the
Municipal Authorities and that the date fixed for balance payments was mutually
extended; this was apparent from the Petitioner's letter dated 20.12.1993. Learned
counsel relied upon other documents such as letter dated 27.4.1994 by the
Petitioner stating her willingness to join the project and make payments for the
construction of the flats. Yet the Respondent failed to take necessary steps for
execution of the sale deed in reference to the property and also further failed to
act reasonably. The development agreement of 9.9.1993 shows that the
Respondent acknowledged the Petitioner having acquired 50% ownership rights
in the property by virtue of the first agreement.

Therefore, disputes as

contemplated under Clause 16 of the Development Agreement arose which had to
be referred to arbitration.

12.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court reported

as J.K. Jain Vs. Delhi Development Authority in 1995(6) SCC 571 to say that
reference to disputes in relation to two agreements for arbitration, is permissible
even though the arbitration clause is contained only one of them.

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

He also

8

submitted that the claim raised not only for specific performance of the contract
concerning immovable property but also for compensation for not respondent’s
part in not fulfilling its part of the bargain. Learned counsel submitted that the
objection as to jurisdiction of this Court are not well-founded; he adverted to the
decisions of the Supreme Court in Hakam Singh vs. Gammon India Ltd. 1971(1)
SCC 236, ABC Laminant Pvt. Ltd. A.P. Agencies 1989(2) SCC 163 and the
judgment of this Court in Karan Mohindru Vs. Vatika Plantations Pvt. Ltd.
2004(74) DRJ 570.

13.

Mr. A.N. Haksar, learned senior counsel for the Respondent submitted that

the disputes sought to be raised are not arbitrable. His objections as to the
maintainability of the present petition under Section 20 of the Act were projected
on two principal aspects. Firstly, that the second agreement for arbitration clause
was dependent on due performance to the mutual satisfaction of the parties of the
obligations by both of them under the first agreement. Having failed to pay the
amounts within the time stipulated, i.e. 31.12.1998, the Petitioner could not claim
any rights towards joint possession or co-ownership.

Therefore, the second

contract, which contains the arbitration clause never, became operational.

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

9

14.

Learned counsel contended that admittedly the total consideration paid

pursuant to the first agreement was Rs.6 lakhs. However, the balance amount was
not paid at all nor was any attempt made to pay within reasonable time. The
Petitioner paid that amount only after approaching this Court. Such conduct
could not prejudice the Respondent who had by then spend considerable amounts
of money and developed the property.

The claims sought to be raised for

reference to arbitration essentially are founded on the first agreement; that does
not contain any arbitration clause.

15.

The second argument made on behalf of the Respondent was that this

Court lacks territorial jurisdiction to entertain the present proceeding. Counsel
adverted to Section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure and submitted that the relief
claimed is for specific performance of the contract relating to immovable
property, in which event the Court under the Act, would be the concerned Court at
Nainital. It was further submitted that the first agreement, which is sought to be
enforced through arbitration proceeding, was entered into at NOIDA. In any
event for these reasons the Courts at Delhi do not possess jurisdiction but if at all,
the Court at Nainital would be the competent Court to decide the case, having
CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

10

jurisdiction over the subject matter.

16.

The analysis of the pleadings of the parties and the materials placed on

record by both of them in support of their contentions would show that two
agreements were entered into between them on 9.9.1993. In the first agreement,
the Respondent agreed to sell the property to the extent of 50% to the Petitioner
for a total consideration of Rs.9.5 lakhs. There is no dispute that Rs.6 lakhs was
paid by the Petitioner. The documents relied upon by the Petitioner as regards its
obligations include letters dated 20.12.1993 and 4.2.1993 which refer to mutual
discussions betweens the parties with a view to defer payment of the balance
consideration till an income tax clearance certificate was obtained by the
Respondent. The copy of a letter dated 27.7.1994 has also been relied upon in
this context. The Respondents on the other hand rely on their replies dated
4.12.1993,18.12.1993 and 30.1.1994 to say that they were insisting on payments
of the balance in the first agreement.

17.

The first question that arises for consideration by the Court is whether the

disputes are covered by an arbitration clause. Now the Respondent does not deny
the existence of the arbitration clause in respect of the second agreement. Its
CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

11

contention, however, is that this agreement never became operational as it was
dependent on the performance of the obligations by the Petitioner in terms of the
first contract, which it allegedly never did. The first agreement undeniably does
not contain an arbitration clause.

18.

The Petitioner has, in its amended petition the following disputes to be

sent for reference to arbitration:

a)

Whether the Petitioner is entitled to decree of specific
performance of the agreements signed between the petitioner and
the respondent on 9th September, 1993?

b) Whether the respondent has obtained the sanction and approval
from the local municipal authorities with respect to the layout
plans annexed to the agreement dated 9.9.1993?
c) Whether the respondent furnished to the petitioner any statements
of expenditure required to be incurred in development of the
aforesaid property?
d) Whether the respondent has a right to enter into any agreement or
agreements for the disposal of the cottages or any other
constructed or non-constructed area belonging to the other party?
e) Whether the Respondent has demolished/dismantled the existing
cottages retaining walls, boundary walls over the said plot of land,
and whether it has a right to do so?
f) Whether the Respondent reconstructed/restricted two of the
cottages and has been trying to sell the said cottages during the
summer season?

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

12

g) Whether the Petitioner is entitled to the partition of the property,
and if so, to what relief?
h) Whether as an alternative relief to para (a ) above, the Petitioner
is entitled to a sum of Rs.1 Crore from the Respondent towards the
cost and compensation of the portion which the Petitioner is
entitled to under the Agreement executed between the parties on
9th September, 1993.”

19.

The scope of jurisdiction of the Court under Section 20 is circumscribed.

It can ascertain whether the disputes are covered by an arbitration clause.
However, it cannot consider the merits of the disputes raised by either party. If
one keeps this jurisdictional constraint in perspective what can be examined by
the Court is only whether a valid arbitration clause or agreement subsists between
the parties.

20.

Both agreements were entered into by the parties on the same day they

relate to the same property and are in fact part of the same transaction. Although
consideration of some of the conditions of the first agreement would suggest that
their due performance, was the basis for operationalization of the second
agreement, the disputes raised in that regard by the Respondent cannot really be
examined by the Court. Taken as a whole, the first agreement meant to convey
the intention of the parties to confer equal rights of the property. Both parties
CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

13

agreed to share such rights and develop the property. The second agreement, on
the other hand, deals only with the issue of development by the Respondent, of
the property and the other modalities connected with it. It is quite apparent that
the Petitioner as well as the Respondent entered into these two agreements as part
of one transaction. The second agreement indeed expressly adverts to the first
agreement.

21.

The view taken by the Courts in India in this regard, while discerning

whether arbitration clauses appearing in one contract or document and referred to
in another, are to be operative in the other have emphasized the need to ascertain
intention of the parties in all such causes. In the ruling relied upon by the
Petitioner i.e J.K. Jain’s case the Supreme Court had, after examining the
conditions of the contract, which contained a clause referring to the tender
conditions (which in turn contained an arbitration clause) held that the parties had
agreed to resolve their disputes through arbitration. The Court had relied upon
Commercial Arbitration by Mustill and Boyd (Second Edition) to the effect that
the parties need not expressly mention about the arbitration agreement in the
contract concerned itself and that the intention to refer the disputes to arbitration

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

14

can be discerned by a condition referring to another document containing such
clause. Earlier in the judgment reported as Abu Road Electricity & Industries Co.
Ltd. Vs. Industrial Gases Ltd. AIR 1977 Cal 482, it was held that when the
contract is one and the same between the same parties in respect of one and the
single transaction, one document containing an arbitration clause and the other not
expressly containing such condition, but adverting the previous agreement,
nevertheless the intention of the parties to refer their disputes to arbitration should
be inferred. Other High Courts have taken a similar view (Ref. T.N. Rao Vs.
Palabhadra AIR1954 Mad 71 and Hindustan Computers Ltd. Vs. Oriental
Business Consultants Pvt. Ltd.1989(1) ARB LR 176 [MP]).

22.

The above rule had also been considered previously by the Supreme Court

in the judgment reported as Alimenta S.A Vs. National Agricultural Cooperative
Marketing Federation of India 1987(1) SCC 615 and later in the The Owners and
Persons Interested in the Vessel M.V. “Baltic Confidence” Vs. State Trading
Corporation of India Ltd. 2001 (7) SCC 473. In both the cases the Court had to
decide whether an arbitration clause, contained in the Charter Party could be
deemed to have been incorporated in a bill of lading which generally referred to,
CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

15

the charter-party, but did not specifically mention about that stipulation. It was
held that in each case the Court has to examine the transaction to discern the
intention of the parties and that unless the result of dealing such incorporation by
reference leads to absurdity, the Court should conclude that disputes arising in
respect of both agreements or transactions should be resolved by the parties
through arbitration.

23.

In view of the above decision and having considered the various clauses in

the two contracts this Court is of the opinion that both contracts formed part of
one transaction and the absence of arbitration clause cannot lead to the inference
that parties consciously refrained from resolving their disputes arising from it,
through arbitration; the reference to the first agreement and the further intention to
carry out mutual obligations, in the latter agreement (which contains an arbitration
clause), underline the parties’ resolve to refer their disputes to the arbitration.

24.

The Respondents contentions on this score are, therefore, rejected. The

second question agitated by counsel for the parties was concerning the territorial
jurisdiction of the High Court. The Respondent had submitted that in view of

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

16

Section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure, this Court should refrain from
exercising jurisdiction as the disputes sought to be raised by the Petitioner as they
primarily concern reliefs pertaining to immovable property located at Nainital and
outside the jurisdiction of this Court. This was resisted by the Petitioner which
relied on Section 20 and also on a decision of the Court.

25.

The relevant provisions in this regard i.e Section 16 and Section 20 of the

Code of Civil Procedure read as follows :

“16.
Suits to be instituted where subject-matter situate, -- Subject
to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any law, suits—
( a ) for the recovery of immovable property with or without
rent or profits,
(b ) for the partition of immovable property,
( c ) for foreclosure, sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage of or
charge upon immovable property,
(d ) for the determination of any other right to or interest in
immovable property,
( e) for compensation for wrong to immovable property,
(f ) for the recovery of movable property actually under
distraint or attachment,
Shall be instituted in the Court within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the property is situate:
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for
wrong to, immovable property held by or on behalf of the defendant
may, where the relief sought can be entirely obtained through his
personal obedience, be instituted either in the Court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate, or in the Court
CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

17

within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and
voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for
gain.
20
Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause
of action arises.-Subject to the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be
instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction--( a ) the defendant, or each of the defendants where there are
more than one, at the time of the commencement of the suit, actually
and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for
gain; or
(b ) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the
time of the commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides,
or carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided that in
such case either the leave of the Court is given, or the defendants who
do not reside, or carry on business, or personally work for gain, as
aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or
(c ) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
[Explanation].—A corporation shall be deemed to carry on
business at its sole or principal office in [India] or, in respect of any
cause of action arising at any place where it has also a subordinate
office, at such place.….”

26.

The Petitioner places reliance on clause 16 and the second recital to say

that this Court has jurisdiction since the agreement was arrived at within its
territorial jurisdiction. The Supreme Court in the judgment reported as Harshad
Chiman Lal Modi Vs. DLF 2005 (7) SCC 791, dealt with almost a similar dispute
concerning the jurisdiction of the Court in relation to the claims over immovable
property. After examining the previous decisions including Hakam Singh Vs. M/s

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

18

Gammon (India) Ltd. 1971(1) SCC 236 and A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. Vs.
A.P. Agencies, Salem 1989 (2) SCC 163 (cited on behalf of the Petitioner in these
proceedings) it was held as follows :

“Section 16 thus recognizes a well-established principle that
actions against res or property should be brought in the forum where
such res is situate. A court within whose territorial jurisdiction the
property is not situate has no power to deal with and decide the rights
or interests in such property. In other words, a court has no
jurisdiction over a dispute in which it cannot give an effective
judgment. The proviso to Section 16, no doubt, states that though the
court cannot, in case of immovable property situate beyond
jurisdiction, grant a relief in rem still it can entertain a suit where
relief sought can be obtained through the personal obedience of the
defendant. The proviso is based on a well-known maxim “equity acts
in personam”, recognized by the Chancery Courts in England. The
Equity Courts had jurisdiction to entertain certain suits respecting
immovable properties situated abroad through personal obedience of
the defendant. The principle on which the maxim was based was that
the courts could grant relief in suits respecting immovable property
situate abroad by enforcing their judgments by process in personam
i.e. by arrest of the defendant or by attachment of his property. “

27.

The Court also held that a reading of Section 20 of the CPC did not leave

any room for doubt that it was a residuary clause which covered those cases
subject to the limitations of Sections 15 to 19. It underlined the expression
“subject to the limitation aforesaid”.

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

It was further held that parties can

19

undoubtedly agree to confer jurisdiction on one Court in the event of more than
one having jurisdiction to entertain a suit or dispute. Yet where the Court agreed
to by the parties does not have jurisdiction in law, such a clause cannot be
enforced. After discussing the impact of the other judgments the Supreme Court
which was called upon to decide an issues to jurisdiction concerning specific
performance of the contract and possession of immovable property, ruled that
Section 16 of the Code would apply. In view of this judgment, which is later in
point of time to the decision of this Court in Karan Mahendru & Anr. Vs. Vatika
Plantations (P) Ltd. 2004 (74) DRJ 570 it has to be held that this Court is not the
competent Court to exercise jurisdiction over the subject matter. The reliance
placed on the proviso to Section 16 in the opinion of this Court is not opposite
since the primary claim by the Petitioner is specific performance of the contract
relating to immovable property; the claim for compensation is only in the
alternative and not the primary subject matter of the dispute.

28.

In view of the above findings and conclusions, this court cannot

adjudicate the dispute and file the arbitration agreement, the reliefs claimed are

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

20

declined.

It is, however, open to the petitioner to approach the court of

competent jurisdiction for the relief claimed by her.
No costs.

Dated : 14 January, 2008
th

CS (OS) NO. 1154/1994

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

21

