9
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 909/2002
April 16, 2007
AJAY KUMAR SINGH
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Manzoor Ali Khan, Advocate
versus
THE STATE (NCT OF DELHI) & ANR
..... Respondents
Through Mr. R.M. Tiwari, Advocate for the CBI.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This revision petition is directed against an order of charge dated 30th July, 2002

whereby the petitioner was charged with having committed offences under Sections
348/330 read with Sections 120B/130/348 IPC and under Section 195 Cr.P.C.
2.

It would be useful to narrate the facts which have been stated by the trial court in

the impugned order. The relative part of that order is hereby extracted below:
“
The facts of this case which was earlier pending in the
Sessions Court at Dehradun and later on transferred to Delhi
pursuant to the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in writ
petition (Crl.) No. 317/94, are that accused Geeta Ahuja and her
father accused Khem Chand Ahuja (who had died during the
pendency of this case) were at the relevant time living in the
CRL.REV.P. 909/2002

1 of 5

neighbourhood of the complainant -Raj Pal Dhal in Rajnagar,
Ghaziabad. As per the prosecution case accused Geeta Ahuja and
complainant's son Atul Dhall fell in love with each other and they
wanted to get married but parents of Geeta were against their getting
married. On 12.8.94 Geeta Ahuja and Atul Dhall came to Delhi
without telling anyone and got married on 12.8.94. As per the
further prosecution case when father of Geeta Ahuja came to know
on 12.8.94 that his daughter had gone with Atul Dhall he called the
police. As per further prosecution case the complainant Raj pal
Dhall and his family members were tortured badly by the police
officials at Police Station kavi Nagar (Ghaziabad) to extract
information from them about the whereabouts of the girl Geeta Ahuja
and they were detained in the Police State through out the night. In
the morning of 13.8.94 accused Geeta and accused Atul Dhall came
to Police Station Kavi nagar and informed the police officials that
they had got married. However, the police instead of leaving
complainant Rajpal Dhall and his family members produced them
alongwith Atul Dhall in Court showing them to have been arrested in
connection with FIR No. 408/94 which in the mean time had been
registered at Police Station Kavi Nagar on 12.8.94 at 10.50 p.m. u/s.
363/366 IPC on the complaint of accused Khem Raj Ahuja that his
daughter Geeta had been abducted by the complainant Raj Kumar
Dhall, his son Atul Dhall and other family members. The
complainant and his other family members were then remanded to
judicial custody and they were released on bail on 19.8.94 and then
on 20.8.94 complainant Rajpal lodged a complaint with District
Magistrate Ghaziabad that he and his family members were brutally
tortured by the police officials on 12/13.8.94 and requested for
taking action against erring police officials. It appears that since no
action was taken on the complaint of the complainant Raj Pal by the
concerned authorities, his son Atul Dhal filed a writ petition before
the Hon'ble Supreme Court for getting the matter investigated by the
CBI.
In that writ petition Hon'ble Supreme Court ordered
investigation by the CBI and it was also ordered by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court that further investigation of the case pertaining to
FIR No. 408/94 would remain stayed. The CBI then registered this
case vide FIR No. RC-28(5)95-DAD and investigated the matter and
on the completion of the investigation it filed a chargesheet in the
concerned Court against seven police officials namely, Sub-Inspector
Satyapal Singh, Sub-Inspector Raja Vats, Ajay Kumar Singh (Sector
Officer), Constable Sukhpal Singh, Constable Satyavir Singh, HC
Ms. Duija yadav and Cost. Ms. Promila J. Mesih and the
complainant of the other case accused Khem Raj Ahuja, who was
CRL.REV.P. 909/2002

2 of 5

alleged to be a big liquor dealer in U.P. having influence in police
circle, and his daughter Geeta Ahuja alleging that these accused
persons
had
committed
offences
punishable
u/s.
342/218/323/330/352/193/195 r/w 120-B IPC and in due course the
case was committed to Sessions Court at Dehradun. Hon'ble
Supreme Court also ordered on 22.7.96 that till the decision of this
case no criminal proceedings will be initiated pursuant to abovereferred FIR No. 408/94. thereafter, complainant's son Atul Dhal
filed a transfer petition before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and vide
order dated 9.1.98 Hon'ble Supreme Court transferred the case to
Delhi”
3.

After investigation, the CBI, which was entrusted with the proceedings, filed a

charge sheet on 8th April, 1996. The Court thereafter heard counsel for the parties and
proceeded to frame charges.
4.

It is contended by counsel for the petitioner, who at the relevant time was the

Circle Officer, that no direct role could be attributed to him and that the petitioner had
visited the police barely for half an hour. In respect of the submissions, he relied upon his
statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. during the course of investigations with
the Magistrate. According to the statement, the stand of the petitioner was that he was
nowhere involved with the case and he happened to visit the Police Station upon being
informed of a crowd present at the site.
5.

Learned counsel urged that in the writ petition filed by the complainant Atul Dhall

before the Supreme Court, he was not made a party and that he subsequently made an
application for impleadment which was dismissed. Learned counsel also endeavoured to
submit that a charge of conspiracy could not be made out from the record.
6.

Learned counsel for the CBI on the other hand submitted that 63 witnesses were

CRL.REV.P. 909/2002

3 of 5

cited by the trial court. The proceedings are going on since, there is no interim order in
the revision petition. It is further submitted that witnesses deposed to the petitioner's
complicity in the case and active involvement of beating or torture of the complainant.
He pointed out that PW-2 Atul Dhal, PW-3 Deepak Malik, PW-7 Sanjay Dhal, PW-1
R.P. Dhal and PW-8 Smt. Annu Dhal all backed the version of the complainant/informant
and in these circumstances, no infirmity can be found with the order of the trial court.
Learned counsel further urged that the question as to whether the petitioner was in fact
present and duration of his visit as also other aspects which he may wish to urge in his
defence are matters to be seen by the trial court in the course of the trial and ought not to
be appreciated in revision.
7.

The impugned order is a fairly detailed one. The trial court discussed the role

played by accused as per the allegations made and the materials presented before it. What
is reported is that 5 of the witnesses cited and named in the charge-sheet, consistently
maintained that the petitioner A.K. Singh brutally bet Sanjay and Deepak, after which
they were beaten in the Police Station where Annu was kept in a separate Room. At the
stage of framing charges, the Court cannot weigh the evidence presented on a fine
balance. In fact, it is not required by law to furnish reasons. If the broad probabilities of
the case point to grave suspicion of accused of having committed the offence, the Court
can proceed to charge them. Of course, the degree of proof should be such that a grave
suspicion should be made out. This does not mean that the Court should, at the stage of
framing charge be satisfied that proof beyond reasonable doubt exists. It is also settled
law that if two views are possible, one favouring the accused and other implicating him,
CRL.REV.P. 909/2002

4 of 5

the former must be accepted.
8.

The trial court as noticed in the preceding paragraph, had discussed the entirety of

the materials. It had also noted that the informant had clearly mentioned about being
beaten by Sh. A.K. Singh. It also appears that such statements was part of the evidence of
other witnesses which have been cited during the trial.
9.

The question as to what is the effect of the evidence which would go to explain

the role of the accused petitioner, cannot be seen at this stage according to the judgment
of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa vs. Debendra Nath Padhi, 2005(1) SCC 568
10.

In view of the above and having considered the submissions, I see no infirmity

with the impugned order. The revision petition is accordingly dismissed.
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
APRIL 16, 2007
dkg

CRL.REV.P. 909/2002

5 of 5

