reported
10
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 668/2004
July 19, 2007
I.N.AJBANI

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. J.C. Mahindroo, Advocate
versus

NARAIN DASS P.GODWANI & ANR.
..... Respondents
Through Mr. Alok Singh, Advocate for
Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate for the MCD.
Mr. Pramod Ahuja, Advocate for the respondent.
Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate for the State.
CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.
2.

Heard counsel for the parties.
In this revision an order of the learned Additional Sessions Judge (hereafter

referred to as the “revisional court”) setting aside the order of the Magistrate, whereby the
application of the petitioner for discharge was rejected, has been impugned by the
informant/complainant.
3.

The undisputed facts are that on 1.8.1987 accused respondent No.2 and the

CRL.REV.P. 668/2004

1 of 6

petitioner entered into an agreement for letting out of the premises II-D/41B, Lajpat
Nagar-II, New Delhi. The second respondent/accused is tenant and the petitioner is the
landlord. The premises let out were a basement. One of the conditions, namely, clause
(3) inter alia postulated that the tenant would be entitled to a separate electricity
connection for which the landlord petitioner would furnish a no objection certificate. It is
not disputed that the tenant was enjoying electricity at the time when the premises were
let out in 1987. Apparently, the electricity connection was disconnected some time in
1996. The tenant respondent alleged that the landlord did this unilaterally; the latter,
however, disputed it. The fact remains that electricity connection was disconnected. The
tenant thereafter moved the Rent Controller under Section 45 of Delhi Rent Control Act
and his application was rejected.
4.

The landlord alleged (and it was the basis for the FIR) that the tenant had

procured certain documents purporting to be a trade licensee from the MCD; on the basis
of such fabricated material he managed to secure electricity connection to the basement
premises without his authority.

The complaint culminated in an FIR lodged on

24.9.1996. The FIR alleged commission of offences under Sections 420/467/468/471
IPC. The investigation proceeded in the case and thereafter a charge sheet was filed.
5.

After filing of the charge sheet, the accused tenant moved an application for

discharge under Section 245. The trial court, however, by its order considered the
materials including the documents and averments of the applicant before it and rejected
the request on 10th December, 2001. The trial court was of the opinion that there were
sufficient materials to proceed against the accused for the offences under Sections
CRL.REV.P. 668/2004

2 of 6

420/468 IPC.
6.

The matter was carried in revision to the learned Additional Sessions Judge. The

learned Additional Sessions Judge considered a letter dated 18.4.1996 written to the
Chief Minister by the complainant landlord's father. The court proceeded to analyse the
Rent Deed dated 9.4.1987 which had initially created the tenancy and reasoned apparently
that no objection was forthcoming at the outset.

Therefore, it concluded that offence of

cheating under Sections 415 could not be made out. As far as forgery was concerned, the
revisional court held as follows:
“Now, coming to the forgery of the documents. The rent deed disclosed
that the complainant who is now deceased vide para no. 9 at page No. 3 of
the Rent Deed has bound the tenant i.e. Revisionist that he shall be liable
to pay enhanced ground rent, regularization charges, penalties imposed
for other than Residential use of Basement floor. Therefore, the
complainant has consented to the Revisionist to use the Basement floor
other than residential purpose impliedly. The condition No.3 on page No.2
has made out that the Tenant shall arrange separate electric meters and
connection in his own name at his own costs for the said Basement Floor
rent out to him, and the Landlord shall sign all no-objection letters for
obtaining the separate connection from D.E.S.U. by the Tenant. This goes
to show that the Revisionist was entitled to get separate connection and the
complainant was to give no objection certificate in this regard. In the
proceedings before A.R.C. In the Written Statement the complainant reaffirmed that he has given “no objection certificate” and in case he find
difficulty, he could further given “no objection certificate” during the
proceedings. The complainant is now no more. The tenant lived for 9
years upto 1996. The complainant had no problem for 9 years and when
the 9 years were to expire he proceeded to file the complaint. Therefore
the action on the part of the complaint was afterthought. Mere vague
allegations are not sufficient to constitute offence of forgery. Therefore,
offence U/s 468 of IPC is also not made out.”
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the court had not adverted to trade

licence which was the basis for the electricity supply to the premises. It was contended

CRL.REV.P. 668/2004

3 of 6

that these two documents were in fact forged and were not part of the record of the
MCD.

He further submitted that the court was influenced by the original tenancy

agreement which had undisputedly assured no objection to the tenant but the question
was whether the restoration of supply for granting of fresh electric supply in 1996 was on
the basis of no objection actually given by the landlord. On the basis of the materials, the
court could not have appreciated any documents or materials furnished by the accused
tenant.
8.

In order to ascertain the correct position the MCD was also issued notice in this

case. According to the counsel on 26.3.1996 a letter had been written by the Corporation
to the Assistant Engineer, the then Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking (DESU) that the
licence No. 65311 under its ad hoc policy was in fact not even issued by it to the tenant.
The MCD disclaimed any responsibility in that regard and alleged that the document was
a forged one. The letter reads as follows:
“The Asstt. Engineer(PS)NZD
Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking
Nizamuddin West, New Delhi
Sir,
With reference to your letter No. XD/NZD/a/1339 dated 18.3.96
regarding confirmation of licence No. 65311, issued under ad hoc Policy to
Sh. Narain Dass P. Godhani S/o Shri P. Godhani for storage of plastic goods
at D-41/B, Lajpat Nagat-II (Basement) New Delhi. In this connection it is
informed that the records of Licencing Deptt. Has been got checked and it is
confirmed that this office has not issued any trade licence to Shri Narain
Dass P. Godhani. The allged licence, a photo copy of which enclosed by you
is forged one. The signatures and G-8 receipt Nos. recorded on the said
licence are all ficticious.
Administrative Officer
CRL.REV.P. 668/2004

4 of 6

Central Zone
M.C.D., Lajpat Nagar
New Delhi.”
9.

Mr. Ahuja, learned counsel for the respondent tenant submitted that the course

taken by the revisional court is unexceptionable. According to him, the court reasoned
correctly that the landlord had furnished his no-objection in the proceedings under
Section 45 before the Rent Controller. He sought to place reliance upon the averments in
that regard as well as the order of the learned Rent Controller which recorded that
according to the counsel no-objection has been given. He further submitted that at this
stage it is unfair to require respondent tenant to face trial. Learned counsel further
submitted that the flimsiness of the allegations are discernable from the fact that though
MCD alleged that the documents relied upon were false, it took no steps in that regard or
even lodged an FIR or complaint. In these circumstances, learned counsel urged that this
Court should decline to exercise its jurisdiction.
10.

The dispute here is whether the restoration of electric supply was premised upon a

genuine no-objection and whether the documents furnished by the respondent tenant were
indeed issued by the MCD. The MCD in its letters dated 1.3.1996 and 26.3.1996,
confirmed that the trade licence in question which admittedly led to the electric supply
being restored to the premises were not issued by it. It even went to the extent of saying
that the copy of the letter was a forged one. This is a matter of record which has not been
denied. About the other issue, namely, whether the no-objection was given by the
landlord, the position is not as clear. This is in view of the fact that in the replication
which is a part of the record of this case filed before the Additional Rent Controller, the
CRL.REV.P. 668/2004

5 of 6

tenant had stated that the landlord had never given any no-objection certificate to the
petitioner.
11.

Having considered the materials on record, I am of the opinion that the view taken

by the revisional court cannot be sustained. It appears that the revisional court was
persuaded to act as it did on the basis of its interpretation of the original Rend Deed. It
nowhere discussed whether any other materials which were on record such as the letter of
the MCD disclaiming to have ever issued the trade licence. It is settled law that the
points or questions which the defence may be permitted to take during the trial cannot be
considered by the criminal court at the charge framing stage (ref: State of Orissa vs.
Debendra Nath Padhi, 2005(1) SCC 568). Therefore, I am of the opinion that the
impugned order requires to be set aside. Ordered accordingly. The matter is remitted to
the trial court for proceeding further in accordance with law. Parties are directed to
appear before the trial court on 20th August, 2007.
The revision petition is disposed off, in the above terms.
Order Dasti.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
JULY
dkg

19, 2007

CRL.REV.P. 668/2004

6 of 6

