*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on March 5, 2008
Date of Decision : March 17, 2008.
IA Nos. 5464-65/06 in CS(OS) 810/2006

+

KALPANA SHARMA
..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Mr. V. Shekhar, Sr. Advocate with Mr.
Pradeep K. Dubey, Advocate.
versus
PERSONAL CARE SYSTEM
..... Defendant
Through Mr. A.K. Verma, and Mr. Inderdeep Singh,
Advocates.
CORAM: MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes.
Yes.
Yes.

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
I.A. Nos. 5464-65/2006

1.

The present order will dispose of two applications preferred by

the plaintiffs who have sued the defendants for infringement of their
trademark in "PYRAMID VASTU'. The

plaintiffs suit alleges copyright

infringement by the defendant.
2.

The first plaintiff claims to be inventor and long user of the

CS(OS) 810/2006

1 of 12

trademark PYRAMID VASTU
respect of

registered on 21.8.2003 in class 9, in

VASTU DEFECT RECTIFICATION INSTRUMENTS.

Reliance is placed upon a copy of the registration certificate issued by the
Trademarks Registry

on 5.10.2005.

Similarly the

word "PYRAMID

VASTU" was registered by the plaintiff as manufacturer in class 16,
concerning PAPER AND PAPER ARTICLES PRINTED MATTER,
NEWSPAPER AND PERIODICALS BOOKS AND BOOK BINDING
MATERIAL, PHOTOGRAPH, etc on 22.11.2005 w.e.f. 21.8.2003.

It is

also claimed that the second plaintiff is a proprietorship firm of the first
plaintiff and permissive user of the said mark; it is also registered in class
16 in regard to VASTU DEFECT RECTIFICATION ARTICLES AND
SHAPES MADE OF PLASTIC.

The plaintiffs advert to PYRAMID

VASTU being registered by Pandit R.K. Sharma as a literary work in the
copyright office of the Central Government and rely upon a certificate dated
4.2.2004. It is claimed that the said Pandit Sharma is author of the work
PYRAM ID VASTU published for the first time in 1995 in India and that
he has assigned the rights in respect of it to the first and second plaintiffs.
3.

The plaintiff alleges that

Pandit R.K. Sharma, the third

plaintiff is a renowned remedial astrologer, gemologist and Vastu expert,
practicing in consultancy for astrology and Vastu; he also the Editor-inCS(OS) 810/2006

2 of 12

Chief of the famous magazine "THE ETERNAL SOLUTIONS" allegedly
popular with vastu readership. It is claimed that the second plaintiff is
active since 1983-84 in the field of

publication of Vastu Defect

Rectification and Remedial Astrology/Gemology. The second plaintiff has
published a famous book entitled "The Science of Balance -- Pyramid
Vastu, Sri Yantra, Mantras and Gem Therapy" authored by Pandit R.K.
Sharma in 2002.
4.

The plaintiffs rely on books, periodicals, products and services

and allege that they have amassed vast goodwill and popularity amongst
members of general public in relation to the mark "PYRAMID VASTU"
for items set out in Class -9 and Class -16 of the Trademark Rules 2002.
They further allege that for the first time in January/February, 2006, the
third, fourth and fifth defendants were involved in publication of articles,
books and advertisements for falsifying the plaintiffs' trademark without
their consent. It is claimed that the said defendants had deliberately used
the word/trade mark "PYRAMID VASTU" for oblique reasons.
plaintiffs' rights in the said mark have been infringed.

The

The plaintiffs

allege that the defendants have copied their idea on account of the
increasing popularity of their books and periodicals.

The plaintiffs allege

that the defendants' action in marketing the book titled "Jiten Book of
CS(OS) 810/2006

3 of 12

Pyramid for Feng Shui and Vastu" prominently highlighting the word
"PYRAMID VASTU" is with a view to deceive and confuse members of
the public into believing that it is the plaintiffs' product.
5.

Mr. V. Shekhar, Senior Counsel relied upon the averments in

the plaint and submitted that the combination of the expression PYRAMID
& VASTU", was conceived by the plaintiffs long ago in 1983. They are
the registered owners of Trade Mark and also holders of its copyrights. He
relied upon several publications including the book/pamphlet entitled
"SCIENCE OF BALANCE" authored by the third plaintiff and other
materials such as the book "Science of balance" for which copyright is
claimed from 2002 by the third plaintiff; extracts of the magazine "The
ETERNAL SOLUTIONS" both of April and May, 2006

containing

excerpts of interviews with the plaintiff concerning the use of past Vastu
and Pyramid and also describing his book. Extracts from the magazine
"Life Plus" (April-June,2003), Inner Strength

(May-June,2002) and

Training & Management (August-2002) have been relied upon for a similar
purpose.
6.

Learned counsel contended that there is sufficient material and

averments on the record as well as the documents to disclose existence of a
strong prima facie case in the plaintiffs' favour.
CS(OS) 810/2006

He relied upon the
4 of 12

judgments of this Court reported as Glaxo SmithKline Pharmaceuticals
Ltd. & Anr. Vs. Naval Kishore Goyal & Ors. 2004 (29) PTC 421 (Del) to
say that the court should reject the defence that the words

VASTU and

PYRAMID are public juris since the applicants' use is of long standing and
what is more important is, the own the trademark. Counsel contended by
placing reliance on the said judgment that the defendants' use of the said
products, involves too much coincidence.

Counsel also contended that

this court should not be misled by use of "Feng Shui" or any other term in
an insignificant manner, by the defendants since the predominant intention
is to deceive members of the public and confuse them into believing that
the defendants' product belong to the plaintiffs.
7.

Learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of the Supreme

Court in N.R. Dongre & Ors. Vs. Whirlpool Corporation & Anr. 1996 (7)
JT SC 555 and submitted that in a case of infringement like the present one
where clear evidence is shown, injunction should be granted and that its
refusal would lead to irrepairable hardship to the plaintiff.
8.

Counsel for the defendant, on the other hand, relied upon

averments in the written statement and reply to the application.

He

submitted that the defendants are prior user of the words PYRAMID &
VASTU. It is claimed that the defendants started manufacturing Pyramids
CS(OS) 810/2006

5 of 12

in the name of “Mini Power Tools” for health and Vastu in 1973 for which
purpose the third defendant was issued a certificate of his having completed
a Specialized Managerial Training Course in Financial Management and
Cost Control in 1976. Counsel also relied upon the averments to say that
by 1981 three products designed by the defendants, namely, Mini Micro
Pyramids, Pyramid Vastu Top and Pyramid Chips had become popular.
The defendants also rely upon a report published and presented to World
Health Organization Conference in 1995 by the fourth defendant. Strong
reliance is placed upon a publication by the fifth defendant “GROW RICH
AND HEALTHY – PYRAMID YANTRA, A STEP BY STEP GUIDE” in
1997. Counsel for the defendant points out that the materials on record,
placed by the plaintiffs themselves show that the earliest in point of time
when the use of PYRAMID & VASTU was resorted in conjunction with
each other was in 1997 by the defendant was publication of a book
“PYRAMID FOR FENG SHUI AND VASTU” in October, 1997. This was
followed by second edition in November, 1997 and the book was published
again in August, 1998, December, 1999, June, 2000, January, 2000, 1

st

th

September, 2001, May, 2003 and was last published in its 9 Edition in
August, 2003.
9.

Learned counsel relied upon “PYRAMID YANTRA

CS(OS) 810/2006

6 of 12

For

Feng Shui and Vastu” which was also published in October, 1997. Further
he relied upon the materials placed on record by the plaintiff in the form of
extracts of the magazine “Life Positive” April, 2003, March, 2003 and
November, 2003 issues to say that the plaintiffs' as well as the defendants'
products and publications were mentioned in the same issues. He also
relied upon the January – March,2003 issue of “Life Positive” to say that
the defendants' publications and products were also mentioned in that issue
besides those of the plaintiff.
10 .

Learned counsel submitted that the plaintiff cannot secure any

temporary injunction in the present case as the materials on record clearly
point to the defendant being the bona fide prior user of the marks. It was
contended that even the copyright certificates placed on the record do not
claim any rights in respect of artistic work but only seek protection of the
literary work in the title.
11 .

For the purposes of the present discussion, it would be relevant

to extract Section 12, 28 and 34 of the Trademarks Act. They are as
follows:“12.Registration in the case of honest concurrent
use, etc.-- In the case of honest concurrent use or of
other special circumstances which in the opinion of
the Registrar, make it proper so to do, he may permit
CS(OS) 810/2006

7 of 12

the registration by more than one proprietor of the
trade marks which are identical or similar (whether
any such trade mark is already registered or not) in
respect of the same or similar goods or services,
subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as
the Registrar may think fit to impose.
28 Rights conferred by registered. -- (1) Subject to
the other provisions of this Act, the registration of a
trade mark shall, if valid, give to the registered
proprietor of the trade mark the exclusive right to the
use of the trade mark in relation to the goods or
services in respect of which the trade mark is
registered and to obtain relief in respect of
infringement of the trade mark in the manner
provided by this Act.
( 2 ) The exclusive right to the use of a trade
mark given under sub-section (1) shall be subject to
any conditions and limitations to which the
registration is subject.
( 3 ) Where two or more persons are
registered proprietors of trade marks, which are
identical with or nearly resemble each other, the
exclusive right to the use of any of those trade marks
shall not (except so far as their respective rights are
subject to any conditions or limitations entered on
the register) be deemed to have been acquired by any
one of those persons as against any other of those
persons merely by registration of the trade marks but
each of those persons has otherwise the same rights
CS(OS) 810/2006

8 of 12

as against other persons ( not being registered users
using by way of permitted use) as he would have if he
were the sole registered proprietor.

12 .

34 . Saving for vested rights.-- Nothing in this Act
shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user of
registered trade mark to interfere with or restrain the
use by any person of a trade mark identical with or
nearly resembling it in relation to goods or services
in relation to which that person or a predecessor in
title of his has continuously used that trade mark
from a date prior-( a ) to the use of the first-mentioned trade
mark in relation to those goods or services be the
proprietor or a predecessor in title of his; or
( b ) to the date of registration of the firstmentioned trade mark in respect of those goods or
services in the name of the proprietor of a
predecessor in title of his; whichever is the earlier,
and the Registrar shall not refuse (on such use being
proved), to register the second mentioned trade mark
by reason only of the registration of the first
mentioned trade mark.”
There cannot be any doubt that in the case of trademark

infringement,

if the plaintiff is able to prima facie establish that the

elements of deception, spelt out in Section 29 exist, the Court must proceed
to evaluate the necessity
infringement exists.
CS(OS) 810/2006

for grant of relief on the basis that

such

This rule is, however, subject to two important
9 of 12

exceptions. One is engrafted in Section 28 which that if both the plaintiff
and the defendant are owners of registered trademarks, an action of
infringement will not follow but their rights inter se for passing off action
can be maintained. The other exception is contained in Section 34 which
enacts that the proprietor or a registered user of registered trademark cannot
interfere or restrain the use of an identical trademark by any person with or
resembling it in relation to goods for which that person or predecessor in
title has continuously used the trademark from a date prior to the use of the
first mentioned trademark in relation to those goods by the proprietor or a
predecessor in title.
13 .

Section 34 was considered in a Division Bench Judgment of

this Court reported as

Shri Swaran Singh Trading as Appliances

Emporium Vs. M/s Usha Industries (India) New Delhi and another AIR
1986 DELHI 343 where it was held that if there is a user prior to the date of
registration, then the user can continue. The Court noticed that there are
two portions of the Section i.e. 33 (which is now Section 34) --one of which
refers to the date of user and the other to the date of registration. The court
also held that the provision seems to give the earlier date as the operative
date, i.e., if the user is earlier than the registration that would be the
guiding factor. In other words, the use claimed by the defendant should be
CS(OS) 810/2006

10 of 12

prior to that of the plaintiff. This provision in the opinion of this Court is
to be given primacy since Section 34 is cast in imperative terms; it overrides other provisions of the Act, including Section 29.
14 .

In the present case, the plaintiff has pleaded user of the word

“PYRAMID VASTU” since 1983. It is claimed in the plaint that a book
was published in 1995. The Registration of the trademark, however, took
place in 2005 w.e.f. 2003.

Likewise, copyright registration was first

effected in 2005. The first publication claimed in the copyright certificate
issued on 5.5.2004 is in 2003 in India, in relation to the title “The Science
of Balance”. An additional protection is claimed
which the user is set up from 1.4.1997.

from 8.2.2006 but for

This pertains to class-42 i.e.

PYRAMID VASTU CONSULTANCY. On the other hand, the defendant
is relying upon documents which show that the book "PYRAMID for Feng
Shui and Vastu” was first published in 1997.
"PYRAMID YANTRA for Feng Shui and Vastu"

Similarly, the book
was published in

October, 1997. The third book PYRAMID YANTRA was published in
October, 1997. Later editions of these books were published. Likewise, the
defendant has relied upon extracts from magazines “Life Positive” for
various months in 2003. In some of those publications the plaintiffs' book
as well as extracts of interviews of Pandit R.K. Sharma have been
CS(OS) 810/2006

11 of 12

published. Apart from claiming that the plaintiffs have been continuously
using the word “PYRAMID VASTU” in conjunction with each since 1983
and another allegation that a book was published in 1995, there is no
material in support of that claim. The plaintiffs have also not disputed the
assertions of the defendant; they have filed extracts of the books published
by the defendants which clearly reveal that the first editions were in
October, 1997.
15 .

In the above circumstances, this court is of the opinion that the

use of the words “VASTU PYRAMID” and marks in conjunction with
Feng Shui and Yantra respectively for the various publications of the
defendants, do not call for any ad interim order in the present proceedings
as the said defendants have prima facie established their prior user of such
expressions.

In the light of the above findings, no ad interim injunction

can be granted; the applications IA Nos. 5464-65/2006 are accordingly
dismissed.
CS(OS) 810/2006
List before the Court on 5.5.2008.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
MARCH
pkv

17 , 2008

CS(OS) 810/2006

12 of 12

