24
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision:- 19th March, 2008

+

ARB.P. 489/2006
SH. DEEPAK KHANNA
..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Harish Malhotra, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.Tanuj Khurana, Advocate.
versus
M/S. PANDIT BRO. & ORS.
..... Respondent
Through Mr.Arvind Nigam with Mr.Sanjeev
Mahajan, Advocate.
CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration

and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter called “the Act”) for referring
the counter-claims raised by the petitioner to the named Arbitrator
Ms. Justice Usha Mehra (Retd.), who was appointed by agreement of
the other parties to these proceedings and has entered upon
reference. The facts necessary for deciding this petition are briefly

ARB.P. 489/2006

1 of 10

stated below:2.

In 1992, apparently a partnership deed was executed and

it reconstituted an existing firm “M/s.Pandit Bros.”. The terms of
the partnership were again changed in 1998, when the firm was

reconstituted; a fresh deed was drawn up on 13.11.1998.

It was

executed by nine parties. The said parties were:Name of the Partner

Amount of Fixed Capital

1. Ms.Archana Haksar
2. Shri Vinay Kumar Mushran

60,000

3. Ms.Nandita Haksar

60,000

4. Ms.Anamika Haksar

60,000

5. Smt. Rup Haksar

40,000

6. Smt. Linnet Margaret Mushran

40,000

7. Shri Rajesh Khanna

60,000

8. Smt. Vijaya Lakshmi Rajamani

10,000

9. Smt. Santosh Khanna
3.

60,000

10,000

The deed (hereinafter referred to as 1998 deed) contained

an arbitration clause, which reads as follows:-

ARBITRATION
In the event of any dispute or
difference relating to the interpretation of
this Deed or any other affair of the
“16.

ARB.P. 489/2006

2 of 10

Partnership, if such dispute or difference
arises:(a)
Among the Partners
Parties Nos.1,2 and 5 to 9.
(b) Among the Partners
Parties Nos.3 and 4.

involving

the

involving

the

The said dispute or difference
shall in the contingency specified in sub
clause(a) be referred to the sole arbitration of
Smt.Archana Haksar or Sh. Vinay Kumar
Mushran and in the contingency specified in
sub clause (b) be referred to the sole
arbitration of any one of the following in the
given order or priority depending on their
availability:1. Shri Gopal Singh Advocate R/o.A-I, Niti
Bagh, New Delhi.
2. Shri B.K.Anand, Chartered Accountant:
R/o1, Jaipur Estate, Nizamuddin East,
New Delhi.”
4.

Apparently, disputes arose on 19.8.1999, when the firm

was again reconstituted; this time four partners, i.e. Ms.Santosh
Khanna, Mr.Rajesh

Khanna,

Ms.Nandita Haksar

and

Ms.Vijaya

Lakshmi Rajamani were excluded from the firm. This led to filing of a
suit by an excluded partner, i.e. Shri Rajesh Khanna before this Court.
Upon change in the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court, the suit was
transferred to the subordinate Court and was re-numbered as CS(OS)
No.237/2003. The plaintiff, Shri Rajesh Khanna had sought a decree
that he continued as a partner. Smt. Santosh Khanna was impleaded
as a defendant in the suit, along with other parties to the present
ARB.P. 489/2006

3 of 10

proceedings. Apparently, Shri Rajesh Khanna also filed a money suit
for recovery of amounts advanced to the firm.

However, that

proceeding is not material for the purpose of deciding the controversy
in these proceedings.
5.

Continuing the narrative, during the pendency of the suit,

i.e. 237/2003, the parties agreed that their disputes should be
referred to arbitration by Ms. Justice Usha Mehra. The consent terms
were, therefore, drawn up and signed by the plaintiff in the suit,
i.e. Shri Rajesh Khanna and M/s. Pandit Bros. represented

as

respondents No.2 to 4 in the present proceedings.
6.

The inter se disputes between the parties is pending

adjudication before the Arbitrator.

In the above background, the

petitioner, the legal representative and son of late Smt. Santosh
Khanna,

(who

had

died

in

2000),

sought

to

press

counter-claims which are outlined in paragraph 8 of the petition and
are as follows:-

“8....
(i) Whether late Smt. Santosh Khanna ever
resigned from the partnership w.e.f.
18.08.1999? If so, its effect?
(ii)Whether other partners had any rights to
remove Smt.Santosh Khanna from the
partnership without her consent? If so,
its effects? If not, its effects?
(iii)Whether late Smt. Santosh Khanna is
entitled to her share in profit and loss,
capital and any damages suffered by her
on account of loss of goodwill?
ARB.P. 489/2006

4 of 10

(iv) Whether late Smt. Santosh Khanna is
entitled to any interest? If so, on what
amount, at what rate and for which
period?”
7.

The Arbitrator, after considering these claims formed

opinion that they were not maintainable as they were not referred to
her.

The petitioner has, therefore, preferred the present proceedings

under Section 11(6) of the Act seeking reference to the said dispute.
8.

It is averred by the petitioner and urged by Mr.Harish

Malhotra, learned senior counsel that the Court should consider the
overall circumstances of the case.
deed,

Smt.

Santosh

Khanna

By virtue of a new partnership

was

unilaterally

excluded

from

partnership, i.e. at the reconstitution of the firm on 19.8.1999.
Counsel relied upon a letter dated 21.10.1999 written by Smt.Santosh
Khanna to say that she had been thrown out as a partner of
M/s.Pandit Bros. and had raised grievances about her illegal exclusion
from the firm and desired to seek recourse to legal proceedings.
9.

It is contended that Smt.Santosh Khanna was a defendant

in the suit filed by Shri Rajesh Khanna which was ultimately referred
to the Arbitrator. The present petitioner in his capacity as a legal heir
of Smt. Santosh Khanna indeed as the heir of a deceased partner in
the firm is party in arbitration proceedings; therefore deny to counter
claim would not be justified.
10.

The respondents aver in their reply and it was also urged

ARB.P. 489/2006

5 of 10

on their behalf by Mr.Arvind Nigam, learned counsel that during her
life time, Smt.Santosh Khanna never pressed claims or even initiated
any legal proceedings. It was submitted that when she was alive, she
did not file a suit; she died before filing the written statement.
Further the petitioner who was impleaded as her legal representative
in the civil suit did not prefer any counter claim when the suit was
pending before the Court.

Learned counsel submitted that if the

erstwhile partner had any issue about the legality of her exclusion or
sought for accounts she was within her rights, to invoke the
arbitration clause. After her demise, the petitioner could have issued
a notice under Section 21 of the Act as admittedly there was an
arbitration clause which binds the parties.
11.

It was also contended on behalf of the respondents that

the petitioner was not a signatory to the consent terms and is merely
a party to the proceedings which are referred to arbitration. In the
absence of any positive assertion by the petitioner, at any stage, prior
to the arbitral proceedings, about his claims, his attempt now to seek
a reference, is clearly barred, by time as also by conduct.
12.

Learned counsel urged that the Court while exercising its

jurisdiction under Section 11(6) of the Act, the Court, only after being
satisfied about existence of a valid arbitration clause, can appoint an
Arbitrator. But in these proceedings the claims sought to be referred

ARB.P. 489/2006

6 of 10

are not live, but stale. For that purpose, he relied upon the decision
of the larger Bench of the Supreme Court in M/s. S.B.P.& Co. vs.

M/s.Patel Engineering Ltd., AIR 2005 S.C. 450.
13.

From the above narrative, what can be discerned is that

Rajesh Khanna, plaintiff in suit No.223/2001, sought a decree that the
second

reconstitution

of

the

firm

dated

19.8.1999

is

invalid.

Undeniably, Smt. Santosh Khanna, the petitioner's mother was a party
to the firm. She was, therefore, impleaded as defendant in the suit.
The suit filed by Rajesh Khanna was eventually referred to arbitration.
The respondent's main objection is that during her life time,
Ms.Santosh Khanna (and after her demise by the petitioner), no
counter claim was filed within time. It was also submitted that since
no notice under Section 21 of the Act was ever given by the petitioner;
he did not assert his rights and claim any relief. The Court should,
therefore, refrain from referring the disputes.
14.

The above discussion would show that the essential issue

which the Court has to decide is whether the claim made in 2006, can
be referred to arbitration.

At all material times, Rajesh Khanna

asserted his right and sought for a declaration and consequent decree
on accounts on the ground of his continuing as partner.

The

petitioner in his capacity as legal representative and son of
Smt.Santosh Khanna, the other excluded partner, however, never

ARB.P. 489/2006

7 of 10

asserted such a right.

If, at any stage, a separate proceeding

asserting a similar right, or an application to transpose Smt. Santosh
Khanna as co-plaintiff had been made, there is no question of the
Court entertaining any doubt as to feasibility of referring that dispute
to arbitration. However, as things stand, no such step was ever taken
during the pendency of the suit.
15.

This is not a case where an arbitration clause did not exist.

The feasibility of seeking recourse to arbitration was always open to
Smt.Santosh Khanna or by the petitioner who could file Section 8 of
the Act before the Court asserting that such dispute existed or also
seeking reference of whatever were his grievances. Even that course
was not taken; likewise no notice was ever issued under Section 21 of
the Act. After the decision in M/s. S.B.P.& Co. (supra), the Court's
jurisdiction to refer or declining the application for referring the
dispute is not an idle formality. The Court has to satisfy itself about
existence of an arbitration agreement and also whether the dispute
sought to be referred are entertainable and are not stale. There is a
certain degree of judicial scrutiny, to exclude claims which cannot be
sustained, in law.
16.

As the discussion by the Supreme Court discloses, that the

Court consciously read in these elements as a pre-condition for orders
under Section 11(6) to avoid referring claims that are untenable. This

ARB.P. 489/2006

8 of 10

is evident from the conclusion at paragraph 46, in the judgment which
reads as follows:-

“46..........(iv) The Chief Justice or the
designated Judge will have the right to decide
the preliminary aspects as indicated in the
earlier part of this judgment. These will be,
his own jurisdiction, to entertain the request,
the existence of a valid arbitration agreement,
the existence or otherwise of a live claim, the
existence of the condition for the exercise of
his power and on the qualifications of the
arbitrator or arbitrators. The Chief Justice or
the Judge designated would be entitled to
seek the opinion of an institution in the matter
of nominating an arbitrator qualified in terms
of Section11(8) of the Act if the need arises
but the order appointing the arbitrator could
only be that of the Chief Justice or the Judge
designate.”
17.

From the above discussion, it is evident that since late

Smt. Santosh Khanna never asserted any counter-claim or grievance
or preferred any legal proceedings claiming her share in the
partnership or similar relief for declaration nor did the petitioner do
so after her demise or even invoke the arbitration clause under
Section 8 or by issuing notice under Section 21, within three years, it
would not be open for the petitioner to make a legally entertainable
claim. Therefore, the grievance sought to be pressed by way of

ARB.P. 489/2006

9 of 10

counter claim cannot be entertained, as it is not live; it is state and
time barred.
18.

The petition is accordingly dismissed. No costs.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
MARCH
'sn'

19, 2008

ARB.P. 489/2006

10 of 10

