1
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CS(OS) 585/1974
March 13, 2008

A N KHANNA

..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Abhinav Vashisht, Mr. Harshita Priyanka,
Advocates

versus
M M KHANNA

..... Defendant
Through Mr. Sandeep Prabhakar, Mr. Amit Kumar,
Advocates

CORAM: MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This is a suit claiming partition and possession of various properties and immovables.

During the pendency of the proceedings, the parties moved the Court under provisions of
Order 23 Rule 3, after having entered into a mutually acceptable compromise.

Their

statements were recorded on 30th April, 1976 and the Court issued a preliminary decree
CS(OS) 585/1974

1 of 5

declaring the rights of the plaintiff and the defendants. Each of them was entitled to 1/4 th share
in the properties. The order of that date reads as follows:
"
This is a suit for partition of the various properties mentioned in the
schedules attached to the plaint. The plaintiffs and the defendants are brothers.
Shri Mool Chand Khanna, the father of the plaintiffs and the defendants died on
13th of April, 1962 leaving behind his widow Smt. Lal Devi and the plaintiffs
and the defendants as his sons. Smt. Lal Devi, the mother of the parties died on
21st of January, 1964 leaving behind the parties as her sons and only heirs.
Certain properties were held by late Shri Mool Chand Khanna as karta of the
joint Hindu family. Certain properties were held by late Shri Mool Chand
Khanna as his separate properties. Certain properties were held by Smt. Lal
Devi as her personal properties. The present suit is with respect to all the
aforesaid properties.
During the pendency of the suit, the parties have entered into a
compromise for settlement of their disputes. An application under Order 23
Rule 3 and Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure has been filed in the
Court today. Statements of all the parties to the suit have been recorded in the
Court today. From the statements of the parties, I am satisfied that the parties
to the suit have entered into a lawful compromise for settlement of the disputes
between them.
In accordance with the terms contained in EX. P-1, I grant a
preliminary decree for partition of the properties in suit including those
disclosed in the written statement of the defendants. The share of the parties
are determined in the properties in suit as 1/4th each.
I also grant a preliminary decree for rendition of accounts and appoint
defendant No.2 to settle all the questions of accounts between the parties.
I appoint defendant No.2 as the receiver, local commissioner and
referee for collecting the estate and settling all questions of accounts and
suggest the mode to divide the movable and immovable properties in four equal
shares between the parties in suit.
Defendant No.2 has undertaken to perform his functions and duties as
are contained in Ex. P1. Defendant No.2 to submit his report by the end of
September, 1976.
Documents filed by the parties in this suit may be handed over to
defendant No.2. Copy of this order along with the copy of the application be
CS(OS) 585/1974

2 of 5

handed over the defendant No.2 through the registry for acting in accordance
with Ex. P1."

2.

The defendant No.2 who was constituted a Receiver/Local Commissioner and referee

empowered to collect the estate and he submitted six interim reports to the Court from time to
time.
3.

On 21.9.1988, this Court allowed I.A. 6473/1988 and permitted the Receiver to sell

Plot No. 11, Ring Road, Lajpat Nagar IV, New Delhi to M/s. Durga Housing and General
Finance Pvt. Ltd. and similarly Plot No. 12, Ring Road, Lajpat Nagar IV, New Delhi to Ms.
Durga Builders Pvt. Ltd. 5A/107, for a total consideration of Rs. 87,50,000/-. The previous
order dated 23.2.1988 had imposed the conditions for such sale and also recorded approval for
sale of another property at South Extension. The Receiver was also directed to invest the
entire amount of consideration in Government approved investment bonds.
On 1.9.1989, the Court directed as follows:
" The Receiver has prayed that the jewellery in 4 bags as referred in the 3rd
report dated 16th September, 1986, be ordered to be divided by drawing lots in
Court. From the said report it appears that the jewellery has been kept in 4
bags. Mr. Gupta, learned counsel for the plaintiff No.1 and Ms. Saxena
appearing for Mr. Dhanda, learned counsel for LRs of plaintiff No.2, also state
that the jewellery be divided by drawing lots as suggested by the Receiver.
Defendants have not been appearing in spite of issue of various notices to them.
Receiver has also filed an affidavit of service. The matter with regard to
division of share will also be considered on 3rd October, 1989, on which date
the lots will be drawn in Court for dividing the jewellery. Let an intimation be
sent by the Receiver to the defendants under registered A.D. cover stating that
CS(OS) 585/1974

3 of 5

the draw of lots for dividing the jewellery will take place in Court and when the
matters with regard to division of shares will also be decided, and if they so
want, they can appear. The Receiver will also annexe a copy of this order
alongwith his letter. Let a copy of the order be given to learned counsel for
Receiver. To come up on 3rd October, 2989."
4.

It is submitted by counsel for the parties that the division of properties of immovable

has been actually effected in terms of the report of the Receiver, suggested to the Court. It is,
however, submitted that the entire surviving issue which the Court would have to deal with is
the division of the shares and the accruals to the same through issue of bonus shares etc.
5.

The Receiver had by a third report filed in the Court on 18th September, 1986

described the share holdings of Late Sh. M.C. Khanna and Smt. Lal Devi Khanna whose estate
was sought to be divided in the present proceedings. According to the valuation made then the
total value was Rs. 4,73,474/-; each of the parties to the suit was held entitled to an equivalent
of 1/4th of the value i.e. Rs. 1,18,368.50. However, the Court has not passed any order on that
report till date.
6.

In view of the fact that this matter has been pending for drawing a final decree all this

while and further that the original parties to the suit are no-longer alive and taking into
consideration the fact that the interim reports have been acted upon, the immovable properties
and the jewellery items, the amounts invested in Government securities upon the sale of the
immovable properties have been duly apportioned in terms of various reports which were
accepted by the Court, this Court is now of the opinion that the third interim report of the
CS(OS) 585/1974

4 of 5

Receiver should be accepted.
7.

In view of the above, let a final decree be drawn in terms of preliminary decree and all

the reports furnished by the Receiver to this Court. This shall, of course, include the third
interim report filed on 18th September, 1986. The Registry is directed to draw a final decree
in the above terms. In so far as the shares are concerned, each original party to the suit is held
entitle to 1/4th share in each share of the late Sh. M.C. Khanna and Smt. Lal Devi Khanna and
the HUF, mentioned in the third interim report.
8.

The final decree shall be drawn in the above terms.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
MARCH
dkg

13, 2008

CS(OS) 585/1974

5 of 5

