*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004
Reserved on : 29th February, 2008
Date of decision :17th March, 2008

Shri Vidyanidhi Dalmia

.... Plaintiff
Through : Ms. Malavika Rajkotia with
Mr. Krishenudu, Mr. Ashish Verma,
& Ms. Jyoti Srivastav, Advocates

:: Versus ::
Smt. Nilanjana Dalmia,

..... Defendant
Through: Mr. V.P. Narula, Sr.
Advocate,
With Mr. Gautam Narula, Advocate

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment?

.Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

.Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

. Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

In this application, the defendant seeks rejection of the plaint, under

Order 7, Rule 11, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereafter “CPC”) on
various grounds, such as the plaint not disclosing a cause of action, the suit
being barred and so on.

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

1 of 24

2.

The plaintiff has, in the suit, seeks the following reliefs:
a) Pass a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
Defendant from entering into or attempting to enter into or
approach within 100 metres of the plaintiff’s residence at F-1,
Anand Niketan, New Delhi and from speaking to or approaching
the Plaintiff’s staff in any manner whatsoever;
b) Pass a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
Defendant from speaking with or addressing any written
communication to the personnel associated with the Plaintiff’s
companies including Directors on any issue not relating to the
respective companies;
c) Pass a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
Defendant from talking, threatening, addressing communications
to the personnel associated with the Plaintiff’s companies
including the Directors on any issues relating to day to day affairs
and operation of the respective companies;
d) Pass a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
Defendant from addressing any communication to the Plaintiff’s
family members, relatives, friends, acquaintances or associates
which are abusive to the Plaintiff and which cast aspersions on his
character and which intrude and invade or tend to intrude or
invade the Plaintiff’s privacy or attempting to approach them
and/or communicate with them for such purposes.
e) Pass a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
Defendant from addressing any communication to the Plaintiff’s
family members, relatives, friends, acquaintances or associates
which are abusive to the Plaintiff and which, in regard to the
Plaintiff, intrude, invade upon and impose on their privacy, cast
aspersions on their character and/or are derogatory to or
defamatory to their reputation, prestige, esteem and standing in
society or attempting to approach them and/or communicate with
them for such purposes.

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

2 of 24

f) Pass a decree of permanent injunction restraining the
Defendant from attempting to enter, attend and/or disrupt any
social/private gathering hosted by the Plaintiff in a public or
private place;
g) Restrain the Defendant, her servants, agents from in any
manner interfering with or transferring, alienating and creating
any third party interest or encumbering in any manner whatsoever
Plaintiff’s immovable and movable properties set out in
paragraph 12 (q) above and
h) Pass such further orders as this Hon’ble Court may deem fit
and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case. ”

3.

The plaint, rather prolix, avers about the marriage of the plaintiff

with the defendant, on 10-5-1978, according to Hindu rites; the birth of
their two children- a daughter on 27-4-1984, and a son, on 12-2-1990. The
plaintiff claims to have abided by his legal relationship with the defendant
as a husband. He however alleges that the defendant has indulged in acts of
cruelty which led to his leaving the matrimonial home, at 27 Akbar Road,
New Delhi, and taking separate residence at F-1, Anand Niketan, New
Delhi, on rent, after brief spells as a paying guest. He alleges to have stayed
within the marriage relationship despite acts of cruelty by the defendant.
4.

According to the plaint averments, the defendant has a tendency to

keep control of all relationships and things, which resulted in her
controlling his affairs and desiring that he acts according to her wishes.
I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

3 of 24

There is advertence to an incident of 15/16-5-1996 when she took exception
to his visiting her cousin and having dinner with her, at Mumbai. Similarly,
the defendant’s dislike and maltreatment of Ms. Leonara Coster, his elderly
childhood governess, has been alleged. The plaintiff also refers to some
incident which allegedly occurred in 1978 when his college friend called
upon him, which led to hysterical behavior by the defendant. Other acts of
cruelty, against Ms. Coster, in 1984 after a sojourn by the couple in the
USA, have been referred to. It is alleged that the defendant started to
mention about her problems with the plaintiff, to her daughter, when she
was about 3-4 years old. The care and attention given to Ms. Coster in
1990, when she suffered a heart attack, was allegedly objected to and
resented by the defendant, who insisted that she should return to Patna. The
plaintiff also avers about two further such incidents in 1996-2000 when Ms.
Leonara Coster suffered heart attacks. Another act of cruelty alleged is of
the year 2000 when the defendant objected to the plaintiff going to take
care of Ms. Audrey Ann’s husband; the said Ms. Ann is Ms. Coster’s neice.
On that occasion, the defendant allegedly hurled obscenities at the plaintiff.

5.

The plaintiff refers to e-mails by the defendant to her brother in

January and February, 1999 accusing the former of adulterous relationships,
I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

4 of 24

and her discomfort or problems with women; the defendant also allegedly
admitted that she had been foolish. The plaintiff alludes to his friend and
classmate, Ms. Fiona Roche’s visit in 1990; this was not liked by the
defendant, who suspected the plaintiff’s affair with the lady; this was
despite the plaintiff’s entreaties that she was a guest. The plaintiff makes
general allegations about abnormal and cruel behavior by the defendant
during 1990-1993; her giving more attention to the son after his birth and
neglecting the daughter, and so on. The couple visited Dubai for a vacation
in 1995, which was allegedly a disaster. Later that year, they visited the
defendant’s brother at New York; there too the defendant started
controlling and limiting the plaintiff’s interaction with her family, rebuking
him openly in front of her brother and escalating the tension between the
parties.
6.

The plaintiff alleges that during the period 1993-95, the plaintiff had

health problems, some serious, but the defendant never cared to look after
him or accompany him to a doctor. The defendant even refused to
accompany him when he underwent colonoscopy on 4th February, 1993;
likewise, she refused to be with him, when he underwent an eye check up in
1994. The defendant allegedly forbade the plaintiff from visiting her house,

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

5 of 24

when her mother died on April, 1996, which shocked and deeply hurt him.
All these led the plaintiff to remove himself from the bedroom and into the
study room, downstairs, in their house; this virtually ended their conjugal
relationship for all practical purposes. The plaintiff also alleges that the
defendant did not allow their children to spend time with him. She accused
him of having extra-marital relationships with various people, including
members of their family. The plaintiff also avers that the defendant never
lost an opportunity to humiliate him. She also allegedly told him that it
would be better that he moved out of the matrimonial home; in June 2001,
she allegedly accused him of having sexual problems. Later that year, the
defendant allegedly accused the plaintiff for not grieving her niece’s death.
7.

Apart from the above incidents, the plaintiff alleges that the

defendant maligned and defamed his reputation and self esteem by telling
many people, including family members, friends etc that he was a loser, a
bad businessman an adulterer and unfaithful wife beater. She however
wrote some e-mails in 1999 admitting some of her mistakes and assuring
him not to repeat them. The defendant is allegedly only a director in the
plaintiff’s companies; yet she tries to assert herself in their functioning. The
plaintiff, after leaving the matrimonial home, has been paying Rs.25,000/-

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

6 of 24

every month to the defendant, towards expenses; Rs. 21,000/- for herself,
Rs.3000/- for the college going daughter, and Rs. 1000/- for the son. The
plaintiff also avers that he has several assets, including shares and
investments in companies; besides, he is non-executive director in some
companies. The defendant has repeatedly, through several acts, sought to
elicit information about him; besides she has written emails to business
associates which are offensive. The suit also contains allegations about
letters written by the defendant to the plaintiff’s friends and acquaintances,
containing objectionable references, which allegedly distressed such friends
and their relatives. The plaintiff alleges that the defendant falsely accused
him of abandoning her, to his friends, and falsely alleging that he
threatened to withdraw financial support, which is contrary to facts. He also
alleges that the defendant accused him of moving from woman to woman
and squandering away reserves on purchase of cars, holidays and visits to
five star pubs and restaurants for women. The plaintiff alleges that the
defendant has threatened to take legal action to seek partition. He mentions
that the e-mails of the defendant assert that his business investments are
from family funds, which are untrue; he has listed out his personal assets in
para 12 (q), asserting that they are self acquired properties.

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

7 of 24

8.

The plaintiff avers that he did not issue instructions to his staff

members to prevent the defendant’s entry into business premises; she as his
wife can assert her legal relationship. The demands of that relationship are
being met by him to the best of his abilities; however she cannot assert the
same relationship as regards business interests and their management. She,
it is alleged, is misusing her relationship as wife to harass and intimidate
him, maligning his reputation and business interests, which cannot be
permitted.
9.

On the basis of the above averments, the plaintiff seeks permanent

injunction restraining the defendant from invading his privacy, defaming
him and/or maligning his reputation.
10.

The defendant applicant seeks rejection of the plaint; she alleges

that the cause of action paragraph of the plaint itself shows that admittedly
the parties are husband and wife. Therefore there cannot be any occasion
for the plaintiff to allege that the defendant has attempted to invade his
privacy. It is further submitted that under the Specific Relief Act, 1963, the
reliefs of the nature sought for in the suit cannot be granted as there is a
specific bar regarding maintainability of a suit of such nature. It is alleged
that the suit therefore is liable to be dismissed.

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

8 of 24

11.

It is averred that there is no cause of action is disclosed in the plaint

which are the basis for claiming the reliefs. It is submitted that the plaintiff
is guilty of not coming before the Court with clean hands as he has
suppressed and concealed material facts from the Court; he has also taken
recourse to total falsehood in the plaint for claiming ad-interim injunctive
reliefs. It is also submitted that the case, based upon falsehood is liable to
be nipped at the bud by exercising jurisdiction under order 7 Rule 11 CPC,
as injunctive reliefs under the Specific Relief Act are discretionary. The
reliefs cannot be claimed as a matter of right; therefore, the onus is on the
plaintiff to prove that he has approached the Court for equitable and
discretionary relief, by showing equity and also that he has no ulterior and
oblique motive in instituting the suit.
12.

It is submitted that an ex-facie reading of the plaint itself would

reveal that the filing of the suit, besides inflicting mental cruelty upon the
defendant, has the ulterior and oblique motive to abuse the process of the
court by seeking injunctive relief in order to intimidate and/or pressurize
the defendant to agree to the plaintiff’s larger design to prevent her from
availing the remedies available to her in law. The defendant alleges that the

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

9 of 24

court should refuse discretionary relief if the suit has been filed as an
intimidatory tactic on the face of the record.
13.

Mr. Y.P. Narula, learned senior counsel for the applicant defendant,

in addition to urging the pleas taken in the application for rejecting the
plaint, submitted that the suit is barred because it is, in effect seeking
judicial separation on the one hand, and the injunction sought, if granted,
would amount to preventing the defendant from availing statutory
remedies. These were impermissible. Counsel submitted that so far as the
first

aspect

was

(hereafter"HMA")

concerned,

the

Hindu

Marriage

Act,

1955

being a special enactment dealing with marriage and

divorce, bound the parties to matrimony. If one party to a marriage had
grievances he or she had to seek remedies under that statute and no other.
Inter se disputes, between parties to a matrimonial relationship, in all
respects, are governed by statute law; the parties are bound to assert their
rights in the relationship and also avail the remedies within the framework
of that statute. The jurisdiction of civil courts is barred, as is the necessary
implication of Section 4 of the said Act.
14.

Counsel submitted that the content of the reliefs sought by the

plaintiff was upon the same grounds he would have to establish for securing

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

10 of 24

a decree for judicial separation; indeed if the injunctions were to be granted,
the court would be mandating in effect a judicial separation, without
complying with the requirements of the HMA. The suit is therefore barred.
It was also submitted that a vital component of a subsisting marriage is
conjugal relationship, which cannot be disturbed by anyone, including the
court, through an injunction. The law provided that such conjugal
relationship could be limited through judicial separation, or extinguished,
through a decree of divorce. Absent these two situations, the right of
spouses to their conjugal relations, which extended to visiting each other,
could not be subject matter of an injunction suit. It was also submitted that
the decree sought for was impliedly barred, because it would be preventing
the defendant from asserting her statutory right to seek restitution of
conjugal rights.
15.

Ms. Malvika Rajkotia, learned counsel for the plaintiff, on the other

hand, submitted tha the suit disclosed a triable cause of action. The plaintiff
was not disputing the marital relationship, or seeking to disturb its integrity.
Indeed, he expressly averred that the marriage between the parties was
subsisting and he had no intention of changing it. Yet, the behavior of the
defendant was unwarranted, and the plaintiff was justified in asserting his

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

11 of 24

right to privacy within the marital relationship. Counsel submitted that
advertence to acts of cruelty by the defendant did not automatically lead to
the inference that such acts constituted alleged “cruelty” under the HMA;
the plaintiff had no intention of seeking any remedy under that statute.
16.

Ms. Rajkotia relied upon the judgment of the Bombay High Court,

reported as Abdur Rahim –vs- Padma AIR 1982 Bom 341 and the decision
of the Court of Appeal in Nanda –vs- Nanda 1967 (3) All ER. 401.
17.

In Abdur Rahim (supra), a Division Bench decision of the Bombay

High Court, dealt with the right to residence of a wife in the
matrimonial home. The marriage between the parties there was
subsisting, yet broken down beyond repairs. The husband filed a suit
for injunction, restraining the wife from entering the matrimonial
house. The Court held that an injunction subject to certain terms and
conditions could be granted. The parties, due to their strained
relationship could not be forced to live together. The court noted that
flat was big enough to allow them to live separately. The High Court set
apart separate portions for the parties, for living separately and
restrained the wife from entering the portion in occupation of the
husband. The husband was an eminent surgeon; the court held that he
could have peace of mind to enable him to discharge his duties,
efficiently. The husband was also directed to pay maintenance to the
wife. Nanda on the other hand, is a decision by the Court of Appeals,

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

12 of 24

where the parties had married each other in India. The wife had
succeeded in securing a decree for restitution of conjugal rights and
sought to enter the husband’s new home, where he was staying with
another woman. The husband’s claim for injunction on the ground of
the wife’s trespass was upheld. The court held that the order for
restitution could not be enforced.
18.

Before a discussion on the merits of the application, it would be

necessary to recapitulate some of the provisions of law, cited on behalf
of the parties. Section 4 of the HMA reads as follows:
“4. OVERRIDING EFFECT OF ACT.
Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,(a) any text rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom
or usage as part of that law in force immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with
respect to any matter for which provision is made in this Act;
(b) any other law in force immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect in so far
as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in
this Act.”
******

******
******

******
******

“9. RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS.
When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable
excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the
aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the district court,
for restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on being
satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition
and that there is no legal ground why the application should
not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights
accordingly.

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

13 of 24

Explanation.-Where a question arises whether there has
been reasonable excuse for withdrawal from the society, the
burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person
who has withdrawn from the society.”
****** ****** ******

******

******

“10. JUDICIAL SEPARATION.
(1) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or
after the commencement of this Act, may present a petition
praying for a decree for judicial separation on any of the
grounds specified in sub-section (1) of section 13, and in the
case of a wife also on any of the grounds specified in subsection (2) thereof, as grounds on which a petition for divorce
might have been presented.
(2) Where a decree for judicial separation has been passed, it
shall no longer be obligatory for the petitioner to cohabit
with the respondent, but the court may, on the application by
petition of either party and on being satisfied of the truth of
the statements made in such petition, rescind the decree if it
considers it just and reasonable to do so.”

19.

The grounds for divorce – which are also grounds for seeking

judicial separation, include adultery; treatment of one spouse with
cruelty after marriage or that the offending spouse has has deserted
the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition. It would be
necessary therefore, to decide whether the acts of cruelty complained
of here are of the same magnitude and intensity required to be proved
by an aggrieved spouse, or whether the aggrieved spouse can seek
relief outside of the HMA. This is necessary, because only if this court
holds that such exclusive jurisdiction vests in courts under the HMA
can it be held that the present suit is barred.
I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

14 of 24

20.

Section 4 enacts, in a sense, the overriding nature of the Act. Its

provisions are to prevail, notwithstanding any other custom, usage, or
provision to the contrary. In the decision reported as Smt. Rohini
Kumari –vs- Narendra Singh AIR 1972 SC 459 it was held that though
the HMA’s preamble describes it as one to codify the marriage laws of
Hindus, and the in such cases, the object essentially is that on any
matter specifically dealt with, it should be sought for in the codified
enactment alone when any question arises relating to that matter.
Ordinarily the court is not at liberty to look to any other law. Yet, HMA
not only amends but also codifies the law of marriage and it makes
fundamental and material changes in the prior law. The court held that
Section 4 of the Act gives overriding effect to provisions of HMA.
Therefore, unless in any other enactment there is a provision which
abrogates or amends those of the HMA, or repeals it expressly or by
necessary implication, the provisions of the Act alone will be applicable
to matters dealt with or covered by the same. The court noticed that
Sections 9 and 10 of the Act provide for restitution of conjugal rights
and judicial separation. Section 10 deals with judicial separation and
once a decree for judicial separation has been granted a decree for
dissolution of marriage can be passed under Section 13(1-A) provided
there is no resumption of cohabitation between the parties to the
marriage for a period of two years or upwards after the passing of the
decree for judicial separation. Section 13 gives several grounds for
dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce and one of the grounds is
I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

15 of 24

the one contained in sub-section (1-A) of that section.
21.

Under Section 9 of the CPC, the civil courts have jurisdiction to

try and decide all civil causes, except those excluded. The courts in
India, have dealt with different nuances of this issue, over the last six
decades. Far back, in Secretary of State v. Mask & Co. (AIR 1940 PC 105)
the question was considered in connection with Sea Customs Act
(1878). It was held that:
"It is settled law that the exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil
courts is not to be readily inferred, but that such exclusion must
either be explicitly expressed or clearly implied.
The Constitution Bench in Dhulabhai v. State of M. P. (AIR 1969 SC 78)
said that:
"Where there is an express bar of the jurisdiction of the court, an
examination of the scheme of the particular Act to find the
adequacy or the sufficiency of the remedies provided may be
relevant but is not decisive to sustain the jurisdiction of the civil
court.
Where there is no express exclusion the examination of the
remedies and the scheme of the particular Act to find out the
intendment becomes necessary and the result of the inquiry may
be decisive. In the latter case it is necessary to see if the statute
creates a special right or a liability and provides for the
determination of the right or liability and further lays down that
all questions about the said right and liability shall be determined
by the tribunals so constituted and whether remedies normally
associated with actions on civil courts are prescribed by the said
statute or not."

Much later, in connection with the Industrial Disputes Act, in Premier
Automobiles Ltd. v. Kamlekar Shantaram Wadke (1976) 1 SCC 496 it

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

16 of 24

was pointed out by the Supreme Court that the civil court will have no
jurisdiction to try and adjudicate upon an industrial dispute, if it
concerns enforcement of right or liability created under that Act. This
line of reasoning was affirmed in Bata Shoe Co. Ltd. v. City of Jabalpur
Corpn (1977) 2 SCC 472 and Munshi Ram v. Municipal Committee,
Chheharta (1979) 3 SCC 83.
22.

In Raja Ram Kumar Bhargava v. Union of India (1988) 1 SCC 681

the Supreme Court held that:
"[W]herever a right, not pre-existing in common law,
is created by a statute and that statute itself
provided a machinery for the enforcement of the
right, both the right and the remedy having been
created uno flatu and a finality is intended to the
result of the statutory proceedings, then, even in the
jabsence of an exclusionary provision the civil court’s
jurisdiction is impliedly barred.."
All these were again reiterated in by a three judge bench of the
Supreme Court, in Rajasthan SRTC v. Krishna Kant ((1995) 5 SCC 75.
23.

What can be deduced from the above discussion is that where

special rights, not existing previously, are created by a statute, which
provides a machinery for their enforcement, then, even in the absence
of express exclusion, the civil court’s jurisdiction over those matters is
barred. Though the plaintiff here has framed the relief in such terms as
to be seemingly different from the remedies available under HMA, a
closer scrutiny of the plaint averments would show that in reality they
are all factual assertions of cruelty, or unacceptable behavior which

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

17 of 24

constitute grounds for seeking judicial separation or divorce. If granted
after a trial, they would be deemed binding- at least in personem, inter
parties. The plaintiff husband would then have no difficulty claiming
the relief of his choice under the HMA, as the defendant would be
bound by principles of res judicata as well as issue estoppel on the
factual aspects. Surely this circumlocutory manner of getting round the
provisions of the HMA, with its regime of special rights, special
obligations on spouses, and special responsibility on the courts
constituted under it, was never envisioned. Parliamentary intention,
while enacting HMA was to codify whatever were existing rights, and
create new ones, with the objective of enforcing them through a special
mechanism. The entire bundle of mutual rights and obligations relating
to marriage, treatment of marital discord and offences, and the
remedies, was to be dealt with under the Act. So viewed, there is no
basis for the assertion of the plaintiff that he has a special zone of
privacy, outside of the Act, which can form the basis of the reliefs
claimed here.
24.

Another aspect which cannot be lost sight of is the stark reality

that if the injunctive relief claimed here is granted, it would practically
amount to decreeing judicial separation of the parties, without the
observance of requisite standards mandated by law.
25.

The second aspect of the matter is the right of spouses to

conjugal relationship, within a subsisting marriage. For this reason,

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

18 of 24

Parliament has enacted Section 9, which enables a spouse to seek
restitution of conjugal rights. In Smt Saroj Rani –vs- Sudarshan Kumar
1984 (4) SCC 90 the Supreme Court spelt out this right as follows:
“In the Dictionary of English Law, 1959 Edn. at page 453, Earl
Jowitt defines 'conjugal rights' thus :
‘The right which husband and wife have to each other's
society and marital intercourse. The suit for restitution of
conjugal rights is a matrimonial suit, cognisable in the
Divorce Court, which is brought whenever either the husband
or the wife lives separate from the other without any
sufficient reason, in which case the court will decree
restitution of conjugal rights (Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950,
Section 15), but will not enforce it by attachment, substituting
however for attachment, if the wife be the petitioner, an order
for periodical payments by the husband to the wife (Section
22).’
Conjugal rights cannot be enforced by the act of either party,
and a husband cannot seize and detain his wife by force (R. V.
Jackson). ((1891) 1 QB 671 : 60 LJ QB 346 : 64 LT 679 : 39 WR
407 (CA)).
14. In India it may be borne in mind that conjugal
rights i.e. right of the husband or the wife to the society of
the other spouse is not merely creature of the statute.
Such a right is inherent in the very institution of
marriage itself. See in this connection Mulla's Hindu Law Fifteenth Edn., p. 567, para 443. There are sufficient
safeguards in Section 9 to prevent it from being a tyranny.
The importance of the concept of conjugal rights can be
viewed in the light of Law Commission - Seventy-first Report
on the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 - "Irretrievable Breakdown
of Marriage as a Ground of Divorce", Para 6.5 where it is
stated thus :
“Moreover, the essence of marriage is a sharing of common
life, a sharing of all the happiness that life has to offer and all
the misery that has to be faced in life, an experience of the joy
that comes from enjoying, in common, things of the matter
and of the spirit and from showering love an affection on
one's offspring. Living together is a symbol of such sharing in
all its aspects. Living apart is a symbol indicating the
negation of such sharing. It is indicative of a disruption of the
essence of marriage - "breakdown" - and if it continues for a
I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

19 of 24

fairly long period, it would indicate destruction of the essence
of marriage - "irretrievable breakdown".
15. Section 9 is only a codification of pre-existing law….”
(emphasis supplied)
26.

A somewhat similar reasoning was finds echo in the Australian

High Court’s decision in, in The Queen –vs- L 1991 (174) CLR 379. The
High Court held that the matrimonial relationship presupposes such
rights:
" Far from relegating a wife to the position of a sexual
chattel, the status of wife created by marriage confers on a
wife a right (to adopt the language of the Scottish decree) to
live with her husband, to have him listen and talk to her, to
be cherished, to be entertained at bed and board and treated
with respect. These are not rights which can be enforced by
decree but they are rights attached to the status of husband
and wife. To jurists in the ecclesiastical courts, the
attachment of these rights to the status of a wife
distinguished the institution of marriage from the state of
concubinage "which degrades [a woman] as the object of
loose desire and mere sensual gratification . Marriage is an
institution which casts upon a husband an obligation to
respect a wife's personal integrity and dignity; it does not
give the husband a power to violate her personal integrity
and destroy her dignity. It would be impossible to preserve,
much less to foster, the institution of marriage as an
exclusive union of man and wife for life if it were otherwise.”

Thus, conjugal relationship, and the right to reside with and be treated
with dignity by the spouse, form significant and meaningful content of
marriage. Injunction by a civil court, on establishment of what
constitute marital offences under the HMA, would rob one spouse of
these rights and what is more, effectively deny the right to move the

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

20 of 24

court under Section 9 of the HMA. By civil court’s decree, the statutory
remedy of restitution of conjugal rights would be extinguished. This
would be subversive of public interest. Therefore, the reliefs sought
cannot be granted by the civil court, and are barred.
27.

The last aspect is whether the plaintiff’s claim for injunction

against a spouse in a surviving matrimonial relationship has any basis
in law. Two decisions, one Indian and the other, of the English Court of
Appeals were cited on his behalf. As regards the decision in Abdur
Rahim (supra), strictly, the ratio of that decision is inapposite here,
since the parties there were not married under the Hindu Marriage Act.
More significantly, the parties agreed to live in the same premises, but
in different, though specifically earmarked portions. The judgment was
more or less consensual. Therefore, the right claimed here did not arise
for consideration. As regards Nanda, in view of the special nature of
rights created under the HMA, and the findings on that aspect, the
decision would not be apposite.
28.

Public policy considerations in India also appear to weigh

against the plaintiff’s claim for privacy against his wife. The Protection
of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (“the Domestic Violence
Act”) by Section 17 enacts the right of a woman, to reside in a shared
household. It creates a statutory right in favour of “every woman in a
domestic relationship”, an expression, given the wide meaning assigned
to “domestic relationship” by Section 2(f), including not only the wife

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

21 of 24

or a female blood relative, but also a female friend who has shared,
even for a short period, the same residence with the husband or male
respondent. The aggrieved spouse or woman can apply to be restored
the shared residence. Contrary to the rights asserted by the plaintiff,
this recent enactment has clothed only wives and women in domestic
relationships the right to remedies of the kind sought here; domestic
violence has, in this context, been defined expansively to comprehend
physical violence, verbal abuse, economic deprivation and so on.
29.

There is also another noticeable trend, of protecting a spouse,

notably the wife, in a relationship in conflict, pending litigation to
resolve the relationship. This is found in Silverstone v Silverstone
[1953] 1 WLR 513; it involved matrimonial proceedings in which the
wife filed a petition for judicial separation. The matrimonial home
belonged to the husband.

The wife applied for an injunction

preventing the husband from residing in the matrimonial home
pending the trial of the petition. The court held that the wife had a
right to remain in the matrimonial home pending the resolution of the
petition and that the court had the power to protect that right in order
to ensure that pressure was not put upon her to abandon her petition.
30.

Likewise, Price V Schultz [2008] SASC 34 (decided on 19th

February 2008) a recent decision of the South Australian Supreme
Court, was a case where the appellant was owner of the property, living
in a domestic relationship with the respondent. The relationship

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

22 of 24

soured and parties sought relief under the Domestic Partners Property
Act, 1996. The trial court had injuncted the appellant from entering
upon or residing at premises owned by him pending litigation. The
injunction was upheld during pendency of the litigation. The court held
that respondent had lived in the house for approximately 13 years, was
suffering from poor health had limited means to move elsewhere. On
the other hand, the appellant had substantial financial means. The
foundation of the court’s reasoning was to the power of the court to
grant an interlocutory injunction to restrain harassment designed to
deter a party from pursuing a legal remedy.
31.

Having regard to the above legal position in India, as well as

decisions from courts in other countries, there is no valid legal basis for
the claims for injunction sought by the plaintiff. He cannot therefore
assert an actionable cause in the civil court; whatever be his remedies
under the HMA. Taking all the plaint averments as a whole, the court is
satisfied that the suit is barred in law and therefore, the plaint deserves
to be rejected.
32.

This is a clear example of what one may term as “bogus” and

vexatious litigation which is so endemic to our legal system. The
plaintiff, possessed of considerable means, has been able to engage in
this litigation, and waste precious court time which could have been
better utilized. In the circumstances, this is a fit case where exemplary
costs should be awarded.

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

23 of 24

33.

The application, IA 7684/2004 is accordingly allowed. For the

reasons mentioned above, the plaintiff shall bear costs, quantified at
Rs. 50,000/- to be paid to the defendant within four weeks. The plaint
is therefore rejected. CS (OS) No1068/2004 is therefore disposed of in
such terms.
DATED: 17th March, 2008.

I.A. 7684/2004 and CS (OS) 1068/2004

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J

24 of 24

