29
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 112/2006
MAST. DHARAMBIR SINGH
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Rabindra Singh with Mr. Harinder Chowdhary
versus
THE STATE, NCT OF DELHI
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for State

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This revision is directed against an order of the Additional Sessions Judge

by which he confirmed the order of the Juvenile Justice Board, declining the bail.
The petitioner along with co-accused was charged with committing offences
under Sections 363/377/302/201/120B/34 IPC.

The incident in this case

occurred on 07.10.05 and FIR was lodged a day thereafter.
2.

The relevant part of the order of the Juvenile Justice Board, made after

CRL-REV-112/06

1 OF 6

consideration of the SIR (Social Investigation Report) at that time reads as
follows:

3.

“ As per the SIR of the juvenile Dharamveer, bad company,
influence of mis-guided accomplice and lure for money are the
suggested cause of the problem. Neighbours have given negative
report about the juvenile, as well as, family.
Juvenile is
manipulative and extrovert.
As per the SIR of the juvenile of the juvenile Sunil, lack of
proper reasoning, lack of maturity are the suggested cause of the
problem.
I have carefully considered the arguments put forth by the
learned defence counsels for the juvenile and perused the record.
Role of the juvenile Dharamveer appears to be that of the
main offender. The fact of delay, if any, in recording the statement
of witness Pradeep shall be seen at the time of final stage. For the
present purposes statement of the witness Pradeep who saw both
the juvenile alongwith third adult accused Anil lastly in the
company of the deceased child cannot be ignored. Besides the
statement of this witnesses, there is recovery of dead body on the
pointing of both the juvenile along with third adult offender Anil.
The motive is clear in the disclosure statement of the juveniles. The
dead body was in decomposed condition when it was recovered and
so some of the forensic reports are still awaited.
In these facts and circumstances of the matter it would not be
in the interest of justice to admit the juveniles to bail. The bail
application of both the juveniles, namely, Dharamveer and Sunil
are rejected. Copy of the order be given dasti.
Put up on the date fixed i.e. 07.01.06.”
During the course of these proceedings, on 28.02.06 this Court had

enlarged the petitioner/juvenile on interim Bail to enable him to prepare and
appear in examinations. That order was continued on 03.03.06 and thereafter
continued till date. Further to the directions of this Court, two fresh Social
Investigation Reports were made on 22.03.06, and recently on 17.04.07. Both
were placed on the file of this Court.
4.

I have considered the Social Investigation Report. Both the reports have

suggested the cause of problem and analysed the case concerned. The previous
CRL-REV-112/06

2 OF 6

report had recommended that the petitioner needs supervision and counselling to
be more aware of societal values. It noticed that the family is deeply concerned
and that the problem should be understood in the proper family environmental
changes. The report had recommended on 22.03.06 that opportunity should be
given to the family and juvenile to regenerate good family values for positive
personality development.
5.

It has now transpired that the petitioner's family, including him have

shifted from the immediate vicinity of the neighourhood where the victim's
relatives reside, apparently on accounts of threats by them.

The latest SIR

records as follows:

6.

“parents stated that due to fear of life they had shifted their
residence from Begum Pur village to Chirag Delhi and as soon as
maintenance work will finish at Aram Bagh, they will shift to their
allotted quarter at Aram Bagh, New Delhi. Parents also promised
to take full responsibility of J/B and also stated that they will keep
a strict vigil on J/B. At present juvenile is pursuing his studies &
have his future career ahead and at present is appearing for class
Xth examination from NIOS.”
The fresh SIR also reiterated strong family concern, and the commitment

to counsel the petitioner juvenile.
7.

The learned counsel for the State in this present case, opposed the grant of

bail on the ground that the alleged act said to have been committed by the
juvenile along with the co-accused was one of great moral degradation and the act
in itself would demonstrate the perversity of the mind of the juvenile. In any
event, the nature of the offence is not one of the conditions on which bail can be
granted or refused to the juvenile.

Bail in respect of a juvenile has to be

considered purely under the parameters of Section 12 of the said Act which
CRL-REV-112/06

3 OF 6

requires bail to be granted mandatorily unless the Court feels that the release of
the juvenile is likely to bring him in the association of any known criminal or
expose him to moral, physical or psychological danger or that his release would
defeat the ends of justice.
8.

The definition of a delinquent juvenile means a juvenile who has been

found to have committed an offence. Section 12 of the Act deals with right of bail
to the juvenile. Sub-Section (1) thereof provides that, when any personal accused
of a bailable or non-bailable offence, and apparently juvenile, is arrested or
detained or appears or is brought before a Board, such person shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or
in any other law for the time being in force, be released on bail with or without
surety but he shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for
believing that the release is likely to bring him into association with any known
criminal or expose him to moral, physical or psychological danger or that his
release would defeat the ends of justice. Sub-section (3) provides that when such
person is not released on bail under sub-section (1) by the Board it shall, instead
of committing him to prison, make an order sending him to an observation home
or a place of safety for such period during the pendency of the inquiry regarding
him as may be specified in the order.
Section 12 makes it mandatory for a juvenile, even if he is “apparently a
juvenile” to be released on bail, then this Court and all the Courts dealing with
such a situation must give full meaning to the provisions of the said Section as
also the object of the Act. Bail has to be granted to a juvenile, notwithstanding
CRL-REV-112/06

4 OF 6

anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for
the time being in force. The idea behind Section 12 being that the juvenile must
be released on bail unless releasing him on bail would be detrimental to him or
would entirely defeat the ends of justice. (Refer Prakash -v- State of Rajasthan
2006 (112) Crl. LJ 1373; Vijendra Kumar Mali -v- State 2003 (109) Crl. LJ 4612;
Vicky Vikram Singh v- State 2003 (112) Crl. LJ 1892).
9.

The anguish of near and dear ones of the victim is understandable. Ye the

underlying social objective of reformation and rehabilitation of juveniles in
conflict, cannot be defeated. The initial assessment of the Board, on the basis of
the existing materials, was unfavourable to the juvenile.

During these

proceedings, he was enlarged on interim bail, to pursue his studies. The two
subsequent SIRs are favourable to him. There also appears to be strong family
concern and support for him. An overview of these circumstances do not show
the juvenile's propensity to indulge in anything objectionable, or that his
continued liberty would expose him to physical or psychological danger, or that
his release would lead to association with any known criminal.
10.

The revision petition No. 112/06 is accordingly allowed. The petitioner's

bail is hereby confirmed. In addition to the conditions imposed, he shall also
report to the Board once every fortnight in addition to the dates when he is
required for enquiry/trial.
Order Dasti.
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
MAY 15, 2007
CRL-REV-112/06

5 OF 6

as

CRL-REV-112/06

6 OF 6

