F-8
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CS(OS) 626A/1996

+

Reserved on : January 4, 2008
Decided on : January 10, 2008.
M/S. VINDHYA TELELINKS LTD.
..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Vishnu Mehra, Advocate
versus
MAHANAGAR TELEPHONE NIGAM LIMITED
Through

..... Defendant

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reports of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes.

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT

1.

This is a proceeding questioning an arbitration award,

under Section 30 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (hereafter “the Act”).
The case appeared in the list of Final matters, for regular hearing by
the court. When it was taken up for hearing, none appeared on behalf
of the objector, Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd (hereafter called
“MTNL”). The case was heard, and shown in the category of “part
heard” matters on the next date of hearing, i.e 4-1-2008. On that day
CS(OS) 626A/1996

1 of 13

too, there was no appearance on behalf of MTNL. Hearing of the suit
was, therefore, completed; the matter was reserved for orders.
2

The claimant in arbitration, ie. Vindhya Telelinks Ltd

(hereafter referred to as “the claimant”) raised disputes and claimed
that the MTNL had unjustifiably withheld amounts payable to it, in
terms of an agreement. The reasons for withholding those sums of
money were that MTNL alleged that the claimant short supplied
quantities of cables. As the agreement contained an arbitration
clause, the claimant sought recourse to it; a sole arbitrator was
appointed by the MTNL. In the statement of claim, a sum of
Rs.6,20,000/- was sought towards damages; the claimant also sought
for award of interest.
3.

In the arbitration proceedings, parties led extensive

documentary evidence; they also relied on oral testimony of their
witnesses. The arbitrator held that the claimant was entitled to the
sum of Rs.13,80,000/- with interest @ 19% p.a.; worked out to
Rs.4,40,000/- from 7-7-1993 to 9-1-1996.
proceeding.

The claimant had filed a

Suit No.721-A/1996 for filing the award, and sought

future interest, during pendency of theose proceedings. The said suit
was disposed as infructuous as the award was lodged in Court.
4.

It is alleged by the MTNL that the award has to be set

CS(OS) 626A/1996

2 of 13

aside, as it is an unreasoned one. It is alleged that according to the
terms of the contract between the parties, MTNL had the right to
reject the goods within a specified period after their supply. Reliance
has been placed on clauses 15, 16 and 21 of the agreement. It is
alleged that the materials on record disclose that there was short
supply and the cables were received provisionally, without prejudice
to the right of the objector MTNL to reject them for not complying
with the agreed terms. The MTNL has placed reliance on two joint
inspection reports to contend that the claimant did not dispute
shortage in supply of cables. It is alleged, in the objections that
according to a circular governing MTNL, issued on 11-101984, drums
containing cables whose seals were undamaged were not required to
be opened; at the time of supply, they could be opened later. If any
defect or deficiency were found at that stage, the MTNL’s right to
object to the supplier was retained and preserved.
5.

MTNL relies upon the endorsements issued by it, while

receiving the goods, to say that the right to conduct a quality check at
a later stage, was reserved. The advertence to quality had to be
understood in the context; it included shortfall in quantities. It is
alleged that clause 15 provided for issuance of “taking over”
certificate

(of

the

consignment).

Ten

percent

of

the

balance

consideration of the goods were payable only after that document was
CS(OS) 626A/1996

3 of 13

issued; in this case, however, the claimant pressed the MTNL to issue
it, even without actual verification. As this was done, the MTNL could
not be made to suffer a disadvantage for short supply discovered
later. The issue of various documents even leading to full payment did
not absolve the claimant of its obligations to supply the goods
according to the terms of contract. They violated these. In overlooking
these aspects, and coming to contrary conclusions, the arbitrator misconducted himself, rendering the award liable to be set aside.
Reliance is placed on clause 16.1 of the contract to say that it contains
a warranty that the contractor (claimant) agreed to supply the goods
free from all defects; it should be responsible for any defects in
hardware or software which may develop later. This condition
discloses that the obligations of the contractor did not cease with
supply or the payment of all amounts.
6.

It is alleged that the findings by the arbitrator that actual

lengths of each drum were measured and certified by the Quality
Assurance unit is erroneous. The unit was not entitled to check the
quantities supplied. According to MTNL the claimant’s witness did not
dispute that inspection of the unwound cables was done by a unit, not
empowered to do so. Therefore, the MTNL could not be prejudiced if
upon actual inspection, at a later date, the quantities were found to be
short; they constituted actionable deficiency in quality, entitling it to
CS(OS) 626A/1996

4 of 13

recover the amounts from other amounts payable to the claimant. It is
alleged that the property is deemed to have passed to the consignee
only in terms of the contract; in this case, the title to the goods
therefore passed only after inspection. It is alleged that this aspect
was overlooked by the arbitrator; the award is therefore vitiated and
liable to be set aside. The award of interest too has been attacked; the
MTNL avers, in addition that the 10% amount could have been
retained by it to ensure performance. It is also alleged that the
arbitrator erred in not awarding the counter claim preferred by
MTNL, towards the excess payments illegally recovered by the
claimant, viz. Rs. 7,48,947/- (after adjusting the sum of Rs.13,80,000/from Rs.21,28,987/- claimed as payable by the claimant).
7.

The claimant has contested the objections of MTNL. It

alleges that the award cannot be challenged as a non-speaking one,
because it is based on evidence. The MTNL had nominated its
arbitrator, who is an expert and a high ranking retired official. It is
alleged that the findings of fact do not show any perversity or
misconduct of the magnitude which would empower a court to
interfere with the award. The claimant alleges that the MTNL
obtained delivery of the goods at all material times and issued “taking
over” certificates. In these circumstances it could not have disputed
the quantities after four to six months. The claimant has also averred
CS(OS) 626A/1996

5 of 13

that the award does not disclose any misconduct by the arbitrator
requiring it to be set aside. The claimant also alleges that the receipt
of goods was not subject to any further or future verification; its
version is that after release of 90% of payment, the MTNL issued Bill
Copy Payable Challan along with Goods Receipt Note (GRN) which
constituted in form and substance the “take over certificate” under
Clause 15. The 10% balance payment was premised on this event.
8.

The claimant contests that MTNL could have sought to

recover

amounts,

including

the

10%

balance,

after

releasing

payments. It is alleged that the MTNL did not intimate about any
shortage in quantities supplied; if indeed that were the position, the
balance payment would have been withheld.
9.

During the hearing, Mr. Vishnu Mehra, learned counsel for the

claimant relied on the award and the original records. These show
that the arbitrator was unimpressed with the assertion of MTNL that
the claimant had sought and was given excess unjustified payments.
The arbitrator noticed that the counter claims for these amounts were
made only after the reference was sought; at no point did the MTNL
ever make a claim or raise dispute in this regard from the claimant.
Counsel contended that there was no material to support the
objection that the TOC (taking over certificate) was issued without
reference to the exact quantities; the MTNL could not substantiate its
CS(OS) 626A/1996

6 of 13

plea that such documents were issued to the claimant, at its asking.
Counsel also urged that the internal circulars of MTNL could not have
been binding on the contractor; they could have been referred to only
if incorporated in the contract, or referred to in it. It was also urged
that once the cables were supplied, as they admittedly were, the
MTNL had the option of recording its objections or reservations at
that time; if these deficiencies were not made good, it could withhold
the balance amounts. However, at every stage, the goods were
accepted and the relevant certificates issued. In these circumstances,
after having taken custody of the contracted goods, disputes about
shortfall in the quantities could not have been raised. The reliance on
clause 16.1 it was contended, was in apposite as it referred only to
quality; during the evidence, the witness for MTNL admitted that
there was no condition dealing with quantities.
10.

The extent and scope of a court’s power interfere with an

arbitration award, under the Act is well settled. From a long line of
decisions, starting with Union of India –vs- A.L. Ralia Ram AIR 1963
SC 1685 down to the recent decision in Food Corporation of

India –vs- Chandu Construction 2007 (4) SCC 697, it has been
consistently held that misconduct does not merely point to moral
lapse or perversity in findings, but also to something unreasonable
which would fall outside the jurisdiction of the arbitrator. It has also
CS(OS) 626A/1996

7 of 13

been held that the standard to be applied is irrationality, caprice,
arbitrariness or acting beyond the terms of the agreement, while
arriving at a finding that the award is vitiated due to misconduct of
the arbitrator (See Bhagwati Oxygen Ltd. –vs- Hindustan Copper Ltd.
2005(6) SCC 462; Rajasthan State Mines and Minerals Ltd. v. Eastern

Engineering Enterprises and Another, (1999) 9 SCC 283). Likewise, it
has been held (U.P. State Electricity Board v. Searsole Chemcials Ltd.
(2001) 3 SCC 397), that where the arbitrator had applied his mind to
the pleadings, considered the evidence adduced before him and
passed an award, the Court cannot interfere by reappraising the
matter as if it were an appeal.
Another test indicated by the Supreme Court - Chandu

11.

Construction(supra) and Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v. M/s. Annapurna
Construction, (2003) 8 SCC 154,) was that where the arbitrator
travels beyond the contract he acts in excess of jurisdiction in which
case, the award passed by him becomes vulnerable and can be
questioned in an appropriate Court.
12.
order

The undisputed facts here are that the MTNL placed an
on

the

claimant

for

supply

of

Armoured

Jelly

Filled

Underground cables, on 20-12-1990. Clause 11.1 stipulated that 90%
of the payment had to be made after the bills were passed and duly
certified by the Assistant General Manager, Materials Management,
CS(OS) 626A/1996

8 of 13

and on production of agreed documents. Clause 15 prescribed for
what was known as the “taking over certificate” to be issued by
MTNL, after receipt of the cable at its stores. Clause 16.1 stipulated a
warranty that the goods were of the assured quality; Clause 16.2
obliged the contractor to replace any item found to be deficient in any
manner. The supplies were made to the stores of the MTNL on various
dates, between April and June, 1991. The MTNL received the goods;
later the taking over certificate was issued. The entire 100% payment
was also released. In October, 1991, letters were written to the
claimant by MTNL, alleging that the cables supplies were of lower
quantities. Joint inspection of representatives of the parties were
undertaken in November 1991 at the premises of the MTNL. At that
stage, it was recorded that the outer seals of the drums in which the
cables had been supplied, were broken. The MTNL alleged shortage
of 1283 meters of cables; the claimant denied any liability, alleging
that the agreed quantity had been supplied, and the alleged
deficiencies had occurred in the premises of MTNL. The latter sought
to recover the amounts in other contracts, by withholding payments.
Parties went to arbitration, on these allegations.
13.

This Court has carefully examined the award, as well as

the original record of arbitration, which is a part of the record of this
case. The award, so far as it directs payment to the claimant, is a
CS(OS) 626A/1996

9 of 13

non-speaking one.

As held by the Supreme Court in Raipur

Development Authority –vs- Chokhamal Contractors, AIR 1989 SC
721, it is not obligatory for an arbitrator to give reasons, unless the
arbitration clause spells out such a duty. In Engineers Syndicate v.

State of Bihar,(2007) 3 SCC 99, speaking about the ruling in Raipur
Development, the Supreme Court held as follows:
“This Court, in the above judgment has
categorically held that it was not open to
the High Court to speculate where no
reasons are given by the arbitrator, as to
what impelled the arbitrator to arrive at
his conclusion. The Court declined to
recognise the power of the Court to
attempt to probe the mental process by
which the arbitrator had reached his
conclusion where it was not disclosed by
the terms of his award. It is also further
observed in the said judgment that the
Court in dealing with an application to
set aside an award has not to consider
whether the view of the arbitrator on
the evidence is justified and that the
arbitrator’s adjudication is generally
considered binding between the parties,
for he is a tribunal selected by the
parties and the power of the Court to set
aside the award is restricted to cases set
out in Section 30.”
14.

In the above back ground, it would be necessary to see

whether the award is in any way unreasonable, or contrary to
provisions of law, as far as it allows the claim of the contractor. The
materials on record, which include the documents filed by the parties,
suggest that all payments had been made to the claimant, including
CS(OS) 626A/1996

10 of 13

the balance payments, after the issuance of the certificate under
clause 15. The MTNL, after these events, started contesting that the
agreed quantities had not been supplied and that there were
shortages. These events led to a reference to arbitration.
15.

A textual examination of the award and the materials, so

far as it relates to the grant of the claim, does not disclose any error
or perversity which measures the standard of legal misconduct.
16.

As far as the reasoning of the award, declining the

counter-claim of MTNL is concerned, it would be apparent that till
invocation of the arbitration clause, no such demand for payment was
made. The arbitrator examined the materials, and reasoned that after
having accepted the goods unreservedly, the MTNL could not, in
terms of the contract, have disputed the quantities.
17.

The exception taken to the award, so far as it is based on

the terms of the contract, an unfounded. Facially, clause 16.1 deals
with quantity. The examination of MTNL’s witness too brings home
the point that no reservation with regard to accepted quantities was
contemplated, (in favour the MTNL) in the document. Similarly the
objection that the taking over certificate was issued due to pressure of
the claimant, (which led to release of all payments) is not based on
contemporary documents, forming part of the record, or brought out

CS(OS) 626A/1996

11 of 13

during examination of witnesses. Therefore the argument about
payment being a result of coercion (and consequently the MTNL being
free to raise the issue of shortage and excess payment to the
claimant) is without basis.
18.

MTNL has adverted to joint inspection reports, which

were produced in arbitration, to say that there were admitted
shortages. This is sought to be made a ground to allege legal
misconduct, by the arbitrator. The court is of opinion that this plea to
is unmerited.

No single factor can be seen in isolation of other

relevant materials.

The claimants letters and pleadings deny such

shortages and show its disclaimer of liability, on the ground that the
goods were in the custody of MTNL for sometime, after the allegation
of shortage was made.
19.

On an application of the established tests to determine

what constitutes “misconduct” under Section 30 to the facts of this
case, as apparent from the award and record of arbitration
proceedings, this court funds no infirmity in the award, declining the
MTNL’s counter-claim.
20.

That leaves the court to determine the claim for interest.

The arbitrator awarded 19% interest, pendente lite and quantified it.
The court discerns no legal infirmity in this having regard to the law

CS(OS) 626A/1996

12 of 13

on the aspect, and the rate of interest prevalent at the time. Interest
@ 18% p.a. has been claimed till realization. In view of the
intervening events, when the interest rates have declined, there is no
justification for granting this part of the claim, under Section 17.
21.

In view of the above reasoning, Suit No. 626-A/1996 is

dismissed as being without merit. The award of arbitrator is made
rule of court, with direction that the MTNL is liable to pay interest @
10% p.a. pendent lite interest, for the duration of proceedings in this
Court, and future interest, till realization, to the claimant at the same
rate. This direction is necessitated to secure ends of justice because
the claimant had sought for post award interest, while asking for the
filing of award.
22.

A decree shall be drawn in the above terms.

Costs,

quantified at Rs.25,000/- are payable to the claimant.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
(JUDGE)
JANUARY

10, 2008

CS(OS) 626A/1996

13 of 13

