IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005
Reserved on 05.12. 2007
Date of decision : January 14th, 2008

1.

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005

DALIP KUMAR CHADHA

.... Petitioner
Through: Ms. Anubha Rastogi, Advocate

:: VERSUS ::
A.I.I.M.S Through its Director
Dr. P. Venugopal & Anr.

..... Respondents
Through : Mr.V.K. Rao, Advocate, for R-2
Mr. Mukul Gupta with Mr. Mr. Mithilesh Singh, Advocates

2.

W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE
… Petitioner
Through : Mr. Mukula Gupta with
Mr. Mithilesh Singh, Advocates
:: VERSUS ::
THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER FOR PERSONS
WITH DISABILITIES & ANR.

… Respondents
Through : Ranjan Sabharwal with
Ms. Seema Bhadavriya, Advocate for R-1
Ms. Anubha Rastogi, Advocate for R-2

CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT :
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

1

in the Digest?

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT:
1.

In Writ Petition (C) No.8925/2005 the Petitioner seeks direction to the

Respondent to restore possession of the Public Call Office (PCO) Telephone booth
located on the premises on AIIMS and sealed on January 5th 2005 by AIIMS.

2.

The Petitioner is physically handicapped with 60% impairment, and is duly

certified as a disabled person under the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full participation) Act, 1995 (hereinafter called the
“Disabilities Act”). The Respondent, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(hereafter referred to as “AIIMS”) is an autonomous statutory body created under the
All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act 1956. In the year 1981 the petitioner was
allotted a PCO Booth to be operated in the Out Patient Department (OPD) of the
Respondent Institute. The allotment was made under a Special Scheme introduced in
1980 by the Department of Post & Telegraph, Government of India for the benefit of
physically handicapped persons. The scheme was intended to provide disabled persons
with a regular source of income and the Department of P&T undertook to provide a

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

2

booth and a cash chest for such persons. On 1st June 1981 an agreement was made
between the President of India and the Petitioner to operate the PCO at the OPD of
AIIMS. The Petitioner operated the booth from June 1981 to January 2005 for a period
of 24 years. The petitioner avers that the PCO booth was inaugurated by the Director,
AIIMS; he also alleges that the maintenance and upkeep of the booth was done by the
AIIMS, whose patients benefited from the service.

3.

The Petitioner avers that in January 2005, the security personnel of AIIMS

threatened to dispossess him of the booth and on 5th January 2005, the Administrative
Officer of AIIMS dispossessed him and sealed the PCO, without giving notice or
granting opportunity of being heard. Failed attempts to persuade the concerned
authorities of the Respondent prompted the Petitioner to approach the Chief
Commissioner for Disabilities, New Delhi (hereafter the “Chief Commisioner”)
claiming that he be allowed to operate his booth, the only source of his livelihood. The
Chief Commissioner issued notice to AIIMS on 27th January 2005, asked them to
provide relevant documents relating to the allotment of the booth, the scheme and the
agreement. The Petitioner meanwhile approached many authorities, including the
Director of AIIMS, the concerned Member of Parliament, but AIIMS refused to hand
over possession. Meanwhile, repeated notices were issued by the Chief Commissioner

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

3

to the Respondent.

4.

On 21st February 2005, AIIMS sent a reply to the Chief Commissioner

admitting that the Petitioner had indeed produced before it details of the scheme, a
copy of the agreement and other relevant documents. However, AIIMS submitted that
the Petitioner did not have any valid allotment from it and proceedings under the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 (hereafter “the PP
Act”) for unauthorized occupation were initiated. On 14th March 2005, the Estate
Officer issued a notice to the Petitioner to show cause within two days why the booth
must not be demolished. On the next day the Petitioner submitted all relevant
documents, including details of the scheme, disability certificate, copy of the
agreement and further also pleaded that since the booth was the only source of income,
he be permitted to continue to operate it. The AIIMS submitted that the authorization
was illegal since there was no agreement between them and the Petitioner.

5.

On the 8th and 15th of April 2005 notices were issued by the Chief

Commissioner scheduling a hearing of the Petitioner and AIIMS on the 24 th of April.
The Petitioner avers that both parties were adequately heard after which the Chief
Commissioner passed an order directing AIIMS to allow the Petitioner to operate the

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

4

booth with immediate effect. In the order the Chief Commissioner after recording
details of the various documents filed by the Petitioner concluded that he had indeed
been allotted the booth and also recorded that it was unreasonable on the part of
AIIMSs to claim that the Petitioner was an unauthorized occupant after 24 years.
This order of the Chief Commissioner was not complied with, and on 5th May 2005 the
Petitioner once again approached the Chief Commissioner, who issued a notice to
AIIMS asking it to furnish reasons for the non observance of the earlier order. Since
the Petitioner was not handed back possession of the booth, he preferred the present
petition claiming that restoration of possession be restored and the proceedings before
the Estate Officer under the PP Act be quashed, besides damages for loss of income.

6.

In WP (C) No. 8337/2005, the Petitioner, AIIMS, challenges the order dated

25th April 2005 of the first Respondent (the Chief Commissioner), asking them to hand
over possession of the booth to the second Respondent as being void, without
jurisdiction and passed in violation of principles of natural justice.

7.

The AIIMS, avers that the second Respondent (the Petitioner in WP (C) No.

8926/05, hereafter called “the claimant Petitioner”) ran the booth without their
permission and that till date no money had been paid to them by him as license fee.

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

5

They also claim to have recently installed a state of the art diagnostic machine
adjoining the OPD block called the PET with a heavy cost of about 5 crores, which
has narrowed the passage to the OPD block. They submit that the booth operated by
the claimant Petitioner creates congestion in the OPD block given that there has been a
steady increase in the inflow of patients in the OPD. They submit that, as there was no
allotment in favour of the second Respondent by the AIIMS, the Estate Manager of the
AIIMS, took steps to initiate proceedings under the PP Act, since the properties of the
AIIMS are “public premises”. Further, that during the proceedings before the Estate
Officer the second respondent was unable to prove that he was given permission by
the Petitioner to run the PCO.

8.

The AIIMS further submits that the Chief Commissioner on the date of hearing

only gave a semblance of hearing and handed over a prepared order to it, asking it to
hand over possession to the claimant Petitioner. They allege that the Chief
Commissioner did not consider the fact that proceedings were pending under the PP
Act nor did he appreciate that no agreement existed between the parties. Further, the
order of the Chief Commissioner is without jurisdiction and over reaches quasi
judicial proceedings under the PP Act. They also submit that there is absolutely no
power or authority with the first Respondent, to pass any such directions under

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

6

Sections 58, 59 and 63 of the Disabilities Act. It is also submitted that under Section
23 the directions of the Central Government are binding on the authorities under the
Disabilities Act.

9.

Mr. Mukul Gupta, learned counsel for the AIIMS submits that there is nothing

on record to show that the claimant Petitioner was in lawful occupation of the
premises since 1981. Further, he contends that in the absence of a notified policy by
the appropriate government with regard to allotment of the booths to persons with
disabilities, the claimant Petitioner had no right to continue in possession of the
premises. He was a trespasser and was liable to be dealt with as such under provisions
of the PP Act. Counsel also submitted that the Chief Commissioner’s orders amount to
curtailing independent quasi-judicial powers of the Estate Officer under the PP Act,
which is uncalled for and unfounded in law.

10.

Mr. Rajan Sabharwal, learned counsel for the Chief Commissioner contended

that under section 58(c) read with section 59 (a) of the Disabilities Act, the Chief
Commissioner had the jurisdiction to hear the matter and was also duly empowered to
pass an order directing restoration of possession of the PCO to the claimant Petitioner.
He submitted that since the matter at hand involved the question of deprivation of the

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

7

rights of the disabled, the Chief Commissioner had the power to ensure that their
rights were not violated. Furthermore, he submitted that notices were sent on various
occasions to the AIIMS asking them to show cause and also adequate hearing was
given to them before passing the order, therefore, the order was valid in law. Ms.
Anubha Rastogi, learned counsel for the claimant respondent, adopted these
submission. She also stated that the Disabilities Act, being a special enactment and
later in point of time, prevailed over the Public Premises Act. Counsel lastly submitted
that the petitioner-claimant is not seeking a lease or interest in AIIMS property, he
merely wants the continuation of a beneficial scheme to earn his livelihood.

11.

The Disabilities Act, as is evident from the preambular paragraph, was enacted

a welfare measure to ensure that disabled persons are extended an adequate standard
of living and also to ensure that they are not discriminated against in terms of
educational, employment and other opportunities. The Act not only guarantees rights
for the disabled but also devises a system through which their problems can be
redressed. The Chief Commissioner is one such authority created. His functions and
powers are delineated by the Act; the relevant provisions are extracted below:
“58. Functions of the Chief Commissioner - The Chief
Commissioner shall -

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

8

1. coordinate the work of the Commissioners;
2. monitor the utilisation of funds disbursed by the Central
Government;
3. take steps to safeguard the rights and facilities made available to
persons with disabilities;
4. submit reports to the Central Government on the implementation
of the Act at such intervals as that Government may prescribe.
59. Chief Commissioner to look into complaints with respect to
deprivation of rights of persons with disabilities - Without
prejudice to the provisions of section 58 of the Chief
Commissioner may of his own motion or on the application of any
aggrieved person or otherwise look into complaints with respect to
matters relating to 1. deprivation of rights of persons with disabilities;
2. non-implementation of laws, rules, bye-laws, regulations,
executive orders, guidelines or instructions made or issued by the
appropriate Governments and the local authorities for the welfare
and protection of rights or persons with disabilities;
and take up the matter with the appropriate authorities.
Xxxxx
xxxxx

xxxxxxx

61.Powers of the Commissioner - The Commissioner within the
State shall1. coordinate with the departments of the State Government for the
programmes and schemes for the benefit of persons with
disabilities;
2. monitor the utilisation of funds disbursed by the State
Government;
3. take steps to safeguard the rights and facilities made available to
persons with disabilities;

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

9

4. submit reports to the State Government on the implementation of
the Act at such intervals as that Government may prescribe and
forward a copy thereof to the Chief Commissioner.

62. Commissioner to look into complaints with respect to matters
relating to deprivation of rights of persons with disabilities Without prejudice to the provisions of section 61 the
Commissioner may of his own motion or on the application of any
aggrieved persons or otherwise look into complaints with respect
to matters relating to a. deprivation of rights of persons with disabilities;
b. non-implementation of laws, rules, bye-laws, regulations,
executive orders, guidelines or instructions made or issued by the
appropriate Governments and the local authorities for the welfare
and protection of rights or persons with disabilities;
and take up the matter with the appropriate authorities.

63. Authorities and officers to have certain powers of civil court The Chief Commissioner and the Commissioners shall, for the
purpose of discharging their functions under this Act, have the
same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit, in respect of the
following matters, namely:a. summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;
b. requiring the discovery and production of any document;
c. requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court
or office;
d. receiving evidence on affidavits; and
e.issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or
documents.
(2) Every proceeding before the Chief Commissioner and

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

10

Commissioners shall be a judicial proceeding within the meaning
of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and the Chief
Commissioner, the Commissioner, the competent authority, shall
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.”

12.

It is a well settled rule of interpretation that while construing welfare

legislations, a beneficial rule of construction should be adopted. (State of Tamil Nadu
v. Sabanayagam, (1973) 1 SCC 813; Workmen v. Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co. Ltd,
(1973) 1 SCC 813)

The construction so placed must effectuate their objectives and

also effectuate the rights conferred by the legislation to the disadvantaged. If that is so,
rights of the disabled can be safeguarded only if the powers of the authorities created
under the Disabilities Act are to be given their widest possible construction. Sections
58(c) and 59 (a) give ample power to the Chief Commissioner to take necessary
action, in order to safeguard the rights and facilities made available to the disabled and
to look into complaints regarding deprivation of their rights. The position of law in
this regard has been summarized in Dilbagh Singh v. Delhi Transport Corporation
2006 (1) LLJ 480 thus:
“22..By virtue of Sections 59, that authority has fairly wide
powers to make, inter alia, suo motu enquiry into instances of
violations of provisions of the Act; including deprivation of
rights of persons with disabilities. He also has the power to
look into complaints, under Section 62. Rule 42 of the Rules

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

11

framed in 1996 under the Act prescribes the procedure to be
followed while investigating into complaints; the Chief
Commissioner can “decide” the matter ex-parte, and decide,
on merits, after hearing the parties (sub-rule 8). Powers of a
civil court, in regard to matters specifically listed, inhere with
the Chief Commissioner (Section 63(1)); proceedings before
him are deemed to be judicial proceedings under Sections
193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (Section 63(2)). It can
therefore, safely be concluded that the powers and duties of
the authority are akin to a quasi judicial tribunal, charged
with deciding issues entrusted to it.
23.
The Act does not, expressly provide that the orders/
decisions of the authority bind the establishment/ government
body concerned. However, the statutory provisions noted
above give sufficient indication that its functions are not
purely recommendatory; it decides the issue of entitlements of
individuals. In such a situation, it must necessarily be
inferred, in the absence of any provision to the contrary, that
full and effectual adjudicatory powers were granted by the
statute. To this end, the maxim “ubi aliquid conceditur,
conceditur et id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest” (Where
anything is conceded, there is conceded also anything without
which the thing itself cannot exist) can be invoked.

13.

This court will exercise its power of judicial review only if it finds that the

impugned order is illegal, irregular or irrational. It will have to be shown that order
suffered some infirmity either in terms of jurisdiction, procedural irregularity, the
consideration of irrelevant factors or the omission to consider relevant ones. From the
foregoing discussion it is amply clear that the Chief Commissioner was cloaked with
appropriate powers to take cognizance of the matter and pass suitable orders. A look at
W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

12

the impugned order would indicate that the Chief Commissioner had provided both
parties adequate notice, appreciated the relevant documents relating to the allotment of
the booth including the scheme under which it was allotted, heard both parties and
concluded that it was unreasonable on the part of the AIIMS after a period of 24 years,
to contend that the claimant Petitioner was an unauthorized occupant, especially so
when the PCO was his only source of livelihood.

14.

Pursuant to the notice of this Court, the Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited

(MTNL) was impleaded as a party respondent in WP(C) No. 8926/2005. In its return
by way of affidavit, the MTNL admitted that the claimant Petitioner was indeed
allotted the PCO under a scheme for the orthopaedically disabled persons, evolved by
it. It also states that the allotment, made in 1981 subsisted.

15.

The Disabilities Act is a lex specialis; and therefore, in cases where the rights

of the persons with disabilities are involved, it will take precedence over the
provisions of the PP Act. Section 43 of the Disabilities Act, enjoins upon all public
authorities the obligation to create opportunities for the full participation of the
persons with disabilities, by evolving policies though which they can be ensured a
decent standard of livelihood, including, though not limited to granting allotment of

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

13

public spaces and office or commercial premises. Viewed from this perspective, the
action of AIIMS, notwithstanding the order of the Chief Commissioner, is
indefensible. Having not disputed possession of the claimant petitioner for the past 25
years, and having being involved in the inauguration of the PCO booth, it would be
highly iniquitous for the AIIMS to now contend that the claimant does not have
documentary evidence to support his possession. Significantly, the claimant Petitioner
does not claim any right, title or interest in the property but only demands that the
status quo be maintained. To deny him of this opportunity to earn a decent livelihood
would not only be iniquitous, but would run contrary to the spirit of the Disabilities
Act and to many of the provisions enshrined in Part III and IV of the Constitution of
India. Undoubtedly the authorities of AIIMS are clothed with power to evict
unauthorized occupants under the PP Act. Yet, like all forms of power, these powers
too are to be used taking into account relevant considerations, and towards securing
public interest. Evicting a person with disability who had been in undisputed
occupation of premises to earn his livelihood, can hardly benefit the public weal. It
may even run counter to the enactment by which AIIMS itself was brought into
existence and owes its character as an institution of national importance.

16.

Therefore, this Court is of opinion that even if for some reason the order of the

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

14

Chief Commissioner is unsound, the facts of this case do not disclose grounds on
which that order should be set aside. During the pendency of these proceedings, the
premises were directed to be de-sealed. In view of the conclusions recorded in this
judgment, AIIMS is directed to hand over possession of the PCO, in operable
condition, within one week, to the claimant petitioner (i.e Shri Dalip Kumar). The
AIIMS shall, in case it becomes necessary to use the space occupied by him, for any
reason, arrange for an alternative space to house his kiosk within the Hospital
premises, in a manner which does not adversely affect the business interests of the said
claimant petitioner, after giving him reasonable notice.

17.

The writ petitions are disposed off in the above terms. No costs.

Dated : 14 January, 2008
th

W.P. (C) NO. 8926/2005 & W.P. (C) No. 8337/2005

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

15

