*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : March 10, 2008.
IA No. 5573/07 in CS(OS) 1467/2002

+

KARAMVIR SINGH

..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. R.P. Bansal, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. B.S. Saini, Mr. Prabhat Ranjan and Mr. Sheetesh
Khana, Advocatets for plaiantiff.

versus
D.D.A

C+
..... Defendant
Through Mr. R.K. Tewari, Advocate for D-2.
Mr. Amitabh Merwah, Advocate for GNCT, Delhi.
Mr. Baankey Bihari Sharma, Advocate for DJB.

CORAM: MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat

Yes.
Yes.
Yes.

(Open Court)

IA No. 5573/07 (under S. 53 of DDA for exemption) (OPEN COURT)

1.
Section 53

This order disposes of an application seeking exemption from
(B) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957

and also the

preliminary issue framed by order dated 26.4.2007.
2.

The short facts necessary for deciding this application are that

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 1 OF 9

the plaintiff had filed a writ petition (No. WP 2839/2001) seeking
directions against the defendant respondents, including the Delhi
Development Authority (DDA) and the Government of NCT regarding
possession of 340 biswa of land situated at Sherpur, Delhi. The court by
its order dated 14.8.2002 disposed of the Writ Petition in the following
terms:“ORDER
“Taking into consideration the nature of the
averments made in the writ petition as well as in the
counter affidavit filed by the respondent No.4, I am
on the considered view that disputed question of facts
are involved which can not be decided except by
adducing evidence.
I am thus of the view that
parties should be relegated to the civil suit for
determining the controversy raised in the petition.
Writ petition is dismissed with liberty to the
petitioner to approach the civil court. .
No. 4968/ CM 2001 and 1454 of 2002
Interim order dt. 7.5.2001 shall continue to
ensure for the benefit of the petitioner for a period of
two weeks in order to enable the petitioner to seek
remedy before Civil Court. Applications stand
disposed off. Dasti.
Sd/Sanjay Kishan Kaul, J.

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 2 OF 9

August 14, 2002”
3.

The plaintiff, therefore, filed the present suit on 13.9.2002.

The defendants i.e. the DDA, Delhi Jal Board and Govt of NCT of Delhi
entered appearance after summons and objected to the maintainability of
the proceedings.

The DDA in its written statement objected to

maintainability of the suit on the ground that mandatory notice under
Section 53 (B) of the DDA had not been issued by/or on behalf of the
plaintiff. It is averred that the suit, therefore, is not maintainable and
should be rejected.

This court had by its previous order formulated a

preliminary issue regarding the maintainability vis-a-vis with Section 53
(B).
4.
Section 53 (B) of the Delhi Development Authority Act reads
as follows:“53B. Notice to be given of suits.--(1) No suit
shall be instituted against the Authority, or any member
thereof, or any of its officers or other employees, or any
person acting under the directions of the Authority or
any member or any officer or other employee of the
Authority in respect of any act done or purporting to
have been done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or
regulation made thereunder until the expiration of two
months after notice in writing has been, in the case of
the Authority, left at its office, and in any other case,

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 3 OF 9

delivered to, or left at the office or place of abode of, the
person to be sued and unless such notice states
explicitly the cause of action, the nature of relief sought,
the amount of compensation claimed and the name and
place of residence of the intending plaintiff and unless
the plaint contains a statement that such notice has been
so left or delivered.
( 2 ) No suit such as is described in sub-section
( 1) shall, unless it is a suit for recovery of immovable
property or for a declaration of title thereto, be
instituted after the expiry of six months from the date on
which the cause of action arises.
( 3 ) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall
be deemed to apply to a suit in which the only relief
claimed is an injunction of which the object would be
defeated by the giving of the notice or the
postponement of the institution of the suit.]
5.

It is contended by Mr. B.B. Sharma, learned counsel for the

applicant/DDA that the mandatory nature of the provision precludes the
plaintiff from maintaining the suit except after compliance with the
provision. It was contended that at no stage did the plaintiff issue or cause
to be issued any notice under Section 53 (B). On the other hand, the
plaintiff after disposal of the writ petition on 14.8.2002 waited beyond the
period of two weeks granted by the court and filed the present suit on
13.9.2002.

Learned counsel relied upon the decisions of this court

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 4 OF 9

reported as Ram Dulari Vs. Delhi Development Authority & Others 59
(1995) DLT 262 in support of the contention that the terms of Section 53
(B) are mandatory and that since the plaintiff has not complied with the
said provision, the plaint has to be rejected and consequently the same is
not maintainable.
6.

Mr. R.P. Bansal, learned counsel for the plaintiff emphasized

that show-cause notice was issued in the writ petition, when it was
disposed of on 14.8.2002. According to the counsel, the object of issuing
notice under Section 53 (B) is to make the concerned statutory authority
aware about the nature of the dispute, so as to enable it to take appropriate
steps to resolve the issues or otherwise take measures to avoid the dispute.
If this objective were to be kept in mind the fact that notice was issued in
the writ petition, it was sufficient compliance with Section 53 (B).
7.

Learned counsel relied upon the decision of this Court in

Nehru Place Hotels Vs. DDA 1991 RLR 389 etc.

In that case the

plaintiff had filed a suit after previously approaching the Court in a writ
petition which was permitted to be withdrawn with liberty to file a civil
suit. The plaintiff had, like in the present case, not issued a notice under
Section 53 (B). The defendant had raised an identical issue as to the
maintainability of the suit on the ground that notice under Section 53 (B)
CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 5 OF 9

had not been issued. The Court after considering the various previous
rulings including the judgments of the Supreme Court in State Bank of
Patiala Vs. M/s Geeta Iron & Brass Works Ltd., AIR 1978 SC 1608,
Ghanshyam Dass Vs. Dominion of India AIR 1984 SC 1004 and other
judgments on the point, (such as N. Parmeshwara Vs. State AIR 1986
Madras 126 where the plaintiff had filed the suit after withdrawing a writ
petition which had sought reliefs but without issuing notice) the court held
that the suit could not be rejected. It was held by the Court in the Nehru
Place Hotels case as follows:“It is to be emphasized that the reliefs sought in
this suit were the same reliefs as were sought in the W.P.
And the said reliefs were strongly opposed by the
defendants in the W.P. And are being again strongly
opposed in this suit & the application. So, the defendants
were well aware about the cause of action and the facts
on the basis of which the plaintiff had sought the reliefs in
the W.P. And were also aware that permission has been
granted to the plaintiff to take appropriate legal
proceedings while the writ petition was dismissed as
withdrawn and thus, it cannot be said in the present case
that the defendants have been taken unaware and had not
been given opportunity by the plaintiff to consider the
case of the plaintiff in order to avert the legal
proceedings. No useful purpose would have been served
by the plaintiff serving a notice giving the same facts and
CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 6 OF 9

the cause of action to the defendants because the
defendants were not obviously going to concede the claim
of the plaintiff which was strongly opposed in the W.P.
By the defendants. So, in the present case, it must be held
that service of the notice in the W.P. amounted to strict
compliance with the provisions of S. 53-B of the Act.
Hence, I need not give any opinion with regard to the
alternate contention raised before me that the suit of the
plaintiff is covered by the exception in S. 53-B (1).”
8

This court has considered the contentions of the parties.

Undoubtedly, the plaintiff did not issue notice under Section 53 (B). As is
evident from a plain reading of the provision, the only exception carved
out is contained in Section 53 (B) (3) where the Court can relieve the
litigant from the necessity of issuing a notice if injunctive relief is sought.
The mandatory nature of this provision was emphasized by the Court in the
two judgments relied upon by the applicant/defendant i.e. Ram Dulari and
R.K. Aneja

.

The Court

in those decisions no doubt took into

consideration the other decisions of the Supreme Court on the issue of
Section 80 of the CPC.
9.

A careful reading of the aforesaid two judgments discloses

that the question as to what would be the fate of a case filed after the
plaintiff approaches the writ Court, but is permitted to withdraw the

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 7 OF 9

proceeding and granted liberty to file suit as a civil action, was never in
issue before the court. That issue was actually addressed in Nehru Place
Hotels, where the Court had to directly decide whether such a suit, after
withdrawal of the writ petition

(but without a previous notice under

Section 53-B) would be maintainable.

The Court gave a perceptive

interpretation to Section 53 (B) and held that indeed the suit would be
maintainable because objective of

issuing notice

is to enable the

authorities to examine the claim of the litigant and settle it if possible,
rather than to institute legal proceedings. The decisions in Ram Dulari
and R.K. Aneja, however, proceeded on a textual interpretation of Section
53 (b); moreover, the previous decision in Nehru Place Hotels appears to
have escaped the notice of the court in both those judgments.
10 .

Having considered the decisions in the above cases, this Court

is of the opinion that the decision in Nehru Place Hotels is most appropriate
to the present case and approximates the facts of this case. The reasons,
particularly contained in para 24 extracted above also commends to this
Court. It is not as if the DDA or the other defendants were unaware about
the plaintiff's grievance; they were parties to the writ petition which was
disposed of on 14.8.2002 permitting the present plaintiff to file a suit.
11 .

In this view of the matter, the court is of the opinion that the

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 8 OF 9

suit is maintainable. The Preliminary issue is answered accordingly.

IA

No. 5573/07 is, therefore, disposed of in the above terms.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J

MARCH
pkv

10, 2008

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 9 OF 9

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 10 OF 9

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 11 OF 9

CS (OS) 1467/2002

Page No. 12 OF 9

