*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998
Reserved on : 6th February, 2008.
Decided on : 15th February, 2008.

Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd.
versus
Saifuddin & another

..... Plaintiff
Through: Ms. Leena Tuteja, Advocate

.....Defendants
Defendant No. 1 ex-parte;
Through:Mr. Ajay Chaudhary, for Defendant No. 2

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1 . Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. The plaintiff, Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd (hereafter called “MTNL”)
sues the defendants for a decree in the sum of Rs. 17, 83,056/- with interest at 24%
p.a.
2. According to averments in the plaint, one Smt. Sudesh Vig was subscriber; she
had applied for a telephone connection. When the intimation of connection was
CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

1 of 17

issued on 27th October, 1994, she was no longer interested in the telephone and
wanted to surrender it to the MTNL. It is alleged that before she could surrender the
telephone, the second defendant, a phone inspector working for the MTNL at that
time, allegedly asked her to get the telephone connection transferred to some
interested person; he allegedly offered Rs. 1,000/- to her to do so. The said Smt. Vig
allegedly agreed, being a housewife and not familiar with procedures, accepted the
offer, and allegedly signed blank papers, transferring the telephone connection to
an intending purchaser. At the time, she did not suspect any foul play. The second
defendant, after allegedly getting the papers signed from Ms. Sudesh Vig, connived
with the first defendant and got the telephone connection installed at the premises
being 10756, Manakpura, Karol Bagh, New Delhi. This entailed misuse of the blank
papers signed by the said Ms. Vig. It is also alleged that though Ms. Vig had applied
only for the connection with Subscriber Trunk Dialing (STD), the defendants got the
connection converted and changed to STD, and International Subscriber Dialling
(ISD), for the said connection, i.e No. 3557108. It is also alleged that the telephone
connection was used for STD and ISD calls. This led to issuance of three bills by
MTNL i.e:
Date of Bill
16-10-1995
16-12-1995
29-1-1995
30-1-1996
CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

Amount
..
..
..
..

Rs. 6,02,389/Rs. 6,36,989/Rs. 1,06, 599/Rs. 3,51,128/2 of 17

3. The plaintiff alleges that a notice was issued to Ms. Sudesh Vig to pay the
amount of Rs. 17,77,105

on 26-2-1996, concerning the use of the telephone,

installed at Manakpura, Karol Bagh; purporting to be aggrieved, she filed a writ
petition, No. 998/1996 before this court, saying that the telephone was never
installed at her residence and that the second defendant had approached and paid
her Rs. 1000 to sign blank papers; according to her, the papers were needed to
transfer the telephone connection. After hearing parties, including the MTNL, this
court directed the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to investigate the entire
facts, by its order dated 14-3-1996. The CBI, after due investigation, recorded a
determination of fraud in respect of installation and use of the telephone at
Manakpura, Karol Bagh; a first information report (FIR ) was lodged on 15-5-1996
under provisions of the Indian Penal Code and the Prevention of Corruption Act. The
criminal case has not yet been decided; it is as yet pending.
4.

It is further alleged that after investigation and report by the CBI, the plaintiff

sent bills to the first defendant, which were, however, received back with the
remark “not available at the address”. It is also averred that the second defendant
filed a writ petition, No. 1591/1997 before this court, against the plaintiff, and Ms.
Sudesh Vig, being WP 1591/1997 seeking direction that the plaintiff should take
steps to recover amounts from Ms. Vig. That writ petition was dismissed on 21-4-

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

3 of 17

1997 in limini at the statement of the plaintiff’s counsel that a CBI inquiry had been
ordered into the matter. It is claimed that instead of making any payments, the
defendants defaulted; they are liable to pay the amounts.
5.

After issuance of summons, only the second defendant put in appearance and

filed his written statement; the first defendant, despite service of summons, did not
enter appearance and defend the suit. He was set down ex-parte by order dated 215-2003.
6.

The second defendant filed his written statement and contested the suit. The

suit is objected to on the ground of non-joinder of a necessary party, ie. Smt. Sudesh
Vig; it is also averred that there is no privity of contract between him and the
plaintiff. According to the second defendant, the suit cannot proceed in the absence
of the subscriber, i.e Sudesh Vig, who is liable, according to Rule 440 of the
Telephone Rules. The second defendant also denies the averments in the suit and
avers that the suit has not been properly instituted and filed by a duly authorized
person.
7.

In support of its case, the plaintiff has relied upon the evidence of four

witnesses; PW-1, PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4. The plaintiff has also relied upon
documents, being Exh.PW1/1 (copy of OB dated 27-10-1994); Exh.PW-1/2 (copy of
intimation regarding release of new telephone connection); Exh. PW-1/3 and Exh.
PW-1/4 ( letters dated 19-7-1995); duplicate bills Exh. PW-2/1 to Exh. PW-2/5. Exh.

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

4 of 17

PW-4/1, delegation of authorizing Chief Accounts Officer (Legal) has been
produced; Exh. PW-4/2, copy of order dated 14-3-1996 of this court in WP
998/1996 is also relied upon.
8.

PW-1 deposed that on issuance of OB, Ex PW-1/1 Sudesh Vig wanted to

surrender connection to the plaintiff; however, before she could surrender the
same, the second defendant approached her and offered to pay Rs. 1000/- to get the
connection transferred to an intending purchaser. He also deposed that the second
defendant was working as phone inspector in the Idgah Exchange. In his cross
examination he admitted that he had no personal knowledge of what was stated in
the affidavit; he claims knowledge from the records of CBI; he also admitted to not
having worked in the said office at that time. PW-2 deposed in support of the
duplicate bills Exh. PW-2/1 to Exh. PW-2/5. He stated that no payment was received
in respect of the bills and the telephone continued to be in the name of Ms. Sudesh
Vig according to the plaintiff’s records. He also deposed that this court referred the
matter to the CBI on coming to know prima facie that defendants had colluded with
each other and used the telephone by making STD and ISD calls. He also says that
the bills were received by second defendant and that the bills sent to the first
defendant were received back by the Plaintiff with the remark “not available at the
address”. In his cross examination, this witness stated that the affidavit was not
based on personal knowledge, but based on the record which he had seen.

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

5 of 17

9.

PW-3 has deposed about the application by Sudesh Vig for a telephone

connection, pursuant to which OB No. 56051037758 was issued on 27-10-1994; a
copies of the application form and duplicate application, with acknowledgement
slip, specimen signature sheet are marked by him as Exh. PW-3/1 and Exh. PW-3/2.
In his cross examination, he admitted that the registered subscriber is liable to pay
the dues of the telephone and the second defendant is not registered telephone
subscriber. He also said that dues can be recovered from the actual user, in addition
to the registered user. He was unable to say whether the second defendant used the
phone. He admitted to having no personal knowledge about the defendants cheating
the MTNL and that his deposition in the affidavit was based on the report of CBI.
PW-4 deposed about Shri H.L. Pahwa, Accounts Officer (Legal) of the plaintiff, being
authorized to sign and verify the pleadings, at the time of filing the suit. He exhibited
the delegation of power/ Power of Attorney authorizing Chief Accounts Officer
(Legal) as Exh. PW-4/1. He also deposed about Ms. Sudesh Vig filing a writ petition,
CW 998/96 and exhibited a copy of the order of court dated 14-3-1996 as Exh. PW4/2. He deposed about the CBI report mentioning about the role of the defendants
in colluding with each other to defraud the plaintiff, in regard to installation and use
of the telephone at 10756, Manak Pura, Karol Bagh, New Delhi, by the second
defendant; he exhibited copy of the first information report as Exh. PW-4/3. He
deposed that the defendants colluded with each other and used the telephone for

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

6 of 17

making STD and ISD calls; according to him, both were liable to make payment for
the suit amount. In his cross examination, he mentioned that he had no personal
knowledge of what he stated in the affidavit/ examination in chief. He stated that
the MTNL maintains the record of the registered subscriber as well as actual user;
he however mentioned that facts pertaining to actual user is based on CBI’s record.
He also admitted not having no information whether the second defendant used the
phone in dispute or had access to the phone.
10.

The second defendant in his affidavit evidence stated that he was phone

inspector and deposed that Smt. Sudesh Vig requested for change of address for
installation of telephone connection. He deposed that the address was changed and
executed according to orders of the concerned Sub-Divisional Engineer/ Divisional
Engineer (Telephones). He stated not having seen Ms. Sudesh Vig or having ever
approached her for transfer of the telephone; he denied paying Rs. 1000/- to her or
having secured her signatures on blank papers. He denied connection with the first
defendant and Ms. Sudesh Vig; he also stated that he could not recognize them.
According to him, the subscriber Ms. Sudesh Vig requested for change of address,
which was done by him after approval and direction of the Sub-Divisional Engineer.
In his cross examination, he denied all suggestions about knowing the first
defendant and that he installed the phone at his (first defendant’s address); he also
denied the suggestion about having got blank papers executed from Ms. Sudesh Vig,

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

7 of 17

or having paid Rs. 1000/- to her. He stated that it was not his duty to take a receipt
regarding installation of the phone from the person in whose name it had to be
installed; that was the responsibility of the linesman and ascertained by the
telephone operator. He used to assign work to linesmen. They were not giving
receipts to him. He denied having seen any document for installation of the phone
connection of Ms. Sudesh Vig in the premises of the first defendant. He admitted to
having got filled Annexure A, which was signed by Ms. Sudesh Vig; and that it was
sent along with OB (Order Book). He also admitted that application for STD and ISD
was given by Ms. Sudesh Vig. According to the witness, he was not authorized to
sanction STD or ISD connection; that was to be done by higher officials. He also
stated that the application for activating the facilities was given before installation
of the phone, sometime in 1994. The OB was also issued at that time. He marked the
photocopy of OB dated 27-10-1994 as Exh. DW-1/1. According to witness, for
activation of STD and ISD on the phone in question, no other OB was issued.
11.

This court had, by order dated 9-1-2004, framed the following issues for trial:
(1)

Whether the plaint is filed and the suit is instituted by a duly

authorized person;
(2)

Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder and mis-joinder of parties;

(3)

Whether the defendants are jointly and severally liable to pay the

outstanding bill amount of Rs. 17,83,056/- claimed in the suit;

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

8 of 17

(4)

Whether the defendants 1 and 2 have connived with each other to

defraud and cheat the plaintiff by misusing the telephone in question;
(5)

If issue No. 3 is answered in favour of the plaintiff, whether the plaintiff

would also be entitled to interest and if so, at what rate and for what period;
(6)

Relief

The findings of this court on the above issues are as follows:
Issue No. 1

Yes.

Issue No. 2

No

Issue No. 3

No

Issue No. 4

No.

Issue No. 5

No

Issue No. 6

None

REASONS
Issue No. 1
12.

The objection as to the authorization to file the suit taken by the second

defendant is that the authorization (Exh. PW-4/1) relied upon cannot be taken note
of since the Minutes of meeting of the Board of Directors was not produced. Exh.
PW-4/1 is a circular issued by the Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd, dated 14-11-

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

9 of 17

1995; it states that by virtue of powers of the General Manager, through office order
dated 29-9-1986, the power to sign, verify pleadings including plaint, written
statement, etc are conferred upon Chief Accounts Officers, Senior Accounts officers
(legal) and Accounts Officers (Legal). This document relies on a general delegation
issued at a time when the MTNL was a government department (1986). Having
regard to the nature of the delegation, i.e that it was made when the MTNL was a
part of the Central government, the fact that Senior Accounts Officers and Accounts
Officers (legal) were later empowered by the circular does not lead to the
conclusion that in the absence of the Minutes Book, the authority should be
disputed. Since the basic circular of 1986 has not been disputed, the defendant’s
locus standi to question the authority of the Accounts Manager (Legal) to file the suit
cannot be upheld. This issue is answered accordingly.
Issue No. 2:
13.

The objection raised by the second defendant here is that he has not been

joined properly in the proceedings,since he was not the subscriber and that the nonjoinder of Ms.Sudesh Vig, who it is claimed, is a necessary party, is fatal to the suit.
14.

In the suit, the plaintiff has averred in more than one place that the amounts

could not be recovered due to the alleged wrongful acts of the second defendant; he
is also alleged to have colluded with the second defendant to cause loss to the
plaintiff. A number of documents have been relied upon; the defendants are sought

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

10 of 17

to be made jointly and severally liable for a decree. It therefore, cannot be said that
the second defendant cannot be joined in the proceedings, as he is not a necessary
party having no privity of contract with the plaintiff in regard to the issuance of
telephone connection. Therefore, this plea has no merit. The second defendant was
joined properly; his absence from the proceedings would have rendered the suit bad
for non-joinder of necessary party.
15.

As far as Ms. Sudesh Vig is concerned, it is no doubt true that she had applied

for the telephone, and according to the plaintiff, she had asked for transfer of the
telephone at the behest of the second defendant, who paid some money to her. Yet,
no relief has been claimed against her; no allegation of collusion or conspiracy has
been leveled against her. Therefore, she is strictly not a necessary party; she could
have been impleaded, being a proper party. However, her absence from the suit
cannot, in the view of the court, afford sufficient cause for its rejection. This is
supported by Order 1 Rule 9, which decrees that a non-joinder of a necessary party
is fatal to the suit, no such consequence in the case of non-joinder of a proper party
has been enjoined by law. Therefore, this issue, too, is answered against the second
defendant.
Issue Nos 3, 4 and 5
16.

These issues can be conveniently discussed, since they hinge on an

appreciation of facts. The plaintiff’s claim is that the defendants were responsible

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

11 of 17

for the alleged cheating and fraud played on it. For this purpose, the plaintiff has
relied upon the order of this court in WP No. 998/1996 dated 14-3-1996. The court
recorded the statement on behalf of the MTNL . The court, after noticing the facts
and the grievance of Ms. Sudesh Vig, who stated that she was asked by the second
defendant to sign two applications for transfer the connections, recorded her
statement; the MTNL file had been produced in court. The court noted that two
applications appeared on the file, dated 19th July 1995, marked X and Y. Ms. Sudesh
Vig, the subscriber and writ petitioner was present in court; she admitted to her
signatures but stated that the second defendant had obtained the signatures on
blank paper. On the basis of the observations and the statement of MTNL, two issues
were framed and the matter was referred to investigation by CBI.
17.

It is contended by Ms. Leena Tuteja, learned counsel that the above order of

court, along with the concerned documents Exh. PW-1/3 and Exh. PW-1/4 ( letters
dated 19-7-1995) amply demonstrate the complicity of the second defendant and
his connivance in installing the telephone after luring the allottee, Ms. Vig, into
signing blank paper. Learned counsel relied on Exh. PW-1/3 and Exh. PW-1/4
(letters dated 19-7-1995) to say that prima facie, they disclose a discrepancy as the
allotment existing on record was for a STD connection; yet the application again
sought for the same facility along with ISD facilities.
18.

Learned counsel submitted that the connivance and liability of both the

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

12 of 17

defendants is also established by the circumstance that the second defendant was
aware of the entire controversy, and approached this court, by filing WP 1591/1997
for a direction that the telephone bills for the connection should be recovered from
the concerned subscriber; that writ petition was dismissed on 21-4-1997. Ms. Tuteja
also relied upon the mis-description of Ms. Sudesh Vig’s name in Exh. PW-1/3 and
Exh. PW-1/4; instead of “Sudesh” the name shown is “Shudish”. She also relied upon
the testimony of the plaintiff’s witnesses to say that the telephone connection was
misused by the first defendant; admittedly the second defendant was responsible
for installing it in those premises. Both defendants therefore, are jointly and
severally liable for the amounts claimed.
19.

Mr. Ajay Chaudhary, learned counsel for second defendant contended that the

plaintiff has failed to prove about the defendant’s alleged complicity or involvement
in the so called fraud. The connection, sanctioned to Ms. Vig, was shifted to another
residence, at her request, in writing. The application was duly approved by a
competent officer. The plaintiff failed to prove that the second defendant had in fact
installed the telephone, or his knowledge or connivance with the first defendant. It
was contended that the order of this court in the writ petition filed by Ms. Vig
cannot be, in the absence of her testimony in the present proceeding, and proper
opportunity to cross examine her, be used against the second defendant to fasten
any liability, or conclude that he was party to a fraud, with the first defendant. It was

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

13 of 17

also contended that even the duplicate bills produced in the present case show that
the subscriber was Ms. Vig. No attempt was made by the plaintiff, beyond filing a
copy of the FIR and alleged statements of officials who had no personal knowledge
in the matter, to establish that the defendants had colluded with each other to
defraud MTNL, by using the telephone connection for STD and ISD calls.
20.

Counsel contended that the entire attempt by MTNL has been to fasten

liability on the second defendant without having to prove any of the allegations
made. Though the FIR has been relied upon, no witness has been produced to
establish the allegations contained there. Similarly, the mere circumstance that a
criminal case is pending cannot be the basis of a civil liability, especially when the
consumer or subscriber continues to be the same, ie. Sudesh Vig. The second
defendant is admittedly not a subscriber. In these circumstances, no finding about
his being party to a fraud to cheat MTNL can be rendered.
21.

Now, the mainstay of the plaintiff’s case seems to be the statement of Ms.

Sudesh Vig, recorded in WP No. 998/1996 dated 14-3-1996. The court, first noted
the facts as well as the grievance of Ms. Sudesh Vig. She had stated that she was
asked by the second defendant to sign two applications for transfer the connections.
The court also noticed that two applications appeared on the file, dated 19th July
1995, marked X and Y. Ms. Sudesh Vig, the subscriber and writ petitioner was
present in court; she admitted to her signatures but stated that the second

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

14 of 17

defendant had obtained the signatures on blank paper. These are serious enough
allegations, and if the court is to accept their credibility and admit the document as
recording the statement in evidence, perhaps it would be damaging to the plaintiff.
Yet, the fact remains that the court merely had recorded in its order about the
statement of the subscriber; her statement on oath had not been recorded.
Moreover, the defendants were not given opportunity to impeach the statement.
The MTNL could well have taken care of this position by producing Ms. Vig as a
witness in support of its case in this suit; significantly, this was not done. Thus, the
allegations recorded as statements of Ms. Vig, in her absence, cannot be relied upon.
The allegation that signatures were obtained on blank paper, by the second
defendant, therefore remains an uncorroborated version of the plaintiff.
22.

It had been urged on behalf of the plaintiff that the discrepancies in the

applications, in terms of mis-description of the name of the subscriber as well as the
request for STD/ISD facilities are also an indicator about the involvement of the
second defendant with the first defendant concerning misuse of the telephone
connection. In the opinion of this court, nothing can be established from such
discrepancy. The documents, Ex.P-2/2 to P-2/5 series are duplicate copies of bills,
issued in the name of Ms. Sudesh Vig. However, no attempt has been made to
produce that witness, or even the evidence of anyone having visited the place where
the telephone was actually transferred or shifted, to say that she does not live there,

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

15 of 17

and that the first defendant lives there. In the absence of such evidence, or the
testimony of Ms. Vig, it was necessary for the plaintiff to establish, with some
credible material, that the actual user of the telephone was first defendant, who was
living, or even had lived in the said premises. Yet, no such testimony of any witness,
or any independent material to such effect is forthcoming.
23.

It may be true, as alleged by the plaintiff that the phone was installed without

authority of the subscriber, and actually misused to make ISD and STD calls, which
were not paid, leading to huge revenue loss for the MTNL. Yet, this court cannot
allow itself to deviate from the established procedure, which requires the plaintiff to
prove its case with legally admissible evidence, in support of the allegations of the
defendants’ joint and several liability and their having defrauded and cheated the
plaintiff. It is trite law that a plaintiff has to positively prove his case. Here, the
statements of the subscriber could have been of relevance had they been recorded
under oath and the defendants given opportunity to test it in cross examination. The
plaintiff has not only failed to adopt that course, it has even sought to place reliance
upon the testimony and evidence of four witnesses who had no connection with the
transaction, and no personal knowledge. The assertion of one such witness that the
bills issued could also be on the basis of actual user’s usage of the telephone,
therefore, cannot be taken at face value. Here again, the plaintiff has to chosen to
rely on documents which show that Ms. Sudesh Vig was the subscriber. Fraud and

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

16 of 17

cheating are fairly serious allegations; even the Civil Procedure Code prescribes
specific standards for pleadings; such allegations have to be established. All that can
be inferred, and said to have been proved, is that the subscriber allottee was Ms.
Sudesh Vig; she asked for the phone to be shifted to Manak Pura, which was done.
The phone was apparently misused; bills to the tune of over Rs. 17 lakhs were
unpaid. However, the plaintiff has not proved that the defaults were on account of
the defendants’ complicity, or that they were jointly and severally liable for a decree
in that regard.
24.

In view of the above the finding on issue Nos. 3 to 5 is that the plaintiff has not

been able to prove that the defendants are jointly or severally liable to pay MTNL
the sum of Rs. 17, 83,056/- with interest at 24% p.a; the plaintiff has also been
unable to prove that the defendants colluded or connived with each other to cheat
and defraud the MTNL. The plaintiff, therefore, cannot claim any relief in the present
suit .
25.

For the foregoing reasons and findings, the suit has to fail; it is therefore

dismissed with costs.

DATED: 15th February, 2008

CS (OS) 1102/ 1998

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J

17 of 17

