*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 178/2007
April 17, 2007

BANSIL MUTEI SHIBLAQ
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Rajiv Nayar, Sr. Advocate with
Ms.Ritu Bhalla, Mr. Sidharth Luthra, Ms. Smriti Sinha,
Advocates
versus
UOI & ORS

..... Respondents
Through Mr. A.K. Vali, Mr. Baldev Malik, Advocates
for the UOI.
Mr. R.M. Tiwari, Advocate for the Interpol.

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

The petitioner invokes the revisional jurisdiction of this court, under Section

397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter “the Code”). He is aggrieved by
the order of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (ACMM) dated 21-32007, rejecting his application for discharge under Section 34-B (2) of the
Extradition Act, 1962 (hereafter “the Act”).

CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

1 of 14

2.

The facts necessary to decide the petition are that the petitioner, a UK

national, professes to have an unblemished record. He was detained pursuant to a
“Red Corner Notice” issued by the Interpol, on account of a request by the
Government of the UAE. He claims to have visited India, with one Peter Simon,
chairman of M/s Monsoon Ltd, UK, a well known international fashion brand, in
connection with some charity work. Upon his landing at the Indira Gandhi
International Airport, he was detained, on the the basis of a “Look Out circular”
(LOC) issued by the Foreigners Regional Registration Office, issued pursuant to
the red corner notice. The detention took place on 7-1-2007.
3.

After his detention, the petitioner caused a legal notice to be issued to the

Ministry of External Affairs, of the Government of India, detailing the various
circumstances that led to the red corner notice. Apparently he had acted as
investment adviser to a financial company, under the direct control of the
Department of Private Affairs of Abu Dhabi. Certain allegations of fraud were
levelled in relation to those dealings; these led to claims being preferred before the
courts in UK. The charges of fraud were not pressed; initially, the petitioner was
held liable to pay some amounts. He carried the matter in appeal in the U.K.
Courts, and his counter claim/appeals were allowed. As a consequence, the
financial arm of Abu Dhabi, which had preferred the claim, was adjudged liable.
In the meanwhile, the Government of UAE apparently held criminal proceedings
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

2 of 14

in absentia, and secured a judgment declaring him guilty. Consequently, a red
corner notice was issued. The petitioner was detained in South Africa, and Canada,
and on both occasions, the local authorities, after considering all the facts, released
him.
4.

The petitioner moved an application for bail, which was considered, and

rejected by the ACMM, through a detailed order on 10-1-2007. Subsequently, this
court, after considering various issues and materials, directed release of the
petitioner on interim bail. The court reasoned that by virtue of Article 10(3) of the
Extradition treaty between the Government of UAE and the Indian Government,
the latter was empowered to release the fugitive criminal (i.e the petitioner) before
the expiration of the period under Section 34(2) of the Act, and that the
circumstances of the case justified his release, on conditions spelt out in the order.
5.

After the issuance of the said order, the petitioner moved the learned

ACMM, for discharge under Section 34(2). That order was rejected by the
impugned order. The relevant and material part of the order reads as follows:
“in the present case there had been no request from any foreign
state foreign state for the immediate arrest of the fugitive criminal
and in fact the fugitive criminal had been arrested admittedly on the
basis of red corner notice of the interpol as discussed above hence,
the question of the provisions of Section 34B (3) having come into
operation does not arise. In this background the question of
discharge of the fugitive criminal under section 34B (2) expiration of
60 days if no request of his surrender has been received during this
period would only be relevant in those case where the provisional
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

3 of 14

warrant for the arrest of the fugitive criminal are obtained from the
Magistrate by the Central Government. Hence, I do not find any
merit in th request made by the applicant/fugitive criminal. Lastly it
is an admitted case that till date no request has been received from
the UAE Government. The provisions of Article 10 of the Indo-UAE
Treaty provides that it is the duty of the requesting State to take all
necessary measures to prevent the escape of such an
applicant/fugitive criminal and release of such a person shall not
prevent his re-arrest and extradition, if the request for extradition is
completed afterwards. Hence a total discharge of the accused as
demanded by him would be in clear contravention of the above
provisions. In view of the above discussion application of the fugitive
criminal is hereby dismissed.
However, this court may observe that the provisions of Article 21 of the
Constitution of India which provides that “no person shall be deprived
of his right or personal liberty except for the procedure established by
law” would apply even to persons who are not Indian citizens which
includes the present applicant/fugitive criminal. This court has
observed that the applicant before this court is an UK National and is
not a resident of India and curtailing his liberty for an indefinite period
and an inordinate delay of bring the applicant/fugitive criminal to
proper enquiry certainly violates the provisions of Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. Under these circumstances it is desirable that the
Ministry of External Affairs should raise this issue through its channels
with the Contracting State i.e. UAE in order to ascertain the status of
the request qua the present applicant. This should preferably be done
at the earliest and a report should be filed before this court on the next
date of hearing.
Admittedly the fugitive criminal/applicant is a UK citizen. He has no
residence in India and hence it would be inappropriate to detain him
for indefinite period as it would serve no useful purpose. Needless to
say in case if no information is received from th requesting state till he
next date of hearing it shall be open to the applicant/fugitive criminal
to apply for suitable modification of the condition of his bail before the
competent court so as to enable him to leave for his country on the
condition of reporting back as and when request is so received or as an
when so directed by this Court. A copy of this order be given to the
counsel for UOI for compliance.
Be listed 09.04.07.”
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

4 of 14

6.

Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, learned senior counsel for the petitioner urged that the

trial court erred in holding that the arrest was not pursuant Section 34-B(1). He
relied on the impugned order, which in no uncertain terms had recorded that the
Central Government did move for the petitioner's detention under that provision.
Reliance was placed upon two Division Bench judgments of this court, in
Flemming Lunding Larsen -vs- Union of India & Anr. 72(1998) DLT 80, and
Pragnesh Desai -vs- Union of India 2004 (73) DRJ 84 to say that with the expiry
of the statutorily prescribed period, the individual had a vested right to be
discharged, if no request was received from the requesting country.
7.

Learned counsel submitted that there were only three situations where a

fugitive criminal could be detained under the Act, as held in Flemming's case. The
petitioner's case clearly fell under the category of arrest pursuant to a request by a
foreign government, as a red corner Interpol notice was the basis of the arrest. The
red corner notice was premised upon the information and request of the
Government of UAE; there was no other notice. Counsel submitted that the court
erred in holding that the arrest was not under Section 34-B.
8.

It is urged that the learned ACMM fell into error in holding, as she did, that

the petitioner's provisional arrest not having been made under Section 34-B(1), he
could not avail the benefit of Section 34-B(2). Counsel submitted that the question
of a so-called “harmonious” interpretation of the provisions on the basis of a
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

5 of 14

perceived conflict between the provisions of the Act, and the Indo UAE treaty did
not arise, and could not be the basis of continued detention, specially when the
Central Government never desired the detention of the petitioner, and had
expressly stated that the arrest was under Section 34-B (1).
9.

It was urged that the ACMM committed a grave impropriety, by proceeding

beyond the confines of the case, in directing the Government of India, to seek
information from the Government of UAE. Once the court was of the opinion that
the petitioner was disentitled to relief, the matter ended; it did not possess
jurisdiction to issue directions, having become functus officio, in such proceedings.
Learned counsel went to the extent of contending that the approach and directions
of the ACMM were not only jurisdictionally improper, but grossly perverse, and
that this court ought to issue strictures.
10.

Mr. Vali, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that as per the reply

filed, the allegations against the petitioner were that he was involved in offences of
misappropriation of amounts totaling Rs. 1,31,88,12,047/-.

The Central

Government had already informed the Government of the U.A.E. about the arrest
of the petitioner.
11.

Learned counsel submitted that too much cannot be read into the reasoning

of the trial court about inapplicability of Section 34-B(2), since the continued
detention was sought for under Section 34-B(1). Learned counsel submitted that
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

6 of 14

the trial court's impression that detention was not under that provision was
incorrect.
12.

The relevant provision, namely, Sections 34-B(1) reads as follows:
"34-B. Provisional Arrest---(1) On receipt of an urgent
request from a foreign State for the immediate arrest of
a fugitive criminal, the Central Government may request
the Magistrate having competent jurisdiction to issue a
provisional warrant for the arrest of such fugitive
criminal.
(2) A fugitive criminal arrested under Sub-section (1)
shall be discharged upon the expiration of sixty days
from the date of his arrest if no request for his surrender
or return is received within the said period."

13.

Two Division Bench judgments of this Court, namely, i.e Flemming's case

and Pragnesh Desai's case have considered the effect of the said provision. In
Flemming's case, (supra) the court held as follows:
“8. Under the Scheme of the Act, a fugitive criminal can be put under

arrest under three circumstances: firstly when an order is issued by
the Central Government under Section 4 of the Act to the Magistrate
for making an enquiry into the offence, on receipt of such an order of
the Central Government the Magistrate is empowered to issue
warrants for the arrest of fugitive criminal and thereafter to proceed
to make necessary enquiry as per the procedure laid down in Section
7 of the Act; the second eventuality under which arrest of a fugitive
criminal can be made is under Section 9 of the Act when it appears
to any Magistrate that a person within the local limits of his
jurisdiction is a fugitive criminal of a foreign State, he may issue a
warrant for his arrest. The Magistrate thereafter is re- quired to
report to the Central Government the fact of issuance of war- rants.
Such a person cannot be detained for more than 90 days unless
within the said period the Magistrate receives from the Central
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

7 of 14

Government an order made with reference to such a person under
Section 5 of the Act; the third category is the provisional arrest as
provided in Section 34B of the Act, which is made on the basis of an
urgent request from a foreign State for immediate arrest of a fugitive
criminal. On receipt of such a request the Central Government may
request the Magistrate of competent jurisdiction to issue provisional
warrant for the arrest of such fugitive criminal. Discharge of such
fugitive criminal on expiry of the period of sixty days is mandatory
under Sub-section (2) of Section 34-B, if no request is made for his
surrender or return within the said period. The question in this case
is that whether request for surrender or return has to be received by
the Magistrate from the Central Government or by the Central
Government from a Foreign State. Section 34-B of the Act reads as
under:
"34-B. Provisional Arrest---(1) On receipt of an urgent
request from a foreign State for the immediate arrest of
a fugitive criminal, the Central Government may request
the Magistrate having competent jurisdiction to issue a
provisional warrant for the arrest of such fugitive
criminal.
(2) A fugitive criminal arrested under Sub-section (1) shall be
discharged upon the expiration of sixty days from the date of his
arrest if no request for his surrender or return is received within
the said period."
9. Only Section 4 of the Act deals with the requisition for surrender
or return of a fugitive criminal, which reads:
"4. Requisition for surrender--A requisition for the
surrender of a fugitive criminal of a foreign State or a
foreign State may be made to the Central Government--(a) by a diplomatic representative of the foreign
State at Delhi; or
(b) by the Government of that foreign State
communicating with the Central Government
through its diplomatic representative in that
State or country;
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

8 of 14

and if neither of these modes is convenient, the
requisition shall be made in such other mode as
is settled by arrangement made by the
Government of the foreign State with the
Government of India."
10. Only on the basis of a request made in consonance with Section
4 of the Act for surrender of a fugitive criminal that the Central
Government is to have the enquiry conducted through Magistrate for
which purpose the Central Government is required to pass an order
to the Magistrate under Section 5 of the Act directing him to make an
enquiry. The procedure to be followed by a Magistrate is laid down
in Section 7 of the Act. In case after enquiry the Magistrate holds
that a prima facie case is not made out, the fugitive criminal is to be
discharged as provided in Sub-section (3) of Section 7 of the Act. In
case prima facie case is held to have been made out in support of the
requisition of the foreign State, the fugitive crimi- nal is to be
committed to prison to await the orders of the Central GovernGovernment for which purpose the Magistrate is to report the result
of the en- quiry to the Central Government as envisaged in Subsection (4) of Section 7 of the Act...”

14.

Likewise, in Pragnesh Desai's case, the Division Bench speaking of

Sections 34-B(2) held that it
“...provides that if no request for surrender or return of a fugitive
criminal is received within sixty days of his provisional arrest under
Sub-section (1), he shall be discharged upon the expiry of the said
period. It is evident that Sub-section (1) is an urgency provision for
the purpose of putting a fugitive criminal under provisional arrest,
pending receipt of a request for his surrender or return, so that he
does not flee in the meanwhile. The mandatory stipulation of
discharge of the person detained upon the expiry of sixty days from
the date of his arrest is a safeguard against keeping the liberty of a
person in suspended animation for an indefinite period without any
accusation or complaint etc. It is clear that the Section does not
postulate that a request for surrender or return of a fugitive criminal
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

9 of 14

has to be only after fugitive's provisional arrest. In other words,
provisional arrest of a fugitive under Sub-section (1) is not a
condition precedent for a request for his surrender to the requesting
country. It is equally not mandatory that a request for immediate
arrest under Sub-section (1) must precede a requisition for
surrender of a fugitive criminal either under Chapter II, which lays
down the procedure for extradition of fugitive criminals to foreign
State, with which there is no extradition arrangements or Chapter III
of the Act, which sets out the procedure for return of fugitives to
foreign States with extradition arrangements, as in the present
case...”
15.

From the above factual narrative it is clear that the petitioner was arrested,

on the basis of a Red Corner notice at the request of the UAE Government, was
issued sometime in 2000. The detention was made on 7.1.2007. The petitioner's
bail application was rejected. Thereafter, the Central Government again sought for
extension of his remand, by moving under Section 34-B(1) of the Act.

As

explained in Flemming's case, the Act envisages detention of a fugitive criminal
under three circumstances:
(i) Order by the Central Government under Section 4 of the Act,
making reference to a Magistrate for enquiry into the offence. In such
an event, the Magistrate can issue warrant for arrest and then proceed
with the enquiry according to Section 7;
(ii) Arrest pursuant to warrant issued by a Magistrate under Section 9 of
the Act, if it appears to him that a person within his jurisdiction is a
fugitive criminal of a foreign State;
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

10 of 14

(iii) Provisional arrest under Section 34-B on the basis of urgent request
for a foreign State for the immediate arrest of the fugitive.
16.

In this case, the first two situations did not and could not have arisen

because there is no reference by the Central Government in terms of Section 4.
Likewise, the petitioner was not arrested pursuant to a warrant issued by a
Magistrate, under Section 9. He was detained, on the basis of the Red Corner
notice when he landed in New Delhi on 7.1.2007. Therefore, his detention clearly
fell within description under Section 34-B. In fact, the learned CMM in her order
has recorded that after arrest, the petitioner was remanded at the behest of the
Central Government under Section 34-B. This is apparent from the narrative in the
impugned order in the second paragraph:
“On the same date, i.e 8.1.2007 when the applicant was produced
before this court he was remanded to judicial custody for seven days
and stand of the MEA even before this court that the remand was
under Section 34-B..”

Though the trial court noticed this aspect, subsequently, the impugned order
proceeded on the footing that there was no request by any foreign State for the
immediate arrest of the fugitive criminal and, therefore, application of Section 34B(2) did not arise. Likewise, the finding that the detention was not in furtherance
of any provisional warrant for arrest under Section 34-B(1) of the act is contrary to
the expressed stand of the Government itself.
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

11 of 14

17.

In the light of the express provisions of Section 34-B(2) and the law

declared by this Court in the decisions in Flemming (supra) and Pragnesh Desai
(supra), the conclusion of the trial court that the Section 34-B(2) was inapplicable,
cannot be sustained. Equally, there is nothing in law to support the perceived
conflict between Article 10 of the Treaty (between the Government of UAE and
Republic of India) and the express terms of Section 34-B(2). In fact, assuming
there to be a conflict, the question of a court preferring the terms of a statutory
mandate, to a treaty, cannot arise. Section 34-B, to that extent, enacts a nonderogable standard, which cannot be ignored. Therefore, I am of the opinion that
the conclusions arrived at by the ACMM cannot be sustained and they have to be
set aside.
18.

Learned counsel for the petitioner had vehemently submitted that the

learned ACMM overstepped the limits of jurisdiction in directing the Central
Government to elicit a response from the Government of UAE and that the Court
ought not to have indulged in such adventurism as it had no authority to do so.
Learned counsel even went to the extent of stating that this is an appropriate case
where some kind of adverse comments or strictures are called for and characterised
the approach of the trial court as unreasonable and untenable.
19.

In the preceding part of this order, the findings of the trial court have been

CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

12 of 14

set aside. The approach of the trial court in this case, in virtually directing the
Central Government to elicit a response, through diplomatic and other channels as
it were, and report back to it, was no doubt without jurisdiction and uncalled for.
That that extent, of course, the petitioner is perhaps justified in complaining as he
does that the directions were not sustainable. All that can be said is that the Courts
are to exercise their jurisdiction and powers in accordance with law and judges
discharge their duties to achieve that end and not to achieve any other purposes,
howsoever laudable it may be from a subjective standpoint. Although it may
tempting for this Court to make an adverse comment about the procedure adopted
by the trial court, and its approach, such a course is not justified in the present
case. The order to the extent it directed the Central Government to take steps, was
perhaps an overzealous reaction. Therefore, the course suggested by the counsel
for the petitioner would not be called for, particularly, in the light of the decision
of the Supreme Court in K.P. Tiwari vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1994 SC
1031 and in “K”, a Judicial Officer reported in 2001 (3) SCC 54.

In the latter

decision, the Supreme Court held as follows:
"The strength of power is not displayed solely in cracking a whip on
errors, mistakes or failures; the power should be so wielded as to
have propensity to prevent and to ensure exclusion of repetition if
committed once innocently or unwittingly. "Pardon the error but not
its repetition." The power to control is not to be exercised solely by
wielding a teacher's cane; the members of subordinate judiciary look
up to the High Court for the power to control to be exercised with
parent-like care and affection. The exercise of statutory jurisdiction,
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

13 of 14

appellate or revisional and the exercise of constitutional power to
control and supervise the functioning of the district Courts and
Courts subordinate thereto empowers the High Court to formulate
an opinion and place it on record not only on the judicial working
but also on the conduct of the judicial officers. The existence of
power in higher echelons of judiciary to make observations even
extending to criticism incorporated in judicial orders cannot be
denied, however, the High Courts have to remember that criticisms
and observations touching a subordinate judicial officer
incorporated in judicial pronouncements have their own mischievous
infirmities.”
20.

In the facts of this case, even though I am of the opinion that the Court

acted beyond jurisdiction in directing the Central Government to elicit responses
from a foreign country and further seeking a report, I am of the opinion that no
further comment is called for.
21.

In view of the above findings and conclusion recorded in the preceding

paragraphs, the petition is entitled to succeed. Accordingly, the impugned order is
hereby set aside. The petitioner's passport is directed to be released forthwith. The
bail bonds furnished by him are hereby cancelled; the petitioner is at liberty to take
back the fixed deposit receipts. The Look Out Circular No. 200102351 is hereby
set aside/quashed.
22.

The petition is allowed in the above terms. Order Dasti under the signatures

of the Court Master.
17th April, 2007
dkg
CRL.REV.P. 178/2007

S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J

14 of 14

