13
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

TEST.CAS. 1/2001

Date of Decision: 15th May, 2008
DR. PRITAM DHIR
..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Sunil Magon, Advocate.
versus
SULOCHANA MALHOTRA
Through None.
CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

..... Respondent

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

% 15.5.2008
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This is a petition under Section 276 of the Indian

Succession Act, 1925, claiming probate of a Will executed by one Shri
Ram Das Dhir, resident of F-11, South Extension Part-II, New Delhi,
dated 31.5.1983; the said Shri Ram Das Dhir is hereafter referred to
as testator.
2.

Briefly, the facts are that the petitioner No.1 claims to be

executor of the Will; the second and third petitioner are his wife and
son. According to averments in the petition, the testator was survived
by the first petitioner and two daughters, namely Mrs. Sulochana
TEST.CAS. 1/2001

1 of 5

Malhotra and Mrs. Mohini Rai. The petitioner claims that the testator
was pre-deceased by a son who was not survived by any issue.
Reliance is placed upon the third recital in the Will which refers to the
testator's widow and younger son having pre-deceased him.
3.

The Will which has been produced along with the petition,

makes various bequests including a cash bequest to Smt. Bhagwan
Devi, wife of Shri Pritam Singh and the bequest of the immovable
property in the house bearing No.M-4, South Extension, Part-II, New
Delhi, to the first and third petitioner. The testator also bequeathed
Rs.1 lakh to the first petitioner's daughter, at the time of her marriage
as his (testator's) gift. All other movable properties were bequeathed
to the first petitioner in terms of paragraph 7 of the Will. The first
petitioner was also appointed as the sole executor of the Will.
4.

The petitioners impleaded Mrs. Sulochana Malhotra who

had then survived her father (the testator) as well as the children of
Mrs. Mohini Rai, who, at the time of the presentation of this petition,
had died. Mrs. Mohini Rai was the second daughter of the testator.
5.

This petition was filed on 5.1.2001. At that time, the near

relatives of the deceased testator surviving were Mrs.Sulochana
Malhotra and the heirs of Mrs. Mohini Rai.

They were accordingly

impleaded as respondents No.2 to 4. The petitioner filed list of assets
along with its estimated value, and marked it as Annexure 'C' to the

TEST.CAS. 1/2001

2 of 5

petition.

On 24.9.2001, the Court recorded the service through

publication to the respondent No.1 who had reportedly died.
Respondent No.3, i.e. Mr.Sunil Rai was duly served.
respondent

No.4

was

not

served.

After

some

However,

proceedings,

respondents No.3 and 4 (Mr.Sunil Rai and Mrs.Shahnaz Sharma, heirs
of Mrs. Mohini Rai) were unrepresented.
27.1.2003

reveals

that

legal

The order sheet of

representatives

of

deceased

Mrs.Sulochana Malhotra, were represented by a counsel. They were
subsequently represented again in Court on 1.3.2004.

Their

application for impleadment, i.e. IA 239/2003 was allowed. Later the
amended memo of parties reflecting their status was also taken on the
record.
6.

The heirs of Mrs. Sulochana Malhotra, the deceased

second respondent, and heirs of Mrs. Mohini Rai, the other daughter
of the testator objected to issue of probate; they did not file any
pleading in these proceedings.

One Mr.K.L.Bhatia, who the

petitioners allege had trespassed the petitioner's property, moved the
Court during the pendency of these proceedings for impleadment by
filing IA 563/2005 on 12.1.2005. He claimed to have acquired onethird share in the property through legal representatives of Smt.
Mohini Rai, i.e. the respondents No.3 and 4 in these proceedings. The
petitioners, in the reply, denied the claim.

TEST.CAS. 1/2001

On 24.3.2008, the said

3 of 5

applicant, Shri K.L.Bhatia withdrew his impleadment application, i.e.
IA 563/2005.
7.

After the above event, the parties led the evidence. The

statements of the petitioners were recorded by their evidence and
exhibited as PW-1/X, PW-2/X and PW-3/X. The said three petitioners
also deposed to having executed the affidavits, under oath, before the
Joint Registrar of this Court, on 31.3.2008.
8.

The Will was attested by two witnesses, i.e. Shri S.P.Jain

and Shri Bharat Singh. According to the petitioners Shri S.P.Jain had
died by the time, this case went to trial. However, the other attesting
witness, Shri Bharat Singh was alive.

He deposed in favour of the

petitioner and for grant of probate by filing an affidavit Ex.PW-4/X, he
also got his statement recorded, under oath, before the Joint Registrar
deposing to the correctness of his affidavit, on 31.3.2008.
9.

According to PW-4, i.e. Shri Bharat Singh, the testator had

called him to his residence for the purpose of witnessing execution of
the will and for attesting it. PW-4 also mentions about presence of the
other attesting witness, Shri S.P.Jain and further having seen, the
testator sign on the Will Ex.PW-1/B at the point, referred to as 'X'. He
deposes to Shri S.P.Jain, the other witness having affixed his
signatures on the instructions of testator as an attesting witness.
10.

The Court has considered the order sheets, and the

TEST.CAS. 1/2001

4 of 5

materials, in these proceedings. The evidence led in support of the
petition includes the death certificate which is presented as Ex.PW1/A deposition of attesting witness.

The said witness PW-4 has

unequivocally deposed to the due execution of the Will by the testator
in his presence. The order sheets and the record also reveal that the
near relatives and subsequently their legal representatives though
served and made aware of these proceedings have not objected to the
grant of probate to the petitioners.

This Court has received a

valuation report in respect of the immovable property, which is
subject matter of the suit property, i.e. M-4, South Extension, Part-II,
New Delhi,

dated 30.1.2006.

The said valuation report is hereby

accepted.
11.

In view of the above discussion, the Court is of the

considered opinion that the petitioners have proved the due execution
of the Will by the testator and their entitlement, as legatees in it. The
Court is, therefore, satisfied that probate should be granted.
12.
granted

Test Cas No. 1/2001 is accordingly allowed.
to

the

first

petitioner

subject

to

the

Probate is

his

furnishing

administration bond, to the satisfaction of the Registrar and paying
the requisite stamp duty.

MAY
'sn'

15, 2008

TEST.CAS. 1/2001

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J

5 of 5

