*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

BAIL APPLN . 393/2007
Date of Decision : April 16, 2007

SURINDER SOOD

… PETITIONER
Through: Mr. Vinaya Bhasin, Sr. Advocate
With Mr. Pradeep K. Mittal, Praveen K. Mittal

&
Mr. Gautam K. Laha, Advocates,
Vs.
STATE

… RESPONDENT
Through: Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate for the State.
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Pradeep
Rana, Advocate for the complainant.

CORAM:
Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT(Open Court)
1.

The applicant is accused of having committed offences punishable under
Sections 420 and 468 IPC. He seeks anticipatory bail.
2. The brief facts necessary to decide this application are that one Rajinder Singh
(herein after referred to as the “Complainant”) allegedly confided in his morning
walk friend Ram Kumar Pawar about his desire to invest in business. He was

BAIL APPLN . 393/2007

1 of 5

informed that the business of human hair was profitable, particularly in export to
European Countries. The complainant, lured by Mr. Pawar expressed his
inability to invest the sum required for the business. The complainant as alleged
was introduced to the Petitioner who along with Mr. Pawar allegedly convinced
him to invest sizeable amounts in human hair business to get good returns. The
complainant upon the assurance given secured bank loans against property.
3. The complainant further alleged that the venture did not yield the expected profits;
the consignment was cancelled on account bad quality of hair. The complainant
was not getting profits or the money invested in the business back. He lodged an
FIR with the police on 9.8.2006
4. The Petitioner states that he and his family members have joined investigations
and the complainant has to be blamed for being careless in purchasing and
despatching inferior quality hair; without bills of purchase and invoices from
Calcutta or notice of demand and thereby making the export impossible, the
human hair was lying un exported. The Petitioner further states that in order to
pressurize him for compromise, the complainant lodged a false FIR.
5. Learned senior counsel, Mr. K.K.Sud, urged that the Complainant did not
approach the petitioner to settle the accounts and disputes regarding quality and
purchase price. It was submitted that the complainant neither demanded payment
nor sent any invoices, delivery challans etc., and that the complainant failed to lift
the inferior stock sent through Railway receipts, which were purchased by him in
Calcutta. It was contended that the Complainant was paid Rs. 7,50,000/-. He
BAIL APPLN . 393/2007

2 of 5

further submitted that the Railway Receipts had not mentioned the value of goods
and most of the receipts were endorsed with ‘Value not declared’.
6. Counsel further submitted that the petitioner insisted the complainant to provide
him with the bills and invoices to settle the issues of payment but the latter said
that he did not possess the documents; yet he made payment of the sum of Rs.
6,50,000/- by issuing cheques on several occasions in 2005-2006 and these
payments are credited to the Complainant’s firm. It was contended that the
complainant paid the sum of Rs.61.20 lakhs to Mr. Pawar and not at his instance.
7. The learned senior counsel for the Petitioner Mr. K.K.Sood has argued that the
Petitioner is a senior citizen and is also suffering. The learned counsel has urged
that the complainant has paid the entire amount to Mr. Pawar, and that they both
knew each other. The Petitioner had no role in introducing them and therefore
could not have induced the complainant to part with money. It was the
Complainants decision to take a plunge in business so the Petitioner’s intention to
cheat at the very inception cannot be established.
8. The learned counsel for the State submitted that the petitioner allegedly cheated
one Dilawar Singh in the business of Human hair, adopting a similar modus
operandi. He stated that a complaint was received on 19.2.2007 at Police Station
Sultanpuri, though no first information report has yet been lodged.
9. I have considered the submissions of the parties, and gone through the materials.
According to the allegations levelled, the Complainant, desirous of investing in
some profitable venture, was lured at the instance of the petitioner, to expend
BAIL APPLN . 393/2007

3 of 5

monies in the human hair export business. Though substantial amounts were
spent, the purchasers did not pay up, and the co-accused Pawar and the petitioner
convinced him that money had been received from the foreign buyer, but credited
in a wrong account. They again allegedly induced him to pay huge amounts after
borrowing from the Bank. In the status reports filed, it was also stated that carbon
copies of invoices were collected from the New Delhi Railway Station, allegedly
bearing the signatures of the complainant, which upon expert opinion, were not
his, but forgeries.
10. It is settled law that grant of anticipatory bail is dependant on sound exercise of
jurisdiction by the Court. While liberty of a citizen is a valuable right, equally
public interest in an unimpeded investigation into serious offences cannot be
undermined. Having considered the submission of parties, at this stage, it cannot
be said that the application’s role is so completely unclouded or blemishless, as to
restrict the prosecutions choice of custodial interrogation. In these circumstances,
the petitioner, in my opinion, cannot be enlarged on bail under Section 438.
11. The above discussion does not preclude the petitioner upon applying for regular
bail; in such case, his request shall be considered independently, uninfluenced by
the above observations. Subject to this, the application is dismissed.

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
APRIL 16th, 2007

BAIL APPLN . 393/2007

4 of 5

BAIL APPLN . 393/2007

5 of 5

