*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.M.C. 1305/2005
Reserved on : March 14, 2007
Decided on : April 18, 2007

PEPSI FOOD PVT. LTD. AND ANR.
..... Petitioners
Through Mr. Rajesh Batra, Ms. Sonia Kukreja,
Advocates
versus
EXPORT INSPECTION AGENCY
..... Respondent
Through Mr. R.N. Mittal, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Puneet Mittal, Mr. Pawan Mittal, Ms. Akanksha
Verma Chandok, Advocates

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?
Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
4.
in the Digest?

Yes

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

This petition,

seeks quashing of the order of charge dated

14.10.2003 passed by the Metropolitan Magistrate ("the trial court") in
Complaint Case No. 3170/1993.
2.
crlmc-1305-2005

The brief facts necessary to decide this petition are that the 1

st

1 of 10

petitioner (hereinafter referred to as “the Company”) is a large exporter
of rice in the country. The 2nd petitioner was employed as General
manager, Corporate Affairs with the company. The company exports
Basmati Rice to USA and other countries.

The respondent,

complainant, (referred to as "the complainant" or "the respondent") is a
statutory body constituted under the Export (Quality Control &
Inspection) Act, 1963, (hereafter called "the 1963 Act").
3.

On 31.8.1991, Director (Inspection and Quality Control)
communicated to the company that the Monthly Import Detention List
forwarded by the Dept. of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug
Administration, Washington, USA, had detained Basmati Rice exported
in the January-February 1991 on account of insect and rodent filth. The
petitioner alleged that the Director demanded information as to where
the rice was processed and a reply to this was furnished. However, no
further communication was received from the export inspection
agency.

4.

The petitioners allege that the Export Inspection Agency
(hereinafter referred to as “the Agency”) filed a complaint against them
under Section 11 of the1963 Act. It was alleged in the complaint that
the Central Government after consulting the Export Inspection Council
promulgated the Export of Basmati Rice (Quality Control & Inspection)

crlmc-1305-2005

2 of 10

Order, 1963 (hereafter "the Order").

The order compelled every

exporter of Basmati Rice to obtain a certificate of quality from one of
the four stipulated agencies. These included AGMARK (Agricultural
Marketing Adviser to the Govt. of India).
5.

The petitioners further allege that the complainant relied upon a
report

of

detention

received

from

the

US Food

and Drug

Administration (USFDA) and correspondence between the parties with
respect to the export consignment.

They further allege that the

complaint is devoid of any particulars or details of export and it that
relied upon the report received by USFDA to establish that some export
was made by it.

The petitioner stated that the consignment was

inspected by the Agency. It is also alleged that the complainant had
similarly filed another complaint, which was dismissed in default.

6.

The petitioners filed two applications before the trial court; one
was for discharge, where it was stated that the company had exported
80 M.T. of Basmati Rice between October 1990 and January 1991, for the
said consignments certificate of quality was obtained from AGMARK
in accordance with the procedure, had been obtained. During the
hearing of the application, it was stated, even assuming the export was
established by report of USFDA to the tune of 176000

crlmc-1305-2005

pounds of
3 of 10

Basmati Rice, that was not suggestive that the exports were made from
India after 29.9.1990. The petitioners further state that the trial court
had taken the AGMARK certificates on record and ruled that they
should be proved during trial.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the complainant
has to establish the specifics of the export that there was an export
within the specific period, which amounted to an offence according to
the law then in force. Secondly, it had to establish that no certificate of
quality was obtained by the exporter from any of the four specified
agencies. The petitioner company already had 3 AGMARK certificates,
and taken in totality, the complainant would be unable to establish its
case. Consequently, the complaint deserved to be quashed.

8.

The trial court in its order dated 14.10.2003 rejected a request by
the company for recall of the summoning order. The extracts of the
said order are as follows:
“The above elicited grounds for recalling of the summoning order
are such which at this stage cannot be ascertained unless the
parties in contest are afforded reasonable opportunity to prove
their case. Even the authenticity of document relied upon by
accused No.2 is required to be proved as it stands not admitted but
disputed by the complainant and when the accused themselves are
initially allegedly claiming requisite certificate having been
obtained by complainant but having not been obtained so but
pursuant to filing of this complaint to take contradictory plea of
having obtained certificate of inspection from another authorised
agency, AGMARK, which certificate are under dispute and the
complainant dispute of the goods detained being not the one for

crlmc-1305-2005

4 of 10

which certificate of inspection are shown by the defence, the matter
requires affording for reasonable opportunities to parties to lead
evidences as triable, issues are raised which requires parties to be
given requisite opportunities and the complaint outright cannot be
dismissed.”
9.

Learned counsel for the respondent, relying on the reply, argued
that the Director received a list of a monthly Import Detention List of
food stuff exported from India and detained at various ports in USA
due to contamination and improper labelling of the consignments. The
petitioner company was named in the list. The Director was asked to
look into the matter and submit a report. The complainant's Director
wrote to the petitioners; in the reply to the letter the petitioner's stated
that the consignment was inspected by the Export Inspection Agency,
New Delhi and the statement was found untrue as per the company's
record and so a complaint was lodged.

10.

It was also submitted that before the trial court, the petitioners stated
that their consignment was inspected by AGMARK which is also a
competent agency for inspection and they also submitted certain
certificates. It was urged that out of the three AGMARK certificates
filed by the petitioners, two were dated 12.10.1990 and the 3rd one
dated 1.11.1990, whereas the consignment was shipped on 30.10.1990.
The quality shown in these certificates was Grade 'A' whereas the

crlmc-1305-2005

5 of 10

quality per packing list is Indian Super Grade 'A'. Rule 4(3) and Subrule (1) says that intimation has to be furnished to the authorities two
days before inspection and the records show that in the present case
intimation was given on the same day and for the intimation dated
12.10.1990, the inspection was done 11.10.1990.
11.

The question which arises for decision is whether the order of the trial
court was issued wrongly, either without application of mind, or in
excess of jurisdiction. The petitioner's challenge to the proceeding is
two fold, i.e. that the complaint is lacking in precise details as to the
commission of the offence; and that the materials on record, justify a
quashing order, since the goods were duly inspected, by a competent
agency, which issued the AGMARK certificate.

12.

The complaint is premised upon information received through monthly
import detention particulars, from the USFDA about improper
labelling and contamination of the goods which were consigned by the
petitioner. The material portion of the complaint reads as follows:

"7.
That on the receipt of the above said letter of the
Government of India, the complainant consignment of basmati
rice for inspection from 6-10-1990 till 31-1-1991 and if so whether
any certificate was issued to him for exporting rice to USA but
found that the accused never obtained any certificate for exporting
basmati rice during that period from Export Inspection Agency,
Delhi.

crlmc-1305-2005

6 of 10

8.
That finding that no such certificate was issued to the
accused for exporting basmati rice the accused were approached to
furnish a detailed report about the consignments of basmati rice
exported by them to USA which were detained by USFDA and
also to give teh name of the authority which issued the Inspection
Certificate under the Act for exporting basmati rice to USA vide
letter dated 31.8.1991. A copy of the same is being filed herewith
as Annexure G.
9. That the accused gave no reply to the said letter dated 31-81991 till date. Cause of action arose on 31-3-1991 and the matter
is within limitation..."
13.

A reading of the order dated 14.10.2003 shows that besides the grounds
urged in the course of these proceedings, it was also contended that the
complaint was barred by limitation.

14.

The principal basis for seeking intervention of the Court is the existence
of documents, said to be certificates and the alleged absence of material
pleadings, making out the offence. The relevant part of the complaint
alleged that the petitioners did not respond, (when asked to do so)
whether the necessary certificate of the agency had been issued to
them, at the time of export of the goods. This was because by virtue of
a Notification dated 14.9.1990, export of Basmati was prohibited unless
a mark or seal recognized by the Central Government indicative of its
confirming to the standard specifications was affixed or applied on the
packages or containers on such rice and the further requirement of its

crlmc-1305-2005

7 of 10

being accompanied by a Certificate / Grade / Inspection issued by the
Agricultural Marketing Advisor to the Government of India or by any
other agency specified under Section 7 of the 1963 Act, to that effect.
The complaint refers to queries by the agency about existence of
certificate by letter dated 31.8.1991. A copy of that letter was annexed
and is a part of the record. Para 10 of the complaint adverts to reply
dated 24.10.1991; a copy of the same is also a part of the record.
Interestingly the letter dated 24.10.1991, of the petitioner merely gives
certain explanations about what is meant by rejection, by the USFDA.
According to the company the rejection was a routine practice,
although an avoidable one.

The reply no where mentioned about

existence of any certificate by any authorized agency, or an AGMARK
certificate, at the time of consignment.
15.

It is no doubt true that in the course of proceedings, copies of certain
AGMARK, grading certificates were filed.

Interestingly, however,

those certificates are dated 12.10.1990 and 1.11.1990. The respondent
complainant has not accepted those documents and there is some doubt
as to whether they relate to the consignments in question.
16.

While dealing with a complaint under Section 200, the trial Court or the
Magistrate as the case may be has to apply his mind before issuing a
summoning order and not act mechanically. If the complaint and the

crlmc-1305-2005

8 of 10

materials justifiably can lead to the inference that an offence as alleged
is made out, issuance of process would be correct.
17.

In the present case, the complaint in my considered opinion contains
sufficient material for the Court to have, at the stage of issuance of
process, formed the opinion that the petitioner had not complied with
the provisions of law and that the offence under Section 11 of the 1963
Act had been made out inasmuch as false statements had been
furnished to the Central Government. The materials also pointed, that
the consignments had been rejected on account of contamination, a fact
which has not been denied.

In view of these, it would not be

appropriate for this Court, to weigh the materials and conclude that
copies of the AGMARK certificates issued in October/November, 1990
conclusively established that the petitioners were not guilty of the
offences. This aspect is further highlighted by the doubts expressed by
the complainant about the documents and whether they could have
been used for the transactions that are the subject matter of the
proceedings.
18.

In the light of the above discussion, I am of the opinion that this not an
appropriate case for intervention by the Court under Section 482 of the
Criminal Procedure Code. The petition is accordingly dismissed.

crlmc-1305-2005

9 of 10

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
APRIL 18, 2007

crlmc-1305-2005

10 of 10

