10
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : April 19th, 2007

+

CRL.REV.P. 81/2005
ANJU KHURANA

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Hari Narayan Takkar, Advocate

versus
STATE & ANR.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. O.P.Saxena, Advocate for State
Mr. R.N.Sharma, Advocate for respondent

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1. This revision petition is directed against an order dated 23.8.2004 whereby two
accused namely Smt. Savita and Amrit Khurana were discharged.
2. The petitioner had complained that the said accused along with her father-in-law
B.D.Khurana, Sanjay Khurana and Prem Khurana had committed offences under
Sections 341/448/380/34 IPC.
3. Learned counsel contended that the impugned order is unsustainable as it is premised
on a complete mis-appreciation of the materials on record. The complainant recorded
her statement on 11.7.2000. After attending her case in the Crime Against Women
Cell, where she complained against her husband and the said accused about offences

under Sections 498A/406 when she returned to the matrimonial home she found that
the accused had locked the premises and taken away all her household goods and
articles. She had been told that the house has been sold to some one else.
4. Counsel took me through the statement recorded and submitted that on 4.7.2000, the
accused threatened to throw all the household goods/articles from the premises of the
informant but she did not take the matter seriously, and went to school, where she was
teaching. The further allegation is that when she returned on 6.7.2000, her father-inlaw and her brothers-in-law were outside the premises and informed her that her
household articles had been removed; the house has been sold to some one else.
5. Counsel for the respondent urged that none of the ingredients of the offences alleged
were made out as far as the discharged accused were concerned. Although there was a
vague statement about 4.7.2000, the actual incident took place on 6.7.2000, when the
complainant did not allege about the presence of the two accused petitioners namely
Smt. Savita and Amrit Kaur. The specific allegations and the persons named were the
other accused.
6. It was contended that the complaint had been previously notified about the impending
disposal of the premises as she was living away from the matrimonial home with her
parents. It was submitted that in spite of being aware about such change she did not
deliberately take back her goods. In any event counsel contended that no offence was
made out because the two accused were rightly discharged and that the order of court
was just and proper.
7. Although the complainant in her statement on 7.11.2000 has alleged that some account
of statement was made by all the accused on 4.7.2000 the actual incident is said to

have occurred on 6.7.2000. On that date she made a specific mention about the
presence of three accused but not of the those who are discharged.

In these

circumstances I am of the opinion, after considering the materials on record including
the file of the trial court that the impugned order is unexceptionable not requiring
interference.
8. The petition is accordingly dismissed. The records of the trial court shall be returned
back forthwith.

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
APRIL 19, 2007
mm

