27
*

+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reported
April 16, 2007
CRL.M.C. 2273/2005
DINESH YADAV

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Anurag Jain, Advocate

versus
C.B.I.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Shashank Singh for CBI

CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be

Yes

allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporters or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest?
%
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT (OPEN COURT)
1.
In this petition, the FIR and criminal proceedings in which the petitioner
has been named as accused No. 4, has been questioned. The petitioner seeks a
quashing order on the ground that taken as a whole, neither the First Information
Report nor the materials or the charge-sheet make out a case against him and
that continuing the criminal proceedings in these circumstances would be
prejudicial to him.
crlmc-2273-05

1 of 5

2.

Mr. Anurag Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner contended firstly that

the petitioner was never named in the First Information Report. The FIR had
alleged that the accused had committed offences punishable under Section
420/467/471 IPC read with Section 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
It was alleged that during the relevant time, sometime in 1997-98, one M/s Vijay
Kumar & Company was allotted work order by the then Executive Engineer, one
Mr. Ahmed Syeed with dense carpeting of the MB Road. The said M/s Vijay &
Company and another concern had submitted tenders; the work was allotted to
M/s Vijay & Company on account of the lower rates of the work quoted. The
whole work order was estimated to Rs. 4,26,526/- but the approval was restricted
to Rs. 4 lakhs. It was alleged that as per the agreement, the work had to be
executed within the parameters of instructions issued by the MCD.

The

contractor was to procure fresh supply of bulk Bitumen from Bharat Petroleum
or Indian Oil Corporation or Hindustan Petroleum as approved by the Engineerin-Chief of the MCD.
3.

The allegations levelled were that the accused concern had a Hot Mix Plant

somewhere in Ghaziabad and that certain invoices said to have been issued by
IOC, Mathura were furnished by the contractor. It was alleged that the invoices
were fraudulent and not genuine. After lodging of the FIR, investigations were
conducted and the petitioner, who was not initially named as an accused was
subsequently shown in the charge-sheet and recommended for trial as accused
No.4.
4.

Learned counsel urged that there is absolutely no material on record

crlmc-2273-05

2 of 5

suggestive of any role, much less culpable role played by the petitioner in the socalled commission of the offence or any conspiracy in that regard. He urged that
he had no connection with the invoice tendered and relied upon by the accused
concern and that the role was primarily attributed to other accused persons. It
was also urged that the petitioner had joined MCD on 3rd August, 1998 whereas
the allegations pertained to a previous period commencing in July, 1998.
5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the mere filing of the charge-

sheet by itself did not necessarily mean that a case had been made out and that
the Court was entitled, by virtue of Section 482 of the Code, to examine the
matter and conclude independently whether the criminal proceedings were
maintainable. He relied upon the judgment reported as Ashok Chaturvedi &
Ors. Vs. Sheetul H. Chanchani & Ors. 1998 SCC Crl. 1704.
6.

Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that after the filing of the

charge-sheet, this Court ought not to entertain the proceedings, as examining the
rival contentions would amount to short-circuiting the process and pre-judging
the case on its merits. It was urged that even though the petitioner was not
named in the FIR originally, yet, on the basis of the investigations and materials
gathered subsequently, his role became apparent and as a consequence, his name
was included in the charge-sheet.
7.

Learned counsel submitted that there is evidence to show that the

petitioner, who was expected to supervise ten per cent of the total work, had
deliberately overlooked the conditions contained in the work order and that also
he had allegedly signed the gate passes of the Hot Mix Plant and other materials
crlmc-2273-05

3 of 5

authenticating the entries made initially by the Junior Engineer and the Assistant
Engineer. Similar authentication of documents of the Accountant and UDC were
made by him on 25.08.98, without satisfying that the work order conditions had
not been fulfilled by the contractor.
8.

Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner did not even verify as to

whether any recommendatory letter was issued by the MCD to the IOC Division
Marketing office, Delhi.
9.

The factual narrative would show that when the FIR was lodged initially,

the petitioner was not arrayed as accused. The allegations pertained to improper
lodging of documents which were allegedly forged and fabricated and the use of
Bitumen which is said to have been never issued by IOC. Though counsel for the
petitioner is right in asserting that the Court, in exercising its jurisdiction under
Section 482 is un-inhibited from considering the materials in totality and
conclude even at the stage of filing of the charge-sheet whether the criminal
proceedings ought to be quashed, nevertheless, such an exercise has to be done
circumspectly and with caution. The rule enunciated by the Supreme Court in
Bhajan Lal's case and several other decisions is that the Court is empowered to
exercise its inherent, and exceptional jurisdiction to further the ends of justice if
it is satisfied that read as a whole, the First Information Report as well as the
materials on record do not make out ingredients of the offence or offences in
question. The other grounds are illegality and mala fides.
10.

The factual narrative contained in the preceding paragraphs of this order,

in my opinion, shows that there is some material on the basis of which chargecrlmc-2273-05

4 of 5

sheet was filed. This is not a case where there is no material for this Court to
conclude that the petitioner cannot be proceeded with. The role attributed to the
petitioner pertained to his alleged acts of omission and commission in the
supervision of performance of the contract by the concern. I am, therefore,
satisfied that no case for interference is made out under Section 482. It is made
clear that the observations in this order were only for the purpose of deciding
whether quashing of the proceedings were warranted and not on the merits of the
case. All rights and contentions of the parties are kept open.
The petition is accordingly dismissed.
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
APRIL 16, 2007
as

crlmc-2273-05

5 of 5

