*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

CRL.REV.P. 194/2007
Reserved on : July 05,2007
Decided on : July 16, 2007

MANOJ KUMAR & ORS

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. V. K.Shali, Advocate

versus
THE STATE(NCT OF DELHI)

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for State

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?
yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

The present Revision petition has been preferred against the order dated 3.1.2007

of the learned Additional Sessions Judge (hereafter "the trial court"). The Petitioners were
charged under section 420/468/471/120B/201 of Indian Penal Code and under section
13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act
2.

The brief facts necessary to decide this petition are as follows. The accused

persons i.e. Ghanshyam Das was the Zonal Employment officer, Nangloi, Delhi. Praveen
Kumar Gupta was a Lower Division Clerk. Pradeep kumar and Kartar singh were the
peons working in the employment exchange. The 17 petitioners
Crl.Rev.P. 194/07

were

allegedly
1 of 8

referred by accused Ghanshyam Das for employment after obtaining illegal gratification.
The names of the Petitioners were allegedly forwarded to the personal officer of the
Ordnance Depot, Shakur Basti for being appointed as "Mazdoors".
3.

It was alleged, in the charge sheet filed by the prosecution that an X-1 card of

every candidate is prepared at the Employment Exchange at the time of registration of a
person for the purpose of employment assistance; the entries are made in the main
register, X-63. The X-1 card is matched with the candidate against the notified vacancies
according to seniority and eligibility. This card plays an important role in matching and
sponsoring of the candidate.
4.

The Ordnance Depot, by its letter dated 18th February 1997 sent a list of 31

candidates(23 of the general category and 8 of OBC category) selected for the post of
Mazdoor for verification to the Director of Employment. It was allegedly revealed at this
point that out of these 31 candidates, 20 in the General category and 2 in the OBC
category were bogus. Accordingly, on 23.9.97, a complaint in this regard was made by
Sh. A.S. Khullar, the then Joint Director (Employment). It was allegedly found during
investigation that the X-1 cards of 18 accused, including the 17 petitioners were missing
from the employment office whereas their names were substituted in the register. The
candidature of these persons was considered as bogus.
5.

Shri Khullar had conducted an inquiry into the matter on 28.8.1997 and allegedly

the co-accused Ghanshyam Das confessed, in the presence of two office employees that
accused Kartar Singh had collected illegal gratification of Rs. 40,000/- from the bogus
Crl.Rev.P. 194/07

2 of 8

selected candidates for illegally sponsoring their names . It was alleged that Rs.15,000/was retained by him and Rs. 10,000/- was taken by Co-accused Praveen Kumar. Kartar
Singh kept Rs. 10,000/- with him and the balance of Rs. 5,000/- was kept by Pradeep
kumar.
6.

The trial court charged the petitioners under Section 420/468/471/120B/201 IPC;

the co-accused were also charged under the said provisions. The extracts of the order
dated 3.1.2007 are as follows;
“ In the light of the legal position highlighted as above. I find that
at this stage only a prime facie case has to be made out and even strong suspicion
is sufficient to frame the charge and the judgments relied upon by the accused
persons have got no applicability at this stage as sifting of evidence is permissible
for limited purpose of finding out if a prima facie case is made out or not. Prima
facie extra judicial confession of accused Ghanshyam das spelling out the role of
his co-accused coupled with the fact that the reasons given in the charge sheet for
candidature of selected candidates being bogus and of missing of x-1 cards of the
beneficiary accused no.5 to 22 and of their being no entry in the renewal register
of their names offer being lapsed and of changed pages in the main register
speaks volume of criminal conspiracy inter se the accused persons to manipulate
the records to cause wrongful loss of charge and undue gain to themselves in
sufficient to call upon the accused persons to face trial in this case as there
cannot be direct evidence of criminal conspiracy and admittedly accused
Ghanshyam Das had retired when the challan was filed against him and so prima
facie there being not any legal requirement of prior sanction for his prosecution.
It is settled law that act or action of one of the accused cannot be used as
evidence against another but section10 of evidence act carves out on exception to
this law in case of conspiracy and so it cannot be said that no case is made out
against the beneficiary accused no.5 to 22 because they have been employment as
labourers in ordnance Depot in pursuance to the directions passed CWP
No.2513/97 as the complainant or the employment exchange was not party to the
said writ petition one for this reason could not be brought to the notice of the
Hon’ble High Court the names of the beneficiary accused no.5 to 22 were not
duly registered with the employment exchange and their registration was bogus…
……..I find that a prima facie case is made out u/s 420/468/471/120-b/201 IPC
against accused.’’

Crl.Rev.P. 194/07

3 of 8

7.

Mr. V.K. Shali, learned counsel, contended that the framing of charge is an

outcome of relying on the extra-judicial confession purported to have been made by
Ghanshyam Das. The Learned Counsel submitted that the said extra-judicial confession is
hit by Sec.164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which lays down as to how confession
of an accused is to be recorded.
8.

The learned Counsel has further submitted that the extrajudicial confession made

by the accused Ghanshyam Das was recorded by one SI, the investigating officer of the
case. This confession is again hit by Section25 of the Indian Evidence Act. The section
provides that confession made to a police officer is inadmissible.
9.

The Learned Counsel urged that the complainant alleged that validity of X-1 of

most of the candidates had lapsed. Counsel argued that merely because some entries in
the register, in the employment exchange were missing, there could be no presumption
against the Petitioners. The counsel submitted that the Petitioners had no access to the
registers; they were in the custody of officials of the Employment Exchange.

The

counsel has also urged that there was no witness to suggest that any illegal gratification
was given to any person. The learned Counsel submits that there is no recovery of any
amount, which is an important ingredient to connect the accused with the accusation. The
learned counsel also questioned the applicability of Section 10 of the Indian Evidence
Act.

He contended that there was no evidence to prove conspiracy. The counsel

contended that this court had occasion to consider the facts when after the selection
process, the Ordinance Depot did not issue the appointment letters. At that stage, the

Crl.Rev.P. 194/07

4 of 8

Division Bench held that the refusal to appoint the Petitioners was unjustified; it directed
their appointment. In these circumstances, the petitioner's employment was a
consequence of this court's directions. The appointments have not ceased, nor have they
been cancelled. The framing of charges would lead to untold harassment.
10.

Learned counsel submitted that the lapsing of the petitioners' registration was a

technicality, which could not vitiate their appointments, since they were admittedly
eligible according to norms and had been found suitable by the Ordnance depot, the
employer, who selected them.
11.

The petition was opposed by the learned Additional Public Prosecutor, who urged

that the statement of Ghanshyam, the co-accused, who facilitated commission of the
offence, was not recorded in extrajudicial proceedings; it was during an enquiry held by
the Employment Exchange. Besides, that statement was witnessed by two other coemployees; they corroborated it, in their statements during the criminal investigation. As
such the question of applicability of Seciton 25 of the Evidence Act, or Section 164, Cr.
PC did not arise. Learned counsel urged that the totality of circumstances showed that the
petitioners were beneficiaries of the criminality perpetrated by the co-accused, for illegal
gratification. They were ineligible and had induced the employer, through false
representations, as well as connivance in getting fabricated documents placed on the
Employment Exchange records, to secure jobs. Such jobs would have been given to
others who were eligible and entitled to it, but for the acts of the petitioners and coaccused.

Crl.Rev.P. 194/07

5 of 8

12.

The factual matrix is that the petitioners, on the basis of recommendations of the

Employment Exchange, secured employment as Mazdoors in the Ordnance Depot. The
Exchange held an inquiry into allegations of irregularities; it was discovered that X-1
cards had been substituted. Other records were allegedly tampered. The petitioners were
beneficiaries. They were otherwise ineligible for appointment, since their registration
with the Exchange had lapsed. On this aspect, as to eligibility, I am unpersuaded by the
submission of the petitioners. The object of requiring employers to recruit from amongst
candidates registered with the Employment Exchanges is to give fairness to the
recruitment system. If the law provides that registration has to be renewed, as a
precondition to forwarding of names to concerned employers, that is a substantive
requirement, since its non-compliance and the forwarding of names of unregistered
candidates or of those whose names have lapsed would then acquire advantage over those
who follow the law, by continuing their registration, or renew it. This would result in
denial of appointment to those who are eligible. Likewise, the order of the Division
Bench, in my considered opinion, cannot preclude investigation and trial into offences
where the behaviour of accused warrants that approach.
13.

The probative value of extra-judicial confessions of a co-accused has to be tested

by the court, in the trial. The Supreme Court, in Thimma vs- State of Mysore AIR 1971
SC 1871 held that an unambiguous confession, if admissible in evidence and free from
suspicion suggesting its falsity is a valuable piece of evidence which possesses a high
probative force because it emanates directly from the person committing the offence. But
in the process of proof of an alleged confession the court has to be satisfied that it is
Crl.Rev.P. 194/07

6 of 8

voluntary, does not appear to be the result of inducement, threat or promise as
contemplated by Section 24 of the Indian Evidence Act and the surrounding
circumstances do not indicate that it was inspired by some improper or collateral
consideration suggestive of its being untrue. Subsequent decisions have endorsed that
view. Such admissions are evidence and constitute relevant circumstances, in view of
Section 10 of the Indian Evidence Act.

14. In State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh 1977 (4) SCC 39 and Union of India V. P.K.Sen
and Anr. AIR 1979 SC 366 was held that at the stage of framing a charge, a strong
suspicion founded upon materials before the Magistrate, which leads him to form a
presumptive opinion as to the existence of the factual ingredients constituting the offence
alleged,may justify the framing of charge against the accused in respect of the
commission of that offence.The court need not meticulously scan the evidence, as such an
exercise would result in a mini-trial, which is not provided by law. Conversely,if the trial
court finds that the materials do lead to suspicion,but not of such degree as to be called
"grave" it need not frame the charges. The path to be trodden by the court is often narrow;
it is always subjective to the facts of the case.
15.

This court today is not concerned with the admissibility or otherwise of the

statement of Ghanshyam. In fact, the circumstances of his statements, as well as their
contents, have been spoken about by the witnesses who heard him. They have recorded
statements during investigation. If one takes these into consideration, as well as the other
features, such as the ineligibility of the petitioners, due to their names having been

Crl.Rev.P. 194/07

7 of 8

recommended despite expiry of their registration, with the Employment, there is
sufficient material, prima facie, to say that there exists grave suspicion about their
involvement in commission of the offences in question. The petitioners, admittedly, were
beneficiaries. Their involvement as conspirators, is to be established in the trial.

16.

The result of the above discussion is that the petition has to fail. The impugned

order is unexceptionable; it is hereby affirmed. The petition is accordingly dismissed,
without any order as to costs.
16th July, 2007

Crl.Rev.P. 194/07

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J

8 of 8

