*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CS(OS) 1913/2002
Reserved on : January 30, 2008
Decided on : February, 18, 2008.

TIME WARNER ENTERTAINMENT, L.P.& ORS.
..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. C.M. Lall, Advocate with
Mr.Manish Dhir, Advocate
versus
SUDHIR SHIVRAM JADAV
Through

..... Defendant

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reports of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?

Yes.

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

In the present suit the Plaintiffs seek decree of permanent

injunction, restraining the Defendant from infringing their copyright,
from using any unlicensed copies of their works and also to direct the
defendants to hand over infringing copies and plates as well as to
render accounts of the profits made by it.
2.

The relevant facts of the case are as follows. The plaintiffs

are nine Corporations incorporated in the Unites States who, either

CS(OS) 1913/2002

1 of 5

themselves and/or their associated and affiliated companies carry on
business of film production; they are owners, co-owners, assignees,
licensees of rights, titles and have interests in and to the copyrights in
the films produced by them. The Plaintiffs’ films are widely distributed
in formats such as Video Cassettes, Video Compact Discs (VCD), Laser
Discs (LD) and Digital Versatile Discs (DVD). The Defendant, a video
library, regularly sells and gives on rent and hires well-known Indian
titles through their outlet or by way home delivery.
3.

On 23rd May 2002 a Police raid against the Defendant was

conducted resulting in a seizure of pirated 872 Video Compact Dises
(VCD’s) and 249 DVD’s from their godown at Shabana Cottage,
Ground Floor, Janhu Gauthan Door NO.2, Juhu, Mumbai and FIR No.
10/2002 was registered against them. Another raid was conducted on
October 16th, 2002 once again resulting in a large seizure of 889
VCD’s and 130 DVD’s. In furtherance of the same, a First Information
Report (FIR) bearing No. 20/2002 was registered with the Police
Station Social Service Branch, Mumbai. This suit was instituted
thereafter.
4.

It is averred by the Plaintiffs, that they are the producers

& the copyright owners of various titles, which have either been
released and/or are due for release in the near future. It is alleged
that the defendant deals with films (whose copyright vests with the

CS(OS) 1913/2002

2 of 5

Plaintiffs) without a license and suit copies are used by cable
networks all over India to exhibit the movies on their local channels.
The Plaintiffs submit that the exhibition of even a single unauthorized
film is capable of causing irreparable injury and damage to them.
They aver that exhibition of pirated copies of films, duplicated for the
purpose of sale or rental by the Defendant, results in reduced
viewership at cinema halls and theaters, which additionally results in
huge losses to the exchequer by way of collection of taxes, including
entertainment tax. Therefore, they aver that the Court must grant a
mandatory injunction in their favour and that Defendant must render
accounts in relation to profits.
5.

On 26th November 2002 the plaint was registered and

summons were issued to the Defendants. Since repeated summons to
the

Defendants

did

not

yield

results,

through

order

dated

September 17th 2003, it was the Defendant was sent down ex-parte.
By virtue of an order passed in I.A. No. 10966/2002 (Plaintiffs’
application under Order XXXIX Rule 1 & 2 CPC) the Defendant were
restrained from dealing with infringing copies of works in which the
Plaintiffs enjoy copyright and also from doing anything without a
license granted by the Plaintiffs, the exclusive right for doing which
under the relevant laws are conferred upon the Plaintiffs. However,
injunction was granted only with respect to those works, titles of

CS(OS) 1913/2002

3 of 5

which were submitted with the Plaint and no injunction was granted
for future works. The same was upheld in appeal.
6.

In support of their claims the Plaintiffs have filed a list of

titles in which they own copyrights (Ex PW1/3), a compact disc
containing the list of titles held by the Plaintiffs (Ex PW1/4), copies of
film certification granted to the Plaintiffs by the Central Board of Film
Certification (Ex PW1/A), copies of Power of Attorney granted in
favour of their constituted attorney (Ex PW1/1 and Ex Pw1/2) by the
Plaintiffs and also the certified copies of the FIR filed in Mumbai (Ex
PW1/B). The Plaintiffs have also filed copies of injunction orders
granted in their favour against cable operators from using the
copyrighted works of the Plaintiffs without license (Ex PW1/C and Ex
PW1/D).

Evidence by way of affidavit also given by Sh. K S Saha, the

Constituted Attorney of the Plaintiffs and the same was duly recorded
by the Court on 18th January 2007.
7.

The pleadings and materials on record, and the testimony

led in support of its case, establishes that the plaintiff are owners of
copyright in respect of the film titles Ex PW1/3 and Ex PW1/4. The
defendant, a video library, was found in possession of 1771 infringing
copies of VCDs and 379 DVD seized during two separate raids. The
plaintiff has also shown that criminal proceedings are pending against
the defendant. Sections 13, 14 and 17 of the Copyright Act protect

CS(OS) 1913/2002

4 of 5

the plaintiff's copyrights in the works. The defendants have chosen
not to contest these proceedings.

On the available materials, the

plaintiffs are entitled to a decree for permanent injunction restraining
the defendants from infringing the copyright of the plaintiffs in the
works mentioned in Ex PW1/3.
8.

So far as future work of the plaintiffs are concerned, the

relief is a sort of blanket and universal injunction.

The nature of

works which are likely to be produced, nature and kind of
infringement, propensity of the defendant to indulge in further
infringement etc. have not been disclosed. The plaintiff also does not
have any cause of action - nor does the suit disclose any so far as the
defendant's likelihood of infringing its future works are concerned.
Therefore, permanent injunction in respect of future works and
copyright for such work cannot be granted.
9.

For the above reasons, the suit deserves to succeed. The

suit is decreed in terms of para 7 of this judgment; let a decree for
permanent injunction restraining the defendants from infringing the
plaintiff's copyrights in the works mentioned in Ex. PW-1/3 be drawn.
10.

No costs.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
FEBRUARY 18, 2008

CS(OS) 1913/2002

5 of 5

