*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : 5th February, 2008.
Decided on : 18th February, 2008.

+

CS (OS) 219/2008
ESPN STARS SPORTS

..... Plaintiff
Through:Mr. Dushyant Dave, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. N. Ganpathy, Advocate

versus
GLOBAL BROADCAST NEWS LTD. & ORS .
Defendants
Through:Mr Harish Salve, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Nisha Bhambhani, Advocate for defendant Nos. 1,3
and 5.
Mr. Manmohan, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Ankur Chawla, Ms.
Pallavi Langar, Ms. Amrita Bhattacharya, Advocates for
D-2.
Mr. A.J. Bhambhani, Ms. Ranjita, Advocates for Intervenor
NBA.
Mr. Maninder Singh, Ms. Pratibha M. Singh,
Mr. Sudeep Chatterjee, Advocates for Zee News Ltd.
CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
IA No. 1469/2008 (U/O 39 R.1 & 2 CPC)
1.

The plaintiff has sought permanent injunction against the defendants

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

1 of 35

to restrain them from utilizing the footage of plaintiff, in the matches played,
and to be played during the India-Australia test matches, 20x20 series and
the tri-series One day internationals involving Sri Lanka, India and Australia,
without obtaining its prior permission and in violation of the plaintiff’s terms
and conditions and from utilizing the footage from the television for any
television programme, except for regularly scheduled news bulletin, in excess
of 30 seconds per bulletin and a total of two minutes per day and from
carrying any advertisements before, during and after such footage. An adinterim injunction to the same effect has also been sought.
2.

The plaintiff, ESPN Star Sports is a general partnership under the laws

of the State of Delaware, United States of America. Its beneficial owners are
Star Group Limited (50%) and ESPN, Inc (50%). The latter is a subsidiary of
the Walt Disney Group. The Plaintiff has its office in Singapore; it is engaged
in the production and the telecasting of sports channels under the name of
ESPN, STAR Sports and STAR Cricket (referred to as “Channels”) among
others, in India. It’s principal production facility is located in Singapore. It
broadcasts 12 channels from that facility to about 26 countries. It claims to
have the services of 35 dedicated, fulltime, award winning professionals. It
retains three dedicated leased satellite lines from London. The Plaintiff has
engaged the services of world class cricket commentators. It creates live feed
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

2 of 35

by deploying the range of 18-26 cameras on the ground apart from software
such as Hawk eye, Snickometer, virtual spectator and super slow motion etc.
3.

The plaintiff avers that it has obtained the sole and exclusive

rights/license from various sports bodies including but not limited to Cricket
Australia to televise sporting events including the India versus Australia
cricket test matches, One Day International (ODI) matches and the solitary
T20 cricket match to be played in Australia from December 26, 2007 onwards
till March 8, 2008 (hereafter referred as the “Cricket Matches”). Therefore, no
other person or entity can broadcast/telecast those cricket matches in India
without licence from the Plaintiff or its sole and exclusive distributor ESPN
Software India Private Limited.
4.

That Defendant No.1, Global Broadcast News Limited, is a Broadcaster

having a number of news channels by the name of “CNN-IBN” and “IBN7”.
The Defendant No.2, TV Today Network Pvt. Ltd., is a Broadcaster which has
news channels by the name of “Aaj Tak” and “Headlines Today”.

The

Defendant No.3, Media Content and Communications Services India Pvt. Ltd.,
is

a Broadcaster having a news channel by the name of “STAR news”.

Defendant No. 4, Zee News Ltd., is a Broadcaster having a news channel by
the name of “Zee News”. Defendant No.5, New Delhi Television Ltd, is a news
Channel by the name of “NDTV 24x7”.
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

3 of 35

5.

The plaintiff avers that it entered into an exclusive licence Agreement

dated 26th July 2002 (valid for the period 1st May 2002 to 30th April, 2008)
with Cricket Australia (CA) whereby the former was granted exclusive rights
to make live and/or delayed and/or pay broadcasts of feeds of the cricket
matches by terrestrial television, cable television and/or satellite television in
India and other specified countries. The cricket matches started at
Melbourne, Australia from December 26, 2007 and the test matches got over
on January 28, 2008.

The Twenty20 cricket match and the ODIs would

continue till March 8, 2008. It is claimed that after the cricket matches began,
the plaintiff’s distributor’s field staff, in various locations noticed that the
Defendants were unauthorizedly telecasting the signals of such matches,
which was inconsistent with their primary obligation of being news based
channels(s), beaming news bulletins or current affairs. The defendants
allegedly used, without authority, substantial portions of the plaintiff’s
footage of its Star Cricket channel, which had telecast the test matches
exclusively, from December 26, 2007 to January 28, 2008. It is alleged that the
defendants used the footage for creating programmes which they
commercially exploited. This it is claimed by the plaintiff is impermissible in
law and inconsistent with the concept of fair dealing and is violative of the
Plaintiff’s broadcast reproduction rights.

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

4 of 35

6.

The Plaintiff avers to issuing notices through their distributor on

January 10th, 2008 to the Defendants calling upon them to cease and desist
from extensively using the Plaintiff’s footage of India versus Australia cricket
test matches. The Plaintiff, agreed through its distributor, to offer all the
Defendants permission to use the footage, provided the Defendants requested
for permission, and agreed to confine the use of such footage to not more
than 2 (two) minutes each day and in certain situations to seven (7) minutes
in the course of twenty four hours.

The Defendants did not reply to the

notice despite receiving it.
7.

To ensure that its footage was not unauthorizedly utilized, the

Plaintiff’s distributor also appointed M/s TAM Media Research Private
Limited

(TAM), a reputed media industry organization to monitor the

telecasts by various channels and prepare a report.

The reports received

from TAM, it is averred, indicate that the defendants were utilizing footage of
the matches for generating cricket match programmes, broadcasting
programmes other than scheduled News Bulletins,
secondage

during

news

bulletins.

The

and using excess

Defendants

also

booked

advertisements in respect of the said programmes. Such advertisements
were telecast before, during and after the use of cricket match footage. These
actions, it is claimed violate the Plaintiff’s broadcast reproduction rights.
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

5 of 35

8.

The Plaintiffs claim to have noticed various violations of their

broadcast reproduction rights by the Defendants. These allegedly include the
following:(a)

The Defendant No.1 on its channel CNN IBN aired a

programme by the name of “LOC : Love of Cricket” and “Shame on
Bucknor” where it extensively used the Plaintiff’s footage of the India
Australia cricket test match at Sydney.
( b)

The Defendant No.2 in its channel "Aaj Tak" used the

Plaintiff’s footage of an interview of Mike Proctor, the match referee for
the Sydney test match,

in their programme titled “Yeh cricket kuch

kehta hai”. It is alleged that Aaj Tak, the news channel could have
interviewed Mike Proctor on its own without using substantial portions
of the Plaintiff’s footage of the interview. Headlines Today and Aaj Tak
the two channels owned by Defendant No.2, too allegedly used the
plaintiff’s footage extensively in their news bulletins; it cannot be
considered to be fair dealing.
( c) (i)

The Defendant No.3, i.e. Star News, in their

programme “Wah cricket” exclusively sponsored by M/s Airtel created
the programme based mainly on the Plaintiff’s footage.;

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

6 of 35

( ii)

Defendant No.3 extensively and unauthorizedly used

the Plaintiff’s footage in an array of programmes like “Faisle Par
Sawaal”, “Harbhajan par Pabandi” and “Bucknor Tisre Test se Bahar”.
( d)

Defendant No. 4 i.e. Zee News extensively and

unauthorizedly used the Plaintiff’s footage and telecast for three days in
various programmes like “Dono Umpire Baimaan”, “Sydney Ke Villain”,
“Beimaani ka Test”,

“Kangaruon ka Kala Khel” and “Bucknor Be

Bakabak”.
(e )

Defendant No.5, i.e. NDTV 24x7, did not make

specific programmes, but in the course of its news broadcast extensively
and unauthorisedly used the plaintiff’s footage in an alarming ratio over
three days.
(f )

The Defendants also broadcasted from time to time

the old/archival footage of the Plaintiff, which cannot be construed as
news and other current affairs programme. It is unlawful and violative
of the Plaintiff’s broadcast reproduction right.
9.

The plaintiff alleges that the data concerning the India-Australia test

cricket matches between 26-12-2007 and 28-1-2008 from TAM showed that
the Defendants blatantly utilized the Plaintiff’s footage unauthorisedly from

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

7 of 35

January 6, 2008 to January8, 2008. The Defendants utilized and continue to
utilize the Plaintiff’s footage of the four test matches, apart from the
utilization of the plaintiff’s footage of live and exclusive programming of
Australia Open Television which was broadcast on Star Sports. It is alleged
that during the period, TAM

was requested to monitor and report the

defendant’s activities. Defendant No. 4 unauthorisedly utilized the Plaintiff’s
footage to the

extent of 16 hours 16

Minutes and 47 seconds.

The

Defendant No.4 also generated a programme by the name of “Bucknor Tune
Kya Kiya” wherein it unauthorisedly utilized 1117 seconds (18 minutes 37
seconds) of the footage of the match. The Defendant No.3 unauthorisedly
utilized the Plaintiff’s footage of the cricket match to the extent of 11 hours 30
minutes and 19 seconds. The Defendant No.2 unauthorisedly utilized the
footage to the extent of 9 Hours 24 minutes and five seconds. Defendant No.1
unauthorisedly utilized footage to the extent of 9 hours 33 minutes and 12
seconds and also generated a programme “Interviews/Portraits/Discussions”.
The Defendant No.5 unauthorisedly utilized the footage to the extent of 9
hours 4 minutes and 40 seconds.
10.

The defendants were on caveat. They were represented through

counsel. They raised preliminary objections regarding maintainability of the
suit and also addressed on the merits of the application under Order 39, Rule
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

8 of 35

1 and 2.
11.

Mr. Dushyant Dave, learned senior counsel for the plaintiff-applicant

submitted that the court should on an overall conspectus of the materials on
record placed before it and the contentions made, grant an ad-interim
injunction restraining the respondents from telecasting unauthorized footage
of the plaintiffs.
12.

Learned counsel extensively relied upon the report of the Media

Consultant, TAM Media Research Private Limited, forwarded to the plaintiff
on 23rd January, 2008. A copy of the same had been produced in the record, in
support of the suit. Learned counsel submitted that each of the defendants
exceeded the 30-second time limit for each program/news bulletin and use of
footage for up-to almost two minutes on such occasions. Learned counsel
relied upon the report to say that the duration almost invariably exceeded 30
seconds in each case. He pointed out that in many instances the plaintiff’s
footage was repeated over and over again in successive programs and that
credit was never given for such footage.
13.

According to learned counsel, the plaintiff had clear and exclusive

rights in terms of the agreement between it and the ACB. He relied upon
Clause (1) to say that the license was exclusive. Part-I of the Schedule to the

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

9 of 35

license was also relied upon, to say the definition of “programme” meant
television coverage of Cricket events in Appendix ‘A’ and also other materials,
as well as the assurance that each programme of the events would be
available in the form of a continuous international “live” signal at the venue of
the event. The license period, according to the clause 3.1 is 1.5.2004 to
30.4.2008. Clause 5.1 defines nature of the exclusive rights, it extends to all
forms of television media including Free to Air Transmissions; Satellite
Television, Cable Television, Satellite Cable Television, MMBS, SMA T.V.,
Closed Circuit T.V. It was submitted with reference to Appendix ‘A’ to the
Schedule that the events for which the exclusive license extend, include the
Three Test India-Australia Series, Fifteen ODI Triangular Series between
December 2007 and February 2008. Counsel also relied upon a certificate
issued by the licensor’s agent i.e. Octagon CSIC International Holding that the
plaintiff was granted sole and exclusive rights to broadcast/telecast through
all means of television in the territory of India. The India tour of Australia
comprises two warm-up matches, Four Test Matches, Fifteen One-Day
Internationals and a Twenty20 International, played between December
2007 and March 2008. A copy of the certificate dated 20th December, 2007
was relied upon for this purpose.
14.

Learned counsel submitted that broadcast reproduction rights are a

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

10 of 35

special class of rights, recognized under Part VIII of the Copyright Act, 1957
(hereafter “the Act”). He relied upon Section 37 for the purpose. According to
counsel, Section 37(3) provides, in clauses (a) to (e) acts deemed to be
infringement of broadcast reproduction rights. According to the counsel, the
unauthorized telecast of footage belonging to the plaintiff, by the defendants,
amounted to re-broadcast under Section 37(3)(a) and also reproduction of
the event under Section 37(3)(d). Learned counsel submitted that the only
exception recognized under Chapter VIII of the Act was the use, consistent
with fair dealing, excerpts of any programme, in the broadcast of current
event or bona fide review for teaching and research, embodied in Section
39(b).

It was submitted that the use of footage for hours at an end

aggregating to between 10 to 16 hours in a span of 3-4 days, as indulged by
the defendants, can never be considered as fair dealing and was in any event
is not bona fide.
15.

Mr. Dave, learned counsel submitted that the special nature of

broadcast reproduction rights, can be clearly gathered by Section 39-A which
makes only few provisions of the Act applicable with suitable adaptation,
having regard to the nature of the broadcast rights. According to the counsel,
the express reference to certain provisions in Section 39-A rules out the
application of all other provisions of the Act in respect of broadcast
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

11 of 35

reproduction rights which are a species of copyright and for which Chapter
VIII constitutes a complete Code. It was, therefore, submitted that technical
requirements such as the need to implead the owner of the Copyright in this
case, (i.e the ACB), in terms of Section 61(1), therefore, were inapplicable.
16.

Learned counsel relied upon the Broadcast Code published by the

British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and BSkyB, dated 29.2.2006. It was
submitted that in such documents, concepts such as “footage”, “primary
service provider”, “sporting events” and “permitted duration of extracts” etc.
are clearly spelt out. These disclose that clear caps in terms of time have
been indicated in news item reporting of specified sporting events. Generally,
they do not exceed 90 seconds per sport events within the specified events.
Learned counsel also relied upon Minutes of the meeting and usage of cricket
events events telecast by Doordarshan, by other T.V. Channel held on
9.12.2005. In its terms, no single news channel is permitted to use more than
30 seconds of fresh footage in a half hour news bulletin; this too is subject to a
cap of seven minutes in one day i.e. 24 hours. This 30 second cap, is relaxed
in exceptional cases to report landmark achievements or outstanding
performances and not in any other circumstances.
17.

Counsel relied upon an order of this Court in Prasar Bharti Vs. Sahara

T.V. Network Pvt. Ltd. (dated 25.11.2005 (CS(OS) 1523/2005) where the
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

12 of 35

Court had tacity approved the seven minute cap in 24 hours for exhibition of
footage and also directed that use of such time shall be only for giving cricket
news without any commercial programmes, advertisements during and after
the cricket news. He also relied upon Hubbard & Anr -vs-Vosper [1972] 1 All
ER 1023, to submit that if extracts or footage are used as a basis for comment,
criticism or review, that may be a fair dealing, whereas if they are used to
convey the same information as the copyright owner’s right, for a rival
purpose, that may be unfair. Similarly, use of long extracts and attaching short
comments may be unfair. He also relied upon the decision in Ashdown –vsTelegraph Group Ltd. [2001] 4 All ER 666, to submit that the defence of fair
dealing depends on three factors: (1) whether the alleged fair dealing is in
commercial competition with the owner’s exploitation of work/ copyright;
(2) whether the work/ performance has already been published or otherwise
exposed to the public and (3) the amount and importance of the work,
copyright of which has been taken.
18.

It was contended that if the injunction sought for is not granted, the

plaintiff would be gravely prejudiced and the defendants would merrily keep
infringing its broadcast rights as well as copyright in terms of exclusive
licence rights. In order to ensure that the plaintiff’s rights are secured and
that its exclusivity is adequately protected, the defendants should be suitably
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

13 of 35

restrained through an ad interim order and that in the event of failure to do
so, plaintiff’s losses cannot be compensated in material terms or sufficiently,
through damages on a later date.
19.

Mr. Harish N. Salve, learned senior counsel submitted that the suit itself

is defective and had to be rejected. He relied upon Section 61(1) of the
Copyright Act to say that in every action, claiming infringement, the owner of
copyright should necessarily be made a party to the proceedings.

The

plaintiff deliberately chose to exclude the owner of the copyright i.e. ACB
from the proceedings. In the circumstances, the suit is not maintainable and
had to be rejected at the threshold.
20.

Learned counsel next urged that the nature of the plaintiff’s licence has

not been disclosed to the Court, raising questions about credibility of the its
claim to being an exclusive licensee of the ACB. He submitted that the copy of
the licence dated 26th July, 2002 produced in Court in support of the plea of
exclusive license conferred upon the plaintiff, raises grave questions about
the plaintiff’s rights. He submitted that crucial sections of the agreement,
particularly, those dealing with the content of the license, and exceptions of
the exclusive rights, have been withheld from the Court. It was, therefore,
submitted that the suit does not disclose the plaintiff’s cause of action to
maintain a claim for infringement.
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

14 of 35

21.

Learned counsel also urged that on the existing materials, even if the

maintainability of the suit were to be assumed, no interim injunction can be
granted. It was urged by Mr. Salve that the nature of the injunction sought
pre-supposed a 30 second or a two minute cap for reporting of each event.
According to the counsel, there is no law, regulation or provision in any
statute which places such a limit or restriction. Counsel submitted that even a
fair reading of the decisions cited on behalf of the plaintiff would clarify that,
what constitutes fair dealing would depend entirely upon on the
circumstances of each case. It was submitted that reportage of sporting
events or episodes in some instances can well justify the enlargement of the
so-called 30 second rule. He dwelt at some detail with the nature of the
controversies surrounding the Harbhajan Singh and Steve Bucknor episode,
which according to the counsel, shook the cricketing world, generally, and
Indian spectators and cricket lovers in particular. It was submitted that the
episode was not merely a sporting event but something larger; in a society
which is cricket crazy a news channel would be well justified in exceeding the
so-called 30 second or two minutes rule, in such a background. Counsel
submitted that in any event it would be fanciful and artificial to attempt
placing such restrictions, especially in the case of panel discussions etc. which
essentially deal with report of such events, as well as reporting of current

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

15 of 35

events. Counsel submitted that the interim order in the Prasar Bharati case
was given in the peculiar circumstances of that case and had to be limited for
that instance alone. He read the said order to submit that the Court did not
consciously evolve a principle for general application and even recorded that
the said 7 minutes rules in 24 hours with the further restrictions upon
advertisement for that duration, was directed in view of the lack of opposition
by counsel appearing for the parties in that case.
22.

Learned counsel urged that an important factor which the Court has to

bear in mind while considering the grant of interim relief, is the feasibility
and practicability of supervising such injunction. It was submitted that the
first relief sought, i.e., restraint order in respect of the test match series is
incapable of being granted as that series had ended by the time, the suit was
filed. Counsel submitted that if the injunction were to be granted in respect of
the One Day International Series or even the Twenty20 series as sought for,
the Court would be called upon to supervise on a virtual day-to-day basis
whether the defendants are complying with it; if not, to what extent. In these
circumstances, the plaintiff can well calculate the degree of harm likely to
ensue in monetary terms, for the alleged infraction of its rights. It can sue and
recover damages. The court should not grant an inchoate injunction incapable
of enforcement. Learned counsel further submitted that the so-called license
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

16 of 35

agreement relied upon by the plaintiff does not even refer to the Twenty20
series thus raising grave concerns about the so-called exclusive nature of the
rights conferred.
23.

Ms. Pratibha Singh, learned counsel for one of the defendants adopted

the submissions advanced on behalf of the first defendant and additionally
urged that the nature of the rights claimed by the plaintiff are what are
popularly known as “neighbouring rights”, i.e. adjunct to those of the primary
copyright holder. It was submitted that the claim of exclusive operation of
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Act cannot be sustained because
broadcast rights, which are sought to be protected are only a species of
copyright and do not stand apart from other provisions such as Section 30
(which deals with the rights of liicensee) and the provisions in Sections 18
and 19 (which mandate the procedure for assignment of copyright). It was
submitted that even Section 39-A (c) recognizes this reality as is evident by
the express reference to Section 52 which contains the whole bundle of
details as to what constitute fair dealing. In fact the concept of fair dealing is
borrowed from Section 52 and Section 39-A cannot be read as limiting those
rights. If these provisions are read harmoniously the question of excluding
applicability of Section 61(1) can never arise. Counsel submitted that in the
circumstances, the deliberate omission to implead the primary owner of the
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

17 of 35

Copyright, the ACB, i.e. the alleged licensor is fatal to the suit and it has to be
dismissed.
24.

Mr. Manmohan, learned counsel for the other defendants submitted

that this Court should not maintain the suit also for the reason that M/s. ESPN
Software Private Ltd. had approached this court by another suit, CS(OS)
146/2008 claiming the same rights and also the same relief; yet that suit was
withdrawn on 29.1.2008 upon the present defendants objecting to its
maintainability due to non-compliance with Section 61(1) and not impleading
the licensor/ ACB. Leave to file the suit in accordance with law was sought,
the same was granted upon those objections and the suit was permitted to be
withdrawn on 29.1.2008 . Nevertheless, the plaintiff filed this suit without
complying with the terms of Section 61.
25.

Before a discussion on the merits of the submissions made by the

parties, it would be necessary to extract the relevant provisions of the Act;
they are as follows:
Provisions of the Copyright Act
“2. (dd) "broadcast" means communication to the public(i)by any means of wireless diffusion, whether in any one or more of the
forms of signs, sounds or visual images; or
(ii) by wire, and includes a re-broadcast;

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

18 of 35

(j)"exclusive licence" means a licence which confers on the licensee or on
the licensee and persons authorised by him, to the exclusion of all other
persons (including the owner of the copyright) any right comprised in the
copyright in a work, and "exclusive licensee" shall be construed
accordingly;…”
xxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

“16. NO COPYRIGHT EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS ACT.
No person shall be entitled to copyright or any similar right in any work,
whether published or unpublished, otherwise than under and in
accordance with the provisions of this Act or of any other law for the time
being in force, but nothing in this section shall be construed as abrogating
any right or jurisdiction to restrain a breach of trust or confidence. “
xxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

“18. ASSIGNMENT OF COPYRIGHT.
(1) The owner of the copyright in an existing work or the prospective
owner of the copyright in a future work may assign to any person the
copyright either wholly or partially and either generally or subject to
limitations and either for the whole term of the copyright or any part
thereof:
Provided that in the case of the assignment of copyright in any future
work, the assignment shall take effect only when the work comes into
existence.
(2) Where the assignee of a copyright becomes entitled to any right
comprised in the copyright, the assignee as respects the rights so assigned,
and the assignor as respects the rights not assigned, shall be treated for
the purposes of this Act as the owner of copyright and the provisions of
this Act shall have effect accordingly.
(3) In this section, the expression "assignee" as respects the assignment of
the copyright in any future work includes the legal representatives of the
assignee, if the assignee dies before the work comes into existence.
19. MODE OF ASSIGNMENT.
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

19 of 35

No assignment of the copyright in any work shall be valid unless it is in
writing signed by the assignor or by his duly authorised agent.
(2) The assignment of copyright in any work shall identify such work, and
shall specify the rights assigned and the duration and territorial extent of
such assignment.
(3) The assignment of copyright in any work shall also specify the amount
of royalty payable, if any, to the author or his legal heirs during the
currency of the assignment and the assignment shall be subject to
revision, extension or termination on terms mutually agreed upon by the
parties.
(4) Where the assignee does not exercise the right assigned to him under
any of the other sub-sections of this section within period of one year from
the date of assignment, the assignment in respect of such rights shall be
deemed to have lapsed after the expiry of the said period unless otherwise
specified in the assignment.
(5) If the period of assignment is not stated, it shall be deemed to be five
years from the date of assignment.
(6) If the territorial extent of assignment of the rights is not specified, it
shall be presumed to extend within India.
(7) Nothing in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub- section (4) or subsection (5) or sub-section (6) shall be applicable to assignments made
before the coming into force of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994.”
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

“30. LICENCES BY OWNERS OF COPYRIGHT.
The owner of the copyright in any existing work of the prospective owner
of the copyright in any future work may grant any interest in the right by
licence in writing signed by him or by his duly authorised agent:
Provided that in the case of a licence relating to copyright in any future
work, the licence shall take effect only when the work comes into
existence.
Explanation.-Where a person to whom a licence relating to copyright in
any future work is granted under this section dies before the work comes
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

20 of 35

into existence, his legal representatives shall, in the absence of any
provision to the contrary in the licence, be entitled to the benefit of the
licence.
30A. APPLICATION OF SECTIONS 19 AND 19A.
The provisions of sections 19 and 19A shall, with any necessary
adaptations and modifications, apply in relation to a licence under section
30 as they apply in relation to assignment of copyright in a work.”
xxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

“37. BROADCAST REPRODUCTION RIGHT.
(1) Every broadcasting organisation shall have a special right to be
known as ''broadcast reproduction right'' in respect of its broadcasts.
(2) The broadcast reproduction right shall subsist until twenty-five years
from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which
the broadcast is made.
(3) During the continuance of a broadcast reproduction right in relation
to any broadcast, any person who, without the licence of the owner of the
right does any of the following acts of the broadcast or any substantial
part thereof,(a) re-broadcasts the broadcast; or
(b) causes the broadcast to be heard or seen by the public on payment of
any charges; or
(c) makes any sound recording or visual recording of the broadcast; or
(d) makes any reproduction of such sound recording or visual recording
where such initial recording was done without licence or, where it was
licensed, for any purpose not envisaged by such licence; or
(e) sells or hires to the public, or offers for such sale or hire, any such
sound recording or visual recording referred to in clause (c) or clause (d),
shall, subject to the provisions of section 39, be deemed to have infringed
the broadcast reproduction right.”
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx
21 of 35

“39. ACTS NOT INFRINGING BROADCAST REPRODUCTION RIGHT OR
PERFORMER'S RIGHT.
No broadcast reproduction right or performer's right shall be deemed to
be infringed by(a)the making of any sound recording or visual recording for the private
use of the person making such recording, or solely for purposes of bona
fide teaching or research; or
(b)the use, consistent with fair dealing, of excerpts of a performance or of
a broadcast in the reporting of current events or for bona fide review,
teaching or research; or
(c) such other acts, with any necessary adaptations and modifications,
which do not constitute infringement of copyright under section 52.
39A. OTHER PROVISIONS APPLYING TO BROADCAST REPRODUCTION
RIGHT AND PERFORMER'S RIGHT.
Sections 18, 19, 30, 53, 55, 58, 64, 65 and 66 shall, with any necessary
adaptations and modifications, apply in relation to the broadcast
reproduction right in any broadcast and the performer's right in any
performance as they apply in relation to copyright in a work:
Provided that where copyright or performer's right subsists in respect of
any work or performance that has been broadcast, no licence to
reproduce such broadcast shall take effect without the consent of the
owner of rights or performer, as the case may be, or both of them.”
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

“55. CIVIL REMEDIES FOR INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT.
(1) Where copyright in any work has been infringed, the owner of the
copyright shall, except as otherwise provided by this Act, be entitled to all
such remedies by way of injunction, damages, accounts and otherwise as
are or may be conferred by law for the infringement of a right:
Provided that if the defendant proves that at the date of the infringement
he was not aware and had no reasonable ground for believing that
copyright subsisted in the work, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to any
remedy other than an injunction in respect of the infringement and a
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

22 of 35

decree for the whole or part of the profits made by the defendant by the
sale of the infringing copies as the court may in the circumstances deem
reasonable.
(2) Where, in the case of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, a
name purporting to be that to the author or the publisher, as the case may
be, appears on copies of the work published, or, in the case of an artistic
work, appeared on the work when it was made, the person whose name so
appears or appeared shall, in any proceeding in respect of infringement of
copyright in such work, be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to be
the author or the publisher of the work, as the case may be.
(3) The costs of all parties in any proceedings in respect of the
infringement of copyright shall be in the discretion of the court.”
xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

“61. OWNERS OF COPYRIGHT TO BE PARTY TO THE PROCEEDING.
(1) In every civil suit or other proceeding regarding infringement of
copyright instituted by an exclusive licensee, the owner of the copyright
shall, unless the court otherwise directs, be made a defendant and where
such owner is made a defendant, he shall have the right to dispute the
claim of the exclusive licensee.
(2) Where any civil suit or other proceeding regarding infringement of
copyright instituted by an exclusive licensee is successful, no fresh suit or
other proceeding in respect of the same cause of action shall lie at the
instance of the owner of the copyright.”

26.

Section 16 provides that there is no copyright except in terms of

provisions of the Act. Assignment of copyright is dealt with under Section 18;
an assignee of copyright becomes owner entitled to copyright to the extent of
assignment. Section 19 deals with the mode of assignment; Section 30
empowers grant of license to licensees; this has to be in terms of Section 19,
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

23 of 35

by virtue of Section 30-A. Chapter VIII deals with broadcasting rights. These
are, by Section 37 defined as “special rights”. Section 37 (3) prescribes that if
during the continuance of a broadcast reproduction right in relation to any
broadcast, any person without the licence of the owner of the right does any
acts of broadcast or any substantial part thereof, i.e re-broadcasts the
broadcast; makes any reproduction of such sound recording or visual
recording where such initial recording was done without licence or, where it
was licensed, for any purpose not envisaged by such licence; sells or hires to
the public, or offers for such sale or hire, any such sound recording or visual
recording is deemed, subject to the provisions of section 39, to have infringed
the broadcast reproduction right. Section 39 (b) provides that excerpts of a
performance or of a broadcast in the reporting of current events or for
bonafide review or for research, is not deemed to be an infringement.
27.

The entire case hinges on the plaintiff’s allegation about its exclusive

broadcast reproduction rights. The defendants object to the extent of the
license; it is contended that in the absence of a copy of the entire license, the
court should not assume that the plaintiff possesses the rights claimed by it.
The copy of the documents filed by the plaintiff in this regard are the license
agreement dated 26th July 2002 entered into with Cricket Australia’s agent
and a certificate issued by M/s Octagon International. The agreement does
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

24 of 35

mention grant of exclusive rights, for events or “programme” defined as
meaning television coverage of cricket events in Appendix ‘A’. Each
programme of the events is made available in the form of a continuous
international “live” signal at the venue of the event. The license period,
according to the clause 3.1 is 1.5.2004 to 30.4.2008. Clause 5.1 defines nature
of the exclusive rights, it extends to all forms of television media including
Free to Air Transmissions; Satellite Television, Cable Television, Satellite
Cable Television, MMBS, SMA T.V., Closed Ciruit T.V.. It was submitted with
reference to Appendix ‘A’ to the Schedule that the events for which the
exclusive license extend, include the Three Test India-Australia Series, Fifteen
ODI Triangular Series between December 2007 and February 2008. Yet,
intriguingly, the entirety of the document has not been revealed. Some of the
salient features which can be gathered from the document placed on record,
may be summarized below:
1) The expression “exclusive” according to clause (1) of the agreement
means what is defined in Part 5 of the schedule. The entire part of
the schedule has not been disclosed.
2) According to clause 5 (Part 5) disclosed, the licencee has the
exclusive right to exhibit programmes in part or whole during the
period specified, subject to other terms in the agreement, including
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

25 of 35

the rights not granted. This includes all modes of television
coverage, wireless transmission, broadband rights, etc; the rights
excluded however, are mentioned in Clause 5.1 (1) to (5)
3) Clauses 5.2 (b) and 5.6 (a), 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10 and 7.0 to 7.9; 8 and 9.0
to 9.4; 11.6, 11.8, 11.10 and 11.13 have not been disclosed; those
conditions have been “blanked out” from the copy filed in court. 18
pages of the 55 page-copy are completely blank; in addition, six
pages contain portions which are not disclosed and conditions
which are disclosed in part.
4) The agreement, in the schedule relating to programmes, mentions
the 3 test match series and the one day international series; yet the
plaintiff claims exclusive rights in respect of the “warm up matches”
in Australia, and the Twenty20 match. The basis of this claim is a
certificate, issued by M/s Octagon. No attempt has been made to
disclose how these rights were acquired, and through what
document or agreement.
28.

The resultant position is that the plaintiff is today claiming a restraint

order against the defendants on the basis of incomplete documents. It is not
as if this is a technicality; the omission, according to this court, goes to the

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

26 of 35

heart of the claim itself. The right which the plaintiff claims is not as a copy
right holder, but as an exclusive licensee. Now a license- exclusive or
otherwise, has to conform to provisions of law. By virtue of provisions of
Sections 30 and 30A (the former being expressly referred to in Section 39-A)
the provisions of Sections 19, as far as they deal with the procedure for
assignment, i.e the requirement to be in writing, etc, apply with equal vigor.
Thus, a broadcast right holder (i.e the performer or primary holder of
copyright) has copyright in the programme; in case he wishes to assign it, that
should be in accordance with Section 18-19; in case a license is to be created,
that has to conform to the requirements of Sections 30 and 19/Section 19-A.
29.

It is well settled that injunction, even an ad-interim one, is an equitable

remedy (Ref M/s Power Control Appliances & Anr –vs- Sumeet Machines 1994
(2) SCC 448; Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. –vs- Coca Cola 1995 (5) SCC 545 etc). He
who seeks equity should come with clean hands; he should also make full
disclosure of the extent of the right asserted. In the context of this case, the
disclosure has to be as to the full extent of the license claimed, with all its
limitations and exceptions. The non-disclosure of the entire agreement is thus
an important factor which weighs against the grant of ad-interim relief.
30.

It would be necessary to examine the other arguments made on behalf

of the plaintiff, for grant of temporary injunction. It has been held that the
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

27 of 35

object of an interim injunction
'.... is to protect the plaintiff against injury by violation of his rights
for which he could not adequately be compensated in damages
recoverable in the action if the uncertainly were resolved in his
favour at the trial. The need for such protection must be weighed
against the corresponding need of the defendant to be protected
against injury resulting from his having been prevented from
exercising his own legal rights for which he could not be adequately
compensated. The court must weigh one need against another and
determine where the "balance of convenience" lies.'
(Ref Wander Ltd. v. Antox India P. Ltd. 1990 (Supp) SCC 726)
31.

The entire case averred and pleaded was that the defendants’ conduct

is not consistent with fair dealing; it is not bona fide. The defendants, on the
other hand, urge that there is no universal standard in this regard; each case
has to be judged on its merits. It is additionally urged for them that the
plaintiff’s claim for relief amounts to seeking an injunction incapable of
supervision, which the court should desist from granting.
32.

The Court of Appeal, in Vosper (supra) held:
“It is impossible to define what is ‘fair dealing’. It must be a question of
degree. You must consider first the number and extent of the quotations
and extracts. Are they altogether too many and too long to be fair? Then
you must consider the use made of them. If they are used as a basis for
comment, criticism or review, that may be a fair dealing. If they are used
to convey the same information as the author, for a rival purpose, that
may be unfair. Next, you must consider the proportions. To take long
extracts and attach short comments may be unfair. But, short extracts
and long comments may be fair. Other considerations may come to mind
also. But, after all is said and done, it must be a matter of impression.”

The test indicated in Ashdown was based on the Textbook “The Modern Law of
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

28 of 35

Copyright and Designs (3rd edn, 2000)” by Laddie, Prescott and Vitoria. The
court held that:
“the authors suggest that the success or failure of the defence depends on
three factors: (1) whether the alleged fair dealing is in commercial
competition with the owner’s exploitation of work, (2) whether the work
has already been published or otherwise exposed to the public and (3)
the amount and importance of the work which has been taken.”
33.

What the plaintiffs suggest is that any clipping of the sport event

exceeding 30 seconds per news bulletin and exceeding seven minutes in any
twenty four hours, amounts to unfair dealing. Reliance has been placed upon
a broadcast code evolved by Prasar Bharti, as well as an order of this court in
CS (OS) No. 1523/ 2005 PRASAR BHARTI VS. SAHARA TV NETWORK PVT.
LTD. AND ORS. The court did, no doubt indicate that limit; yet what cannot be
ignored is that the standard was evolved with consent of the parties to the
litigation. Here, no such consensus appears to be forthcoming; on the other
hand, the defendants contest that their use was unfair. It is urged on their
behalf that the controversies covered and debated in shows and programmes
amounted to reviews and discussions, and also that the nature of the events
discussed had rocked the cricketing world as a whole, thus rendering the so
called 30 second 7 minute rule inapposite.
34.

As observed in Vosper, whenever a court has to see whether a

particular conduct is “fair dealing” or not, the context, the length of the
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

29 of 35

original work borrowed, and the purpose, can never be ignored. No universal
rule or standard exists; cases have to be decided on the peculiar facts. What
may be unfair in one context may be perfectly fair in another and vice versa.
There is a certain amount of elusiveness in evolving a thumb rule. Judged
from this standpoint, the court finds it difficult to accept that a 30 second
limit or 7 minute cap can apply “across the board” in all contingencies.
Similarly, the court cannot universalize that recourse to advertisements
before or after broadcast of such clippings would be unfair. In the
circumstances of this case, the plaintiffs have not shown sufficient materials,
barring the aggregate length of the clippings used by defendants in their news
programmes and sports reviews, to say that it amounted to unfair dealing. In
any case, there is no imminent threat or danger of legal injury of such kind
that damages or a claim for money cannot compensate. Even if the
defendants’ use of the clippings were, or partly were to be found as unfair
use, the plaintiff can be adequately compensated in damages. On the other
hand, the nature of injunction sought is of such a broad nature that the court
would well be drawn into details, while attempting to supervise it – a course
of action hardly desirable if not entirely unfeasible.
35.

For the above reasons, the plaintiff cannot be granted the ad-interim

injunction sought for. The application is dismissed.
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

30 of 35

CS (OS) 219/2008
36.

The defendants questioned the maintainability of the suit on the

ground that the plaintiff’s cause of action has not been disclosed and also that
in the absence of the owner of the copyright, under Section 61 (1) the suit has
to fail.
37.

The first limb of the objection pertains to the non disclosure of the

plaintiff’s claim for exclusive license. Here, the argument of the plaintiff is that
it is exclusive licensee; reliance has been placed upon the license granted in
2002. The defendants, on the other hand, submit that the withholding of the
full document, claimed as the license – on the basis of which this suit is
founded, is fatal, as it reveals that the plaintiff’s assertion is suspect.
38.

The second objection is that failure to implead the owner of the

copyright, ACB is fatal to the suit. The plaintiff’s response to this argument is
that the said provision, i.e Section 61 has no application to Chapter VIII, which
deals with broadcast rights. Only specific provisions of the Act are applicable;
they have been expressly indicated in the statute.
39.

The second objection can be taken up first. Now, Section 61 (1) creates

an absolute standard in the case of civil action for infringement of a copyright;
it prescribes that in every suit for infringement of a copyright filed by an
exclusive licensee, the owner of the copyright has to be, unless the court
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

31 of 35

otherwise directs, made a defendant and where such owner is so impleaded,
he can (“has the right”) to dispute the claim of the exclusive licensee.
40.

No doubt, Chapter VIII deals with a species of rights known as

broadcast reproduction rights. The content and extent of that right has been
defined in Section 37. Section 39-A of the Act refers to certain provisions of
the Act; it has inspired an argument that the absence of a reference to Section
61 means that the requirement of impleading the owner of copyright in a
sporting event does not apply to broadcast rights and that such rights are
“special”. Facially, the argument seems logical; yet a careful examination
would reveal several flaws in it. Firstly, there is no legislative intention to
elevate “broadcasting rights” to a special status, whereby the Chapter dealing
with it operates in a special zone within the statute, immune from the
operation of the other parts of the Act. If such intention were there,
Parliament would have used legislative devices such as non-obstante clauses,
exclusions, etc. Secondly, the argument flies against well established canons
of legislative interpretation that a statute must be read as a whole and the
legislature should be deemed to have intended application of each part for the
situations intended. If the plaintiff’s contentions were accepted, Section 61
would operate only in some situations and not all, even though no express
provision manifests such intention nor can it be drawn by necessary
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

32 of 35

implication. The requirements of Section 61, procedural in nature, apply with
equal vigor to all nature of rights that are subject matter of the Act.
41.

The third reason why the plaintiff’s argument is unacceptable is that

though Section 39-A refers to a few sections, and applies them with suitable
modifications, yet, there is express reference to copyright in Section 39;
similarly, there is reference to application of what is meant by fair dealing
under Section 52, over and above what is enacted under Section 39, in
relation to copyright. It is not as if the plaintiff says that Cricket Australia does
not have copyright in the content of the broadcast; what is argued is that such
owner is not necessary party to these proceedings. Seciton 39-A proviso also
negatives the plea, because it clearly refers to the copyright of a performer or
owner of copyright, where reproduction of a broadcast is involved.
42.

For these reasons, it has to be held that the mandate of Section 61(1)

applies in case of claims for infringement of broadcast reproduction rights;
the non-impleadment of the owner of copyright is fatal to the maintainability
of the suit. Similarly, the non-joinder of owner of the copyright renders the
suit liable to be rejected. The proviso to Order 1, Rule 9 Civil Procedure Code
enacts that a suit can fail for non-joinder of a necessary party. In Udit Narain Singh
Malpaharia v. Addl. Member, Board of Revenue, Bihar 1963 Supp (1) SCR 676
pointed out to the distinction between "necessary party" and "proper party". The

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

33 of 35

Court held that:

"The law on the subject is well settled : it is enough if we state the
principle. A necessary party is one without whom no order can be made
effectively; a proper party is one in whose absence an effective order
can be made but whose presence is necessary for a complete and final
decision on the question involved in the proceeding."

The failure to implead the owner of copyright in the present case has resulted
in keeping out a party whose presence is necessary for a final and complete
decision on the question involved in the proceeding. Thus, apart from the suit
being not maintainable due to Section 61 (1) of the Act, it is also bad for
mis -joinder of a necessary party.

43.

Coming now to the first aspect, i.e whether the plaintiff has disclosed a

cause of action, this court had noticed in the previous section of the judgment,
while dealing with the claim for temporary injunction, that the plaintiff had
not disclosed the entire agreement, which was a relevant factor for the
exercise of discretion in granting or refusing ad-interim relief. However, the
same standard cannot be applied while considering whether the plaint has to
be rejected as not disclosing a cause of action. A cause of action is a bundle of
facts which are required to be proved for obtaining relief and for the said
purpose, the material facts are required to be stated but not the evidence
CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

34 of 35

(Raptakos Bret –vs- Ganesh Property 1998 (7) SCC 184). As long as the plaint
discloses some cause of action that has to be determined by the court, mere
fact that in the opinion of the Judge the plaintiff may not succeed cannot be a
ground for rejection of the plaint. Therefore, the non-disclosure of the
entire agreement, at this preliminary stage is not such irregularity as to
warrant rejection of the plaint, for reason of its not disclosing a cause of
action.
44.

In view of the findings on Section 61, this suit is not maintainable. It is,

therefore, dismissed. The parties are left to bear their own costs.

DATED: 18th February, 2008

CS (OS) 219/2008 & IA No. 1469/2008

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J

35 of 35

