*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
I.A. No. 10742/2007 & I.A. No. 6882/2007
IN
CS (OS) NO. 1096/ 2007
Reserved on : February 28th , 2008
Pronounced on :March 17th, 2008

SUPERCASSETTE INDUSTRIES

… Plaintiff
Through : Mr. Ameet Dutta, Mr. George
Thomas & Mr. Himanshu Bagai, Advocates

Vs.
NIRULAS CORNER HOUSE (P) LTD

… Defendants
Through : Mr. Mudit Sharma,
Avocate

CORAM

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

This order shall dispose off I.A. No. 10742/2007 preferred under Order VII Rule

11 by the applicant defendant seeking the rejection of the plaint and also I.A. No.

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

1 of 18

6882/2007 under Order XXXIX Rule 1& 2 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
2.

According to the plaint averments, he plaintiff is copyright holder of a variety of

literary and musical works, sound recordings, music videos and cinematographic videos.
It plaintiff manufactures and sells VCDs, DVDs and Cassettes containing these works
and also licenses the right to exploit its works. The defendants are engaged in the
business of hotels/restaurants in New Delhi.
3.

The plaintiff avers that after coming to know about alleged infringement of its

copyright in variety of works it asked an investigator to visit the premises of the
defendant in order to ascertain the extent of viewing of those works. The said investigator
visited the said premises of the defendant in May 2007 and found that few audio
clippings of songs in which the plaintiff owned copyright where being played in different
channels on the television in a room of the defendant’s hotel. The investigator also filed
an affidavit in this regard. The plaintiff alleges that such transmission of works in which
the plaintiff has copy right, without a license in that regard, amounts to infringement of
the copy right as the defendants perform/communicate the works of the plaintiff to the
public. The plaintiff therefore seeks an injunction against the defendants restraining it
from the alleged public performance and also seeks damages.
4.

By order dated 31st May 2007, this Court granted ex parte ad interim injunction

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

2 of 18

restraining the defendant from infringing in any manner the copyright of the Plaintiff in
its works by playing the same at their hotel premises and restaurants. In support of the
averments, the plaintiff has filed a copy of the DVD recorded in the defendant’s hotel
premises.
5.

The defendant filed its written statement also present application for rejection of

the suit. The defendants submit that the plaintiff is unable to establish that the copyright
in its works are being infringed and failed to put on record any document in this regard. It
also submits that no infringement of the plaintiff’s works has in fact being committed by
it. The plaint according to it is, therefore, liable to be rejected under Order VII Rule 11
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 read with section 55 of the Copyright Act (hereinafter
referred to as “the Act”) for non disclosure of cause of action.
6.

Mr. Ameet Datta, learned counsel on behalf of the plaintiff, relying on the

affidavit of the investigator contended that titles in which it had copyright were in fact
being played in the hotel rooms, without a proper licence. He states that such usage
would amount to public performance/communication to public of the work, the exclusive
rights to which were granted only to the copyright holder or a duly licensed person under
the Act. He submitted that one of the exclusive rights prescribed by Section 14 of the
Act, in the case of literary works, musical works, sound recordings and cinematograph
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

3 of 18

works (films) is the right to communicate the work to the public, which is being infringed
by the defendants. He also drew the attention of the Court to section 2(ff) that defines
“communication to the public” as occurring when a work is made available to the public
directly or by any means of display or diffusion, regardless of whether the work has been
seen or heard. The explanation to Section 2 (ff) inserted in 1995 specifically mandates
that making a work available by simultaneous means of communication in hotels rooms
would amount to a communication to the public. Relying upon the statement of Objects
and Reasons of the Amendments of 1995 he submitted that the intent of the explanation
was to clarify the statute about the meaning of “public” and therefore in effect the
explanation clarifies that the guests in the rooms of the hotel are a distinct public
audience. Further, he argued that since Section 51 states that any act in contravention of
the exclusive rights conferred under section 14 amounts to infringement, the
communication to the public, of the works of the plaintiff, prima facie amounts to
infringement of its rights. He placed reliance on section 51 (a) (i) and (ii) of the Act and
contended that the defendant was liable both for primary and secondary infringement of
the copyright in the works of the plaintiff.
7.

It was submitted that guests in the defendant's hotel rooms would amount to a

distinct “public” audience, since as the defendant provides the service directly to the
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

4 of 18

customers and not the cable operator. The television sets installed in the rooms by the
defendant are the means through which electronic signals are converted into audio and
video signals, and therefore constitute a separate act of communication to the public
distinct from the act of the cable operator. He relied on the judgment reported as
Performing Right Society Vs. Hammond’s Bradford Brewery Co. Ltd., (1934) Ch. 121.
In that case the hotel had installed a wireless set and loudspeaker that made available
musical works to person visiting the hotel. In the appeal field by the hotel, while holding
that the hotel was liable for infringement of copyright, Lawrence LJ held as follows: “The question therefore resolves itself into whether the defendants, by
operating their wireless set, were causing an acoustic representation of
the works to be given at their hotel. In my judgment that question must
be answered in the affirmative. The wireless receiving set by means of
which alone the sounds were produced at the hotel belonged to and
was under the control of the defendants, who operated it for the
purpose of giving to their customers at the hotel an acoustic
representation of the musical works being performed at Hammersmith;
but for the defendants having put their wireless set into operation there
would have been no acoustic representation of the works at the hotel at
all, I find it impossible to escape from the conclusion that the owner of
a receiving set who puts it into operation cause an acoustic
representation of a musical work which is being broadcast to be given
at the place where the receiving set is installed and is therefore himself
performing or authorizing the performance of the musical work within
the meaning of the Copyright Act, 1911”.

8.

Reliance was also placed on Moorhouse. Angus and Robertson Ltd. v. University

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

5 of 18

of New South Wales, [1976] RPC 151, where the court was called upon to determine the
liability of the University for alleged breach of copyright by a student who had
photocopied the claimants books, to support his argument about the defendant having
authorized or permitted or approved the watching of the plaintiffs works. He also cited
the judgment reported as Garware Plastics and Polyester Ltd. v. Telelink, AIR 1989 Bom
331, where the Court held that broadcasting of content through cable channels to various
households etc. amounted to public performance and submitted that a similar analogy
could be drawn in the present case.
9.

Mr. Mudit Sharma, learned counsel submits that through the affidavit of the

investigator, the plaintiff has admitted that the content was being provided by the cable
operator through various channels and not by the defendant. In relation to direct content
being provided by the defendant in the restaurant, bar etc. by playing recorded music, the
investigator had not disclosed whether the defendant was in fact playing the plaintiff’s
works. Therefore, he argued that no cause of action has been established against the
defendant. According to him, the plaintiff has neither made any averment in relation to
the broadcast itself being unlicensed nor has he made the broadcaster a party to the
present proceeding. If the broadcast itself were not illegal, he contended that broadcaster
would be entitled to the broadcast reproduction right under section 37, which allows the
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

6 of 18

broadcaster to communicate the work to the public. The broadcast itself and the receiving
of such broadcast, he submitted would not amount to infringement under section 51 of
the Act. He submitted that the defendant was merely receiving the signals transmitted by
the cable operator, and because the plaintiff does not dispute the legality of the cable
operators content, the defendant itself could not be held liable for infringement of the
work through communication to the public, since it has obtained the consent of the cable
operator to receive such content. He also submitted that the plaintiff has intentionally not
disclosed the details of their arrangement with Broadcasting Organizations and has
intentionally not disclosed the channels, if any, from which the songs were recorded on
the CDs, as the same would have falsified the plaintiff's contention. It is alleged that the
CDs filed on record do not disclose any infringement on the contrary it does not even
demonstrate as to how, when and where they were recorded.
10.

Counsel for defendant next submitted that the plaintiff has no locus standi to file

the present suit as an independent copyright of the Broadcaster subsists in a broadcast and
the later is owner of the Copyright. He submitted that Section 55 of the Act categorically
states that the sina qua non for filing a suit for infringement of a copyright is that the
plaintiff’s copyright should have been infringed. Therefore, the cause action would arise
only when the defendant infringes plaintiff’s copyright. In this suit, the plaintiffs have
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

7 of 18

failed to demonstrate that their copyright was infringed and as to how a right to sue i.e.,
cause of action arose in its favour against the defendant. Further, it was submitted that
irrespective of whether the guests view the televisions or not, same fare is charged, and
the Defendant does not profit from the guest viewing or not viewing the television.
Therefore the Defendant would not fall within the ambit of section 51 (1) (ii).
11.

Section 2 (ff) of the Act defines a public performance as follows:
(ff) "communication to the public" means making any work available for being
seen or heard or otherwise enjoyed by the public directly or by any means of
display or diffusion other than by issuing copies of such work regardless of
whether any member of the public actually sees, hears or otherwise enjoys the
work so made available.

Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, communication through satellite or cable
or any other means of simultaneous communication to more than one household or place
of residence including residential rooms of any hotel.”
“Copyright” has been defined in Section 14 as follows:
“14.MEANING OF COPYRIGHT.
For the purposes of this Act, "copyright" means the exclusive right subject to the
provisions of this Act, to do or authorise the doing of any of the following acts in
respect of a work or any substantial part thereof, namely:(a)in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a computer
programme,(i)to reproduce the work in any material form including the storing of it in any
medium by electronic means;
(ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

8 of 18

(iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the public;
(iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work;
(v)to make any translation of the work;
(vi) to make any adaptation of the work;
(vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of the
acts specified in relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (vi);
(b)in the case of a computer programme,(i)to do any of the acts specified in clause (a);
(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial rental
any copy of the computer programme:
Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect of computer
programmes where the programme itself is not the essential object of the rental.
(c)in the case of an artistic work,(i)to reproduce the work in any material form including depiction in three
dimensions of a two dimensional work or in two dimensions of a three
dimensional work;
(ii) to communicate the work to the public;
(iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;
(iv) to include the work in any cinematograph film;
(v)to make any adaptation of the work;
(vi) to do in relation to an adaptation of the work any of the acts specified in
relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (iv);
(d)in the case of a cinematograph film,(i)to make a copy of the film including a photograph of any image forming part

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

9 of 18

thereof;
(ii) to sell or give on hire or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the film, regardless
of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier occasions;
(iii) to communicate the film to the public;
(e)in the case of a sound recording,(i)to make any other sound recording embodying it;
(ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the sound
recording, regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on
earlier occasions;
(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the public.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, a copy which has been sold once
shall be deemed to be a copy already in circulation.”
12.

Section 52 defines what is copyright infringement; it reads as follows:
“51. WHEN COPYRIGHT INFRINGED.
Copyright in a work shall be deemed to be infringed(a)when any person, without a licence granted by the owner of the copyright or
the Registrar of Copyrights under this Act or in contravention of the conditions of
a licence so granted or of any condition imposed by a competent authority under
this Act(i)does anything, the exclusive right to do which is by this Act conferred upon the
owner of the copyright, or
(ii) permits for profit any place to be used for the communication of the work to
the public where such communication constitutes an infringement of the copyright
in the work, unless he was not aware and had no reasonable ground for believing
that such communication to the public would be an infringement of copyright; or
(b)when any person-

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

10 of 18

(i)makes for sale or hire, or sells or lets for hire, or by way of trade displays or
offers for sale or hire, or
(ii) distributes either for the purpose of trade or to such an extent as to affect
prejudicially the owner of the copyright, or
(iii) by way of trade exhibits in public, or
(iv) imports into India, any infringing copies of the work :
Provided that nothing in sub-clause (iv) shall apply to the import of one copy of
any work, for the private and domestic use of the importer.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the reproduction of a literary,
dramatic, musical or artistic work in the form of a cinematograph film shall be
deemed to be an "infringing copy".”
13.

Certain acts are deemed not to be infringements, under Section 52; they include,

under Section 52 (1) (k) use of recordings of musical works. There is also another
exception, where the use is for a religious occasion, (Section 52 (1) (ka). Those
provisions read as follows:

“(k)

the causing of a recording to be heard in public by utilising it,-

(i)in an enclosed room or hall meant for the common use of residents in any
residential premises (not being a hotel or similar commercial establishment) as
part of the amenities provided exclusively or mainly for residents therein; or
(ii) as part of the activities of a club or similar organisation which is not
established or conducted for profit…”
xxxxxx

xxxxxx

“ (za) the performance of a literary, dramatic or musical work or the
communication to the public of such work or of a sound recording in the course
of any bona fide religious ceremony of an official ceremony held by the Central
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

11 of 18

Government or the State Government or any local authority.
Explanation.-For the purpose of this clause, religious ceremony including a
marriage procession and other social festivities associated with a marriage.”

14.

The copyrights conferred under Section 14 of the Act consist of a bundle of

rights. The owner of a copyright is entitled to assign and licence each of those rights
separately or in bundles. The bundle of rights could vary in complexity depending upon
the nature of the work-literary, dramatic, musical recording or cinematographic films. In
the case of music videos, which is essentially a cinematographic film, rights could subsist
in the following works: lyrics of the song (literary), music composition (musical),
choreography and performance (dramatic), the sets (artistic), the capturing of the musical
work on tapes (sound recording) and the capturing of it all on a film (cinematographic
film). Under section 14, the rights to reproduce, perform, adapt, translate, make copies of
these works exists. Each of these rights could be assigned, reassigned and licensed. For
example, the owner of the rights in a cinematographic film, can licence the literary and
musical rights in the lyrics to a radio channel to be aired, and also assign the license to
make copies of the cinematographic films on cassettes and CDs etc to a person and so on.
The work thus follows a trail of licences.
15.

We are here concerned with rights of the plaintiffs in such cinematographic films.

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

12 of 18

In relation to cable channels the plaintiff would convey the right to broadcast the work to
public, they in turn would convey the right to re-broadcast the work to cable operators
and what is conveyed to the customer is a license to watch the work. This trail of
conveyance of the rights have to be kept in mind.
16.

One of the earliest cases on the issue appears to have been decided by the US

Supreme Court, in Jewell-La Salle Realty Company –vs- Buck 1931 283 US 191. The
court acknowledged that the owner of a private radio receiving set, who in his home
invites friends to hear a musical composition which is being broadcast would not be
liable for infringement, for, even if this be deemed a performance, it is neither public nor
for profit. It was held however, that the acts of a hotel proprietor, in making available to
his guests, through the instrumentality of a radio receiving set and loud speakers installed
in his hotel and under his control and for the entertainment of his guests, the hearing of a
copyrighted musical composition which has been broadcast from a radio transmitting
station,

constituted a performance of such composition within the meaning of the

Copyright Act, and thus violative of the owner’s rights.
17.

Copinger and Skone James on Copyright, Volume One, (Fifteenth Edition, 2005;

published by Sweet and Maxwell), in Para 7-96A says this:
“…It has been decided by the Exchequer Court of Canada (Canadian Admiral
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

13 of 18

Corporation Ltd-vs- Rediffusion Inc [1954 Ex.CR 382]) that the performance of
material by way of television in private homes, the material having been received
by subscribers to a cable service, did not amount to public performance on the
ground that the character of the audience was purely domestic and even a large
number of “private” performances could not be in public. It might therefore be
argued that the character of the audience in separate hotel bedrooms is similar,
each hotel bedroom being the occupant’s “home” for the night, and each
performance being “private”. (See e.g. Mellor –vs- Australian Broadcasting
Commission (1940) AC 491at 500; but cf. Messaer –vs- British Broadcasting Co.
Ltd 1927 (2) KB 543). In a decision of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
(Rank Film Production –vs- Dodds 1983 (2) NSWLR 533; see also Hotel
Mornington AB –vs- Forenigen Svenska Tonsattares Internationellla Musikbyr
(STIM) 1982 (2) ECC 171 (Sup. Ct. of Sweden); Teosto –vs- A Taxi Driver (2004)
ECDR 3 (Sup. Ct of Finland) (provision of music by taxi driver to his
customers…) the issue arose whether the watching of television sets by the
occupants of motel rooms, to which films were relayed by means of a video
cassette recorder and cables, amounted to public performance. The plaintiff’s
case was argued primarily on the basis that presentation of a film in a single
room, even to only one person, amounted to public performance. It was held that
such presentation was in fact public since the character of the audience was as
guests of the motel and not as individuals in a private or domestic situation. In
that capacity the guess were paying for the accommodation and the benefits
which went with it. It is thought that for the same reasons the performance of
works to inmates of prisons is in public”
18.

The expansive definition under Section 2(ff) in this case would mean that

broadcast is deemed to be communication to the public. The question is, what is
copyright deemed infringed. As noticed earlier, the plaintiff claims copyright in the music
recordings as well as the video recordings. The objection that the plaintiff has not
disclosed whether and to what extent, it parted with any of those rights to the broadcaster

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

14 of 18

cannot really be gone into; the plaintiff has in any case asserted these rights. Under
Section 51, (ii) infringement occurs, if anyone permits for profit, any place to be used for
the communication of the work to the public where such communication constitutes an
infringement of the copyright in the work, unless he was not aware and had no reasonable
ground for believing that such communication to the public would be an infringement of
copyright. The exception to this definition of infringement is contained in Section 52.

19.

In terms of Section 52 (1) (k) the causing of a recording to be heard in an

enclosed room or hall meant for the common use of residents in any residential premises
(not being a hotel or similar commercial establishment) as part of the amenities
provided exclusively or mainly for residents therein, is not deemed an infringement.
Similarly an exception, involving the communication of a work the public, or of a sound
recording, in the course of any bona fide religious ceremony is not a public performance
(Section 2(1) (za)). These provisions are pointers to the legislative intent of treating use
of televisions and sound recordings, in hotels as communications to the public; the
intention appears to be reinforced by specific exception, from Section 52 to the category
of what is not infringement, the use of recording to be heard in a hotel.

20.

While on the subject, it may not be out of place to observe that the two categories

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

15 of 18

“hotels” and “similar commercial establishment” gives a clue to Parliamentary intention
to exclude the operation of such categories of establishments from the benefit of what are
obviously deemed not infringements. Such provisions should receive a restricted
interpretation, having regard to the nature of the expressions used. Thus, the Court will
not extend the law beyond its meaning to take care of any perceived broader legislative
purpose. Here "strict" means merely that the Court will refrain from exercising its
creative function to apply the rule announced in the statute to situations not covered by it.
(See Bipinchandra Parshottamdas Patel –vs- State of Gujarat: 2003 (4) SCC 642;
Thampanoor Ravi –vs- Charupara Ravi 1999 (8) SCC 74). Obviously therefore, all
establishments cannot come within the fold of the expression. There can even be a class
of situations where it can conceivably be argued that the service provided is so integrally
connected with the communication to the public, that it may not fall within Section 51.
As held in Hubbard –vs- Vosper, 1972 (1) All ER 1072 the court must consider the
question of proportions, in the case of a copyright infringement action. Therefore, for
instance, the placing of a common television in a motel reception, accessible to all but
without keeping a television set, in each hotel room, or placing such a set in a grocery
shop for the recreation of the owner, or a wayside restaurant, may not fall within the
mischief of the definition of infringement. Proportion in this context, would necessarily
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

16 of 18

imply the nature of the activity of the establishment and the integral connection the
infringement complained of has with it. Likewise, the use of television or radio in a city
bus can be contrasted with such use in an aircraft.
21.

In the light of the above discussion, it cannot be said that the plaint does not

disclose any cause of action; equally, the court cannot go behind the pleadings to hold
that the materials or pleadings do not disclose any triable cause of action (Ref. Popat and
Kotecha Property-vs-State Bank of India Staff Association 2005 (7) SCC 510). It has
also been held that there cannot be any compartmentalization, dissection, segregation and
inversions of the language of various paragraphs in the plaint. The court cannot reject a
part of the plaint, if defects are noticed in it for any reason : Raptakos Brett & Co. Ltd. v.
Ganesh Property, 1998 (7) SCC 184. Therefore, the defendant’s application for rejection
of plaint cannot succeed; it has to fail.
22.

The plaintiff has been able to show that the defendants are using cable connection

and extending facilities of television to their patrons in the hotel rooms, for payments are
received. In this view, prima facie, the content of songs and videos broadcast are
communications to the public. The defendant’s contention that the plaintiff has not said
that it has not licensed any rights to the broadcaster, is a matter of defense; the extent of
license, if any and the terms of those licenses, are matters which have to be gone into at
I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

17 of 18

the trial. The plaintiff’s right to the titles and video recordings as owner of copyright is
alleged; there is material on record to substantiate it. The defendant is a hotel. In the
circumstances, the plaintiff has established a strong prima facie case of infringement. The
balance of convenience too would be in its favour, since refusal to confirm the injunction
would mean the defendant is free to continue infringing the copyright, and profit from it.
23.

In the light of the above discussion, I.A. No. 6882/2007 has to be allowed; the

injunction made in the earlier course of the proceedings is hereby confirmed.
24.

Accordingly, I.A. No. 6882/2007 is allowed and I.A. No. 10742/2007 is

dismissed. No costs.

17th March, 2008

S. RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE

I.A. 10742/07 & 6882/07 in CS (OS) 1096/ 07

18 of 18

