*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on 23rd February, 2007
Delivered on 19 March, 2007
BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007
TUNDE GBAJA

……Petitioner
Through Mr.R.A. Worso Zimik, Advocate

Versus
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

…..Respondent

Through Mr. Harish Gulati with Mr. Rohit Sharma, Advocates
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporters or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest?
%
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT

1.

The present petitioner/accused is a Nigerian national claiming to be in possession of a

valid International passport issued by the Federal Republic of Nigeria. He claims bail, and
asserts that he has to be released in terms of Sections 167(1) & (2) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (Cr. PC.).

BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

1 OF 14

2.

The brief facts necessary to decide this application are that the Petitioner was

apprehended by the Central Bureau of Investigation ( “CBI,” hereafter referred to as “the
Respondent”) on 25.9.2006, based on a complaint of one Sh. Vivek Ahlawat intimating it that a
consignment of counterfeit bank drafts and postal orders of foreign currency were received by
him.
3.

The Respondent, on receiving the complaint registered the First Information Report

(FIR) against the accused, namely, M/s Joshua, Eubuoniwa and Joseph for offences punishable
under section 120 B read with Sec.489-A to 489-E of IPC. The Respondent raided premises of
the Petitioner on suspicion that accused persons were in hiding, but none of them were found
there. The Petitioner alleged that he and his three other friends, found at the premises were
apprehended by the C.B.I and taken into custody for interrogation.
4.

The Petitioner alleges that he was produced before the concerned magistrate after expiry

of 24 hours of his arrest i.e. on 27.09.06 and the magistrate sent him to judicial custody and
since then he is in custody. He further alleges that even after the expiry of 90 days the
Respondent failed to file a charge sheet or a challan against him in respect of the alleged
offence for which he was arrested. It is alleged that a part charge sheet was filed against him
for his over staying in India, after the expiry of his visa. The visa was valid up to 08.06.2006.
5.

The Petitioner states that on 10.10.2006, he applied for bail before the ACMM, which

was rejected. The extracts of the order dated 13.10.2006 are as follows;
“in so far as the allegations against the accused are concerned, the
record reveals that the accused is not a suspect but is an accused in the
present case. The accused is a Nigerian national and has been residing
in India without a valid passport and visa. His address is yet to be
BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

2 OF 14

verified. The allegations are of preparation and circulation of fake
instruments of foreign currency which has been wide spread
international ramification and the accused is reported to be a part of this
conspiracy. Keeping in view the allegations involved, no ground for bail
is made out. The application is hereby dismissed”
6.

The petitioner moved the learned Additional Sessions Judge, which too, rejected his bail

application on 10.01.2007. The extracts of the order dated 10.01.2007 are as follows;
“Allegations against the applicant are that the applicant has no authority to
remain in India accordingly he was charge sheeted under section 14 of
arms act. Learned counsel for the applicant has not shown any reasonable
ground as to why the applicant who is a foreign national was present in
India. Accordingly, I do not find any ground to grant bail to the applicant.
Application is hereby dismissed”
7.

The Respondent in its reply has stated that a complaint by the Senior Security Specialist

of Federal Express (Fed Ex) alleging that fake postal orders, drafts of foreign countries were
being sent to various places through Federal Express, by Mr. Joshua and Mr. Eubouwman Nosa
Victor was received by it. Thereafter a search was conducted on 25.9.2006 at 10.30 pm and it
concluded on 26.9.2006 at 01.30 hrs. The raid was conducted at 120 D, Gokul Apartment,
Krishna Nagar, Gali No. 5, Safdarjung Enclave, N.Delhi. At that time Mr. Josha was not
present at the premises but Mr. Nosa Victor was present along with four other Nigerian
Nationals. It is alleged by the Respondent that the Petitioner was one amongst them. The
Respondent states that during the raid some incriminating materials were seized. It is also
alleged that the Petitioner was found residing in India without any valid documents since
9.6..2006 till his arrest on 26.9.2006 and thus he violated the provisions of Section 14 of the
Foreigners Act, 1946 for which a charge sheet was filed before the court of the Metropolitan
Magistrate within the stipulated time i.e. 60 days of his arrest.
BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

3 OF 14

8.

The Respondent alleged that the Petitioner and two others could not produce any valid

document regarding their stay in India; so they were arrested and produced before the court on
27.9.2006. It is alleged that the trial in this case is in progress and the prosecution evidence is
going on. It is averred that during the raid two passports, one in the name of the petitioner and
another in the name of William George were seized along with some other incriminating
documents. It is alleged by the Respondent that after scientific examination by CFSL
authorities, it was observed that the photographs affixed on the passport i.e. of William George
were the same as those on the passport of the petitioner.

9.

The Respondent states that the Petitioner was apprehended on 26.9.2006 at 1600 hours

only after recovery of incriminating documents such as forged passports and counterfeit
banking instruments.

10. The principal contention of the Petitioner in this case is that he was apprehended on mere
suspicion and he had nothing to do with the alleged offence committed by the accused persons.
He has contented that he was produced before the magistrate beyond the mandatory period of
24 hours of his arrest. The Petitioner has further contended that the Respondent has even after
the expiry of 90 days failed to file charge sheet in respect of the alleged offence for which he
was arrested.

BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

4 OF 14

11.

Mr. Worso Zimik, learned counsel relied upon the decision of this court in Ram Singh

Batra v. State (2005 RLR 255), in support of his submission that the petitioner had to be
released. It was held, inter alia, that:
“If a person is denied bail by High Court under s.439 and meanwhile
investigation does not complete within statutory period then he is entitled
to bail’’

12.

Mr. Zimik also placed reliance on a decision of the Kerala High Court reported as

S.M.Purtado v. Dy. S.P.C.B.I. Cochin (1996 Cr.L.J. 3042) which held that filing of a part
charge sheet in respect of some offences, without reference to others, mentioned in the FIR, did
not satisfy the requirement of having to file the challan within the period prescribed; the
accused therefore acquired an indefeasible right to be let out on bail. Reliance was also placed
on the decision of the Gujarat High Court in Surajmal Kanaiyalal Soni -vs- State of Gujarat
1989 Crl.LJ 1678. Counsel submitted that in accordance with the provision under Section 167,
the respondent was obliged to file a challan/ charge sheet, in respect of all the offences, within
the period prescribed, i.e a maximum period of 90 days; not having complied with the
command of law, the court should disregard the so-called charge-sheet, and direct the
petitioner's release.

13.

Shri Harish Gulati, learned counsel for the respondent, submits that there is no substance

in the contentions that the applicant is entitled to be released on bail because of the failure of
the prosecution to file charge sheet within the prescribed period. He submits that a charge sheet
BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

5 OF 14

was filed in this case on 23-11-2006. That charge sheet shows that the applicant is arrayed as
accused. The entire material disclosed till that date is forming part of the said charge sheet. He
also submitted the distinction between Sections 167 and 190 of the Code and contends that
Section 190(1)(b) postulates taking cognizance of the offence. Cognizance of offence is taken
upon filing of charge sheet.

14.

His next submission is that the applicant does not contend that the charge sheet is not

compliant with Section 173(2) of the Code. Therefore, there is no question of applicants having
any indefeasible right to apply for and being released on bail. The present application must,
therefore, be dismissed.

15.

Counsel submits that in Section 173(8) the words used are "as far as may be". There is

no question of strict compliance with Section 173(2) when such is the intention of the
Legislature. Section 173(8) deals with further investigation. That is not a provision dealing with
taking cognizance. It is only upon failure of the prosecution to comply with the mandate of
Section 173(2) that the indefeasible right accrues and not otherwise. Since the charge sheet, so
far as it related to the offence under the Foreigners Act, was complete in all respects, it was
open to the respondent to carry out further investigation under Section 173(8) of the Code. It
was further submitted that even in respect of offences under the Foreigners Act, the allegations
were grave, and the Forensic Laboratory confirmed that the passports were forged.

BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

6 OF 14

16.

It would be useful to notice the relevant provisions of the Cr. PC, i.e Sections 173 and

309:
"167. Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four
hours :- (1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it
appears that the investigation cannot be completed within the period of
twenty-four hours fixed by Section 57, and there are grounds for believing
that the accusation or information is well-founded, the officer in charge of
the police station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is not
below the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the nearest
Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary hereinafter prescribed
relating to the case, and shall at the same time forward the accused to such
Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this
section may, whether he has or has no jurisdiction to try the case, from time
to time, authorise the detention of the accused in such custody as such
Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole; and
if he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, and considers
further detention unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to
a Magistrate having such jurisdiction :
Provided that - (a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the
accused person, otherwise than in the custody of the police, beyond the
period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing
so, but no Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused person in
custody under this paragraph for a total period exceeding, (i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable
with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less
than ten years;
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence,
and on the expiry of the said period of 90 days or sixty days, as the case
may be, the accused person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to
and does furnish bail and every person released on bail under this subsection shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter
XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter;
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this section
unless the accused is produced before him;
(c) no Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in this behalf
by the High Court, shall authorise detention in the custody of the police.
BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

7 OF 14

Explanation I :- For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that,
notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified in para (a), the accused
shall be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.
Explanation II :- If any question arise whether an accused person was
produced before the Magistrate as required under para (b), the production
of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order
authorising detention."
Section 309 of the Code reads as under :
"309. Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings :- (1) In every inquiry or
trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as possible, and in
particular, when the examination of the witness has once begun, the same
shall be continued from day to day until all the witnesses in attendance
have been examined, unless the Court finds the adjournment of the same
beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded.
(2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence or commencement of
trial, finds it necessary or advisable to postpone the commencement of, or
adjourn, any inquiry or trial, it may, from time to time, for reasons to be
recorded, postpone or adjourn the same or such terms as it thinks fit, for
such time as it considers reasonable, and may by a warrant remand the
accused if in custody".

17.

In Uday Mohanlal Acharya v. State of Maharashtra AIR 2001 SC 1910, the Supreme

Court, after elaborately considering all the previous decisions on the applicability of Section
167, and the various situations arising, held as follows:
“There is no provision in the Criminal Procedure Code authorising
detention of an accused in custody after the expiry of the period indicated in
the proviso to sub-section (2) of S. 167 excepting the contingency indicated
in Explanation I, namely, if the accused does not furnish the bail. It is in
this sense it can be stated that if after expiry of the period, an application
for being released on bail is filed, and the accused offers to furnish the bail,
and thereby avail of his indefeasible right and then an order of bail is
passed on certain terms and conditions but the accused fails to furnish the
bail, and at that point of time a challan is filed then possibly it can be said
BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

8 OF 14

that the right of the accused stood extinguished. But so long as the accused
files an application and indicates in the application to offer bail on being
released by appropriate orders of the Court then the right of the accused on
being released on bail cannot be frustrated on the oft chance of Magistrate
not being available and the matter not being moved, or that the Magistrate
erroneously refuses to pass an order and the matter is moved to the higher
forum and a challan is filed in interregnum. This is the only way how a
balance can be struck between the so-called indefeasible right of the
accused on failure on the part of the prosecution to file challan within the
specified period and the interest of the society, at large, in lawfully
preventing an accused for being released on bail on account of inaction on
the part of the prosecuting agency. On the aforesaid premises, we would
record our conclusions as follows :1. Under sub-section (2) of S. 167, a Magistrate before whom an
accused is produced while the police is investigating into the offence
can authorise detention of the accused in such custody as the
Magistrate thinks fit for a term not exceeding 15 days in the whole.
2. Under the proviso to aforesaid sub-section (2) of S. 167, the
Magistrate may authorise detention of the accused otherwise than
the custody of police for a total period not exceeding 90 days where
the investigation relates to offence punishable with death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than 10
years. and 60 days where the investigation relates to any other
offence.
3. On the expiry of the said period of 90 days or 60 days, as the case
may be, an indefeasible right accrues in favour of the accused for
being released on bail on account of default by the Investigating
Agency in the completion of the investigation within the period
prescribed and the accused is entitled to be released on bail, if he is
prepared to and furnish the bail, as directed by the Magistrate.
4. When an application for bail is filed by an accused for
enforcement of his indefeasible right alleged to have been accrued in
his favour on account of default on the part of the investigating
agency in completion of the investigation within the specified period,
the Magistrate/Court must dispose it of forthwith, on being satisfied
that in fact the accused has been in custody for the period of 90 days
or 60 days, as specified and no charge-sheet has been filed by the
Investigating Agency. Such prompt action on the part of the
Magistrate/Court will not enable the prosecution to frustrate the
object of the Act and the legislative mandate of an accused being
BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

9 OF 14

released on bail on account of the default on the part of the
Investigating Agency in completing the investigation within the
period stipulated.
5. If the accused is unable to furnish bail, as directed by the
Magistrate, then the conjoint reading of Explanation I and proviso
to sub-section (2) of S. 167, the continued custody of the accused
even beyond the specified period in paragraph (a) will not be
unauthorised, and therefore, if during that period the investigation is
complete and charge-sheet is filed then the so-called indefeasible
right of the accused would stand extinguished.
6. The expression 'if not already availed of used by this Court in
Sanjay Dutt's case (1994 AIR SCW 3857 : 1995 Cri LJ 477) (supra)
must be understood to mean when the accused files an application
and is prepared to offer bail on being directed. In other words, on
expiry of the period specified in paragraph (a) of proviso to subsection (2) of S. 167 if the accused files an application for bail and
offers also to furnish the bail, on being directed, then it has to be
held that the accused has availed of his indefeasible right even
though the Court has not considered the said application and has
not indicated the terms and conditions of bail, and the accused has
not furnished the same.”
18.

It is therefore, settled, that an accused must be held to have availed of his right flowing

from the legislative mandate engrafted in the proviso to sub-section (2) of S. 167 of the Code of
if he has filed an application after the expiry of the stipulated period alleging that no challan has
been filed and he is prepared to offer the bail, if ordered, and it is found as a fact that no challan
has been filed within the period prescribed from the date of the arrest of the accused. The
Supreme Court held that even if the application for bail is listed after some length of time, or
even if the Magistrate refuses the application erroneously and the accused moves the higher
forum for getting formal order of being released on bail in enforcement of his indefeasible
right, then too, filing of challan at that stage would not deprive him of the right, as such course
struck a balance between the “indefeasible right” of the accused on failure on the part of the
BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

10 OF 14

prosecution to file challan within the specified period and the interest of the society, at large in
lawfully preventing an accused for being released on bail on account of inaction on the part of
the prosecuting agency.

19.

The Kerala High Court, in S.M.Purtado's case (supra), held as follows:
“10. The investigation under section 167 of the Code can be one involving
one or more offences against the accused persons. The investigation of a
case cannot be split up in such a way to file piece-meal reports before
Court. Section 173 of the Code does not stipulate a piece-meal
investigation and filing of incomplete charge sheet before Court. It
contemplates filing of a charge/refer report after completion of the entire
investigation of the case in respect of all offences and where several
offences area involved in a case, a charge report could be laid before
Court only after the investigation is over and formation of an opinion
regarding all the offences alleged against the accused. Admittedly, for the
offence under section 3 of the Official Secrets Act, 1923, in maximum
punishment prescribed is 14 years of imprisonment. Therefore, under
section 167(2) of the Code, the maximum period the accused could be
detained in custody is 90 days. That period was over on 10-4-1996, the
date on which the CBI had filed a report in Court in respect of offences
other than the one under the Official Secrets Act. Admittedly, the
petitioners are even now in custody and now more than 130 days even
elapsed since then.
11. In the decision reported in Vijayaraghavan v. CBI, 1984 Ker LT 522 :
(1984 Cri LJ 1277), this Court held that the investigation of a cases relates
to the entire transaction of which information is given and not merely one
of the offences committed in the course of the transaction. In paragraph 10,
this Court held thus :
"10. The expression 'case' used in the provisions under examination has to
be understood in the general sense and not in a narrow or technical way.
The words 'offence' and 'case' are not synonymous, though an offence
always leads to a case and a case would always involve an offence or
offences. An occurrence or transaction may involve commission of only one
offence; or it may involve several offences. When a police officer receives
information about the commission of a cognizable offence, and records the
same, he is said to register a case, sometimes called a crime case. 'Case'

BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

11 OF 14

understood in this general sense means that the case before the police
officer arising from the information placed before him regarding an
occurrence in which an offence or offences are committed. 'Case' relates to
the transactions of which information is given and not merely one of the
offences committed during the course of the transaction".
This Court further held that when Section 173 speaks of completion of
investigation, it must ordinarily be taken to refer to completion of
investigation of all the facts and circumstances relating to the case,
whether the transaction involves one offence or plurality of offences and a
final report or charge sheet under section 173 could be filed only after
completion of the investigation in the case relating to all the offences
arising in the case. We are in respectful agreement with the said finding
arrived at by U. L. Bhat, J., as he than was. Viewed in that light, it must be
held that the 'charge report' stated to have been filed by the CBI on 10-41996 cannot be said to be a final report as contemplated under section 173
of the Code and we must say that the prosecution was not justified in
making piece-meal charge report in respect of various offences alleged to
have been committed by the petitioners. In the absence of completion of the
investigation of the case against the petitioners, we hold that the
Magistrate cannot take cognizance of the case as contemplated under
section 309 of the Code.
12. A Magistrate can take cognizance of an offence only on filing of a
report under section 173(2) of the Code. Unless power is conferred by law,
there is no inherent power to remand an accused to custody. Holding so, in
the decision reported in Natabar Parida v. State of Orissa, AIR 1975 SC
1465 : 1975 Cri LJ 1212, the Supreme Court proceeded to say that under
section 167(2) proviso and under Section 309(2) of the new Code, the
power of remand of jail custody conferred on the Magistrate during the
pendency of the investigation is only under the former Section and not
under the latter Section. The Supreme Court also held that Section 309(2) is
attracted only after cognizance of an offence is taken or commencement of
the trial has proceeded.
13. A remand under section 309(2) of the Code can be made only after
taking cognizance of the offence. That being the position, in the absence of
a final report regarding all the offences alleged to have been committed by
the accused persons, it has to be held that the Magistrate has not taken
cognizance of the offences as required by Section 309(2) of the Code. The
Magistrate is not empowered to order remand of the accused to judicial
custody unless final report as contemplated under section 173(2) of the
Code is laid before Court.

BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

12 OF 14

14. Thus, in the light of the report filed by the CBI, a further investigation
in respect of the offences under the Official Secrets Act, IPC, Act and the
Order is necessary. If final report is laid before Court and the Magistrate
takes cognizance of the offence, a further report under section 173(8) of the
Code regarding commission of offences or involvement of the accused in
connection with the other offences can be made. But in the absence of a
final report in respect of all the offences, it cannot be said that a final
report under section 173(2) in respect of the offences alleged to have been
committed by the petitioners under the Official Secrets Act could be legally
filed by invoking the provisions of Section 173(8) of the Code. The finding
of the Court below to the contra is, in our view, illegal.
15. Admittedly, no final report has been filed by the CBI against the
petitioners in respect of the various offences. In its absence, the prosecution
is not justified in resorting to Section 173(8) of the Code to submit a further
report in respect of the alleged involvement of the petitioners under the
Official Secrets Act, IPC, Act and the Order. Since the investigation of the
case is not complete, we find no reason to deny the statutory bail to the
petitioners under Section 167(2) of the Code.
16. The Supreme Court has held that in the scheme of the 1973 Code,
remand to custody during investigation can be made only under Section 167
of the Code and remand to custody under section 309 can be made only
after taking cognizance of the offence by the Court. The result is that if the
investigation is not over and the period mentioned in Section 167(2) to
detain the accused is custody is over, by invoking Section 309 of the Code,
the custody of the accused cannot be extended and are to be released on
bail.”

20.

It is well known that the court takes cognizance of the crime, not the offender. The

argument that the respondent filed a charge-sheet, within time, when it did, is not correct. The
charge-sheet pertains only to the offence under the Foreigners Act, for which, as per proviso to
Section 167 (2) had to be filed within 60 days. But for the other offences, in respect of which
the period prescribed, for filing the charge sheet is 90 days, no charges were indicated. Though

BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

13 OF 14

the right of the investigating agency to file a supplementary charge sheet, or a further report
(under Section 173(8) pursuant to order of the court) cannot be disputed, yet the fact remains
that there cannot be part charge sheet, as has been contended in the present case. Therefore,
following the decision in S.M.Purtado's case, as well as the Supreme Court ruling in Uday
Mohanlal Acharya, it has to be concluded that the petitioner is entitled to be enlarged on bail.
This is without prejudice to such other rights the respondents may have in law, to place further
materials in support of the case, before the trial Court.

21.

In view of the above discussion, the petitioner is directed to be enlarged on bail, subject

to the following conditions:
a)

His furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs. 30,000/- and a surety of the like amount

to the satisfaction of the competent court;
b)

His undertaking not to leave the country, during the trial into offences under the

Foreigners Act, and depositing his passport with the court;
c)

His reporting to the court every week, on a date to be determined by the court, during

pendency of the trial.
The petition is allowed in the above terms. Order dasti.

MARCH 19, 2007

S. RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE

BAIL APPLN. NO. 215/2007

14 OF 14

