*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

1.

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005
Reserved on : March 5, 2007
Decided on : April 18, 2007
CRL.M.C. 6649/2005
D.K. RASTOGI

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Naveen Malhotra, Advocate

versus
UNION OF INDIA

2.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Subhash Bansal, Advocate

CRL.M.C. 6650/2005
D.K. RASTOGI

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Naveen Malhotra, Advocate

versus
UNION OF INDIA

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Subhash Bansal, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

The petitioner in these proceedings under Section 482 Criminal
Procedure Code (Cr.P.C.) claims quashing of a criminal complaint filed by

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

1 of 12

the respondent, Chief Enforcement Officer, alleging commission of offences
under Sections 56 of Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (hereafter
"FERA") read with Sub-section 3 & 4 of Section 49 of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999.
2.

The facts necessary to decide the petitions are that M/s. Kudos
Exports Pvt. Ltd. (KEPL) had imported worthless material claiming to be
computer software from M/s. Ganton Limited, London, of Abhishek Verma
arrayed as accused No.5.

The consignment was imported through 13

invoices, of which ten were dated 12.4.1996 and three, dated 25.7.1995; the
amounts towards the ten consignments were remitted through Bank of
Rajasthan, South Extension., New Delhi. The rest were remitted through
Union Bank of India, Yusuf Sarai, New Delhi.

A total sum of US$

17,74,000/- were remitted to the account maintained by M/s. Ganton Limited,
London in Swiss Banking Corporation Zurich, from the accounts of KEPL.
3.

The documents were forwarded by banks alongwith the copies of Bill
of Entry of Warehousing, whereas the Bill of Entries for home consumption
were not filed. Samples were drawn from the office of the Customs STPI,
Noida from the stock of Autocad and representatives of M/s. Hindustan
Office Product Limited, (one of the authorized distributors of USA based
company M/s. Auto Desk) as an experts were consulted. The goods were
inspected; it was alleged that Accused No.1 i.e. M/s. Kudos Exports Pvt. Ltd.
had imported pirated software for an exorbitant price.

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

2 of 12

4.

In the course of investigation and proceedings, statements of Sh. Ravi
Bhatnagar, Director of M/s. Kudos Exports Pvt. Ltd. (also arrayed as third
accused) were recorded under Sections 108 of the Customs Act as well as
under Section 40 of the FERA. He alleged that all actions performed by him
were under directions of the firth accused Abhishek Verma, Chairman of the
second accused, Esam India Limited. Abhishek Verma, admitted to the facts,
as well as about his being a Director of M/s. Esam Trading Company,
responsible for its decisions and further being director of KEPL.

5.

The petitioner was arrayed as the eigth accused; his statement was
recorded under Section 40 of the FERA. He was a Chartered Accountant of
M/s. Esam Trading Company, (the holding company of KEPL to the extent of
99%). It was also alleged that the transactions that were the subject matter of
scrutiny leading to adjudication as well as the filing of the complaint were
under the exclusive directions of Abhishek Verma.

6.

On 17.1.2002, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner and the
other accused, impleaded in the complaint, alleging that they had violated
various provisions of law. The show cause notice was resisted inter alia by
the petitioner who disclaimed any liability and furnished his explanation. By
the order in original issued on 31.3.2005, the Special Director (Enforcement),
Central Government imposed penalties on M/s. Kudos Exports Pvt. Ltd., M/s.
Esam Trading Company Ltd, M/s. Ravi Bhatnagar, Mr. Manish Bhatnagar,
Mr. Abhishek Verma and Mr. M.A. Khan.

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

The total penalty amounts
3 of 12

directed

to

be

recovered

from

those

accused,

including

the

concerns/companies and the individuals were Rs.7,00,00,000/- (Rupees seven
crores). The Special Director after discussing the evidence, materials on
record and the explanation of the petitioner dropped the proceedings against
him.
7.

The findings of the Special Director as far as they were relevant for

consideration in the present case, are extracted below:
“ 58. From the foregoing facts, it was evident that the noticee
company namely M/s. Kudos Exports (P) Ltd. had not imported
goods of corresponding value both in terms of price of
corresponding value both in terms of price and quality and the
import invoices were highly over-invoiced.
Further, it was
observed that the imported software was of negligible value and
the noticees did not clear the consignments. Added to the above
another important fact which had gone against the noticee
company is the non existence of M/s. Ganton Ltd., the U.K.
supplier. It is pertinent to note that while the invoices were
raised from U.K. and the consignments were also sent from U.K.
the remittances were made to the supplier's account in Swiss
Banking corporation Zurich. In the statement of Sh. Sandeep
Puri he categorically stated that M/s. Ganton Ltd. London is a
front company of Sh. Abhishek Verma. The facts demonstrate
that the import transactions undertaken by the noticee company
were with the ulterior motive of transfer of foreign exchange in
surreptitious manner in the guise of import payments. During
the course of investigations by the directorate as well as during
adjudication proceedings no one came forward on behalf of the
noticee company to explain the transaction or adduced any
submissions in its defense. The charge against the company for
contravention of Sections 8(3) & 8(4) of the FERA, 1973 are
therefore well established based on the materials and evidence
gathered and relied upon in the SCN.
xxxxx
xxxxx

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

4 of 12

61.
As regards the charges against S/Sh. Abhishek Verma,
Sandeep Puri, Jitendra Agarwal, D.K. Rastogi and M.A. Khan,
notice no. 5 to 9 on analysis of the materials on record. It is
observed that Sh. Abhishek Verma was the chairman of M/s.
Esam and was the pivotal around which the whole activities of
M/s. Esam had been taking place. In his defense reply, Sh.
Verma submitted that he was no more connected with M/s. Esam
during the period in which the import transactions which are the
subject matter of the SCN took place. His submissions revolved
around the contention that he had resigned from the Board of
Directors of the company in the year 1993 and thereafter he had
no connection what so ever with the company. However, there
submissions when examined vis-a-vis the records gathered by the
directorate during the course of investigations and those which
were relied upon revealed that there is no merit in those
submissions. It is observed that the remittances to the tune of
US$ 17.74 lakhs were made by M/s. Kudos (P) Ltd. and the
requisite Indian currency funds were provided by Sh. Abhishek
Verma through his company M/s. Esam, even the business of M/s.
Kudos (P) Ltd. in dealing with computer software was an idea
floated by Sh. Abhishek Verma and put into shape through Sh.
Ravi Bhatnager/Manish Bhatnagar. The department had made
enquiries with various money changers and foreign Embassies
and records gathered therefore revealed that Sh. Verma had been
availing foreign exchange under LERMS for business travels on
behalf of M/s. Exam. Further Sh. Abhishek Verma had applied
for visa to various embassies stating that he was representing
M/s. Esam as its Chairman/director. A brief account of the
enquiries are as discussed below.
62.
During the course of the investigations. Documents were
collected from various money changer viz. M/s. Bajaj Travels,
New Delhi, M/s. Dension Finance Ltd and M/s. American
Express Travel Related Services, New Delhi and M/s. R.R. Sen &
Bros. (P) Ltd. The security of the passport of the notice revealed
that he had availed foreign exchange under BTQ/LERMS from
the aforesaid money changers for his travel abroad for
business/personal purpose. This facility of foreign exchange for
travel aboard was availed in his capacity as Chairman of M/s.
Esam. The aforesaid money changer i.e. M/s. Bajaj Travels vide
letter dated 15.12.1999. M/s. Denson Finance Ltd. vide letter
dated 20.12.1999. American express Travels Related Services
vide letter dated 21.12.1999 and M/s. R.R. Sen & Bros. (P) Ltd.
CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

5 of 12

vide letter dated 11.2.2000 furnished copies of the relevant
documents which the notice/his company submitted to them as
the time of availing the foreign exchange under the BTQ/LERMS
schemes.
63.
Further, the department caused enquiries with various
Embassies of foreign countries viz. Embassy of France, British
High Commission, Embassy of Brazil, Embassy of Switzerland
and Embassy of Finland and the replies/details furnished by them
vide letter dated 14.3.2000 respectively confirmed that
applications were submitted to the said Embassies for obtaining
visas for the notice's travel abroad for business promotion of
M/s. Esam.
64.
The depositions of Sh. Ravi Bhatnagar, Director of M/s.
KEP and those of S/Sh. Sandeep Puri, Jitendra Agarwal and a
number of other persons whose statements were relied upon as
evidence together with the detail forwarded by the bankers of
M/s. Esam established in undisputed manner about the nexus of
Sh. Verma in the import transaction of Ms. KEP. It further
established that the version of Sh. Verma that after 1993 he was
in no way connected with Ms/s. Esam was contrary to facts on
record. In fact the various record read with the depositions of
the concerned persons displayed that Sh. Abhishek Verma was
the sole authority who had enjoyed unquestionable and
enormous power of decision making not only in M/s. Esam but
also in M/s. KEP and the other directors were acting according
to the tunes of Sh. Verma, on careful consideration of the
materils. It became amply clear that the charges against M/s.
Esam Trading Co. Ltd. (M/s. Esam India Ltd.) and Sh. Abhishek
Verma were proved to the hilt despite his efforts to disassociate
himself from the activities of the companies.
65.
As regards S/Sh. Sandeep Puri, Jitendra Agarwal, D.K.
Rastogi and M.A. Khan it is observed that the said
Directors/officials of the company were paid directors appointed
by Sh. Abhishek Verma at his own whims and fancies as Sh.
Verma was the virtual owner of the company holding 99% of the
equity share, from the statements of S/Sh. Sandeep Puri Juitendra
Agarwal and D.K. Rastogi recorded during the course of
investigations and also the documents gathered during the
course of investigation. It became ardently clear that they were
cimply carrying out the instructions of Sh. Verma and being paid
CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

6 of 12

directors had not other choice but to act in tune with the
directions of Sh. Abhishek Verma. In fact the depositions of S/Sh.
Sandeep Puri, Jitendra Agarwal and D.K. Rastogi had helped the
department in unearthing a huge racket in surreptitious of funds
from India to bank account in Switzerland. Further Sh. D.K.
Rastogi was a Chartered Accountant taken on the board of
directors of stream lining the accounting system of the company.
All of them stated in unambiguous terms that Sh. Abhishek Verma
was the master-mind behind all the transactions and had a hand
in all the decisions. In the circumstances, I find that the charges
attributed against them the SCN are not sustainable on the fact
of the submission made by them in their Defense that they were
merely tools in the hands of Sh. Verma.”
8.

The petitioner contends that with his exoneration in the adjudication
proceedings, the foundation for continuing the prosecution no longer exists.
Learned counsel relied on several judgments and urged that adjudication by
the Special Director and the order in those proceedings were issued on merits;
they fully exonerated the petitioner. Accordingly, he was entitled to the
quashing order claimed in these cases.

9.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court
reported as G.L. Diswania and Anr. vs. Income Tax Officer and Anr., 1995
Suppl. (2) SCC 724 and Uttam Chand vs. Income Tax Officer, Central
Circle, Amritsar, (1982) 2 SCC 543. He also relied upon the recent judgment
in Sunil Gulati vs. R.K. Vohra, 2007 (1) JCC 220.

10.

Learned counsel for the respondent urged that the mere fact that the
petitioner was exonerated in departmental or adjudicatory proceedings would
not entitle him to escape prosecution in criminal proceedings which are
independently maintainable. Reliance was placed upon P. Jayappan vs. S.K.

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

7 of 12

Perumal, First Income-Tax Officer, Tuticorin, 1984 (Supp) SCC 437;
Commissioner of Income Tax. Mumbai vs. Bhupen Champaklal Dalai and
Anr. (2001) 3 SCC 469 and Surkhi Lal vs. Union of India, (2005 (3) JCC
1788.
11.

This Court in the judgment reported as Sunil Gulati vs. R.K. Vohra,
2007 (1) JCC 220 which was relied upon by the learned counsel for the
petitioner during the hearing, elaborately considered the various nuances of
identical problems, where adjudication proceedings culminated in orders
favouring the accused/assessee and where in exercise of independent powers
prosecution or complaints were launched. The Court after noticing various
judgments including Supreme Court rulings and the judgment in Standard
Chartered Bank's case (supra) was of the opinion that though seemingly there
was a facial conflict in the different strands of reasoning, yet on a deeper
analyses, it was apparent that it was one thing to say that two proceedings
could be maintained as a matter of law, but entirely another to say that after
suffering an adjudication order on the same facts, the department or the
prosecuting agency ought not to be allowed to prosecute the assessee having
failed to establish the basic and necessary facts. The issue is not, therefore, as
much as existence of power to prosecute an offender, as the finding by a
competent Court or Tribunal about foundational facts which would justify
prosecution.

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

8 of 12

12.

The court, after noticing the ostensibly conflict in reasoning, in
various judgments, reconciled the question, in the following terms:
“In fact, various cases of the Supreme Court, not whereof is taken
above, deal with different situations. The principles which can be
culled out from the aforesaid judgments, when all these judgments
are read out harmoniously, would be the following:
1.
On the same violation alleged against against a
person, if adjudication proceedings as well as criminal proceedings
are permissible, both can be initiated simultaneously. For initiating
criminal proceedings one does not have to wait for the outcome of
the adjudication proceedings as the two proceedings are independent
in nature.
2.
The findings in the departmental proceedings would
not amount to resjudicata and initiation of criminal proceedings in
these circumstances can be treated as double jeoparty as they are not
in the nature of “prosecution”.
3.
In case adjudication proceedings are decided against
a person who is facing prosecution as well and they Tribunal has
also upheld the findings of the adjudicators/assessing authority, that
would have no bearing on the criminal proceedings and the criminal
proceedings are to be determined on its own merits in accordance
with law, uninhibited by the findings of the Tribunal. It is because of
the reason that in so far as criminal action is concerned, it has to be
proved as per the strict standards fixed for criminal cases before the
criminal court by producing necessary evidence.
4.
In case converse situation namely where the accused
persons are exonerated by the competent authorities/Tribunal in
adjudication proceedings, one will have to see that reasons for such
exoneration to determine whether these criminal proceedings could
still continue. It the exoneration in departmental adjudication is on
technical ground or by giving benefit of doubt and not on merits or
the adjudication proceedings were on different facts, it would have
not bearing on criminal proceedings. If, on the other hand, the
exoneration in the adjudication proceedings is on merits and it is
found that allegations are not substantiated at all and the concerned
person(s) is/are innocent, and the criminal prosecution is also on the
same set of facts and circumstances, the criminal prosecution cannot
be allowed to continue. The reason is obvious criminal complaint is
filed by the departmental authorities alleging violation/contravention
of the provisions of the Act on the part of the accused persons.
However, if the departmental authorities themselves, in adjudication

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

9 of 12

proceedings, record a categorical and unambiguous finding that
there is no such contravention of the provisions of the Act, it would
be unjust for such departmental authorities to continue with the
criminal complaint and say that there is sufficient evidence to foist
the accused persons with criminal liability when it is stated in the
departmental proceedings that ex-facie there is no such violation.
The yardstick would, therefore, be to see as to whether charges in the
departmental proceedings as well as criminal complaint are identical
and the exoneration of the concerned person in the departmental
proceedings is on merits holding that there is no contravention of the
provisions of any act.”

13.

In the present case, several concerns or firms were alleged offenders;
they were called upon to show cause why penalties ought not be levied upon
them. Individual directors and others, perceived to be offenders were also
called upon to furnish their explanations. The findings, based on elaborate
analysis of the materials and the explanations afforded to the adjudicating
officer, namely, Special Director, held the concerns/companies and those
integrally connected with their functioning, or in control of its affairs who
were responsible for the actions, guilty and imposed substantial penalties.
However, the petitioner was fully exonerated and found not to have played a
part or role that was culpable. The criminal complaint filed parallely during
the time when the adjudication proceedings were pending, contained identical
allegations based on the same facts.

14.

It is no doubt true that judgments of the Court have settled the
position that exoneration in adjudicatory or assessment proceedings should
not automatically result in conclusion that criminal complaints are not

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

10 of 12

maintainable. The court examining the issue should consider the facts of
each case. If the exoneration is based on technicalities or in the absence of
certain features which are otherwise available in the criminal proceedings, the
latter should be allowed to proceed. Additionally, the Court has also to
consider other circumstances such as whether an appeal is maintainable
before a superior or appellate body and is pending; the standard of proof in
either proceedings etc.
15.

In the facts of this case, it is evident that the findings of the Special
Enforcement Director discharging the show cause notices issued to the
petitioner were premised on merits and on full appreciation of all the factors.
In these circumstances, I am of the considered view that such a decision
amounts to a categorical and unambiguous finding that no contravention of
provisions of law, took place. It, therefore, falls within the fourth category
contemplated in Sunil Gulati's

case.

Therefore,

the basic reason for

prosecuting the petitioner, namely, his having contravened provisions of the
Act, a foundational issue, in terms of violation of Section 56 ceased to exist.

16.

There is one more material aspect, which is that the appeal to the
Appellate forum in such cases, can be availed of only by a person aggrieved.
No material was brought to the notice of the Court that the appellate remedy
could be invoked by the Enforcement Department against orders of the
Special Director. The necessary conclusion in these circumstances is that it

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

11 of 12

would unjust to permit the prosecution of the petitioner in the complaints
filed by the respondent. The proceedings in complaint Nos. 581/1/2002 and
582/1/2002 pending before the concerned court are quashed, as far as they
concern the petitioner.
17.

The petitions are allowed in the above terms with no orders as to
costs.

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
April 18, 2007
dkg

CRL.M.C. 6649/2005 and CRL.M.C. 6650/2005

12 of 12

