37
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI Reported
Date of decision : April 19, 2007

+

CRL.M.C. 2090/2005
KULDEEP KUMAR

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Sunil Kumar, Advocate

versus
G.K.MISHRA & ORS.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate for State
Mr. Pankaj Batra, Advocate for R1 to R6

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This petition under Section 482 seeks intervention by exercise of inherent

jurisdiction of the court. The petitioner had filed a complaint alleging commission of
offences under Sections 147/148/149/323/452/506/120-B IPC.
2.

The allegations, in the complaint were that the accused persons on 30.1.2003, in

the late evening entered his house started abusing him and started mercilessly beating his
mother, brother and son. These along with the complainants, allegedly received serious
injuries. It was alleged that the incident was witnessed by one Baleshwar Prasad, a local

CRL-MC-2090-2005

1 of 6

respondent.

The complainant/petitioner alleged that the police were called and the

injured were taken to the Lal Bahadur Shastri Hospital and they were admitted. It was
further alleged that subsequently due to some pressure a compromise was recorded. Later
on coming to know about the lodging of an FIR, by the accused, the petitioners filed the
complaint.
3. In the course of the proceedings before the learned Magistrate, six witnesses were
examined in support of the petitioner's case. These included the injured persons as
well as CW1 one Lama Ram, working as Constable. That witness produced the record
and mentioned about the incident, in support of the complainant's version.
Additionally, Baleshwar Prasad, the complainant's neighbour and alleged eye witness,
who had seen the incident deposed in favour of the complainant.
4. The trial court by the order recorded as follows :
“On carefully scrutiny of the testimony of the
witness, reveals that the complainant and the
respondent are the neighbours and the respondent
used to harassed the complainant and his family
members, and as respondent wanted the
complainant to sell his house. The complainant has
made several complaints to the police. The
respondent stated to have entered into house of the
complainant on 31/03/03 and started abusing and
beating the complainant and his family members.
Police was called and the matter was somehow
compromised. The complainant came to know on
12/7/03 that the police has registered a case U/S
323/325 of the IPC against the complainant and his
family members of the incident dt. 31/03/03. The
respondent is stated to have manipulated the MLC.
The matter was reported to the senior police officers
but no action has been taken against the respondent
on the complaint of the complainant. Persual of the
CRL-MC-2090-2005

2 of 6

testimony of the witness and perusal of the case file
reveals that the FIR No.310/03 U/s. 323/325/34 of
the IPC is already on the record in which the
complainant is the Gopi Kant Mishra who has been
arrayed as respondent No.1 in the present
complaint. Once the FIR against the complainant is
already registered against the complainant and his
family members. The present complaint appears to
the court as counter blast of the FIR No.301/03 of
the PS Shakar Pur in which the complainant and his
family are the accused and the respondent no.1 is
the complainant in the aforesaid FIR. The present
complaint has been filed in view to arrive at desired
result of compromise etc. as the FIR no.301/03 of
the PS-Shakarpur is already registered against the
complainant and his family members. It is the
bounden duty of the court to curb the multiplicity of
the litigation between the parties.
As the
summoning of the respondent will definitely will be a
multiplicity of the proceeding between the parties
which are neither desirable nor warranted.
Needless to say, the complainant will be given ample
opportunity to lead evidence in defence in the
aforesaid proceeding in the state case and will be
given fair chance to lead evidence in support of his
complaint. Since the present complaint is the
counter blast of the case FIR No.301/03 of the PSShakar Pur in which the complainant and his family
member are the accused and the respondent no.1
G.K.Mishra is the complainant. I do not consider
the testimony of the witnesses worthy of giving any
credence.
Under aforesaid facts, circumstances and
testimony held above I am of the considered opinion
that the complaint is liable to be dismissed and
consequently the complaint is dismissed. File be
consigned to Record Room.”
5. On the above reasoning the complaint was rejected. The petitioner preferred a revision
to the learned Additional Sessions Judge. The latter dealt with the facts and narrated
the sequence of events in the first part in paras 1 to 8 of his order. The only reasoning
CRL-MC-2090-2005

3 of 6

adduced by the revisional court in support of its order, dismissing the revision was that
the court found no infirmity in law or illegality in the observations of the trial court.
6. Counsel urged that the reasoning of the courts below in rejecting the complaint namely
avoidance of multiplicity of litigations or proceedings is hardly a justification for
refusing to issue a process when the materials on record amply bore out commission of
an offence. It was also contended that the FIR lodged by the respondent/accused was
in fact motivated. That FIR was irrelevant at the stage of summoning and that the
court was strictly bound to see whether the ingredients of the offences concerned were
made out in the evidence, and proceed in accordance with law.
7. Learned counsel for the State submitted that the approach of the courts below appeared
to be casual and also commented that the observations that it is open to the
complainant to urge his points in the course of the proceedings as an accused in the
FIR lodged by the respondents, cannot be construed as correct. It was submitted that
the petitioner as a complainant had every right to bring to the notice of court or set into
motion the process about the commission of offence earlier in March, 2003.
8. Learned counsel for the contesting respondents No.1 to 6 resisted the petition and
submitted that the approach of the trial court as affirmed the revisional court cannot
be faulted with. He relied upon on the circumstance that the complaint had been
lodged after a considerable delay of four months. It was submitted that the alleged
incident occurred on 31.3.2003 whereas the complainant approached the court exactly
four months later. Counsel contended that even assuming though not admitting the
lodging of the FIR by the respondent/accused to be a justifiable reason for the delay,
CRL-MC-2090-2005

4 of 6

nevertheless a further delay of about 18 days in the lodging of the complaint was not
explained.

These, it was contended, amount to multiplicity on the part of the

complainant/petitioner.
9. Learned counsel also contended that taken in totality there was no reliable evidence
that could have impelled the courts to issue process.

It was submitted that the

reasoning of the trial court namely avoidance of multiplicity of proceedings and the
lodging of the FIR by respondents No.2 to 6 were valid and justifiable reasons for
rejecting the complaint. It is also contended that once the matter is carried in revision
and the revisional court also found no infirmity with the order of the trial court there
was hardly any scope of interference.

It is also contended that the so-called

independent witness namely Baleshwar Prasad, who is said to have seen the incident in
March, 2003 was also arrayed as an accused in the subsequent FIR.
10.Having considered the materials on record it appears that the trial court seems to be
unduly influenced by the so-called compromise arrived at between the parties, said to
have been arrived at in March, 2003. There were six witnesses who deposed in the
proceedings including the family members of the petitioner as well as two outsiders;
one of them was a police constable who had brought the records to show that an
incident had occurred on the date alleged. Another person namely Baleshwar Prasad
also deposed in the proceedings. At that stage the question as to whether the petitioner
or any of the witnesses was arrayed as an accused elsewhere or the veracity of the
statement of such persons in the complaint proceedings lodged by the petitioner, in the
allegations of the FIR, in my considered opinion have arisen and in any case
CRL-MC-2090-2005

5 of 6

considered by the trial court.
11.The courts below in my opinion fell into error in seeing the subsequent lodging of the
FIR as the motivation for the complaint and were influenced into infer that the
complaint would have resulted in multiplicity of proceedings. That is hardly a ground
to reject a complaint. The court has to apply its mind to the facts of the case and see
independently whether the materials justify an order summoning the accused. There is
no discussion on the veracity or otherwise of the deposition of the six witnesses and
the circumstance which were spoken about by CW1.
12.In view of the above conclusions, I am of the opinion that this petition ought to be
argued. The matter is accordingly remitted to the learned trial court for appropriate
proceedings in accordance with law.
13.The petition is allowed in the above terms. Nothing said in this order shall be
construed as an expression on the merits of the case. All rights and contentions of the
parties are kept open.
(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
APRIL 19, 2007
mm

CRL-MC-2090-2005

6 of 6

