10
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 5273/2007
August 16, 2007
ASEEM AGARWAL

..... Petitioners
Through Mr. Ajit Kumar, Ms. Nitika Sharma, Advocates

versus
UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Amit Bansal, Ms. Manisha Singh, Advocates
for R-2/CBSE.
Mr. Sewa Ram, Mr. R.K. Bachchan, Advocates for R-1 and 3.

CORAM:

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

Issue Rule. Mr. Amit Bansal, learned counsel waives notice of Rule on behalf of

respondent No.2 and Mr. Sewa Ram, learned counsel waives notice on Rule on behalf of
Respondents 1 and 3. With consent, the petition was heard finally.
2.

The petitioner claims a direction to the respondents to grant him admission in a

Medical college in India in a participating units in the All India PMT, in a Central

W.P.(C) 5273/2007

1 of 4

Government/State Government Institution the All India quota.
3.

The undisputed facts are that the petitioner qualified in the equivallent of the 10+2

examination. He is not an Indian national but has been registered as Overseas citizen of
India under Section 7-A of the Citizenship Act, 1955. He was permitted to participate in
the common entrance test held by the Central Board of Secondary Education/CBSE. His
grievance is that after he was permitted to so participate and after declaration of his result
—he having obtained a high ranking of 1643. The respondents prevented him from
further participating in the counselling process. It is claimed that the petitioner's name
was not forwarded to the DGHS, entrusted in terms of scheme to counsel. The did not
recommend his name for admission to any institution.
4.

Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the provisions of Section 7-A and

7-B and submitted that there is no prohibition placed by any statutory provision,
inhibiting registered overseas citizens from claiming benefits available to other citizens in
Government and Government aided institutions. Learned counsel also placed reliance on
a notification dated 11.4.2005 (S.O. 542 (E) ) where the Central Government had inter
alia stated as follows:
“ The Central Government has specified (vide S.O.542 (E), dated 11th
April, 2005) the following rights to which the persons registered as
Overseas Citizens of India under Section 7A of the Act shall be entitled,
namely :(a) grant of multiple entry lifelong visa for visiting India for any
purpose;
(b) exemption from registration with Foreign Regional
Registration Officer or Foreign Registration Officer for any length of
stay in India; and
(c) parity with Non-Resident Indians in respect of all facilities
available to them in economic, financial and educational fields except
W.P.(C) 5273/2007

2 of 4

5.

in matters relating to the acquisition of agricultural or plantation
properties.”
Learned counsel for the CBSE submitted that on 5.12.2006 the petitioner was

informed that according to its interpretation of Rule 8(i) of the Information Bulletin and
Application Form for AIPMT-2007 he was ineligible, being an overseas citizen. Learned
counsel contended that by inadvertence the petitioner was issued a roll number and thus
he appeared in the examination. This, it was contended did not confer any benefit which
was otherwise admissible.
6.

Mr. Sewa Ram, learned counsel for the Union of India submitted that the

understanding of the Central Government was that overseas citizens were dis-entitled to
the benefits of admission in Central Government/State Government or Government aided
institutions having regard to the subsidised nature of such facilities. He, however, stated
that this issue was engaging the attention of the Central Government and the Committee
Secretaries in principle decided to extend the facilities to overseas citizens in terms of
Section 7-B read with S.O. 540 (B). It was also contended that there is no prohibition
under Section 7-B. Learned counsel contended that in view of the high ranking i.e. 1643
obtained by the petitioner and also taking into consideration the fact, that second
counselling has been completed, the most appropriate course at this stage would be that
his name should be considered as per merit/ranking, before surrendering the left over
seats to the State Government in case any vacancy exists. Learned counsel made these
submissions on the basis of instructions and subject to issuance of a notification.
7.

In view of the above statement made on behalf of respondents 1 and 3, I am of the

opinion that this Court should refrain from expressing any opinion as to the eligibility or
W.P.(C) 5273/2007

3 of 4

otherwise of overseas citizens, in respect of the admission processes, to State/State aided
educational institutions in India. The most appropriate course, therefore, would be to
require the said respondents to consider the petitioner's case in accordance with the
merit/ranking obtained by him, in the event of any vacancy being available on or before
the cut off date before surrendering medical seats to the State for being filled up. Ordered
accordingly.
8.

The petition is disposed off in the above terms.
Order Dasti.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J

AUGUST
dkg

16, 2007

W.P.(C) 5273/2007

4 of 4

