*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 842/2006 & Crl.M(Bail) No.2124/2006
July 17, 2007

SHRINIWAS

….. PETITIONER
Through: Ms. Jyoti Kalra, Advocate

Vs.
STATE

...... RESPONDENTS
Through Mr. O.P. Saxena, Advocate

CORAM:

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court):
1. The present revision petition challenges an order-dated 4.11.2006 passed by the
Ld. Additional sessions Judge (ASJ). The order affirmed conviction and sentence
for the offences committed under Sections 279, and 304A of Indian Penal code
(IPC).
2. The brief facts necessary to decide this petition are that; on 11.10.1997 allegedly,
information was received at Police station Sultan Puri that an accident had taken
place and a child lay dead at village Karala, on Madan Pur road, opposite a water
tank. The police rushed to the spot; they saw one stationery tempo-bearing no.
DL-1L- A-4392. On its left side, under the front wheel the body of the child
Crl.Rev.P.No.842/2006

1 of 6

(hereafter referred to as the deceased) Manish Kumar S/o Shri. Bhagwan was
found. The alleged accident was caused while the petitioner was driving in reverse
gear. Smt. Nirmala Devi, the mother of the deceased (hereafter “the
complainant”) was present at the spot.
3. The SI recorded the statement of the complainant and the father of the deceased.
A case was registered, the Petitioner was arrested and the vehicle was seized. The
petitioner was charged with committing offences under section 279, 304A of the
Indian penal code (IPC).
4. The prosecution examined 8 witnesses in support of the case. The Learned
Metropolitan magistrate (trial Court) by order dated 25.05.2004 convicted the
Petitioner under section 279/ 304 –A IPC read with Section 3/181 of the Motor
Vehicles Act. The accused was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for a period of
6 months and a fine of Rs.500/- for the offence under section 279 IPC and a
further 2 year Rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.1000/- for the offence
under section 304A and a Simple imprisonment for one month and a fine of
Rs.200/- for the offence under section 3/181 of the Motor Vehicle Act. All the
sentences were to run concurrently..
5. The petitioner aggrieved by this order preferred an appeal before the Learned
ASJ. The appellate Court modified the sentenced imposed by the trial Court. The
extracts of the order are as follows;
“Taking into account the age, social and economic and
family background of the accused as well as the fact that he was
not a previous convict. I modify the same to the extent that the
rigorous imprisonment passed by the Ld. M.M. for the offence
under section 304-A IPC is reduced from two years to one year
Crl.Rev.P.No.842/2006

2 of 6

and RI of six months under sec.279 IPC is reduced to three
months. The appellant/convict is sentenced to undergo RI for a
period of 3 months and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/- for the offence
under section 279 IPC and further to undergo RI for one year
and to pay a fine of Rs. 1000/-for the offence under section 304A IPC. Since the fine has already been paid before the court of
the learned Metropolitan magistrate, there is no question of
imposing sentence on default of payment of fine”
6. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the charges were
manipulated one and all the facts were false. There are two versions in the I.O’s
statements. Counsel submitted that in the challan the IO stated that the accident
took place at 6pm and as per the first version when the IO reached the spot at
6.45pm, the body of the deceased was found behind the left front wheel. In the
other version he stated that the body was found under the wheel of the vehicle.
The counsel also relied on the statement of the complainant, where she stated
that the boy did not die at the spot but was removed to M.R.S. hospital with
injuries due to the alleged accident.
7. Learned counsel submitted that there were many discrepancies in the case. It is
evident from the complainant’s statement that the boy did not die on the spot
but was removed to the hospital and when declared dead. he was brought back
and kept under the stationery tempo. Photographs were taken at 10p.m and the
Photographer was not examined. Therefore the petitioner is entitled to benefit
under section 114(g) of the Evidence Act. Learned counsel further urged that PW3 was a planted witness. The doctors who treated the child were not examined.
Learned counsel further submitted that there is no cogent evidence to prove that
the Petitioner was rash and negligent and he had not taken the extra care while

Crl.Rev.P.No.842/2006

3 of 6

reversing the vehicle.
8. The learned counsel submitted that the complainant did not depose about the
right colour of the alleged vehicle. The blood sample from the vehicle were not
collected and it is not reported that the tyres of the vehicle had any bloodstains.
The counsel contended that there were no eyewitnesses to the incident.
9. Learned counsel submitted that even if the facts alleged, viz the Petitioner having
caused death while reversing the vehicle, were be assumed, that did not indicate
criminal negligence, or a rash and negligent act.

Counsel relied upon the

judgment reported as Mohammed Aynuddin @ Miyam Vs. State of A.P. 2000(7)
SCC 72 to say that criminal negligence is failure to exercise duty with reasonable
and proper care and precaution guarding against injury to the public or to any
individual in particular.

It was submitted that evidence showing that the

petitioner did not exercise such reasonable care is lacking.
10. PW-1 and PW-3 deposed, and were cross examined about the incident. They
were eyewitnesses; they supported the prosecution story and also identified the
Petitioner. PW-1, apparently illiterate and consequently was unable to give the
vehicle number. This was not a lacuna, because PW-3 was able to do so. The trial
court has recorded that the petitioner did not dispute his identity as the driver of
the concerned vehicle, in the statement recorded under Section 281. These, taken
together with other evidence and material circumstances, led the Courts below to
convict the Petitioner; the sentence imposed by the trial Court was modified by
the Appellate Court.
11. I have considered judgments of the courts below. The findings are to the effect
Crl.Rev.P.No.842/2006

4 of 6

that while reversing a tempo, the Petitioner ran over Manish, the young six year
old son of PW-1; he died. There cannot be any formula or strait jacket format to
say what is a rash and negligent act. Facts and attendant circumstances of each
case invariably dictate the course of findings by the Court, as they ought to. Thus,
the speed of a vehicle or the demenour of its driver may define whether he drove
negligently in one case; in another, such facts may be entirely irrelevant. Here
the Petitioner was found to have caused death while reversing the vehicle. It was
incumbent for him – once PW-1 and PW-3 deposed about the circumstances of
the accident, to lead credible evidence or at least disclose that there were
reasonable doubts about his negligent acts, or that he acted with due care. The
Courts below took all these and concluded that he was guilty.
12. Revisional jurisdiction, against appellate judgments, do not permit the High
Court to second guess and substitute its findings, on facts. The jurisdiction can
be correctly invoked to cure glaring irregularities, or illegalities, or improper
exercise of jurisdiction, by the Courts. If these bounds are not respected, the
High Courts would be transforming themselves into second appellate Courts,
contrary to Parliamentary mandate.
13.

I have carefully examined the judgments of the Courts below, and the

contentions of the Petitioner. The submissions on his behalf do not point to any
glaring irregularity in the approach of the Courts below or their findings. As regards
sentence too, the approach adopted by the ASJ is correct. I do not find any infirmity
with it.
14.For the above reasons, this revision must fail. The Petitioner shall surrender
Crl.Rev.P.No.842/2006

5 of 6

within four weeks, to the Jail Superintendent to serve rest of his sentence. The
petition is dismissed subject to the above terms. Dasti.

July 17, 2007

Crl.Rev.P.No.842/2006

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

6 of 6

