IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on April 3, 2007
Decided on April 18, 2007
+ CRL.REV.P. 70/2006, CRL.REV.P.71/2006, CRL.REV.P.72/2006,
CRL.REV.P.73/2006
NEERAJ GUPTA & ORS.

………….Petitioner
Through counsel

Versus
C.B.I.

……Respondent
Through Mr. Hari Haran, Advocate for complainant
Mr. R.M.Tiwari, Advocate for the CBI

CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporters or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

%
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1. The petitioners have challenged an order on charge, made by the learned Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate (“the trial Court”) on 17.9.12005. They were charged with
committing offences punishable under Section 498-A/406, read with Section 34,
Indian Penal Code (hereafter called as “the IPC”).
2. The first petitioner (hereafter "the husband") is the son of petitioners No.2 and 3 and
the brother of the fourth Petitioner. The husband got married to the informant,

CRL.REV.P. 70-73/2006

1 of 8

(hereafter variously "the wife" and "the complainant") Ms. Juhi Modi, on 3.7.1998.
According to the first information report, (FIR) lodged by the informant wife with the
police on 11.5.2000, the marriage was preceeded by her parents' gifting valuables to
the petitioners. When she joined the matrimonial home, the parents in law namely
petitioners No.2 and 3 expressed disappointment with the marriage arrangements and
stated that their expectations were unfulfilled. It was alleged that they wanted a
Mercedes car, but since they were unable to maintain it, an Opel car and Rs.16 lakhs
were to be paid. It was also alleged that the complainant’s father was called to the
matrimonial home in July and August, 1998 and told in no uncertain terms that Rs.1.5
crores ought to have been given to the petitioners. As the complainant’s parents could
not fulfill these demands, it was alleged that the accused proceeded to hurt, humiliate
and insult the respondent.
3. It was also alleged that the husband kept taunting her, alleging that she was ugly; the
accused, besides, assigned her menial jobs such as washing clothes, utensils etc. They
also criticized her for not doing those jobs properly. The FIR cited several instances
where acts of cruelty were allegedly perpetrated on the informant. It was alleged that
the complainant asked leave to visit her parents but the petitioners refused to do so.
She stated that once her husband turned her out of the house early in the morning at
3.00 a.m. without any cause. The complainant alleged as follows :

“On 30.9.98 my father came to meet me at New Friends Colony
& brought Rs. 1,50,000/- & gave it to Suresh Kumar and
Sumitra Devi. When he paid this money, they started shouting
“Itne se paise se kya hoga. Apne aap ko Rai Bahadur Gujar
CRL.REV.P. 70-73/2006

2 of 8

Mal Modi ka nephew kehte ho, Exporter ho, beshumar paisa
hai to humko 1.5 crorers kyon nahin dete.” At this point my
father said he will not pay any another penny & they could do
what they wanted & he left the house. On 5.10.98 I was sent to
my parents house. On 7.10.98 Neeraj took me back to his
house, my parents sent all the things traditionally given on
Karva Chauth. On the way back he spoke very rudely to me
and told me that he had made a big mistake by marrying me.
On 8.10.98 on the day of Karva Chauth Neeraj’s elder sister
Poonam came from Noida to spend the day. Sumitra Devi told
me that my parents should have sent a silver lota & though my
father is a rich exporter he has sent such small things. In the
evening we all did pooja together. The Suresh Kumar, Sumitra
Devi, Poonam & Sonika called me to the front room of the
house, shut the door & started shouting at me. “Itni ghatia
shadi hamne baniyon mein nahin dekhi. Tere ma-baap ne koi
lena-dena nahin kiya. Koi reeti riwaz nahin poore kiye.
Baniyon mein to paison ka lena-dena hota hee hai. Hamne kai
bar tere baap se paisa manga hai aur us Modi ne saaf saaf
mana kar diya hai. Hamne bhi saaf saaf kehna parega, apne
ma-baap se kaho 51 lac rupay aur 51 ginni lakar Diwali se
pehle hame dekar jayen. Hamare liye tum kisi kam ki nahin
ho, mere ladke ke liye bahut ladkiyan hain.” Sumitra Devi
pulled my hair and shouted “Kaise nahin lakar denge paisa.
Mein dekhti hoon. Koi baap ladki to gahr nahin baitha sakta.”
Then Sonika slapped me. At that moment I felt afraid for my
life. Then Poonam told me to phone my parents & tell them to
come & take me from there. I phoned my father & asked him
to come immediately as they were again asking for money. I
went to my room & sat there. After this Neeraj came from the
office & he was rude and abusive. When I asked him why
money was being demanded again when my father had clearly
refused to pay, he hit me with his foot and told me “you have
no place in this house, since your father still hasn’t understood
how marriages take place.” In the meanwhile my father along
with Mr. B.L.Gupta and Mr. G.K.Aggarwal reached there and
talked to my in-laws. They insisted that my father take me with
him. I left the house bare-handed because when I demanded
my jewellery which is in the custody of my monther-in-law
along with the articles of istri-dhan, all of them became ……
and abusive. This list of jewellery given to me at the wedding
by my parents & parents-in-law is enclosed herewith. The
aforesaid members of family of my husband along with my
CRL.REV.P. 70-73/2006

3 of 8

husband have thus committed breach of trust. That as a result
of this cruel treatment to which I have been subjected my
health has been gravely affected. All these months, I have been
under a great deal of physical & mental torture. All the above
persons harassed me to extort money from my father. I am not
in a position to meet the demands of my parents-in-law, nor is
my father agreeable to dole out money to them. It is with this
state of mind that I am requesting you to take action against
the culprits under law. In these circumstances to finish my life
by suicide is the only option with which I am constantly toying.
I am approaching you with the hope that you may come to my
rescue. I am doing so with a complete conviction that my
survival in my matrimonial home is not only difficult but
impossible. “
4. The complainant had moved this court by filing a writ petition being Crl. W.P. No.
164/2000. By order dated 25.4.2000 the court directed the case to be transferred to,
and investigated by, the CBI. The CBI filed a charge sheet on 20.3.2001. It proposed
action against the petitioners. The trial court, after considering the submissions of the
parties and the materials on record made the impugned order.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the court should not to have made the
order. Counsel relied upon the decree of the learned Additional District Judge in
HMA 91/2006 which allowed a petition under Section 13(i)(a) of the Hindu Marriage
Act filed by the petitioner husband on alleged grounds of cruelty by the complainant
wife. It was contended that contrary to the allegations made in the FIR, the Additional
District Judge found that the complainant was guilty of acts of cruelty and he therefore
decreed divorce.
6. Learned counsel also contended by placing reliance on the pleadings that the court did
not consider any materials and facts brought on record. It was contended that the court
CRL.REV.P. 70-73/2006

4 of 8

ought to have made an effort to ascertain whether the report of the CBI was correct
and whether any prima facie case against the petitioners was made out.
7. Learned counsel submitted that the court has to sift the evidence on record and other
documents to ascertain, prima facie whether any case was made out against the
accused. If no credible evidence is available or if insufficient materials exist, the
accused ought to be discharged.

Counsel relied upon the decisions reported as

Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi Vs. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya reported as 1990
(4) SCC 76 and in Dilawar Balu Kurane v. State of Maharashtra reported as 2002 (2)
SCC 135.
8. Learned counsel relied upon the order of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate dated
8.10.2004 suggesting steps for a possible amicable settlement.

According to the

submission all the dowry articles were recovered; a suit is pending adjudication before
the court, and further that the divorce proceeding too culminated in an order, the trial
court should not have framed the charges.
9. Learned counsel for the respondent State submitted that there were sufficient
materials to warrant framing of charges under Section 498-A/406 IPC. He relied
upon the contents of the charge sheet, which recorded that expensive items were
given to the petitioners at the time of marriage. The counsel also stated
there were prima

that

facie material revealing that a sum in excess of Rs. 2 lakhs was

paid in cash to the petitioners who deposited it in a bank account. Bank vouchers
evidencing those deposits and the details of such deposits, are part of the record. It was
further submitted that the decree of divorce, relied upon, by the petitioners, could not
CRL.REV.P. 70-73/2006

5 of 8

conclude whether they were liable for the offences; the statements recorded during
investigation, and the other supportive materials, furnished adequate grounds for
proceeding to frame charges.
10.The factual matrix here is narrow; the informant wife married the husband in 1998.
According to her allegations, levelled in the FIR in 2000, the petitioners started
treating her with cruelty almost from the inception of the relationship. The reason for
misbehaviour, it was stated, was the failure of her parents to give sufficient dowry
articles.

According to the FIR, the petitioners expected her father to present a

Mercedes Car but alleged that since they would be unable to maintain it they were
willing to settle for an Opel Astra Car and the sum of Rs. 16 lakhs towards the
difference between the price of the two cars. Besides, the complainant’s father in law
allegedly demand Rs. 1.5 crores from her father, keeping in mind his status. She also
alleged ill treatment by all the petitioners when she lived in the matrimonial home.
Appar ently during the course of the investigation several valuable articles were
returned to the complainant.
11.The task of the court, at the charge framing stage is to assess the overall weight of the
evidence presented before it and reasonably infer whether grave suspicion exists that
the accused, prima facie committed the offence alleged. The exercise of sifting the
evidence involves, to a certain extent, value determination about the tentative worth of
such evidence. Yet this exercise cannot be confused to a standard discharged at the
time of trial i.e. proof beyond reasonable doubts. The court has to make a reasonable
assessment; if upon application of such a bench mark, no prima facie case is made out,
CRL.REV.P. 70-73/2006

6 of 8

accused would be entitled to be discharged. It is also settled law that if two views are
possible, the one favouring the accused is to be preferred.
12.There is some substance in the complaint of the petitioners that the allegations levelled
against them seem exaggerated. Yet the court cannot at this stage discard the entirety
of those allegations on the possibility of their embellishment. The statement of the
complainant wife about specific instances of cruelty in 1998, the dates when demands
were made and also the details of bank accounts listed in the charge sheet, where cash
deposits were made by the petitioners, in my considered opinion constitute sufficient
material justifying framing of charges. The decree of divorce, as is apparent, was an
ex-parte one; it would be hazardous for this court to say, on the basis of the evidence
led before it, that the petitioners cannot be guilty of cruelty, within the meaning of
Section 498-A. As regards the offence under Section 406 IPC, it cannot be said that
the return of the disputed articles exonerated the petitioners.
13.The judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa -vs- Debendra Nath Padhi Vs.
2005 (1) SCC 568 is an authority on the proposition that the court should not consider
materials that may be relied upon by the defence at the stage of framing charges.
Therefore, reliance placed upon an ex parte decree of divorce, is of little assistance to
the petitioners.
14.In view of the above discussion and having considered the materials on record, I find
no infirmity or illegality in the order of the trial court, challenged in these proceedings,
requiring interference. The petitions are accordingly dismissed without any order as to
costs.
CRL.REV.P. 70-73/2006

7 of 8

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
April 18, 2007
mm

CRL.REV.P. 70-73/2006

8 of 8

