* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995
Reserved on : 03.01. 2008
Date of decision : January 14th, 2008

M/S. INDIAN SHAVING PRODUCTS LTD.,

..... Petitioner
Through: Ms. Sidhi Arora, Advocate
for Mr. Virender Goswamy, Advocate for R- 2 & 3.

:: VERSUS ::
M/S. SHRIRAM ENTERPRISES

..... Respondent
Through :

None

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat :
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT:

1.

In these proceedings, a direction to the Arbitrators to file the award, published on 15.3.1995,

has been claimed. After notice was issued the award was filed; the petitioner (hereafter referred to as

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

1 of 12

the claimant) filed its objection being i.e. No. IA 1320/1997. The respondents No.1 and 2 also

preferred objections to the award being IA No.5221/1997. The 4

th

respondent has also preferred

objections, being IA 6884/2000. At the time of hearing, counsel for respondents was not present; later,
after the conclusion of hearing on 3-1-2008, leave to file written submissions was sought. However,
despite the opportunity, no written note of submissions was filed.

2.

The brief facts necessary for deciding this case are that the petitioner company claims to be a

pioneer in manufacture of blades, razors, shaving cream etc. The respondent No.1, is a partnership
firm; the other respondents are its partners. The petitioner appointed the respondents as its clearing
agent by a contract/agreement dated 1.3.1988. In terms of the agreement (hereafter referred to as “the
contract”) the respondents were to receive stocks at Hyderabad, to arrange its storage and forward the
goods according to directions issued by the petitioner, at the concerned destination. The respondents
were responsible for safety of the goods that were dispatched to them by the petitioner and also
responsible for their storage in godowns; they were not entitled to claim any charge or lien over the
goods in such godowns. Besides stipulations relating to accounts, a declaration that the title in the
goods shall always be that of the petitioner, whether in transit or during transit after discharge by the
latter etc. was agreed upon. Clause 9 prescribed that the C&F agent i.e. the respondent would be
responsible for safety of the goods that dispatched to it, from the time of receipt at Hyderabad until
time of delivery to the Railway authorities or any other mode of transportation. The respondents were
CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

2 of 12

liable to make good any loss caused to the company. The said clause is reproduced below :-

“C&F AGENT shall be responsible for the safety of the
goods despatched to it from the time of receipt thereof by it
at Hyderabad, until the time of delivery to the Railway
Authorities or to the road transport or any other carriers for
onward dispatch as per instructions from the company and
shall be liable to make good any loss caused to the company
as a result of pilferage, theft, robbery or damage or
destruction of the goods excluding Act of God, during such
period. When goods are received by the C&F AGENT, it
shall take open delivery thereof from the Railway or road
transport carriers if there is external damage in transit upto
delivery point and the C&F AGENT shall forthwith proceed
to make the necessary remarks in the Railway/carrier's
delivery book and also obtain `shortage' certificates and/or
`damage' certificates covering defective consignments and a
record in this regard shall be communicated promptly to the
company to enable the company to take up follow up action.
The C&F agent for prompt preference of claim with
Railway/carrier. The C&F agent shall be responsible and
liable to keep the company indemnified against any loss
suffered by the company by reason of the C&F agent's
failure to comply with the above provisions.”

3

The contract also contains other conditions spelling out mutual obligations and inter alia

provides that in the event of a dispute or difference between the parties concerning the construction of
the contract or any clause relating to rights and obligations, such disputes were to be referred for
arbitration to the PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi for resolution in accordance
with its rules.

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

3 of 12

4.

In the time intervening between 11.9.1993 and 12.9.1993 a theft occurred in the godown of the

respondents in Hyderabad, as a result of which 2,28,000 super-platinum blades, were pilfered. This
loss was confirmed on a later physical verification. A complaint was lodged being FIR No.192/1993
with the local police.

The petitioner claimed that by a letter dated 16.2.1994 the contract was

terminated since the respondent failed to make good the monetary equivalent of the loss suffered on
account of pilferage. A legal notice was issued on 6.7.1994 to the respondents demanding settlement
of accounts and claiming a sum of Rs. 5,77,962.57. This claim included a demand for Rs. 42,750/towards their computer advance made by the petitioner to the respondents other claims were also made.
On these allegations the arbitration clause was invoked. The petitioner filed its statement of claim on
23.9.1994.

5.

The respondent resisted the proceedings and disclaimed any liability and alleged that liability

under clause 9 for pilferage, theft, robbery etc. being penal in nature and content would arise only if
they were found to have flouted their obligations. It was claimed that the goods were kept in safe
custody and as theft occurred for reasons beyond their control; without their complicity, they could not
be held liable. It was also alleged that the police were able to recover the some goods i.e. super
platinum which were in the custody of the Uppal police station. A letter dated 19.8.1994 by the police
authorities was relied upon. It has was alleged that the said goods could be released and as far as the
value for balance goods was concerned, the respondents were under no obligation either in contract or

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

4 of 12

under law to satisfy a claim. Other claims preferred towards repayment of amounts allegedly due on
account of the computer advance etc. were denied.

6.

The arbitrators, after considering the pleadings and the documents placed on record during the

proceedings made a non-speaking award. The said award after re-citing the background of the goods
such as the contract, the occasion for reference to arbitration and so on, held as follows :
“We refuse to take upon ourselves the dispute on a sum of Rs.
43,750/- (Rupees Forty three thousand seven hundred and fifty only) on
account of Computer Advance, as the claim arises under a separate
contract which does not have any arbitration clause, and therefore the
same cannot constitute a part of the present reference. The parties are at
liberty to agitate their rights before a proper forum.
We reject the claim of the Claimants for Rs.19103.96, on account
of one case SS (9.50) SRN.
We award Rs. 9900/- (Rupees nine thousand nine hundred only) on
account of Imprest, to be paid by the respondents to the Claimants,
amount admitted as correct by both the parties.
We award Rs. 3,21,497.96 to be paid by the Respondents to the
Claimants against their claim of Rs. 5,71,497.96 towards cost of 2,28,000
super platinum blades stolen from the godown and remaining untraceable
and unaccounted, after adjusting the cost of cases recovered and lying in
police custody. The claimants are free to claim and recover the goods
from the police or take any other action as they deem fit as real, owners
and title holders to the property.
We award Rs. 66,289.35 (Rupees sixty six thousand two hundred
eighty nine and paise thirty five only) to be paid by the claimants to the
respondents, amount admitted as correct by both parties.

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

5 of 12

We award Rs. 21,000/- (Rupees twenty one thousand) being cost of
the arbitration proceedings and other costs of the Chamber to be shared
by the Claimants and Respondents equally.
We award that both parties shall bear their own respective
expenses of arbitration including the counsels' fees etc.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we, the said Arbitrators, appointed as
th
aforesaid, hereunto set out respective hands at new Delhi this 14 day of
March, 1995.”

7.

The petitioner's objections pertain to the rejection of the claim to the extent that

only

Rs.3,21,497.96 was directed to be paid by the Respondents to them as against their claim of Rs.
5,71,497.96. It also objects to the denial of the sum of Rs. 43,750/- (Rupees Forty three thousand seven
hundred and fifty only) on account of Computer Advance, and contends that the reasoning that the
claim arises under a separate contract which does not have any arbitration clause, is erroneous. The
rejection for the claim for Rs.19103.96 is also questioned.

8.

Mr. Banerjee, learned counsel, besides reiterating the objections raised in IA 1320/1997, also

submitted that the arbitrators committed an error apparent on the face of the award, amounting to
misconduct, in accepting only the version of the respondents without rendering independent findings on
the quantum of total claims payable. It was submitted that restricting the compensation to Rs.
3,21,497.96 as against the claim of Rs. 5,71,497.96 is wholly unsupported on the facts. It was further

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

6 of 12

submitted that the reasoning of the arbitrators, that the claim for Rs. 43,750/- could not be adjudicated,
is perverse. Counsel submitted that the agreement concerning advance enabling the respondent to
purchase computers, was a supplemental one and had to be read along with the original agreement
dated 1-3-1988. He relied upon the terms of the said supplemental agreement, dated 27-2-1992 and
submitted that the object of executing it was to facilitate efficient functioning of the respondent's
activities in relation to the contract between the parties, dated 1-3-1988. In wholly ignoring these
important considerations and taking a narrow view that the disputes in the second agreement were not
subject to arbitration clause, the award discloses patent error, requiring interference.

9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon the Full Bench decision of the Calcutta High

Court in Dwarkadas & Co -vs- Daluram Gaganmull AIR 1951 Cal 10 and Abu Road Electricity Co.
-vs- Industrial Gases AIR 1977 Cal 482 in support of the submission that reference of an earlier
agreement between the same parties, in a later contract would mean incorporation of the terms of the
prior agreement. Therefore, the artbitrators mis-conducted themselves in failing to examine the claim in
respect of the computer advance, and ruling upon it.

10.

The respondents, in their objections (IA 5221/1997 and IA 6884/2000) have disputed the

correctness of the award. According to them, no obligation was cast upon them to provide for a
contingency of the kind which led to burglary and pilferage. As bailees, in charge of the goods

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

7 of 12

entrusted to them, they exercised the degree of care and prudence they had to under law. As C&F
agents, the goods sent to the respondents continued to be property of the claimant- petitioner.
Therefore, the responsibility of insuring them squarely was that of the owner, i.e the petitioner. It is
alleged that the petitioner should have seen that the insurance policies were taken out, to secure their
goods; their failure cannot, in the absence of any finding of negligence or complicity of the
respondents, result in the latter's liability for loss occurring due to theft of the goods.

11.

A reading of the award would show that it is a non-speaking one. It has now been settled by the

larger, five judge decision of the Supreme Court in Raipur Development Authority -vs- Chokhamal
Contractor 1989 (2) SCC 721 that an arbitrator, unless agreed to otherwise by parties, or so directed by
court, is under no legal obligation to furnish reasons for his award. If the matter were to be viewed
from this perspective, the court's jurisdiction is extremely circumscribed.

12.

Here, the arbitrators considered the materials on record, as well as the agreement between the

parties, and concluded that the petitioner was entitled to be paid Rs. 3,21,497.96 towards the loss
suffered by it. In doing so, the arbitrators consciously took note of the nature of the contractual
relationship and the mutual obligations cast by the parties on each other. No apparent perversity in the
award of the amounts, can be discerned from this. The relevant stipulation in the agreement spells out
the C&F Agent’s responsibility of ensuring the safety of the goods entrusted to it; it makes explicit
mention of the damages being to its account, by reason of theft, burglary, pilferage, etc. Therefore, this
CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

8 of 12

court does not see any infirmity in the finding about the liability of the respondents. Likewise, the
arbitrators found for the petitioner partially and declined the claim in respect of the other amounts.
They apparently took into account the value of the blades as well as the value of the goods received.
This court is unable to find any illegality or unreasonableness in this approach, amounting to
misconduct. For these reasons, the challenge to the award, by the petitioner so far as this aspect, as well
as denial of the amount of Rs.19103.96 is rejected. Similarly, the objections of the respondents to the
award as far as it directs payments on account of burglary, cannot be found fault with. The findings
about the respondent’s liability are in consonance with law, since a bailee and even an agent, entrusted
with custody of the goods is under a duty to take all reasonable steps to protect them (Ref Pannalal
Jankidass –vs- Mohanlal AIR 1951 SC 144).

13.

The next question centers round correctness of the arbitrators conclusion that the claim for Rs.

43,750/- so far as it related to return of computer advance, was not covered by the arbitration clause.
The arbitration clause to which parties sought recourse is contained in the agreement dated 1-3-1988.
The claim as far as computer advance is concerned is connected with the subsequent agreement, dated
27-2-1992. A reading of the latter no doubt discloses that there is a reference to the previous contract
between the parties. The question therefore, is whether this reference amounts to incorporation of the
arbitration clause in the latter agreement.

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

9 of 12

14.

The decision of the Calcutta High Court in Dwarkadas's case (supra) considered the question if

the advertence to conditions in a charter party, with the express condition that they would constitute
conditions in the bill of lading, can lead to inference that the disputes relating to a bill of lading too
were the subject of arbitration. The latter contract made a reference to the former, in the following
terms:

"Subject to all terms and conditions of the Contract No. 73 of 13.12.1947
issued to us by M/s. Bubna More & Co.".

In several judgments the ratio of Dwarkadas was considered. The latest ruling on the point is the
judgment of the Supreme Court, in The Owners and the Parties Interested in the Vessel M.V. “Baltic
Confidence” –vs- State Trading Corporation 2001 (4) Arb. Law Reports 574. It was held that:
“From the conspectus of the views expressed by Courts in England and also in
India, it is dear that in considering the question, whether the arbitration clause in
a Charter Party Agreement was incorporated by reference in the Bill of Lading;
the principal question is, what was the intention of the parties to the Bill of
Lading ? For this purpose the primary document is the Bill of Lading into
which the arbitration clause in the Charter Party Agreement is to be read in the
manner provided in the incorporation clause of the Bill of Lading. While
ascertaining the intention of the parties attempt should be made to give
meaning to the incorporation clause and to give effect to the same and not to
invalidate or frustrate it giving a literal, pedantic and technical reading of the
clause. If on a construction of the arbitration clause of the Charter Party
Agreement as incorporated in the Bill of Lading it does not lead to inconsistency
or insensibility or absurdity then effect should be given to the intention of the
parties and the arbitration clause as agreed should be made binding on parties to
the Bill of Lading. If the parties to the Bill of Lading being aware of the
arbitration clause in the Charter Party Agreement have specifically

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

10 of 12

incorporated the same in the conditions of the Bill of Lading then the intention
of the parties to abide by the arbitration clause is clear. Whether a particular
dispute arising between the parties comes within the purview of the arbitration
clause as incorporated in the Bill of Lading is a matter to be decided by the
Arbitrator or the court. But that does not mean that despite incorporation of the
arbitration clause in the Bill of Lading by specific reference the parties had not
intended that the disputes arising on the Bill of Lading should be resolved by
Arbitrator.”
(emphasis supplied)
15.

It is necessary, in all cases where a contention is raised that subsequent contracts between the

same parties would also be governed by the arbitration clause, contained in a former agreement, to look
at the express terms, to gather the intention of parties. Here, apart from the recital clause which
mentioned about the agreement dated 1-3-1988, the later agreement nowhere discloses that the
conditions contained in the former were to be read into the latter contract. No doubt, the petitioner
might have wanted efficient functioning of the respondent and even financed the purchase of the
computer. Yet, the title to the computer remained with the respondents; apart from mentioning
conditions for the loan and other stipulations relating the amounts given, the latter agreement does not
contain any mention of the former. In the circumstances, there cannot be an inference that the parties
wished that disputes arising in relation to the latter agreement too were covered by the arbitration
clause in the previous contract.

16.

In view of the above conclusions, the petitioner’s complaint that the arbitrators erred on the

issue of jurisdiction, in declining to rule on the claim relating to computer advance, cannot be upheld.
CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

11 of 12

There was no illegality or error of jurisdiction in that regard.

17.

The arbitrators chose not to award pendent lite interest. Though this discloses hardship to a

certain extent, to the petitioner, hardship alone cannot be a ground for interfering with an otherwise
valid award, even on this limited score. In view of the conclusions, all objections to the award are liable
to be rejected, and are accordingly dismissed. The petitioner shall in awarded interest @9% from the
date of filing of award in this court, till date, and also future interest, till realization. The award is
directed to be made rule of court, in the above terms. A decree shall be accordingly drawn.

Dated : 14 January, 2008
th

CS (OS) NO. 929A/1995

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

12 of 12

