*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007
Date of Decision : May 15, 2007

DEV RAJ
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr. Subodh Markandeya, Senior Advocate with
Mr. Madhusudan Bhayana, Advocate

versus
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
..... Respondent
Through Mr. R. M. Tewari, Advocate
CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr.Justice S.Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This revision petition challenges an order of the learned Special Judge,

New Delhi, dated 8-1-2007, charging the petitioner of having committed offences
under Section 120 B IPC and 13(2) read with 13(1) (d) Prevention Corruption
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

1 of 13

Act, 1988 (hereafter "the Act").
2.

The brief facts are that a case was registered against Shri Subhash Sharma,

IAS, the then Chairman, NDMC, Sh. Dev Raj, Sh. Ashok Kumar, Sh. Rajesh
Kumar, Sh. Jagjeevan Kumar Sood, AE, NDMC and Sh. Vijay Kumar, alleging
that 9657 sq.ft. of space on the ground floor and basement of Akbar Bhawan,
Chanakyapuri, New Delhi was rented out to M/s Gesture Hotel and Food Pvt. Ltd.
It was alleged that pursuant to connivance of Sh. Subhash Sharma, the then
Chairman, NDMC, and other officials of NDMC misusing his official position and
acting in conspiracy with the petitioner, a co-accused and others, Directors of M/s.
Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt. Ltd, favorable conditions for that company were
created, by change of land use conditions, ignoring and over ruling other directions
and approved allotment of space. It was alleged that pecuniary loss was caused to
the public exchequer, by the use of excess space, over and above the allotted space
(to M/s Gesture Hotels) and other co-accused, in the Engineering department of
NDMC, abusing their official position facilitated this misdeed.
3.

It was alleged that during investigation, it transpired that the Director,

Estates, by letter dated 29.05.2002 wrote to Director (PR), NDMC for publishing
an advertisement on 30-31.05.2002 in the five local dailies. The space in question
was mentioned in Sl.No. 15 of tender notice enclosed with the letter as 9657 sq.ft.
Space, at ground/lower ground floor at Akbar Bhawan, Chanakyapuri with AC

CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

2 of 13

facilities and fixtures for licensable/Non licensable trade.

The space was

mentioned to be licensed on “As is where is Basis”. The NIT was published on
30.05.2002 in the 3 local dailies. In response, the only offer received was from the
petitioner, who quoted the rate of Rs. 36.99 per sq. ft. per month. The allotmentSubcommittee under the Chairmanship of Sh. Arun Baroka, Secretary, NDMC,
deliberated upon the offer on 21.06.2002. and recommended that the offer of the
petitioner may be accepted subject to any addition/alteration made in the premises
with approval of the Chief Architect.

That meeting note was put up to the

Chairman, co-accused Subhash Sharma on 25.06.2002 who approved it on the
same day. According to this approval, the Director (Estate) issued a letter of
acceptance to the petitioner on 03.07.2002. He was asked to form a
partnership/private limited company within 10 days of the receipt of the letter.
4.

According to Column No. 8(i) of the tender form, the tenderer was asked to

submit an option whether the contract was to be in the name of applicant or a firm
or a company if the offer was ultimately accepted. The petitioner had filled this
column as “proposed by partnership/private limited company”. Accordingly he
formed a company, viz. M/s. Gesture Hotel and Foods Pvt. Ltd; it was registered
with the Assistant Registrar, Govt. of NCT Delhi on 12/7/2002. Besides the
petitioner, Sh. Rajesh Kumar, Sh. Ashok Kumar and Sh. Kamal Kumar, all three
sons of Sh. Dharamvir Khattar (brother of the petitioner) were appointed as
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

3 of 13

Directors of the company. Investigations also revealed that Dy. Director (Estate),
Sh. Deepak Virmani by his letter dt. 22.07.2002 addressed to the Director M/s.
Gesture Hotel and Foods Pvt. Ltd. asked him to contact the Executive Engineer
(Civil) CBM, NDMC to take over possession of the said premises. A copy of this
letter was marked to Executive Engineering (Civil), with the request that
possession of the vacant space at lower ground and ground floor at Akbar
Bhawan/Chankyapuri with A/c facilities and fixtures (9657 sq.ft.), may be handed
over to the Director of M/s. Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt. Ltd. He also requested for
sending the handing over report showing actual covered area of the premises along
with the inventory of fitting and fixtures.
5.

Physical possession of the premises were handed over to M/s. Gesture Hotel

& Foods Pvt. Ltd. On 23/7/2002 by Sh. Jagjeevan Kumar Sood, Asstt.
Engg.(Civil) Engg. Deptt., NDMC and Sh. Vijay Kumar, Jr. Engineer (Civil)
Engg. Deptt., NDMC and Sh. Vijay Kumar, Jr. Engineer (Civil), NDMC.
According to CBI, the occupation report prepared by the two engineers, did not
mention about the area handed over. During the course of investigations, a team
comprising of Investigating Officer, the JE (Civil) CBI ACB, JE CPWD and
independent witnesses measured the said space occupied by M/s. Gesture Hotel &
Foods Pvt. Ltd, on 30.09.2003 in presence of two Directors of M/s Gesture Hotel
& Foods Pvt. Ltd. The measurement showed that M/s. Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt.
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

4 of 13

Ltd. was occupying a covered area of 14504.91 sq. ft. against an allotment of 9657
sq. ft. Besides this, an open space measuring 15536.69 sq. ft. on the lower ground
and ground floor was also found in occupation of Ms. Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt.
Ltd. The banquet hall called 'Jewel' occupied area measuring at 9957.52 sq.ft.
which was more than the allotted space of 9657 sq. ft. Apart from the banquet hall,
M/s. Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt. Ltd. also had occupied office-cum-reception
room, restaurant, kitchen, two stores and parking besides open space. According
to CBI, the NDMC had suffered a loss of rent of Rs. 1,88,290.19 per month, which
has compounded to Rs. 22,59,482/- for a period of one year on account of
occupation of extra space by M/s. Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt. Ltd.
6.

The CBI, in its charge-sheet alleged that Shri Subhash Sharma violated and

over ruled the procedures in regard to approval accorded for the space. Sh. Kamal
Kumar, Sh. Ashok Kumar & Sh. Rajesh Kumar also came in picture when the
hotel was got registered with Assistant Registrar of Companies; the tender form
was submitted by the petitioner and allotment letter was also issued in his name. It
was alleged that all these acts disclosed commission of offence by the accused
persons namely Sh. Jagjeevan Kumar Sood, A.E., Sh. Vijay Kumar, J.E. and the
petitioner, Director of M/s. Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt. Ltd. punishable u/s 120B
IPC r/w 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of PC Act, 1988. The CBI alleged that it secured
sanction for prosecution.
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

5 of 13

7.

The Special Judge, after hearing all the parties on the point of charge, held,

inter alia, as follows:
"
On behalf of A-1 Devraj arguments have been addressed
by Sr. Advocate Mr. Sandeep Sethi Assisted by Mr. Abhijeet,
Advocate. It is stated that it tis not in dispute that the disputed
premises had been let out to A-1 in terms of the NIT published
in three local dailies dated 30.05.2002 and the property in
question mentioned at Sl. No.15 of the Tender Notice and the
space was mentioned to be on license on “as is where is basis”.
The possession of this property had been handed over to A-1 by
NDMC on 23.07.2002 which is evident from D-18 and a
perusal of the said document would clearly show that there is
no column mentioned therein about the measurement of the
space allotted to A-1; there is no connivance or conspiracy on
the part of A-1 to have got this excess space allotted to him.
Ingredients of Section 13(1) (d) of the PC Act which necessarily
entail the obtainment of a valuable thing or a pecuniary
advantage by a public servant either for himself or for any
other person, is clearly missing in this case and the version of
the prosecution in criminal law. There is no evidence of any
conspiracy or meeting of the minds of the co-accused with A-1;
suspicion by itself cannot take place of grave suspicion to make
out a prima-facie case for framing of charge; there is no
complaint by NDMC that excess land had been leased out to A1; version of the prosecution is based on source information
alone. Attention has been drawn to D-5 i.e. the letter dated
29.05.2002 wherein it is clearly stated that tenders are invited
which include the present premises on “as is where is basis”.
Attention has also been drawn to D-8 i.e. the Tender Notice in
the local Daily which clearly states that the premises has been
sealed under the orders of the Delhi High Court. It is stated
that in these circumstances the question of inspection or
measurement of space by A-1 did not arises as the premises
stood sealed under the orders of the official liquidator.
Reliance has been place upon the judgment of the Hon'ble High
Court of Delhi reported in DLT 124 (2005) page 16 as also
another judgment of Hon'ble Courts on the basis of the catena
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

6 of 13

of authorities clearly state that the Judge while considering the
question of framing of charge under Section 227 Cr.P.C., has to
make out a prima-facie case and the materials placed before
the court must disclose a grave suspicion against the accused
and only then the court will be justified in framing the charge;
these ingredients are lacking in the case.
On behalf of A-2 Jagjivan Kumar Sood and A-3 Vijay
Kumar arguments have been addressed by counsel Sh. J.r.
Priani. It is argued that admittedly the NIT which is D-8
clearly states that the premises had been sealed under the
orders of the official liquidator and the premises had been
lease out on “as is where is basis”, so the question of the
measurement of the space did not arise. In view of this fact of
the sealing of the property, the conspiracy on the part of A-2
and A-3 with A-1 to lease out the extra space, it thus negatived
by this documents itself. It is argued that the possession had
been handed over to A-1 on 23.7.02; CBI had measured the
area on 30.9.03 when allegedly they found that the extra space
has been leased out to A-1. It is argued that even otherwise
this matter is the subject matter of a civil dispute before the
Hon'ble High Court and the Hon'ble High court had granted
an injunction in favour of A-1 subject to a payment of Rs. 25
lacs as an interim measure to the NDMC and the matter being
sub-judice in the Civil court before the Hon'ble High Court and
the injunction having been granted in favour of A-1, the
question of mens rea or culpability on the part of the accused
persons even otherwise does not arise.
Arguments have been heard. Record has been perused.
D-18, is the document vide which the possession had
been handed over to A-1 on 23.7.02 and the occupation report
has been duly signed by the Asst. Engineer Jagjivan Kumar
Sood (A-2) as also by Junior Engineer Vijay Kumar (A-3). The
signature of the allottee appears in the last column i.e. of A-1 of
having occupies the said premises in his capacity as Director of
M/s. Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt. Ltd. Admittedly on the date
when the possession was taken over by A-1, the premises was in
an unsealed condition. D-8 which is the Tender Notice in the
local Daily clearly states that the disputed premises have been
sealed by the Official Liquidator under the orders of the
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

7 of 13

Hon'ble High Court and the allotment of the premises will be
subject to the High Court releasing the same; on the date when
the possession was received by A-1 i.e. on 23.7.02 the premises
was in an unsealed condition and the arguments of ld. Defence
counsels that the premises could not be measured as they were
bore the seal of the official liquidator, finds on force in view of
the fact that on the date when possession had been handed over
to A-1 by A-2 and A-3 the premises were admittedly in unsealed
condition and the first column of D-18 clearly stipulates the
details of the particulars of the building/quarters.
The Deed of License D-9 (page 179) dated 24.9.02
executed between the NDMC and M/s. Gesture Hotel & Foods
Pvt. Ltd. States that an area measuring 9657 Sq. Feet has been
leased out to A-1 on license basis for a period of 10 years. This
document stipulates that 9657 Sq. Feet of area has been lease
out to A-1. D-19 however, clearly negatived this position and
the actual area in occupation with A-1 shows that it is
14,504.91 Sq. Feet; this measurement was carried out on
30.9.03. Statements of PW 10 Sh. Umesh Vashisht and PW 9
Sh. Rakesh Dutt who had carried out the measurement in the
presence of independent witnesses PW 7 Sh. Anurag Verma
and PW 8 Sh. Dhirender Bhader Singh are also relevant in this
regard. This document D-19, clearly states that the total area
in occupation with A-1 is 14,504.91 Sq. Feet.
The prima-facie conspiracy on the part of A-2 and A-3 to
abuse their official position as public servants to enable A-1 to
obtain a pecuniary advantage, is thus borne out. There is
sufficient material to frame charge against all the accused
persons.
Charge under Section 120 B IPC and 13(2) read with
13(1) (d) PC Act be framed against all the accused persons.
Substantive charge under section 13(2) read with
13(1)(d) PC Act be also framed against A-2 and A-3."

8.

Mr. Subodh Markandeya, learned senior counsel submitted that a fair

CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

8 of 13

reading of the only two documents relevant in point of time, viz the letter dated 295-2002 (D-5) and the Tender Notice (D-8) would disclose that the NDMC did not
commit itself to any particular area, for licensing; on the other hand, at all relevant
times, the parties concerned were told that the premises were available on "as is
where is" basis. In these circumstances, the suspicion of connivance could not
have been the sole foundation for the charges. Reliance was also placed on D-18 to
say that no column was shown, to establish the area, or that the petitioner obtained
the premises by practising deception. It was submitted that the petitioner, as a
director of the licensee company had no control in the handing over of the
premises.
9.

Learned counsel contended that the petitioner could not have been

charged with the commission of the offences, as the materials were not sufficient
to raise a "grave suspicion". Counsel contended that the company which entered
into the arrangement did so after the application made on its behalf, legitimately,
was considered the highest bid. There was nothing illegal or improper in this
transaction. It was also submitted that the exact area could not have been
ascertained, because the premises at the time of advertisement were sealed; merely
because more area was handed over no inference of mens rea to commit a crime or
offence could be drawn. The area was in fact handed over on "as is where is"
basis.
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

9 of 13

10.

In addition to D-5 and D-8, the CBI had placed reliance on other

documents, to support its allegation that the petitioner and co-accused consciously
made reference to 9657 square feet and that the petitioner could not claim
ignorance in this regard. D-15 (dated 22-7-2002) was one such document; it read
as follows:
"It may be noted that the licence fee of the said premises measuring
9657 sq. ft. has already commenced from 12.7.2000 at the rate of Rs.
3,57,212.43 p.m. Besides Rs. 17861/- p.m. Towards the cleanliness,
maintenances along with sanitation and security charges."
Similarly, D-13, the allotment letter addressed to the petitioner, who had applied
pursuant to the advertisement, to the extent it is relevant, is extracted below:
"Dear Sir,
With reference to your tender application dated 18.6.2002 for
allotment of the above subjected shop, you are hereby informed that
it has been decided to accept your offer of Rs. 36.99 per sq.ft. Per
month (Rs. 357212.43 PM).
You are, therefore, allotted the above mentioned unit measuring
9657 sq. ft. on monthly licence fee of Rs. 375073/- PM (Rs.
357212.43 plus its 5%) and Rs. 17861/- PM in addition as
cleanliness & maintenance along with sanitation and security
charges on licence basis for a period of 10 years subject to
enhancement of licence fee by 10% every year on the terms and
conditions mentioned in the tender and already agreed to by you.
Your are permitted to run the trade of Restaurant-cum-Banquet and
Allied Trades..."

11.

The petitioner in fact received possession; this is evidenced by D-18. It is

CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

10 of 13

dated 23.7.02; the occupation report was signed by the Asst. Engineer Jagjivan
Kumar Sood (A-2) as also by the Junior Engineer Vijay Kumar (A-3).

The

signature of the allottee, viz the petitioner A-1 appears in the document. The
occupier acknowledged having occupied the premises in the capacity of Director
of M/s. Gesture Hotel & Foods Pvt. Ltd. There is no dispute that on the date
possession was taken over by the petitioner, the premises were in an unsealed
condition.
12.

In State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh AIR 1977 SC 2018, it was held :
"Reading Ss. 227 and 228 together in juxtaposition, as they have got
to be, it would be clear that at the beginning and the initial stage of
the trial the truth, veracity and effect of the evidence which the
prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously judged.
Nor is any weight to be attached to the probable defence of the
accused. It is not obligatory for the Judge at that stage of the trial to
consider in any detail and weigh in a sensitive balance whether the
facts, if proved, would be incompatible with the innocence of the
accused or not. The standard of test and judgment which is to be
finally applied before recording a finding regarding the guilt or
otherwise of the accused is not exactly to be applied at the stage of
deciding the matter under S. 227 or S. 228 of the Code. At that stage
the Court is not to see whether there is sufficient ground for
conviction of the accused or whether the trial is sure to end in his
conviction.
Strong suspicion against the accused, if the matter remains in the
region of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at the
conclusion of the trial. But at the initial stage if there is a strong
suspicion which leads the Court to think that there is ground for
presuming that the accused has committed an offence then it is not
open to the Court to say that there is no sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused...."

CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

11 of 13

These principles were reaffirmed in Union of India -vs Prafulla Chandra Samal
AIR 1979 SC 363. The decision of the Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra
-vs- Som Nath Thapa 1996(4) SCC 659 had ruled that the test of prima facie case
is the one which has to be applied at the stage of framing of the charges; the court
is not expected to and indeed does not have the jurisdiction to conduct a pre-trial
by weighing the evidence on a scale. All that it can do is to examine the materials
and see whether prima facie the materials on record point to the accused having
committed the offences alleged or any offence at all.
13.

In view of the above discussion, the nature of materials available with the

trial court, particularly the documentary evidence, prima facie could lead to
inference that the petitioner was guilty of the offences he was charged with. The
soundness of his explanation, or the fact that premises were measured during
investigation, are matters on which evidence has to be considered and examined;
they are also defences, which cannot be properly considered by the court framing
charges.
14.

In the foregoing premises, I find no infirmity with the order of the trial

court. This petition, therefore, fails and is dismissed. No costs.

CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

12 of 13

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J
DATED 15th May, 2007

CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 87/2007

JUDGE

13 of 13

