* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ OMP NO.240 /2006

%

Date of decision :11th March, 2008

NARESH KUMAR GUPTA
..... Petitioner
Through:Dr. N.K. Khetrapal with Mr. Ankit
Kheterapal, Advocates.
:: VERSUS ::
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI & ANR.
... Respondents
Through:Ms. Smita Shankar, Advocate.
CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

The Petitioner, in this proceeding under Section 34 of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, challenges the correctness and
legality of an award dated 27.3.2006 by the Sole Arbitrator appointed by
this Court. The only ground taken was that a finding about the claim being
time barred is patently illegal and contrary to provisions of law.

OMP NO.240 /2006

1 of 10

2.

The facts briefly are that the Petitioner had tendered for

construction of Municipal Staff Quarters in June, 1991. The work order
for Rs.1,20,77,499/- was awarded; according to the agreement the work
was to be completed within 18 months. It is not in dispute that the work
commenced on 25.1.1992 and was completed on 10.1.1997.

The

Petitioner sought a reference and his application under Section 11(6) was
allowed by this Court. His claim in arbitration was that the Respondent
(hereafter called the “MCD”) defaulted in its obligations which led to
delay in execution of work and that MCD did not prepare a final bill. The
Petitioner also claimed compensation for escalation charges under Clause
10(CC) of the Agreement.
3.

The MCD resisted the proceedings alleging that the claim was time

barred as the amounts demanded were much after the expiry of three years
from the accrual of the cause of action for their recovery. The MCD also
alleged that a final bill had to be prepared by the claimant and that it had
paid all bills raised by the latter. In addition it alleges that the claimant
had accepted the amounts in full and final settlement of his dues and that
he never demanded any further amounts towards so-called final bills. The
MCD also alleges that it had no occasion to repudiate any such claim

OMP NO.240 /2006

2 of 10

allegedly in the final bill.
4.

After hearing the parties and considering the materials the Sole

Arbitrator rendered his findings both on the question of limitation as also
on merits.

He upheld the objection on limitation and held that he

claimants invoked the arbitration clause in terms of Section 21 only on
18.8.2002 which is deemed to be the date for commencement of
arbitration. The Arbitrator noticed rival contentions about applicability of
Article 18 of the Limitation Act, in contrast to Article 113 and held as
follows :“Now so far as the question of the applicability of Act.18 of
the limitation Act for the claims No.1 & 2 is concerned, I
find myself in agreement with the contention of the
respondent’s counsel that there is nothing in the contract
and in cl.7 thereof in particular, on which reliance for the
contrary view is placed, that time for payment of the price
of the work done was provided in the contract. The last
sentence of Cl.7 of the contract says that the final bill shall
be submitted by the contractor within one month of the date
fixed for completion of the work, otherwise the Engineer
incharge’s certificate of the measurement and of the total
amount payable for the work accordingly, shall be final
and binding on all parties. This clause only put finality to
the measurement as taken by the Engineer-incharge of the
respondent and to the amount of the final bill as prepared
on the basis of such certificate in a certain eventuality.
There is not the slight indication even in this clause as to
when the payment of the final bill as prepared on the basis
of the final bill as submitted by the contractor, if any, or in

OMP NO.240 /2006

3 of 10

the absence of that for the payment of the bill prepared on
the basis of the Engineer incharge’s certificate is to be
made. This clause does not even provide for any time
during which the Engineer incharge may take
measurements of the work done or for the preparation of
the final bill by the respondent thereafter and not even for
payment of the amount of the final bill so prepared by the
respondent’s concerned official. The decision of a division
bench of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in State of
Punjab Vs. Sham Lal Gupta,1971 PLR 166 cited by the
respondent’s counsel is a clear authority on the point that
time for payment of the price of the work done cannot be
deemed to have been provided by virtue of the clause of the
contract in that case which was identical to cl.7 of the
present contract. A contrary view was no doubt taken by
the Allahabad High Court in State of U.P. Vs. M/s. Thakur
Kundan Singh, AIR 1984 All 161 (D.B.) referred to by the
learned counsel of the claimant. However, I need not delve
with this aspect of the matter further as, in my opinion,
Act.18 of the Limitation Act does not govern the case-for a
different reason. This is that even though time for payment
is not presided in the contract, payment of the price for the
work done by the contractor could not become due on the
completion of the work simplicitor. Said Cl.7 provides for a
certain step to the taken by the contractor on the
completion of the work, viz to submit the final bill within a
period of one month of the completion of the work. The
Engineer incharge had to pass that bill, if so submitted, or
in the absence of that, to get the final bill prepared on the
basis of the measurements of the work done by the
Engineer incharge, Cl.7 thus provides for preparation and
finalisation i.e. settlement of the last bill much beyond the
date on which the work stood completed. Art. 18 of the
Limitation Act thereof could not come into play in view of
this agreement between the parties relating to the time of
payment of the price of the work done. Under the
circumstances the residuary Art. 113 of the Limitation Act,

OMP NO.240 /2006

4 of 10

1963 would no doubt be applicable to the case. The
controversy thus gets narrowed down only to the question
as to when the cause of action to sue for the price of the
work done could be said to have arisen. The contention of
the respondent’s learned counsel that the cause of action
also shall be deemed to have arisen on the date of the
completion of the work as that is the normal position,
stands negative on my above view about the effect of Cl.7
viz that the amount could not be said to have become due
on the date of the completion of the work and no cause of
action to sue for the recovery of the same could arise on
that date and that would arise only on a subsequent date”.

5.

After the above observations and findings the Arbitrator noticed

the effect and import of clause 7 which granted a month’s time to the
contractor/ petitioner for submitting the final bill. It was also noticed that
no time is provided to the Engineer-in-Charge for passing the bill. In these
circumstances the Arbitrator deemed that a period of one month would be
reasonable to finalize the bill in either situation. He thus held that the
cause of action to sue for the balance price arose on 10.3.1997 whereas the
claims were made on 18.2.2002 and were thus barred. The Arbitrator also
overruled the contentions about extension of time since the last payment
was made on 12.12.2001. He noticed that even if the contentions were to
be given credence, the immediately previous payment was made on
31.3.1998. Since the payment in question was made more than 3 years

OMP NO.240 /2006

5 of 10

after the said last payment there was no question of applicability of Section
18 of the Limitation Act.
6.

Learned counsel relied upon the decisions reported as R.K. Aneja

Vs. Delhi Development Authority, 2000 Arb LR 214; Union of India vs.
Momin Construction Co. 1997 (9) SCC 97 and Satya Prakash Vs.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi, 2001 (91) DLT 38 and submitted that
limitation would commence only in the contingency of a final bill having
been drawn by the appropriate Authority. It was submitted that in this case
the Petitioner kept representing and was able to persuade the MCD to
make payment as lade on 2001; in the circumstances the claim for
arbitration being made in 2002 and the payments made in the course of
arbitration proceedings thereafter were well within the period of limitation.
The finding to the contrary were, therefore, patently legal and liable to the
set aside.
7.

It is now well settled that the power of construing the terms of a

document, or the agreement is the domain of an arbitrator. If he interprets
a particular clause of the contract in one manner, the Court will not
interfere with that decision (Ref State of U.P. v. Allied Constructions
(2003) 7 SCC 396; Ispat Engg. & Foundry Works v. Steel Authority of

OMP NO.240 /2006

6 of 10

India Ltd. (2001) 6 SCC 347 - and BOC India Ltd. vs. Bhagwati Oxygen
Ltd. 2007 (9) SCC 503. Here, the arbitrator construed Clause 7 of the
agreement between the parties, while deciding the question of limitation.
The interpretation cannot be said to be unreasonable, or unwarranted.
8.

Speaking about the question of limitation, in the context of

arbitration and claims which are alleged to be time barred, the Supreme
Court held, in Panchu Gopal Bose v. Board of Trustees for Port of
Calcutta, (1993) 4 SCC 338

that:

“the period of limitation for the commencement of an arbitration
runs from the date on which, had there been no arbitration clause,
the cause of action would have accrued just as in the case of
actions the claim is not to be brought after the expiration of a
specified number of years from the date on which the cause of
action accrued, so in the case of arbitrations, the claim is not to be
put forward after the expiration of the specified number of years
from the date when the claim accrued."

It was also held that "action" and "cause of action" in the Limitation Act
were to be understood to mean arbitration and cause of arbitration. The
cause of arbitration, therefore, arises when the claimant becomes entitled
to raise the question, i.e, when the claimant acquires the right to require
arbitration. It was held that:

OMP NO.240 /2006

7 of 10

"13. In the Law of Arbitration by Justice Bachawat in Chapter
37 at p. 549 it is stated that just as in the case of actions the
claim is not to be brought after the expiration of a specified
number of years from the date when the claim accrues, so also
in the case of arbitrations, the claim is not to be put forward
after the expiration of a specified number of years from the
date when the claim accrues. For the purpose of Section 37(1)
'action' and 'cause of action' in the Limitation Act should be
construed as arbitration and cause of arbitration. The cause of
arbitration, therefore, arises when the claimant becomes
entitled to raise the question, i.e. when the claimant acquires
the right to require arbitration. The limitation would run from
the date when cause of arbitration would have accrued, but for
the agreement.
14. .... Section 3 of the Limitation Act applied by way of
analogy to arbitration proceedings, and like interpretation was
given to Section 14 of the Limitation Act. The proceedings
before the arbitration are like civil proceedings before the
court within the meaning of Section 14 of the Limitation Act.
By consent the parties have substituted the arbitrator for a
court of law to arbiter their disputes or differences. It is,
therefore, open to the parties to plea in the proceedings before
him of limitation as a defence."
9.

In State of Orissa and another v. Damodar Das, (1996) 2 SCC 216

the Supreme Court, quoted Russell on Arbitration with approval; the
author stated that the period of limitation to start an arbitration runs from
the date on which the "cause of arbitration" accrued, or, from the date
when the claimant first acquired either a right of action or a right to require
that an arbitration take place upon the dispute concerned. The period of
limitation for the commencement of an arbitration therefore, runs from the

OMP NO.240 /2006

8 of 10

date on which, had there been no arbitration clause, the cause of action
would have accrued.
10.

In Major (Retd.) Inder Singh Rekhi v. Delhi Development

Authority (AIR 1988 SC 1007), it was held that:
"... a party cannot postpone the accrual of cause of action by
writing reminders or sending reminders but where the bill had not
been finally prepared, the claim made by the claimant is the
accrual of cause of action. A dispute arises where there is a claim
and a denial and repudiation of the claim. - There should be a
dispute and there can only be a dispute when a claim is asserted by
one party and denied by the other on whatever grounds. Mere
failure or inaction to pay does not lead to the inference of the
existence of dispute. Dispute entails a positive element and
assertion of denying, not merely inaction to accede to a claim or
request. Whether in a particular case dispute has arisen or not has
to be found out from the facts and circumstances of the case."
11.

The work was, undeniably, completed here by the petitioner, on

10.1.1997. The demand for arbitration was made more than four years
later. Whatever be the correspondence between the parties earlier, on an
application of the rule in Major (Retd.) Inder Singh Rekhi’s case (supra) it
has to be held that the inaction of the petitioner to claim amounts, through
arbitration, or the failure to approve the final bill did not postpone,
indefinitely, the accrual of cause of action. In that respect the arbitrator is
correct in surmising that the aggrieved party is expected to wait
reasonably, and thereafter approach the court, or seek arbitration. If indeed

OMP NO.240 /2006

9 of 10

arbitration is understood to mean a speedy and effective mechanism for
dispute resolution, then it is expected that the party seeking it should act
with dispatch, and alacrity, not biding his time, awaiting an opportune
moment to approach the court. The petitioner, has done precisely that. The
other decisions of the Supreme Court mentioned in the preceding
paragraph are categorical in that arbitration is only a mechanism whereby
the court is substituted; application of other laws is not disputed.
12.

With the advent of the Act and the articulation of the standards of

judicial intervention, in judgments of the Supreme Court, the scope of this
court’s powers are limited. These are confined, inter alia, to violation of
law or contract, the award being contrary to public policy or national
interest. On an application of those standards, this court is of the opinion
that the findings of the arbitrator dos no call for interference. The petition
is accordingly dismissed, without any order on costs.

Dated : 11th March, 2008

OMP NO.240 /2006

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

10 of 10

