14
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision:- 10th April, 2008

+

CS(OS) 808A/2001

NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPN
..... Plaintiff
Through Mr.P.N.Bhardwaj with Mr.Ashutosh
Bhardwaj, Advocate.
versus
INDUSTRIAL CARBON
..... Defendant
Through Mr.V.Seshagiri, Advocate for
defendant No.14.
CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

YES

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

YES

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

The plaintiff, in these proceedings, under Section 30/33 of

the Arbitration Act, has challenged the award of the sole Arbitrator
dated 19.3.2001.
2.

The brief facts necessary for deciding this case are that

the petitioner (hereafter referred to as “the Corporation) entered into
an agreement with the respondent on 30.3.1989 (hereafter called “the
contract”) for licensing its knowhow for the manufacture of “SILVER

CS(OS) 808A/2001

1 of 16

IMPREGNATED GRAPHITE”. In terms of the contract, the licensee,
i.e. the respondent was permitted to manufacture the product for ten
years.

The parties agreed that the respondent would pay a

consolidated premium of Rs.55,000/- at the time of the execution of
the licence deed and royalty @ 5% ex-factory sale price of the Article.
These were payable on the first day of April and on the first day of
October. [clause 5 (ii)].
3.

The

representations

respondent/licensee

included

its

and
duty

undertakings
under

clause

of
6(B)(ii)

the
to

promptly disclose and provide to the Corporation, (in documented
form

to

the

maximum

extent

possible),

all

improvements,

developments and modifications in regard to the knowhow and/or
process etc. Such improvements, developments etc. were constituted
an integral part of the knowhow and such were to belong to the
Corporation.

The respondent was also obliged to do the following

things, as provided by clause 6(B) (iii), (iv) and (v).

“....(iii) The Licensee shall always
keep and maintain at its usual
place of business, separate books
of accounts relating to the royalties
in such form and containing such
information and particulars as may
be required by the Licensor for all
or any of the purposes of this
Licence, including Clause 5 hereof.
(iv) The Licensee shall at all
reasonable times, produce the
CS(OS) 808A/2001

2 of 16

books of accounts so maintained
and all other relevant books of
accounts, vouchers, documents,
receipts and connected papers, if
any, to the Licensor, its attorneys
or duly authorised agent(s) and will
permit the Licensor, its attorneys
or duly authorised agent(s) to
inspect the same, take copies of
extracts
thereform
and
the
Licensor shall give full information
as may be required by the Licensor
for determination of the amount of
royalties payable hereunder as
aforesaid.
(v)
The Licensee shall, before
first day of April and first day of
October every year deliver to the
Licensor, its attorneys or duly
authorised agents, a true and
complete
statement
of
the
ARTICLE manufactured, stored
and marketed or used for its own
purposes by the Licensee and exfactory sale price of the ARTICLE
during the period for which the
royalties are payable to the
Licensor, as well as a statement of
calculations of the estimated
royalties. All such statements shall
be duly certified by the Auditor of
the Licensee and their validity shall
be proven and substantiated if so
required by the Licensor.
4.

The contract further contained an arbitration clause in

terms of which disputes and differences were to be referred to
arbitration. It is not in dispute that the Corporation terminated the
contract on 7.4.1994 alleging that the respondent had not complied

CS(OS) 808A/2001

3 of 16

with the terms regarding disclosure of accounts of royalty. In these
circumstances, the Corporation invoked the arbitration clause; a sole
Arbitrator was

appointed and he entered upon reference on

18.7.1994.
5.

The

Corporation

which

was

the

claimant

in

the

proceedings sought for the following reliefs:(a)

direction to the respondent to furnish the true and correct

statement of accounts and the statement of its manufacturing activity
from the date of start of the production under the license agreement
till the respondents continued to utilize and exploit the Knowhow;
(b)

An award for a minimum amount of Rs.6 lakhs on account of

royalty allegedly due to the respondent for the period when the latter
started commercial production of the licensed product till termination
of agreement and further award of damages quantified at Rs.55,000/per month for the illegal use of manufactured products “SIG
Contacts”.
(c)

Interest @ 18% per annum of the amount of royalty so

determined in the arbitration.
6.

The respondent in its defence, inter alia, averred that the

technical knowhow provided to it was defective and unviable. It listed
the various deficiencies on paragraph 5 of its reply. It also denied any
liability of its terms/contract/agreement dated 30.3.1989.

CS(OS) 808A/2001

On the

4 of 16

contrary, they sought for refund of premium amount, i.e. Rs.55,000/-.
7.

The Arbitrator framed as many as thirteen issues on the

basis of the pleadings and materials made available at that stage on
2.12.2000.

He returned findings and rejected the claims of the

Corporation for royalty and damages.

He held that the respondent

was not entitled to claim the return of Rs.55,000/- as premium, in the
impugned award dated 19.3.2001.
8.

In the present objections to the award by the Corporation,

the findings concerning issues No.8, 9 and 10, i.e. entitlement of the
claimant to royalty, damages and interest have been questioned.
9.

It is averred and contended on behalf of the claimant that

the Arbitrator committed a misconduct in the eyes of law, in not
considering the materials available on the record and returning
findings against the respondent. Learned counsel for the Corporation
relied heavily upon the contract, particularly, clause 5(ii) and 6(B) to
submit that the respondent, having entered into the contract and even
exploited

the

knowhow,

was

under

a

duty,

as

long

as

the

arrangements subsisted between the parties, to comply with its terms.
These included the duty to furnish accounts on periodic basis as
stipulated in the Contract and also to pay the royalty agreed by the
parties. Learned counsel relied upon Exhibit C-13 dated 16.12.1991
to submit that the respondent's allegation about economic unviability

CS(OS) 808A/2001

5 of 16

or unfeasibility were without any basis. The said document is Exhibit
C-9 dated 3.4.1989.

The certificate was executed on behalf of the

respondent and it states that the respondent was fully satisfied about
the information supplied concerning the knowhow which was the
subject matter of the contract. The petitioners also rely upon other
documents such as Exhibit C-13, a letter dated 6.2.1991 written by
the petitioner to the National Physical Laboratory with a copy to the
respondent saying that its help and guidance for the demonstration of
the production process was requested. Learned counsel further relied
Exhibit C-17, whereby the respondent informed that the product
manufactured by it were tested and approved by the Ministry of
Railways, Central Government. The respondent also enclosed copies
of the letters written by the Railways as Exhibit C-18 and C-19.
Learned counsel next relied upon Exhibit C-21 to Exhibit C-29 and
submitted that all these were reminders and letters written to the
respondents demanding from them the payment of royalty and
furnishing of accounts.
10.

It was contended that the Arbitrator completely ignored

these documents and did not advert to the very first claim made by
the Corporation, i.e. a direction to disclose the accounts, as an aid to
calculating the damages and amounts payable to the former.

He

relied upon Exhibit C-33A, which was a letter written by Research

CS(OS) 808A/2001

6 of 16

Designs & Standards Organisation (RDSO) of Railways, stating that
according to their records, the respondent's product had been
inspected and supplied.

Similar letters for a previous period were

furnished and produced being Exhibit C/33C, C/33D and C/33E. The
petitioners also rely upon a report made by one Mr.Chander Mohan,
Deputy Manager, about his visit to RDSO, Lucknow, and the details of
his observations.
11.

Learned counsel submitted that the award discloses

manifest error in law since the Arbitrator ignored relevant materials
on the one hand, and on the other, refused to award any amount
against the respondent. The Arbitrator had reasoned that the onus
for proving quantum of damages claimed was on the Corporation
which had not produced any independent evidence apart from the
record and depositions of its officers. The Arbitrator had commented
that if the respondents were to be held liable, some thing more than a
mere report of its officials was necessary, either in the form of
evidence relating to other contracts for the same product and the
profits arising from it or the primary evidence of the officials from the
Railways itself.

The Arbitrator noted that the entire record of the

Railways were seen by the claimant's witness. On a consideration of
all these circumstances, the Arbitrator concluded that the claim for
royalty, damages was not proved and he did not award any amount in

CS(OS) 808A/2001

7 of 16

that regard.
12.

Learned counsel relied upon the findings of the Arbitrator

on Issue No.12. The Arbitrator observed as follows:-

“Moreover the respondent has
also committed breach of licence agreement
Ex.A-1/1 inasmuch as he has neither
submitted six monthly returns nor sent any
account to the petitioner nor paid any royalty,
therefore, the respondent is not entitled to
return of Rs.55,000/- paid as premium at the
time of execution of licence agreement dated
30.3.1989. This issue is, therefore, decided
against the respondent.”
13.

Learned counsel for the respondent argued that the award

cannot be set aside as disclosing illegality or palpable irregularity. It
was contended that the Arbitrator acted within his rights in accepting
the licensees' justification to the claim that the knowhow and the
technology provided to it were unviable and obsolete. He relied upon
Exhibit C-32, a letter dated 21.9.1994 whereby the respondent alleged
that the technology was of no use and nevertheless offered as a
without prejudice measure, to pay 2% royalty for the concerned
period when commercial production had been resorted to, i.e. for
1992-1994 to end all disputes. Learned counsel relied upon Exhibit C11 and C-13 to contend that though the contract was executed on
30.3.1989, the plant was not even commissioned for more than three
years. Exhibit C-11, a letter dated 12.2.1990, by the respondent to

CS(OS) 808A/2001

8 of 16

the Corporation stated that production had not yet started and that it
was in the process of establishing manufacturing facility required for
it.

Exhibit C-13 was a letter dated 6.2.1991 by the Corporation,

disclosing that the respondent had requested help and guidance for
demonstration of the production process so that the final production
could be commenced immediately, that was 6.2.1991.

In these

circumstances, it was contended that the production itself had
commenced much later in 1992 and the respondent experienced
considerable problems on account of obsolete technology and there
was no question of paying royalty or damages.
14.

Learned counsel for the respondent justified the findings

in relation to issue No.8 to 10 and submitted that since the
Corporation had made a claim for royalty and damages, the burden of
proving its loss was squarely on it. Learned counsel contended that
the Arbitrator's approach was sound inasmuch as he proceeded on the
assumption that even if the respondent was ex-parte and unrepresented, the onus of proving its case as claimant lays squarely
upon Corporation.

The latter, however, did not produce adequate

material to justify any findings of breach of contract or any other
material in support of its claims for damages.
15.

Learned counsel submitted that mere reliance upon a

report Exhibit C-33, was insufficient and the Arbitrator correctly

CS(OS) 808A/2001

9 of 16

surmised that such material being hearsay evidence was insufficient
to warrant any finding or award for damages for specific amounts.
Counsel furthermore contended that the estimated loss of Rs.50,000/per month and Rs.6 lakhs as damages was fanciful and there was no
evidence in support of such claim. It was urged that the Arbitrator
had, in the award, indicated the possible method by which the
claimant could have proved its case either by adducing material
profits in relation to other contracts involving the same technology or
by producing the purchasers of the products allegedly sold by the
respondent.

It could do neither and, therefore, the Arbitrator

correctly surmised that no award for any sums of money could be
made.
16.

A reading of the contract, particularly clause 5(2), would

show an obligation was cast on the respondent to pay royalty. The
said condition is as follows:"5.

PAYMENT OBLIGATION

In consideration of the Licence hereby granted the Licensee
shall pay to the Licensor:
i)
Premium of a consolidated sum of Rs. 55,000/(Rupees Fifty Five Thousand only) on or before the
execution of these presents.

ii)
Royalty @ 5%, on the ex-factory sale
price from the time being of the ARTICLE, on
the first day of April and on the first day of
CS(OS) 808A/2001

10 of 16

October every year regularly and punctually
and in any event not later than the first day of
May and first day of November immediately
following, in every such year. PROVIDED that
the liability of the Licensee to pay royalty
under and in terms of this sub-clause (ii) shall
accrue upon the commencement of the
manufacture of the ARTICLE for commercial
purposes at the PLANT including for any usage
of the article by the Licensee and shall
continue for a minimum period of 10 years
from such commencement.”
17.

The materials on record, apart from the said agreement in

support of the claimant's case were Exhibit C-9, a Certificate about
the supply of all information and the expression of satisfaction by the
respondent.

The claimant also produced other documents such as

Exhibit C-10, Exhibit C-21 to 29 etc. to show that the respondent did
not pay any royalty for any period and did not furnish any accounts.
In addition, the claimant had furnished other material such as Ex.C17, whereby the respondent had acknowledged that bulk production,
pursuant to the contract would commence. This was a letter dated
14.11.1991. Materials such as Exhibit C-18 to 20 and Exhibit C-33A,
33B, 33C, 33D and 33E, to an extent establish that the respondent
was in fact using the technology.
advert to these materials.

The award, however, does not

On issue No.11 itself, the Arbitrator

concluded that there was no evidence that the goods produced by the
respondent were flamed or defective because the technological
knowhow was obsolete and they were so rejected by the buyers. He
CS(OS) 808A/2001

11 of 16

also held that the respondent did not produce any witness. That issue
was therefore, decided against the respondent. Likewise in relation to
issue No.12, there was a categorical finding that monthly returns had
not been furnished to Corporation nor was any account sent to by the
respondent. On the face of these findings, the Arbitrator could not, in
the opinion of the Court, have rejected the entire claim. In fact, the
very first claim was for a direction to the respondents to disclose their
accounts. The claims (a) and (b) reads as follows:“(a) That the respondent – firm be directed to furnish the true
and correct statement of accounts and the statement of its
manufacturing activity from the time of start of its production
under the licenced agreement till the respondents continuing,
utilizing and exploiting the Knowhow;
(b)

An award for a minimum amount of Rs.6 lakhs on account

of royalty allegedly due to the respondent for the period when
latter started commercial production of the licensed product till
termination of agreement and further award of damages
quantified at Rs.55,000/- per month for the illegal use of
manufactured products “SIG Contacts”.
18.

As far as the question of damages and/or other amounts

allegedly payable by the respondents were concerned, the Arbitrator
proceeded on the footing that the onus was on the petitioner to

CS(OS) 808A/2001

12 of 16

adduce evidence in addition to the letters produced by it.
19.

Counsel for the petitioner had relied upon Section 114(g)

of the Evidence Act and contended that the Corporation had produced
the best evidence available to it and that Arbitrator committed an
error in law drawing deficiencies, inference, in the circumstances of
the case.

He had, in that background, relied upon the decision

reported as GOPAL KRISHNAJI KETKAR VS. MOHAMED HAJI

LATIF AND OTHERS, AIR 1968 SC 1413 and ARMUGAM VS.
CHANNAGIRI N. GOVINDARAJ SHETTY, AIR 1992 KARNATAKA
347.

In those decisions, the Court had held that if a party in

possession of best evidence which would throw light on the issue in
controversy withholds it, the Court ought to draw adverse inference
against him notwithstanding that onus of proof does not lie on him.
20.

In this case, the Arbitrator framed issues and after

considering the materials undeniably returned the following findings:1. The respondent did not pay any royalty.
2. The respondent did not furnish any accounts to the Corporation.
3. The respondent was unable to prove that the technology and
knowhow, furnished to it pursuant to the contract was either
unviable or defective.
21.

In case a party alleges breach of contract by the other

claims, specific amounts, as compensation of damages, the general

CS(OS) 808A/2001

13 of 16

principles applicable would be Section 73 of the Contract Act or if the
parties stipulate the payment of an agreed pre-determined amount, in
accordance with Section 74.

Such amounts should be a genuine

pre-estimates of the loss. In the present case, there is no stipulation
which can be characterised as a genuine pre-estimate of damages or
as liquidated damages. In the absence of such an agreed stipulation,
the burden of proving the extent of profits or amounts that could be
reasonably derived by the respondent was upon the plaintiff. It is one
thing to contend that the best evidence in the form of books of
accounts were available with the respondent, for securing an order
that such books of accounts should be disclosed.

However, it is

entirely another to say that the withholding of such books of accounts
itself should lead to an adverse evidence that damages automatically
had to be avoided. The Court is of the opinion that such an automatic
inference is not permissible and unsupported by any principle of law.
The Corporation being a claimant was no doubt under duty to prove
what could have been the reasonable profits as well as the period for
which such profits would have been derived by the respondents in
support of its claims for damages and reasonable royalty.

In this

regard, the Arbitrator has, in the opinion of the Court, correctly
analyzed the evidence on the record.

He considered the report

Exhibit C-33 as well as the deposition and other letters and concluded

CS(OS) 808A/2001

14 of 16

that they are insufficient for a finding of the damages to the tune of
Rs.55,000/- per month or for any other amount such as Rs.6 lakhs.
22.

It is a trite law that a party or plaintiff who approaches the

Court is under a duty to prove damages and the extent suffered. In
the absence of positive evidence, the claimant could not, on the issues
of damages, rely on the withholding of books of accounts. Therefore,
the finding of damages and royalty cannot be interfered with. In this
context, it would be well remind one self that Court's jurisdiction
under Section 30/33 is supervisory and not appellate. It can interfere
with the award, if satisfied upon the materials on record that the
inferences

drawn

on

the

findings

rendered

as

such

can

be

characterised as manifest errors of law or those which could have
been rendered in the circumstances of the case. There is no material
available on the record.

All the relevant discussions in this regard

concerning damages, in the opinion of the Court, cannot be interfered
with. It is certainly not a manifest error of law.
23.

The Court is of the opinion that even while the finding on

damages or the adequacy of proof in that regard cannot be interfered
with, the award has rendered inconsistent findings and also not
addressed the issue of claim No.1.

After having rendered clear

findings concerning the respondent's breach of the contract failure it
to pay royalty, and failure to disclose accounts, the Arbitrator could

CS(OS) 808A/2001

15 of 16

not have completely overlooked claim No.1.

In the circumstances,

even while sustaining the other findings, this Court is of the opinion
that the award requires to be interfered with on that limited aspect.
24.

In the light of the above discussions, the award should be

partly set aside. The Arbitrator has to render fresh findings on claim
(a) and consequent directions in claim (b) concerning royalty, and
interest.
25.

In view of the above discussion, the claim in the suit has

partly succeed.

Accordingly the award is partly set aside.

The

Arbitrator is hereby directed to consider the materials on record and
render specific findings on claim No.1 and based on the same after
the hearing of the learned counsel for the parties, render specific
findings on the other claims. Subject to these directions, findings on
Issue No.8 and 9 are left undisturbed.
The Registry shall ensure that the arbitration records are
sent back.
26.

The parties shall be present before the Arbitrator on 28th

April, 2008 for further proceedings/directions.
The suit is partly decreed in the above terms.
Order dasti.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
APRIL
'sn'

10, 2008

CS(OS) 808A/2001

16 of 16

