IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

CRL. REV. P. 764/2005

RAJENDER JAIN & ANR.

Reported

..... Petitioners
Through Mr. M. Krishnamani, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Rajesh Aggarwal, Advocate

versus
STATE

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Shamra, Advocate for the State

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat: [Open Court]
1. This revision questions an order on the point of charge dated 26.9.2005, made by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge.

The petitioner accused are charged with

committing offences punishable under Sections 307/452 read with 201/34 IPC.
2. It is alleged that the Petitioner No.1 threatened Shri Sandeep Arora that he should be
shot. Thereafter the petitioners along with two armed Guards went inside the building.
After sometime they came out and beat Pradeep Anand with fist blows; on which,

Sandeep Arora and others tried to intervene. Petitioner No.1 asked his men to beat
them. A gunman allegedly fired a shot, whereas another gunman gave a butt blow
Crl.R.764/05

1 of 5

on the head of Pradeep Anand. Thereafter, all four men fled the spot. During
investigation, Sandeep Arora was medically examined. He was found to have
sustained simple injuries on his parietal region with a blunt object.
3.

The petitioner No.1 a builder had constructed “Jaina Towers” conveyed and

handed over possession of various shops in the complex to their purchasers. He
allegedly had not repaid his liabilities on account of bank loans obtained by him. It
was alleged that the bank sought to proceed against the properties.

The first

petitioner was allegedly under pressure. On 3.9.2001 the petitioners, with two
armed guards went to the site of occurrence, where Sandeep Arora, Ajit Singh,
Pradeep Anand, Avatar Bhatia, Nilesh Aggarwal, Vijay Aggarwal, Sanjeev Maggu,
Virender Verma and Manish Gupta were present.
4.

The FIR in this case was lodged and subsequently after investigation the

police filed a report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. The petitioners were charged with
having committed various offences. It was alleged that they were guilty of offences
under the Arms Act. The trial Court after considering the materials produced
concluded that there were sufficient grounds to frame charges under Sections
307/452/201 read with Section 34 IPC and did so accordingly.
5.

It is contended by Mr. Krishnamani, learned Senior Counsel that the charge under

Section 307 was unsustainable on the basis of the materials presented to the trial
Court. Counsel contended that the nature of the blows alleged to have been inflicted
upon the injured-complainant were such as could not have, in the natural course of
events, caused death.
Crl.R.764/05

He placed reliance upon the

medical report to say that
2 of 5

according to the doctor who ministered the victim, the latter had sustained only simple
injuries. In these circumstances, the charge under Section 323 alone could have been
framed.
6.

Learned counsel submitted that the location of the blow alone is not a material

fact; the Court has to consider all attendant circumstances to gather the intention of the
assailant. If indeed the petitioners had intention of causing such grievous injuries as
were likely to cause death, so as to fall within the four corners of Section 307, that
would have manifested in a more over manner. Counsel contended that even if the
prosecution version in regard to the surrounding circumstances, were to be accepted,
there was no question of the petitioner being a party to an assault with intention to
inflict such injuries that would have resulted in death.
7.

Counsel relied upon the fact that even though a gun was alleged to have been

used, the nature of the injuries inflicted were not the result of a gun shot but were
simple and superficial; allegedly with the butt of the weapon. Learned counsel relied
upon the decision of the Supreme Court reported as Jai Narain Vs. State of Bihar AIR
1972 SC 1764 and contended that not all head injuries necessarily point to an intention
to commit offences punishable under Section 307.

In this case, the injury was

superficial and did not lead to any untoward incident. No other ground was urged in
support of the petition.
8.

Learned APP opposed the petition. According to him the injury inflicted on the

head in the parietal region, its description namely, of the length of 11.5 x 0.2 cm
coupled with the exhortations by the petitioners that the complainant ought to be
Crl.R.764/05

3 of 5

finished, were sufficient for the Court to frame charges under Section 307 as well as
the other provisions.
9.

As may be seen the undisputed factual matrix is that the petitioners are alleged to

have been instrumental in beating up the victim on the head. The first petitioner is a
builder; he allegedly defaulted in discharging his liabilities to a bank.

The

vendees/purchasers of the shops built by him felt threatened and apparently started to
pressurized him. He visited the site and a quarrel broke out. In the process the
complainant/injured who sought to intervene, was allegedly threatened and beaten up.
10.

There is no gain-saying that not every head injury cannot be construed as an

attempt to commit murder. There cannot be any inflexible rule that injury on certain
parts of the body should necessarily lead to the charge of having committed a
particular offence. The surrounding circumstances, the intention of the party or parties
concerned to be gathered from the incident, the background of the case, nature of the
weapon and intensity of the blow are all relevant factors. In a given case a simple
injury on the head without aggravating factors may be mere hurt; in another instance if
there are surrounding and aggravating factors, an identical injury or even an act which
may not result in an injury, could well justify the charge under Section 307. In this
case the nature of the injury though described as simple was inflicted on a sensitive
and vital part of the body. Having regard to that part namely, the head, the injury
though termed simple and superficial, cannot be construed as manifesting intention to
cause mere hurt. One does not need to use the butt of a gun, which is rather heavy to
cause a simple hurt. This factor, coupled with the words by the accused, uttered to my
Crl.R.764/05

4 of 5

mind, are the key to their intention.
11. It is settled law that the Court at the charge framing stage has to merely sift the
evidence and satisfy itself as to whether, prima facie, the materials point to grave
suspicion about the accused having committed the offence. The Court should not
embark on a meticulous examination or analysis of the evidence, a task ordained by
the Code, to be undertaken at the stage of trial.
12.

Having considered the materials on record, the trial Court felt there were

sufficient grounds to frame the charges as it did. I am not persuaded to hold otherwise;
the facts do justify the charges framed by the trial Court.
13. In view of the above findings this petition has to fail. It is accordingly dismissed.

July 24, 2007

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J.

mlb

Crl.R.764/05

5 of 5

