*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.M.C. 3406/2005
Delivered on May 25, 2007
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. B. Balaji, Advocate

KARIKALAN
versus

M/S BIRLA YAMAHA LTD.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. S.P. Singh, Mr. Naveen Khanna, Advocates

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

In these proceedings the petitioner seeks quashing of a criminal complaint

initiated by the respondent for alleged commission of offences under Sections 138/142 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act (hereafter “the Act”).
2.

The complainant alleged that in the course of commercial transactions a cheque

for Rs. 2.5 lakh was issued by the first accused. On 31.3.2002 it was presented and
returned on the ground of insufficiency of funds. Subsequently, it was presented to the
drawee bank which apparently returned, citing insufficiency of funds on 1.10.2002. On
these grounds, the complaint was filed before the court.
3.

A quashing order under Section 482 has been sought primarily on two grounds,

crlmc-3406/05

1 of 3

namely, that the cheque lost its character as a negotiable instrument since it was presented
to the drawer bank on 1.10.2002 i.e. after the period of its validity.

The second

contention raised is that the present petitioner has no connection with the instrument as he
was not the drawer of the cheque; the same , being his brother, who had transacted with
the complainant.
4.

The petition was resisted by the respondent complainant who relied upon the

original records and submitted that the cheque was not returned on the ground of its being
invalid or having lost its character as an instrument but on the specific ground of
insufficiency of funds. It was, therefore, contended that the defence as to whether it was
an instrument or not is a matter of trial. As far as the other ground, namely, the petitioner
is not being a signatory or a drawer, it was contended that the complainant had no means
to verify who in fact executed or signed the cheque. These were sent to the complainant
and after notice was issued the petitioner never denied his liability. It was contended that
not being a drawer there was no need for the petitioner to have ever responded to the
notice.
5.

During the course of the hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the

judgment of the Supreme Court in K. Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan, (1999) 7
SCC 510 for the proposition that an offence under Section 138 is complete in five
circumstances and that it is neither of those occasions arose in this case.
6.

An examination of the cheque issued on 31.3.2002 shows that it was presented on

two separate occasions. The return memo issued by the drawer bank does not support the
case of the petitioner; the instrument was returned with the remarks “exceeds
crlmc-3406/05

2 of 3

arrangements”.
7.

So far as the second ground urged in support of the petition concerned, I am of the

opinion that this fact is a matter of trial. The circumstances under which the transaction
took place, i.e. whether the petitioner and the respondent complainant were known to
each other, whether the respondent complainant would have identified the signatures of
the drawer of the cheque are all matters which require to be considered during the course
of the trial and cannot be assumed, on the basis of the pleadings in Section 482.
Likewise, on this ground also the third objection that the complaint is not maintainable by
placing reliance in the judgment of the Supreme Court in K. Bhaskaran's case (supra)
cannot be accepted.
7.

In view of the above, I am of the opinion that this petition is without merit. It is

accordingly dismissed. The record of the trial court shall be returned forthwith.
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
MAY 25, 2007
dkg

crlmc-3406/05

3 of 3

