*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on August 14, 2007
Delivered on August 20, 2007
W.P.(C) 17455/2006
NEERA DADHWAL

..... Petitioner
Through Petitioner in person.

versus
DEEPAK PAINTAL AND ORS.
..... Respondents
Through Mr. J.S. Rupal, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1. The Petitioner invokes the writ jurisdiction of this Court and claims a direction to admit
her in the fifth semester of the LLB Course, conducted by the Delhi University.
2. The brief facts necessary to decide these proceedings are that the Petitioner, a resident
of Leh, Jammu and Kashmir enrolled with the Campus Law Centre, Faculty of Law,
University of Delhi in the year 2004. The course has six semesters and 30 subjects have
to be cleared by every student by the end of the sixth semester, to secure a law degree. A
student has to clear 15 out of 20 subjects in order to qualify for admission to the fifth
semester.

W.P.(C) 17455/2006

1 of 8

3. The Petitioner is a regular student. She avers about her participation in legal aid camps,
by providing free legal assistance to the under privileged, living in slum areas. She
claims to have represented her college in the Moot Court Competition held in
Aurangabad and Lucknow on 06.11.2004 and 02.02.2005.
4. In her fourth semester the Petitioner was asked by the Students union to organize the
annual festival of the campus and in the process missed three days of her classes. She
had 61% of attendance and according to Ordinance VII, of the Statutes and Ordinances
the Dean/Professor in charge is empowered to condone the attendance since she was
working for the institution.
5. The Petitioner submitted her form to appear in the fourth semester; she received her
admit card on time. She avers about not being allowed to appear in the first paper; she
was sent back from the institution. The Petitioner allegedly was issued roll number for
the second examination, a few minutes of the commencement of her exams.

The

Respondents allegedly took another 15 minutes to find her a vacant seat. The Petitioner
alleges that the same thing happened for her third paper too, but no extra time was
allowed to her to complete the paper. She avers that she cleared two out of the four
subjects, in which she was allowed to appear. The Petitioner submits that the result
showed that she has passed or qualified in 14 subjects out of 19 but actually it is 14
subjects out of 17 as the other 2 papers were disturbed by the Respondents.
6. Ms. Dadwal, the petitioner appeared and conducted the proceedings. She reiterated the
submissions made in the petition. It was further urged that the respondents, by their
acts of omission, caused immense and irreparable prejudice to her. It was also urged
that since she could appear only in 17 papers, the Court should declare that she had

W.P.(C) 17455/2006

2 of 8

passed the fourth semester, as she passed or qualified in 14 papers (instead of 15 out of
20).
7. Mr. J.S. Rupal, learned Counsel for the Respondent denied the allegations and
submitted that the admission process for the said fifth semester was over and hence the
present petition has became infructuous. He further submitted that the petition was
preferred only in November 2006 and by then the fifth semester classes were nearing
completion.
8. The Learned Counsel urged that the Petitioner did not clear 15 papers out of 20 papers
and possess the minimum attendance required which is 66% under Ordinance VII 8(a)
of the Delhi University ACT 1922 to enable her to appear in the firth term examination in
December 2006. The Petitioner was not promoted to the fifth term; she cannot claim
any relief. Learned Counsel also submitted that the Petitioner was issued an admit card
which had a roll number and she has not annexed her fourth semester admit card.
9. The undisputed case is that the petitioner had about 61 per cent attendance. The norm,
stipulated by Ordinance VII 8 (a) is 66 per cent of lectures in each of the subjects as also
moot courts and practical training course. Appendix II to Ordinance V (2) and VII
prescribes that a law student, to be promoted to fifth semester, should have passed at
least in 15 out of 20 papers.
Ordinance VII (8) (a) reads as follows:
“8 (a) “ The student shall be required to put in minimum attendance of
66 per cent of the lectures on each of the subjects as also at the moot
courts and practical training course. ”
Provided that in exceptional cases for reasons to be recorded and
communicated to the Bar Council of India, the Dean of the Faculty.
of Law/Professor-in-charge of the Law Centre may condone attendance
short of those required by this Rule, if the student had attended 66 per cent of

W.P.(C) 17455/2006

3 of 8

the lectures in the aggregate of the semester examinations.
Provided further that no personal shall be deemed to have satisfied the
required conditions in respect of his instructions unless, in addition to the
requirements regarding attendance and other conditions, he has appeared and
satisfied by his performance the Professor-in-Charge of the Law Centre in such
test, written and /or oral, as may be held by him in hi discretion. The Professorin-Charge shall have, ands shall be deemed always to have had, the power to
detain a student in the same class in which he has been studying or not to sent
him up for the University Examination, in case he did not appear at the t est/s
aforesaid or his performance was not satisfactory.
The Professor-in-Charge of the Law Centre shall have power to strike off
the name of a student who is grossly irregular in attendance in spite of
warning, or, when the absence of the student is for such a long period that he
cannot put in requisite percentage of attendance.”
Appendix II to Ordinance V (2) & VII is as follows:
“A student of the First, Third, and Fifth Term will be promoted to the
Second, Fourth and Sixth Term respectively, irrespective of the number
of courses in which he/she has failed to pass or failed to appear in the
First, Third or Fifth Term Examination: Provided that he or she has not
been detained on account of shortage of attendance in First, Third or
Fifth Term Examination, as the case may be.
Provided further that no such student shall be admitted to the Third or
Fifth Term unless he/she has passed in at least five courses offered by
him/her for the First and Second Term Examinations taken together in
case of promotion from I year to II year and in at least fifteen courses
offered by him/her; for the First, Second, Third and Fourth Term
Examination taken together in case of promotion from II year to II year
of the LLB course.
Note:- The students eligible for admission to III/V Term must seek admission
not later than two weeks from the date(s) of announcement of the results of
LLB II/IV Term Annual Examinations or within one week of commencement of
classes, whichever is later, failing which they will forfeit their right to be
admitted to III/V Term.”

10. The petitioner's allegation is that she could not attain the 66 per cent minimum
attendance criteria, as she was asked to participate in student union activities; she also
attended moot courts and legal aid camps. She has relied upon certificates issued by the

W.P.(C) 17455/2006

4 of 8

Legal Aid Society, of the Campus Law Centre about her active participation in legal aid
programmes and also other documents showing involvement in students union
activities.

As far as her clearing 14 out of 17 subjects is concerned, although the

allegation that she was permitted to appear late in some exams, and not permitted to
appear in paper XVI (Constitutional Law – II) is denied, yet during the hearing, she
produced the response of the Principal Information Officer of the Campus Law Centre
under the Right to Information Act, 2005.

11. The petitioner had sought information about the seating plan for students
attempting in all the subjects of the fourth semester; Constitutional Law, paperXVI was the subject of examination on 01.05.06. The seating plan for room No.
26 indicated that 55 students had attempted the examination. The petitioner's
Roll number i.e. 60856, did not find mention in that examination hall; indeed it
does not find mention in any other examination hall for that paper. What has,
therefore, been established is that the petitioner lost the opportunity to appear in
one paper. She was admittedly marked “absent” in that paper. To that extent,
her grievance of not being permitted to appear in all the papers seems well
founded. As regards the complaint that she was permitted to appear but later on
in some other subjects, there is no evidence to establish that. Similarly, in the
representations addressed by her on 17.10.06 and later, she has not complained
that attendance was wrongly withheld.

In these circumstances, the only

grievance which can be considered by the Court is whether the respondents acted
with justification in proceeding to detain her at the end of the fourth semester
examination.
W.P.(C) 17455/2006

5 of 8

12. After the filing of this writ petition, this Court had permitted the petitioner to
appear in the fifth semester (Suppl.) examinations conducted in May-June, 2007.
The Court had also directed that the results would not be declared till further
orders and that no special equities would arise in her favour by the permission to
appear in the examinations.
13. The above facts and attendant circumstances would disclose that the petitioner
fell marginally short of minimum attendance requirement spelt out by the
Ordinance. There is some documentary evidence in support of her claim of
having participated in legal aid camps and co-curricular activities of the students'
union. Apparently, the respondents have not given credit for it; in any case, the
petitioner fell short of attendance by nine classes. At the same time, she was also
not permitted to appear in all the examinations – the response to the query made
by her under the Right to Information Act, indicated that her roll number was not
included in the seating plan for that examination on 01.05.06.

In these

circumstances, the respondents' action in marking her absent cannot be justified.
I am, therefore, of the considered opinion that the petitioner's results for the fifth
semester examination should be declared forthwith.

However, this cannot

automatically mean that all attendance requirements have to be given a go by.
She was not admitted to the 6th semester examination. She approached this Court
on 21.10.06 and was unable to secure an interim order. In these circumstances,
although this Court has got wide powers under Article 226 of the Constitution,
such powers should be exercised with circumspection having regard to the
express statutory conditions and the attendant circumstances. In this case, the
W.P.(C) 17455/2006

6 of 8

issue is one of compliance with attendance norms.

If this Court, at this stage

were to permit the petitioner to appear in the 6th semester without her having
ever been admitted to it, it would be violating the attendance requirements and
all other conditions. At the same time, denial of any relief would result in loss of
two years – the Petitioner would be relegated to the second year, and would be
eligible for promotion to final year in 2008. The Court, therefore, has to strike a
balance and mould the relief, to secure the ends of justice.
14. In the above circumstances, following directions are issued:
(1)

The Faculty of Law, namely, the third respondent shall declare the results

of the fifth semester examination (Suppl.) in which the petitioner appeared,
within a week from today;
(2)

The petitioner shall be admitted to the fifth semester. It shall be open to

her to appear in the examinations/tests conducted by the respondents in respect
of the subjects which she has not cleared in accordance with the Ordinance and
statutes;
(3)

The petitioner shall be permitted to make up the deficiency of attendance

if any in the fifth semester and shall be admitted to the 6th semester at the end of
the present term, in January, 2008. Thereafter, subject to her fulfilling the
attendance norms and other conditions, she shall be permitted to appear in the
6th semester examinations.
The petition is disposed off in terms of the above directions. No costs.
Order Dasti.

W.P.(C) 17455/2006

7 of 8

AUGUST 20 , 2007
BHAT)

(S.

RAVINDRA

JUDGE

W.P.(C) 17455/2006

8 of 8

