*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : May 17th, 2007
Date of decision : May 22nd 2007

+

CRL.REV.P. 845/2006
LAJPAT RAI SURI

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Jagjit Singh, Advocate

versus
SUBHASH SURI

..... Respondent
Through

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

%
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

This is a revision under Section 397 Criminal Procedure Code (hereafter “the

Code”). It challenges the judgment of the Additional Sessions Judge (hereafter “the
Appellate Court”) dated 21.9.2005, rejecting the petitioner's appeal against conviction,
under Section 323, Indian Penal Code (IPC).

The trial court found him guilty of the

offences under Sections 341 and 506, IPC and released him on probation; he was also
directed to pay compensation of Rs.25,000/- and fine of Rs. 5,000/-. The Appellate Court
CRL.REV.P-845-06

1 of 8

allowed the appeal so far as it was directed against the findings against Section 341/506.
The compensation of Rs. 25,000/- directed to be paid to the complainant was set aside.
The conviction and sentence under Section 323 was affirmed; that has been assailed in
these proceedings.
2.

Briefly the facts are that the petitioner was accused of offences under Sections

341/323/506(1) Indian Penal Code (hereafter “IPC”). According to the complainant,
Subhash Suri, (brother of the petitioner) in an incident which occurred on 20.8.2000 at
about 7.30 he was stopped, abused and assaulted. The complainant alleged that the
petitioner caught hold of him by the neck, rained fist blows upon his mouth, beat him up,
and kicked him, which resulted in several injuries upon his person. It was alleged by the
complainant that another brother V.P.Suri intervened and saved him from the petitioner
accused who also used indecent and threatening language. The complainant called the
police who took both the parties to the police station. The complainant was taken to
hospital namely the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) where he was
examined. During the trial the complaint was supported by PW-1, Police Constable Jag
Mohan, Shanker Prasad PW-2, PW-3 and the complainant PW-4.
3.

The petitioner's defence was that both parties had a long history of disputes which

included the complainant engaging himself in acts of breach of peace and disturbing
public tranquility which had previously resulted in an order dated 18.1.1991 by the
Special Executive Magistrate. An earlier effort of the complainant, to have proceedings
under Section 107, 151 of the Code drawn, were dropped because he had lodged a false
complaint about an incident dated 24.1.1998 when the Petitioner was admittedly out of
CRL.REV.P-845-06

2 of 8

the country. In his defence the petitioner urged that soon after the matter, i.e the so-called
incident parties were taken to the police station, the matter was amicably resolved and
duly recorded in a diary entry. In spite of this, the complainant chose to implicate the
petitioner and level baseless allegations, against him.
4.

Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that findings of the courts below are

unsupported by any reliable evidence. According to him what impressed the courts were
testimonies of PWs- 3 and 4, who had history of enmity against him. Counsel contended
that the testimony of PW-3, was wholly unworthy of credence since he too had a dispute
with the petitioner and was an accused in another incident where the petitioner's wife was
a complainant. As far as the statement of PW-4 complainant was concerned, counsel
stated that this was belied by two circumstances namely the diary entry and the supporting
statement of PW-1 and PW-2 who established that after the parties were went to the
police station the matter was compromised. He also submitted that the medical evidence
was neither cogent nor comprehensible and the findings of the courts below were
mechanical and presumptive, based upon absolutely no material or evidence.
5.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of a Division Bench of this court

reported as Sher Singh Vs. State, 1995, RCR and submitted that examination of a record
clerk to prove handwriting of a medical practitioner or doctor did not constitute proof. It
was submitted that the courts below fell into grave error in concluding that the materials
were sufficient to arrive at a finding of guilt. Learned counsel further submitted that the
courts below also fell into error in applying differing yardsticks for appreciation of
evidence. On the one hand the deposition of PW 3, also a brother of the accused and the
CRL.REV.P-845-06

3 of 8

complainant was accepted, whereas the deposition of DW-3 was discarded although there
was no reason to do so. DW-3, Kuldeep Suri is another brother of the petitioner as well
as the complainant.

6.

Notice was issued on 24.1.2007, in this case; it was served upon the respondent

On the date of hearing, i.e today, despite the matter being kept back at second call, the
respondent did not enter appearance. The matter was therefore proceeded with on merits.
7.

The brief facts have been discussed above. I have considered the evidence namely

copies of depositions of PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, PW-4, DW-1, DW-2 and DW-3 as well as
the copy of the DD Entry 20.8.2000 and medical certificate produced before the trial
court namely PW-2/A. These show that some quarrel took place in the morning of
20.8.2000; the complainant alleged that he was beaten and kicked badly. The police was
approached; copies of the DD Entries were part of the record. The two entries namely 2A
and 4A mention about the quarrel and; according to DD No.4(A) P.S. Lajpat Nagar-II, the
disputes and disagreements were with regard to minor arguments of division of a house.
The Entry recorded that parties have got the matter settled and the complainant as well as
the petitioner did not wish to proceed further. A reading of the Appellate Court's order
would show that it formed an opinion that the findings were based essentially on the
following conclusions :
“A cumulative study of the above referred three
documents reveals that a matter was recorded to the PCR
regarding which a QST was prepared and transmitted to PS
Lajpat Nagar where DD No.2-A was recorded and HC
Naresh and Ct. Ajay Kumar had left for the spot. The spot
CRL.REV.P-845-06

4 of 8

was recorded in these two documents is E-43/44 Lajpat
Nagar-II. These two documents when read with the
evidence of complainant PW-4 do support his testimony that
he had made a phone call to the PCR. The police had
arrived and taken them both to the hospital. Ex. PW 2/A,
i.e. MLC corroborates the statement of PW-4 to the effect
that he was taken to AIIMS for treatment. Ex. PW 4/B, DD
entry 2-B can also be read in support of the complainant's
case because it does mention of a dispute between the two
brothers at E-43/44, Lajpat Nagar-II. Though, it also
mentions of a compromise, yet compromise cannot be read;
as there is no statement by the complainant recorded by the
IO proving that compromise had taken place. I find no
merits in the arguments of Ld. Counsel for the appellant that
time of 10.34 AM recorded in the MLC makes the same
doubtful because the complainant was present at the PS at
10.40 AM, when DD No.2-B was recorded. DD No.2-B
does not any where record the presence of complainant at
the PS. This is merely a report by the HC Naresh, which
cannot be accepted to be true in the absence of statement of
the complainant reinforcing the compromise. From the
material as discussed above, I am of the opinion that an
occurrence did take place on 20.8.2000 before 8.35 AM,
regarding which a report was made by the complainant to
the PCR. Complainant was also medico legally examined at
the hospital and some injuries were noticed. Though the
information on the MLC cannot be read as the MLC has
been proved only by a record clerk of the AIIMS; yet an
opinion can be drawn that Subhash Suri was medicoillegally examined at AIIMS on the day of the occurrence.
The injuries can at the least be presumed to be simple in
nature. The charge u/S. 323 IPC is, therefore, established
and the impugned judgment to that effect is upheld.”

8.

In the earlier part of the judgment the court had discarded the eye witness

testimonies of PW-3 and DW-3, both brothers of the parties. It also discarded the
testimony of DW-2 on the ground that he was an interested witness, being employee of
the petitioner.

It proceeded solely on two circumstances i.e. The DD entries and

CRL.REV.P-845-06

5 of 8

deposition of PW-2 . The extracted part of the judgment would show that the court drew
inferences. The first inference is that though the DD mentioned a compromise yet that
should not have been taken into consideration because there was no statement by the
complainant proving that such compromise had taken place. This, I am of the opinion
was in clear error because Constable Jag Mohan PW-1 did mention about the
compromise in spite of the DD Entry. He further stated that there was nothing regarding
medical examination of the complainant. In such circumstances the only evidence which
survived for consideration was that of PW-4, the complainant who stated about alleged
assault and relied on the eye witness testimony of Ved Prakash Suri. The evidence of
Ved Prakash Suri was discarded.

In these circumstances it was necessary that the

allegation about medical examination had to be corroborated.
9.

The court does not appear to have taken into consideration the contents of the

MLC relied upon. Apart from the fact whether the record could have been proved by a
staff member and not a doctor, it was also necessary to see the contents of the document
in order to be satisfied whether any injuries had been made out. In the deposition PW-4
had categorically stated that the petitioner rained several blows, besides kicking him. The
copy of the MLC produced before the courts below is absolutely unreadable. Perhaps this
was the reason why neither court adverted to the nature of injuries. Instead they chose to
go by a general surmise that since a record clerk of the AIIMS had answered the
summons to prove the genuineness of the document, some injury must have been inflicted
on the person of the complainant.
10.

One of the fundamental rules which should courts have to at all times be alive to

CRL.REV.P-845-06

6 of 8

is that the burden of proving all allegations levelled lies upon the prosecution. This
burden is said to be discharged only when the case alleged by it is proved beyond
reasonable doubt. In this case after having discarded the testimony and evidence of PW-3
DW-2 and DW-3, only depositions of PW-1 and PW-4 survived consideration PW-1
categorically spoke about the compromise – that was considered unworthy of acceptance
by the courts. PW-2 the record clerk could not have proved about the injuries. The
document produced by him is not comprehensible or legible. In the totality of these facts
and attendant circumstances, the prosecution, in my considered opinion, cannot
conceivably be said to have been proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.
11.

The High Court undoubtedly has limited revisional jurisdiction - it cannot in the

exercise of its discretion convert a finding of acquittal and convict an accused. However,
if the records or the proceedings of any of the courts below in a given case point to
material irregularity, illegality or conduct of the proceedings which have resulted in
manifest failure of justice, the court can legitimately intervene and cure such illegality or
irregularity. In the facts of this case, I am satisfied that the findings of the courts below
convicting the petitioner of the offence under Section 323 and imposing the sentence
upon him, are unsupported by the legal evidence which proved his guilt beyond
reasonable doubt.
12.

For the above reasons the petition has to succeed. Accordingly, it is allowed. The

impugned judgment and order dated 21.9.2005 and the sentence imposed by the trial
court dated 10.9.2004 so far as they convicted the petitioner under Section 323 are hereby
set aside.
CRL.REV.P-845-06

7 of 8

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
MAY 22, 2007
mm

CRL.REV.P-845-06

8 of 8

