*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on February 20,2007
Delivered on February 26,2007
CRL.M.C.837/2005
GULZARI LAL KALRA
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Manish Gandhi, Advocate
versus
N.K. KATHURIA & ANR.
..... Respondents
Through Mr. Arvind Gupta , Advocate
Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be Yes
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reportedYes
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr.Justice S.Ravindra Bhat
1.

The petitioner seeks quashing of criminal proceedings, in the present

petition under Section 482, Code of Criminal Procedure.
2.

The respondent ( hereafter called "the complainant") preferred the criminal

proceedings, alleging that he and the petitioner were friends, that the petitioner had
been approaching and requesting the complainant for a loan. The complainant
claims to have been advancing loans as requested, from time to time. It was
Crl.M.C.837/2005

1 of 8

claimed that the petitioner owed to the Complainant a sum of Rs.1,87,200.00
(Rupees One Lakh Eighty Seven Thousand Two Hundred Only) being the amount
borrowed by him. It was alleged in February 1998, when the complainant was in
need of money, he asked the petitioner to return the amount of Rs.1,87,200.00. The
petitioner, in repayment of the amounts due, issued cheques bearing No.703711
dated 05.02.1998 for Rs.87,200.00 drawn on Punjab and Sind Bank, Malka Ganj,
Delhi and another cheque No.476284 dated 07.02.1998 for Rs.1,00,000.00 drawn
on Punjab National Bank, Roshanara Road, Delhi with an assurance that the
cheques would be honoured on presentation.

3.

It is claimed that on 05.02.1998, the petitioner approached the Complainant

and requested that he had not been able to arrange for the amount of
Rs.1,87,200.00 and requested for grant of time of around a month. It was also
alleged that in the first week of March, 1998, the petitioner asked the complainant
to present the cheque in such a way that it could be presented to the bankers of the
petitioner on 9.03.1998, with an assurance that the cheque would be honoured on
presentation.

4.

The cheques were presented by the Complainant to his bankers i.e. Bank of

India, Janpath, New Delhi but were returned dishonoured. The cheque for

Crl.M.C.837/2005

2 of 8

Rs.87,200.00 drawn on Punjab and Sind Bank, Malka Ganj, Delhi was returned
with the remark "exceeds arrangement" while the other cheque for Rs.1,00,000.00
drawn on Punjab National Bank, Roshanara Road, Delhi was returned with the
remark "Insufficient Funds". The complainant through his Advocate's notice dated
March 24, 1998 demanded re-payment of the cheque amounts. The complainant
alleged that despite receipt, yet, the petitioner failed and neglected, to reply to the
notice or to pay the sum of Rs.1,87,200.00 (Rupees One Lakh Eighty Seven
Thousand Two Hundred only),

within the stipulated 15 days. Upon these

allegations, the complainant instituted a criminal complaint alleging offences
under Sections 138 and 142, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1981. The summoning
order, and continuance of proceedings have been impugned in this petition.

5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner raised three contentions. It was urged,

firstly that the Act is a self contained one, and in so far as it prescribes the period
within which the complaint has to be filed, Section 142 would prevail; however, as
regards other matters of procedure, the Code of Criminal Procedure would apply.
The trial court, in the submission of the counsel, could not have taken cognizance
on 7-8-1999, i.e much beyond the period of limitation prescribed under Section
468 of the Code. The second submission made was that the notice in question
claimed an amount larger than the sum of the two cheques; therefore, it could not

Crl.M.C.837/2005

3 of 8

be construed as a notice under Section 138. Consequently, the complaint, and the
proceedings, were without jurisdiction. It was lastly urged that the notice was not
received by the petitioner.

6.

Reliance was placed upon observations in a judgment of the Supreme

Court, reported as Krishna Pillai -vs- T.A. Rajendran & others 1990 (Supp) SCC
121 to say that Section 468 of the Code creates a bar upon Courts taking
cognizance after expiry of the stipulated period.

The Court in that case,

no

doubt, went by the textual meaning of taking cognizance, and held that filing did
not mean taking cognizance. However, the Court has explained, in recent
decisions, as to when cognizance is taken, of an offence, will depend upon the
facts and circumstances of each case and it is impossible to attempt to define what
is meant by “taking cognizance" ( Ref Mohammed Yusuf -vs- Afaque Jahan
2006(1)-SCC -627).

7.

In Bharat Damodar Kale -vs- State of AP 2003 (8) SCC 559, precisely the

same issue, as is sought to be argued here, on the question of limitation, in taking
cognizance, even though the complaint was filed in time, arose. The Court held as
follows:

Crl.M.C.837/2005

4 of 8

"a cumulative reading of various provisions of the
said Chapter clearly indicates that the limitation
prescribed therein is only for the filing of the
complaint or initiation of the prosecution and not for
taking cognizance. It of-course prohibits the Court
from taking cognizance of an offence where the
complaint is filed before the Court after the expiry of
the period mentioned in the said Chapter. This is clear
from S. 469 of the Code found in the said Chapter
which specifically says that the period of limitation in
relation to an offence shall commence either from the
date of the offence or from the date when the offence is
detected. Section 471 indicates while computing the
period of limitation, time taken during which the case
was being diligently prosecuted in another Court or in
appeal or in revision against the offender should be
excluded. The said Section also provides in the
Explanation that in computing the time required for
obtaining the consent or sanction of the Government
or any other authority should be excluded. Similarly,
the period during which the Court was closed will also
have to be excluded. All these provisions indicate that
the Court taking cognizance can take cognizance of an
offence the complaint of which is filed before it within
the period of limitation prescribed and if need be after
excluding such time which is legally excludable. This
in our opinion clearly indicates that the limitation
prescribed is not for taking cognizance within the
period of limitation, but for taking cognizance of an
offence in regard to which a complaint is filed or
prosecution is initiated beyond the period of limitation
prescribed under the Code. Apart from the statutory
indication of this view of ours, we find support for this
view from the fact that taking of cognizance is an act
of the Court over which the prosecuting agency or the
complainant has no control. Therefore, a complaint
filed within the period of limitation under the Code
cannot be made infructuous by an act of Court. The
legal phrase "actus curiae neminem gravabit" which
means an act of the Court shall prejudice no man, or
Crl.M.C.837/2005

5 of 8

by a delay on the part of the Court neither party
should suffer, also supports the view that the
Legislature could not have intended to put a period of
limitation on the act of the Court of taking cognizance
of an offence so as to defeat the case of the
complainant."
A similar view had been indicated, in Pallav Seth -vs- Custodian & Others 2001
(7) SCC 549, where the Supreme Court held that a non-obstante provision of
Section 20 Contempt of Courts Act, (identically phrased as Section 468, Cr. PC)
could not prevent the court from initiating action, as long as the litigant filed the
case within the time stipulated in law. In view of the above decisions, the first
contention of the petitioner has to fail; it is rejected as without merits.

8.

The second question pertains to whether the notice issued by the

complainant cannot be said to conform to Section 138 of the Act. Clause (b) of
proviso to Section 138 requires the payee of the cheque to demand the payment of
the cheque by giving a written notice to the drawer of the cheque "within 15 days
of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the
cheque as unpaid" : clause (c) to the same proviso further provides that in case the
drawer of the cheque fails to make payment of the amount of the cheque to the
payee "within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice" the drawer of the
cheque subject to the fulfilment of other conditions laid down in the main clause as
well as in clause (a) an offence punishable, stands committed by the drawer of the
Crl.M.C.837/2005

6 of 8

cheque. In the present case, a careful reading of the notice issued by the
complainant reveals that the demand made was for Rs. 1,87, 200/- in addition,
2.5% interest per month, with notice fee was claimed. In my opinion, the dominant
intention expressed in the notice was to claim the amount of the cheque. Other
references were merely incidental. Therefore the second argument of the petitioner
is without merit.

9.

As regards the last contention, i.e that the petitioner did not receive the

notice, and thus the complaint was not maintainable, I am of the considered
opinion that it cannot be examined in the present proceedings under Section 482,
being a pure issue of fact, which has to be considered on the rival contentions of
parties.
10.

In the light of the above conclusions, I am of the opinion that this petition is

Crl.M.C.837/2005

7 of 8

lacking in merits; it is accordingly dismissed without any order as to costs.

February 26, 2007

Crl.M.C.837/2005

( S. RAVINDRA BHAT )
JUDGE

8 of 8

