*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl.Rev.344/2007 and CRLM.A. 5716-17/2007
Reserved on May 21, 2007
Decided on May 25, 2007

RASHEED MASOOD

….Petitioner
Through: Mr. H.R. Khan Suhel, Mr. Rashid Harshim, Mr. Saif
Khan, Advocates.
Vs.

CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

….Respondent
Through: Mr. R.M. Tewari, Advocate.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

%
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

The present revision petition is preferred by the Petitioner for setting aside the

order on charge under Section 120-B/420/467/468/471 I.P.C. and Section 13 (1)(d), 13
(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act passed by the Special Judge by an order dated
27.01.2007.
2.

The brief facts necessary to decide this present petition are that the State of

CRL-REV-344/07

1 OF 12

Tripura does not have any medical college of its own. Consequently some MBBS and
BDS seats are allocated every year from Central Pool by the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Government of India in various Medical Colleges of the country. These seats
are made available to the State of Tripura for allotment of eligible students from the state
on the basis of merit. The Government of Tripura constituted the Tripura Board of Joint
Entrance Examination (hereafter referred to as "TBJEE") in the year 1988 for the
selection of candidates through joint entrance examination held every year.

The

candidates were nominated on the basis of merit. The Eligibility criteria for candidates to
appear at the Joint Entrance Examination was that the candidate or his parents should
have resided in Tripura continuously for a period of 10 years or more at the time of
issuance of certificate and the candidate should have passed HSC conducted by Tripura
Board of Secondary Examination or equivalent. In case the candidate is not a permanent
resident of Tripura and his parents are officer(s) on deputation to the Govt. of Tripura or
officer in the Central Govt. working in Tripura and had served in Tripura for a period of
3 years or more and passed HSE from an Institute of Tripura, then too, the candidate is
eligible.
3.

It is alleged that the one Sandeep Pawar, co-accused of the petitioner was a

resident of Gujarat and he was ineligible to appear in JEE conducted by TBJEE, he did
not appear in the Entrance Examination. His name was recommended for admission in
the MBBS course out of the Central Pool Quota reserved for the residents of the State of
CRL-REV-344/07

2 OF 12

Tripura. According to the prosecution, despite his ineligibility and despite his not having
appeared in or cleared the Joint Entrance Examination conducted by TBJEE, his name
was recommended for admission in the MBBS course out the Central Pool Quota
reserved for the residents of the State of Tripura.
4.

It was further alleged that 17 MBBS & 2 BDS seats were allocated for the

candidates of Tripura as per the records available with the Directorate of Health Services,
of the State; as per the file of Department of Health and Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare 22 MBBS and 4 BDS seats were allocated to the State of Tripura. 5 MBBS and
2 BDS seats were allegedly suppressed and concealed from TBJEE and Directorate of
Health services, Govt. of Tripura. It was alleged that in 1990-91 co-accused Gurdial
Singh was the Resident Commissioner, Govt. of Tripura and the petitioner was the then
Minister of State for Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of India.
5.

It is alleged that the co-accused Sandeep Pawar got his name nominated from

Gurdial Singh in the 1st year MBBS course in KG’s Medical College, Lucknow in
academic year 1990-91 from the Central Pool Quota of Tripura. He was admitted to the
course at K.G. Medical College. According to the prosecution (CBI) the petitioner,
allegedly entered into criminal conspiracy with Gurdial Singh and the accused, Sandeep
Pawar. The co-accused Gurdial Singh allegedly issued a nomination letter in favour of
Sandeep Pawar to facilitate his admission in K.G’s Medical College. The court framed
charges against the petitioner, Gurdial Singh and co-accused Sandeep Pawar under
CRL-REV-344/07

3 OF 12

Sections 468/420/471 IPC and Section 13 (1)(D), 13 (2) of Prevention of Corruption Act.
The co-accused was declared a juvenile by Special Judge.
6.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the nomination letter was issued

by the Resident commissioner, co accused Gurdial Singh, who was aware about the
enhancement of seats. The information regarding the enhancement of seats was intimated
to the Govt. of Tripura through its Resident Commissioner, who should have duly
informed about it. The Petitioner further submitted that the co-accused Sandeep Pawar
was already in the list of Central Pool Quota. There was no question of any misconduct,
or cheating, much less inducement to part with property with dishonest motive, since the
petitioner, as minister, merely facilitated the enhancement of the quota for the relevant
year. This was at the behest of the Government of Tripura and the then Chief Minister of
the State, who kept visiting him, complaining of lack of opportunity to the students, due
to non availability of institutions. The petitioner, being minister, helped in the decision to
enhance the Tripura quota; however, after that action, and its due intimation to the State,
he ceased to play any role. There was no material, much less any legally sustainable
document or circumstance, linking his alleged role in filling the seats through ineligible
candidates.
7.

The learned counsel submitted that the enhancement of 5 MBBS and 2BDS seats

were intimated to the Govt. of Tripura. He further submitted there is no direct proof to
show his involvement. Counsel submitted that the involvement of Gurdial Singh and that
CRL-REV-344/07

4 OF 12

of the student did not, and ought not to lead to an inference that the petitioner, a minister,
whose involvement was nowhere documented, was part of a conspiracy, or that he had a
hand in the illegal or wrongful acts. In any case, no wrongful gain was shown to have
accrued to the petitioner.
8.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Bihar

v. Ramesh Singh ((1977) 4 SCC 39 where the Court observed as follows:
"Strong suspicion against the accused, if the matter remains in the region
of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at the conclusion of
the trial. But at the initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which leads
the Court to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
committed an offence then it is not open to the Court to say that there is no
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The presumption of
the guilt of the accused which is to be drawn at the initial stage is not in the
sense of the law governing the trial of criminal cases in France where the
accused is presumed to be guilty unless the contrary is proved. But it is only
for the purpose of deciding prima facie whether the Court should proceed
with the trial or not. If the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to
adduce to prove the guilt of the accused even if fully accepted before it is
challenged in cross-examination or rebutted by the defence evidence, if
any, cannot show that the accused committed the offence, them there will be
no sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial."

These principles were reitereted in Union of India -vs- Prafulla Kumar Samal AIR
1979 SC 366. Reliance was also placed upon the decision in Dilawar Babu Kurane -vsState of Maharastra AIR 2002 SC 564. It was contended that in the absence of any shred
of evidence connecting the petitioner with the alleged illegal activities or wrongdoing, the
CRL-REV-344/07

5 OF 12

tenuous piece of evidence, i.e statement of the then Officer on Special Duty, Bipin
Bahadur Mathur, was insufficient to raise a grave suspicion, which was the appropriate
standard requisite for framing a charge, according to the decision in Kurane's decision.
9.

The Special Judge by his order dated 27.01.2007 charged the Petitioner and the

other accused. The extracts of the order charging the Petitioner and others u/s. 120B/420/467/468/471 IPC and under Section 13 (1)(d), 13 (2) of Prevention of Corruption
Act are as follow;
“The contentions raised by the accused persons can be well appreciated
only after the evidence is led by the parties. On the basis of material placed
before me a strong prima facie case is made out against accused Nos.1 & 3
that they entered into criminal conspiracy with Sandeep Pawar (since held
to be juvenile and sent to Juvenile Justice Board) to cheat Directorate of
Health Services, Government of Tripura and officials of KG’s Medical
College Lucknow and in furtherance of said criminal conspiracy accused
No.1 dishonestly and fraudulently forged and issued the nomination letter
dated 06.08.1990 in favour of Sandeep Pawar though he was not eligible for
admission in MBBS course being not a resident of Tripura and accused
No.1 used the format of Directorate of Health Services while issuing the
nomination letter and he committed criminal misconduct by abusing his
position as a public servant and used that forged nomination letter by
sending the same to KG’s Medical College Lucknow and that accused No.3
being the Minister of Health holding the independent charge of the Ministry
by abusing his official position as public servant concealed / suppressed 5
MBBS and 2 BDS seats of Central Pool for the academic year 1990-91
meant for residents of Tripura and accused No.1 and 3 deprived the
residents of Tripura of their right to get admission in said College and as
such a strong prima facie case is made out against accused No. 1 & 3 u/s
120-B, 420, 467, 468, 471 IPC and u/s 13 (1)(d) read with Section 13 (2) of
CRL-REV-344/07

6 OF 12

Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against accused No.1 substantive
offence U/S 13(1)(d) read with Section 13 (2) of Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 against accused No.3. Let the charges be framed against them
accordingly.”

10.

The evidence discussed by the trial court, in the impugned order, indicates that the

State of Tripura did not have adequate access to medical education for its students. This
constrained eligible students from realizing their potential. A method was evolved by the
Central Government to offset this disadvantage, to a certain extent, by creating new seats,
and nominating eligible candidates from the State. The procedure for filling those seats
was through a Joint Entrance Examination. Students who qualified, were nominated to
the Central seats, in various colleges throughout the country, according to their merit,
based on a merit list drawn for the purpose. The creation of seats in various Central or
centrally aided/ funded institution was undertaken by the Central Ministry; intimation was
sent to the appropriate department of the State as and when new or additional seats were
created, or made available in the quota. The State, at its end used to send the names to the
Central Government, for nomination to the concerned college or colleges. This was on
the basis of merit, determined from the result of the joint entrance test, in which eligible
students of Tripura could compete.
11.

At the relevant time, the petitioner was the Minster of state in the Centre; the co-

accused Gurdial Singh was the Resident Commissioner of Tripura, at Delhi. Both knew
CRL-REV-344/07

7 OF 12

the mechanism. The prosecution alleged that Gurdial Singh used this knowledge to
manipulate a situation whereby for the relevant year, i.e 1990-91 though seven medical
and dental seats were sanctioned or created at the Central level, appropriate intimation
was not sent to the Government of Tripura. This resulted in a circumstance where the
seats could be filled, by nomination in the Central institutions, within the Tripura quota,
from among rank outsiders, who were plainly ineligible, and who had not competed in
accordance with the established procedure, or qualified. The petitioner is seeking to
distance himself from the whole affair alleging to be in the dark, and not involved at any
stage, save the role played in the creation or sanction of the additional seats.
12.

The evidence used to support framing of charge against the petitioner was that

Gurdial Singh used to visit him in connection with creation of the seats; the role played
by the petitioner in the creation of the seats; the statement of Shri Bipin Bihari Mathur,
OSD, who stated that Sandeep Pawar used to frequently visit the office of the Petitioner
to enquire about the release of the Tripura quota, and the fact that the creation of
additional seats was not intimated to the Tripura Government. The trial court dealt with
the peculiar nature of the offence of criminal conspiracy and after analysing the attendant
circumstances, proceeded to frame charges for the offences against the petitioner and
other co-accused. Shri Bipin Bahadur Mathur, whose statement was seen by the court,
described the petitioner's role in the entire episode, in the following manner:
"the Minister has initiated note to the Ministry for increase in MBBS Seats
CRL-REV-344/07

8 OF 12

to the government of Tripura. A couple of day after Gurdial Singh came to
me in the Ministry and said that the increase in the Post-graduate Seats for
the Govt. of Tripura was necessary. I told him that he should approach the
Minister, as he alone can do it depending upon the number of seats
available. After sometime, one day a gentleman came to me saying that he
has already met the Minister and the Minister has sent me to him to find out
similar information regarding the nomination case of one Sandeep pending
with Tripura Government for sometime. He wanted to know the correct
status of this case. I got in touch with the Minister Rasheed Masood over
intercom and the Minister directed me to find out from the Resident
Commissioner of Tripura Government and the present position of this
person. I accordingly telephoned the Commissioner to find out the latest
position. He replied that he would find out and let me know. After some
days, he telephoned to inform that Sandeep's name is included in the case
approved for nomination in MBBS and the letter was under issue. I passed
on this information to that person and to the Minister. Later on, the same
day Shri Gurdial Singh telephonically informed that the letters meant for
Sandeep and one Sachidanand Diwedi were being sent by post and since
inquiry has come from the Minister about Sachidanand to avoid delay in
postal delivery if the letters are delivered personally to the candidates,
whom the Minister might be knowing. Gurdial Singh requested me to
collect these two Envelopes from him, place them before the Minister and
seek his direction as to their prompt delivery as to the candidates. I acted
accordingly and placed the two letters before the Minister and the Minister
instructed me to keep the two Envelopes in the Office and if concerned
person did not come the next day I should return the Envelop to Gurdial
Singh for sending them by post. The same day, the candidates or their
representative called to the Minister and the Envelops were handed over to
them by me. After taking their receipt on plain paper, the Receipts were
later on passed on to Gurdial Singh.
I did not handle any other cases or the information of the candidates
to the MBBS, BDS seat by the Government of Tripura. I also did not meet
Shri Gurdial Singh thereafter. Once, I receive phone call from Shri
Rajinder Diwedy, S/o Sachidanand from Lucknow that his son's admission
in MBBS as nominee of Government of Tripura has been questioned and he
inquired from me as to what he should do in the matter. I told him that the
nomination was done by the Government of Tripura therefore he should
contact them or the Minister Rasheed Masood. Statement dated 3.10.96."

CRL-REV-344/07

9 OF 12

13.

In Yash Pal Mittal v. State of Punjab (1977) 4 SCC 540 the Supreme Court

discussed the nature of criminal conspiracy, and stated that it is an understanding, an
agreement, concert, or league that is the ingredient of the offence. It was held that:
"... It is not necessary that all the conspirators must know each and every
detail of the conspiracy as long as they are co-participators in the main
object of the conspiracy. There may be so many devices and techniques
adopted to achieve the common goal of the conspiracy and there may be
division of performances in the chain of actions with one object to achieve
the real end of which every collaborator must be aware and in which each
one of them must be interested. There must be unity of object or purpose but
there may be plurality of means sometimes even unknowns to one another,
amongst the conspirators. In achieving the goal several offences may be
committed by some of the conspirators even unknown to the others. The only
relevant factor is that all means adopted and illegal acts done must be and
purported to be in furtherance of the object of the conspiracy even though
there may be sometimes misfire or over-shooting by some of the
conspirators."

14.

In Mohammad Usman Mohammad Hussain Maniyar v. State of Maharashtra

(1981) 2 SCC 443 it was held that for the offence under Section 120-B IPC, the
prosecution is not compelled to prove that the conspirators expressly agreed to do or
cause the illegal action; the agreement can be proved by necessary implication. In Noor
Mahammad Mohd. Yusuf Momin v. State of Maharashtra (1970) 1 SCC 696 it was held
that Section 120-B IPC makes the criminal conspiracy as a substantive offence which
postulates an agreement between two or more persons to do, or cause to be done, an act
(which includes omission) by illegal means. If the offence itself is to commit an offence,

CRL-REV-344/07

10 OF 12

no further steps need be proved, to carry the agreement into effect. In Shivanarayan
Laxminarayan Joshi v. State of Maharashtra (1980) 2 SCC 465 the Supreme Court
underlined that a conspiracy is hatched in secrecy and it is impossible to adduce direct
evidence in proof. The offence can be only proved largely through inferences, drawn
from acts or illegal omission committed by conspirators in pursuance of a common
design. All these principles were restated and applied in Ajay Agarwal -vs- Union of
India AIR 1993 SC 1637.
15.

The Petitioner's role, which persuaded the trial court to frame the charges, were his

note which culminated in the increase of seats; the visits of Gurdial Singh, to him, before
and after increase in the Tripura quota; and the statement of Shri Bipin Bahadur Mathur
about these incidents, and the visits of someone enquiring about the nomination of Shri
Sandeep Pawar, the co-accused who was ineligible. The witness deposed that at two
separate stages, i.e before nomination to the Tripura quota seat, as well as after that event,
the Minster was distinctly appraised of these; he was in the know about the events.
16.

The above analysis would show that at the relevant time, Tripura was in need of

access to medical education; a novel method of nomination in Central or Centrally aided
institutions was devised; eligible students from the state, determined through a
competitive test held by that government were nominated. This assured some access in a
Centrally available resource, specifically to such students, disadvantaged on account of
their birth or domicile in an educationally backward state. The stratagem employed by coCRL-REV-344/07

11 OF 12

accused, and the petitioner, as per the allegations was that the demand for creation of
seats was acceded to; yet the increase was suppressed from the State authorities.
Resultantly, seven more seats or resources were available, but the State could not
nominate eligible students, as it was kept in the dark. This facilitated filling up of those
seats by persons who could not be considered eligible. As to how such persons became
aware of the new seats, and what method could have been adopted in the normal course if
the seats went unfilled from students of Tripura, are matters of detail; for the purpose of
this discussion it is sufficient to note that only few persons in the know of the seats were
Gurdial Singh, the petitioner and the beneficiaries. In this contextual background, the role
of the petitioner might ultimately be limited. However, at this stage, his involvement in
the criminal conspiracy to commit the acts which are offences he is charged with, cannot
be ruled out.
17.

For the above reasons, I find no infirmity or illegality in the impugned order on

charge. The petition has to necessarily fail; it is accordingly dismissed.

DATED: 25th May, 2007

S. RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE

CRL-REV-344/07

12 OF 12

