*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

1. OMP. 15/2008
CHOLA TURBO MACHINERY INTERNATIONAL PVT LTD .... Petitioner
Through Mr. Chetan Sharma, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Manish Vashisht, Mr. Sameer
Vashisht, Advocates
versus
DEVELOPMENT CREDIT BANK THORUGH
ITS GENREAL MANAGER & ANOTHER ..... Respondent
Through Mr. Valmiki Mehta, Sr. Advocate with Mr.
Deepak Tukral, Mr. Amit Singh, Advocates for R-2
Mr. Puneet Taneja, Advocate for R-1
2. OMP. 19/2008
CHOLA TURBO MACHINERY INTERNAIONAL PVT LTD .... Petitioner
Through Mr. Chetan Sharma, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Manish Vashisht, Mr. Sameer
Vashisht, Advocates
versus
THE SOUTH INDIAN BANK LTD & ANOTHER..... Respondent
Through Mr. Valmiki Mehta, Sr. Advocate with Mr.
Deepak Tukral, Mr. Amit Singh, Advocates for R-2
Mr. Puneet Taneja, Advocate for R-1
COARM
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
ORDER
%

24.1.2008

1. These are two proceedings under section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

1 of 16

(hereafter referred to as “the Act”). The petitioner seeks orders from this court, to restrain the
respondents from encashing and realizing the proceeds of two bank guarantees issued at its
request, by the respondent banks. With consent of counsel for the parties, the two petitions were
heard today. Reasons are indicated by this order, today, as the Court concluded hearing at 4.15
P.M., and announced its decision, in open Court.
2. Briefly, the facts are that the petitioner and the second respondent (referred to hereafter as “the
supplier” and “the purchaser” respectively) entered into an agreement on. 21st October 2007 for
the design, supply, erection and commissioning of two 11 MW power plants at Afghanistan.
Among others, the agreement contained the following condition, in Schedule 12, requiring the
petitioner to furnish bank guarantees to the seller, in the following terms:
“ 1. Payment Terms:
A. For supplies
a) Performance Bond/ Bank guarantee of 5% of the total contract
supply of value shall be issued by the SELLER valid up to the end
of the daily period.
b) 10% of the contract supply price as interest-free advance
together with the order, against bank guarantee of equal in
amount. Value of the bank guarantee shall be adjusted to the
extent of advance adjusted in the SELLERS bills on monthly basis.
c) 10% of the contract supply price after submission of proof of
placement of the orders on major equipment suppliers through LC.
xxxxxxxxxxxx
g) 8% of the supply contract price shall be kept as guarantee value
and shall be made 12 months after the successful commissioning
of the powerplant. Sellers shall be able to draw this amount
against the bank guarantee together with (e) above...”

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

2 of 16

Schedule 11dealt with supply price; it mentioned US$ 18,300,000 (US dollars eighteen million,
three hundred thousand) as the agreed supply price. Clause 11.2 stated that the price was based
on US dollar – Indian rupee equivalent of 40 Rupees per dollar. The final price payable to the
seller was to be adjusted according to the exchange rates prevailing on the date of Exim Bank
loan sanction and an establishment of letter of credit. After that event, the contract price was to
remain fixed. Effective date of contract, according to clause 2.0, Schedule 2, was defined as
follows:
“ The effective date of the Contract shall be
2.1 Signing of this contract with 10% advance against bank guarantee of
equal amount.
2.2 Subject to the approval of Exim Bank of India, Buyer shall open a letter of
credit (L/C). If the approval of the line of credit by Exim Bank of India to
buyer is delayed beyond six weeks then the effective date of the contract
shall be amended accordingly.
2.3 Soil Investigation report and Topography Survey report with drawings
within four weeks of signing of contract.
If the buyer delay is the above, the effective date automatically gets
extended by equal time.”

The Delivery Schedule was outlined in Schedule 13; condition 13.1 stipulated that the petitioner
would dispatch all the civil drawings, Bill of Quantities instructions and specifications within
four months.

Schedule 18 dealt with Liquidated Damages, in terms of clause 18.1 such

liquidated damages are payable for delayed delivery; clause 18.2 deals with liquidated damages
for shortfall in performance. The last part of clause 18.2 reads thus:
OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

3 of 16

“ the total amount of all liquidated damages for delayed supply and
shortfall in performance shall not exceed 8% of the FOB supply price.”

There is no dispute that the purchaser released the advance payment equivalent to Rs. 8 crores,
to the petitioner.

3.

In OP No. 15/2008, the Development Credit Bank (first respondent, referred to as “the

bank”) issued a guarantee, dated 29-11-2007, containing, inter alia, the following terms:
“ WHEREAS the Purchaser has entered into a contract dated 21-10-2007
with M/s Chola Turbo Machinery International Pvt Ltd, a company
Registered under the Companies Act, 1956 and having its registered office
at 401, Trade Center 45/7, Dickinson Road, Bangalore, India, (hereinafter
referred as the “SELLER” or “SUPPLIER”) for Design,
Engineering,Manufacturing, Testing, Supply, Supervision of civil works,
Erection and Commissioning of 2 X 11 MW Coal Based Power Plant on
Turnkey basis excluding Erection and Civil Job Execution (hereinafter
referred to as the Contract)
AND WHEREAS in terms of the contract, the seller has agreed to furnish
and a bank guarantee for US $ 1,424,000 (One Million, Four Hundred
and twenty four thousand only) to secure suppliers obligations in regard
to arranging completion of schedule and against any loss or damage
caused to or suffered by the purchaser by reasons of quantifiable breach
of the terms and conditions of the said order on the part of the supplier
and to cover an equal portion of (US $ 1,424,000 ) of advance payment
already received by the seller.
AND WHEREAS at the request of the Seller the bank has agreed to give
this Bank Guarantee in the manner hereinafter appearing.
1. NOW, THEREFORE, IN CONSIDERATION OF THE PREMISES, the
OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

4 of 16

Guarantor does hereby guarantee to the Purchaser the payment of an
amount not exceeding S $ 1,424,000 (One Million, Four Hundred and
twenty four thousand only ) against the written demand of the purchaser
stating that the sum mentioned therein is due to the Purchaser on account
of the seller's failure to fulfill the seller's obligations relating with the said
contract, such statement in the demand being binding on the guarantor
with regard to the amount due. The Guarantor also increased that such
the mind may be made or routed through the Bankers of the purchaser.
2. The Guarantor undertake to make payment against the said demand
without any demur, discussions, or objections and irrespective of any
dispute between the supplier and the
Purchaser which is not
subject to arbitration. The Guarantor does hereby declare that the
obligation of the Guarantor hereunder are intended to be and shall be
treated and construed
as per terms of “the Contract” and the
Guarantor shall not be entitled to withhold or delay payment of the net
amount due to the Purchaser in the manner aforesaid as per the
enumerated in the manner aforesaid as per the enumerated in the
said contract and its schedules 1 to 28 all inclusive. This guarantee shall
not be impaired or discharged or released by
any amendment or
change or modification to the terms of the said purchase order or by any
alteration or amendment in the obligations undertaken by the supplier
thereunder or any allied documents or by any change in the constitution of
the Bank or the supplier or by any arrangement made between the
Supplier or the Purchaser without the assent of the Bank or
by any
forebearance as to time, performance or otherwise shown or extended by
the purchaser to the supplier...”

In OP No. 19/2008, the South Indian Bank (first respondent, referred to as “the bank”) issued a
bank guarantee, dated 24-12-2007 containing, inter alia, the following terms:
“ WHEREAS the Purchaser has entered into a contract dated 21-10-2007
with M/s Chola Turbo Machinery International Pvt Ltd, a company
Registered under the Companies Act, 1956 and having its registered office
at 401, Trade Center 45/7, Dickinson Road, Bangalore, India, (hereinafter
OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

5 of 16

referred as the “SELLER” or “SUPPLIER”) for Design,
Engineering,Manufacturing, Testing, Supply, Supervision of civil works,
Erection and Commissioning of 2 X 11 MW Coal Based Power Plant on
Turnkey basis excluding Erection and Civil Job Execution (hereinafter
referred to as the Contract)
AND WHEREAS in terms of the contract, the seller has agreed to
furnish and a bank guarantee for US $ 356,000 (Three Hundred and fifty
six thousand only) to secure suppliers obligation in regard to arranging
completion of schedule and against any loss or damage caused to or
suffered by the purchaser by reasons of quantifiable breach of the terms
and conditions of the said order on the part of the supplier and to cover an
equal portion of (US $ 356,000) of advance payment already received by
the seller.
AND WHEREAS at the request of the Seller the bank has agreed to give
this Bank Guarantee in the manner hereinafter appearing.
1. NOW, THEREFORE, IN CONSIDERATION OF THE PREMISES, the
Guarantor does hereby guarantee to the Purchaser the payment of an
amount not exceeding US $ 356,000 (Three Hundred and fifty six
thousand only) again the written demand of the purchaser stating that the
sum mentioned therein is due to the Purchaser on account of the seller's
failure to fulfill the seller's obligations relating with the said contract,
such statement in the demand being binding on the guarantor with regard
to the amount due. The Guarantor also increased that such the mind may
be made or routed through the Bankers of the purchaser.
2.
The Guarantor undertake to make payment against the said
demand without any demur, discussions, or objections and irrespective of
any dispute between the supplier and the Purchaser which is not
subject to arbitration. The Guarantor does hereby declare that the
obligation of the Guarantor hereunder are intended to be and shall be
treated and construed
as per terms of “the Contract” and the
Guarantor shall not be entitled to withhold or delay payment of the net
amount due to the Purchaser in the manner aforesaid as per the
enumerated in the manner aforesaid as per the enumerated in the
OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

6 of 16

said contract and its schedules 1 to 28 all inclusive. This guarantee shall
not be impaired or discharged or released by
any amendment or
change or modification to the terms of the said purchase order or by any
alteration or amendment in the obligations undertaken by the supplier
thereunder or any allied documents or by any change in the constitution of
the Bank or the supplier or by any arrangement made between the
Supplier or the Purchaser without the assent of the Bank or
by any
forbearance as to time, performance or otherwise shown or extended by
the purchaser to the supplier...”

4.

On 6-1-2007, the Purchaser issued identically phrased demands to the two banks,

claiming the amounts guaranteed, requesting that the amounts i.e US $ 1,424,000 and US $
356,000/- should be paid to it by the concerned bank. These demands contained the following
statement:
“ In view of the breach of the contract dated 21-10-2007 between us and
Chola Turbo Machinery International Pvt. Ltd, a constituent of yours, on
whose behalf the above Bank Guarantee has been issued in our favour, we
hereby invoke the subject Bank Guarantee. This letter may please be
treated as the notice of invocation.”
5.

The petitioner claimed that the invocation of the bank guarantees was unsupportable in

law as it amounted to a fraud; it claimed irretrievable injustice and filed OMP No. 15/2008,
under Section of the Act, since the contract contained an arbitration clause. By an interim order

dated 9

th

January 2008, this court restrained the supplier from encashing the guarantee for US $

1,424,000 and listed the case, after notice on 1

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

st

February. The petitioner filed the second

7 of 16

proceeding under Section 9 i.e OMP 19/2008, challenging the invocation of the guarantee
issued by the South Indian Bank, for US $ 356,000/-. Ex-parte injunction was refused; the
petition was heard for some time on 14-1-2008. It was also recorded that the petitioner was
willing to furnish a bank guarantee for the sum equivalent to 10% of the contract in accordance
with schedule 12 to the contract, towards interest free advance, containing advertence
(reference) to that condition; and that the existing guarantees would be substituted. Counsel for
the respondent purchaser had then indicated according to instructions that such course of action
was acceptable and that the matters could be resolved. Both petitions were listed, with consent
of counsel for the parties, for further proceedings and possible hearing today. In the course of
hearing, today, both parties leveled accusations against each other; the respondent's counsel,
upon instructions from the Chief Executive Officer of the said party, submitted that a resolution
of the dispute was not possible. Therefore, with the consent of counsel for the parties, the
petitions were heard together.
6. Mr. Chetan Sharma, learned senior counsel relied on the pleadings and submitted that exfacie, the Bank guarantees were conditional; clauses 1 and 2 clearly referred to conditions of the
contract between the parties, i.e the Supplier and Purchaser. Therefore, the bank was under an
obligation to be satisfied that invocation of the guarantee was in accordance with its terms; that
the invocation had to spell out, in some basic detail about the failure or breach of the contract.
The invocation of the guarantees, in general terms, without mentioning what breaches were
OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

8 of 16

committed by the supplier, did not comply with the terms of the guarantee. The bank was
therefore not obliged to comply with the demand. Counsel submitted that to permit the
purchaser to encash the guarantees, in these circumstances, would result in irretrievable
injustice. Therefore, the order restraining the purchaser from receiving proceeds and restraining
the bank from paying the amounts, had to be issued.
7.

Learned counsel next adverted to the pleadings to say that the delivery dates mentioned

in the contract had not even passed. Therefore, the purchaser could not justifiably allege breach.
It was contended that in fact the petitioner-supplier had furnished technical drawings to the
purchaser. He also relied upon copies of some correspondence exchanged between the
purchaser and the seller.

It was further contended that though the purchaser had paid the

advance amount equivalent to 10%, the same was duly secured by the two bank guarantees in
question. It was submitted that on the other hand, the purchaser had not obtained the essential
requirement of having to secure the EXIM Bank's approval for the line of credit to be made
available to the supplier. Therefore, according to clause 2.2, Schedule 2, the effective date of
the contract had not even taken place or occurred. Counsel urged that seen from the backdrop of
these facts, the purchaser's demand for encashing the bank guarantees was not only unjustified,
but utterly unlawful; it amounted to an egregious fraud, enabling this court to issue the
injunction claimed, for the duration of pendency of arbitration proceedings.
8.

Learned counsel urged that the respondent- purchaser was driven by ill-motives to

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

9 of 16

encash the guarantees, since the supplier had already dispatched the technical and engineering
drawings. The invocation of the bank guarantees was a ruse to circumvent the obligation to pay
fees or charges, for cancellation of the contract, agreed to by the parties, according to Schedule
26 to the contract. In terms of the relevant clause, the petitioner would be entitled to 50% of the
value of the contract if cancelled by the purchaser, in the present case. Learned counsel placed
reliance on Hindustan Construction Co -vs- State of Bihar, 1999 (8) SCC 436 and submitted
that in guarantees like the present one, the court has to construe the intention of the parties not
only to discern whether they wanted incorporation of the terms of the main contract, in the bank
guarantee, but also whether in such case, the guarantee itself is invoked in terms of the contract.
It would not be enough if the beneficiary blandly asserts about breach; there should be some
mention about the nature of the breach and the attendant facts. In their absence, the invocation
is suspect.
9.

Mr. Valmiki Mehta, learned senior counsel for the respondent- purchaser opposed the

petitions. According to counsel, a plain reading of the payment clause (Schedule 12) would
reveal that three different kinds of guarantees were to be furnished. Firstly, a guarantee for the
sum equal to 10% of the contract value, to secure the advance payment made by the purchaser
had to be furnished. Secondly, a 5% performance bond/ bank guarantee to secure due
performance of the contract had to be furnished. Lastly, 8% of the supply contract price had to
be kept as guarantee value and payment of the said amount can be made 12 months after the
OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

10 of 16

successful commissioning of the power plant. Counsel submitted that the true intention of the
supplier not to fulfil its obligations was apparent, since the bank guarantees issued by it were
not in accordance with the contract. The guarantees made a composite, rolled up statement
about their issuance,
“to secure suppliers obligation in regard to arranging completion of
schedule and against any loss or damage caused to or suffered by the
purchaser by reasons of quantifiable breach of the terms and conditions
of the said order on the part of the supplier and to cover an equal portion
of ....of advance payment already received by the seller.”
The guarantees were neither for securing 10% advance, nor amounted to the 5% performance
guarantee; it could not also be construed as securing amounts payable for quantifiable breach,
for which a maximum of 8% of the value of the contract was payable. It was urged that the
supplier had to furnish guarantee for at least 15% of the contract value; instead it issued
documents, which were unclear, and also fell short of the agreed stipulations. On the other
hand, the supplier had enjoyed the benefit of vast sums of money paid as advance. In these
circumstances, the purchaser acted within the bounds of commercial prudence in invoking the
bank guarantees, on a fair construction of the contract.

10. Learned counsel relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court reported as Mahatma Gandhi
Sahakra Sakkare Karkhane vs. National Heavy Engineering Coop. Ltd., (2007) 6 SCC 470 and
Himadri Chemicals Industries Ltd. vs. Coal Tar Refining Co., (2007) 8 SCC 110 and submitted
OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

11 of 16

that wherever the Court is called upon to injunct the encahsment of an unconditional bank
guarantee, the fundamental principle to be kept in mind is not the bank cannot rely of the term
underlying contract between the parties. The bank furnishing such a guarantee is bound to
honour it irrespective of any disputes raised by its customer, since it is an independent contract,
absolute in nature. Counsel also contended that mere mention of fraud is not sufficient, for a
case to fall within the exception, empowering the Court to injunct operation of a bank
guarantee. The evidence must be clear, both as to the fact of fraud and to the bank's knowledge.
It was urged that there is nothing on record even remotely suggesting that a fraud had been
played upon the petitioner by the respondent which would entitle this Court issue interim
injuction.
11. The above discussion would show that parties to these proceedings entered into a contract for
supply of design, engineering specifications and commissioning of 11 MW power plants in
Afganistan. It is not in dispute that contemporaneously or immediately after the agreement, the
purchaser paid an advance amount aggregating 10% of the value of the contract i.e. about US $
1.8 million. The supplier/petitioner furnished two bank guarantees which are in question. It
alleges that in addition, it supplied drawings and some specifications to the purchaser.
According to the contentions made on its behalf, when even the initial part of the time schedule
has not lapsed and without even obtaining EXIM Bank's approval, (which would in term
render the contract effective), the respondent/purchaser has without cause and fraudulently
OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

12 of 16

invoked the guarantee. It is contended on its behalf that the guarantees issued were conditional
as they are premised upon mutual obligations under the contract; it is also alleged that the
ground for invoking the guarantees i.e. failure to issue guarantees in accordance with the
contract, is a ground not available. Apart from fraud, irretrievable injustice has also been urged.
12.

Now, a reading of the bank guarantees which is subject matter of the present cases, no
doubt shows that there is some mention of the contract between the parties. Yet, if one sees the
recital and the unequivocal declaration of the bank in Clause 1 (extracted above), there can be
no doubt that the obligation to pay his absolute and unconditional, if a demand is made by the
beneficiary, i.e. the purchaser. This Court is of the opinion that the mere advertence to the
underlying contract between the parties without any other internal evidence—as in the present
case does not automatically lead to the inference that all contractual terms would have to be
necessarily scrutinized by the bank or that the guarantee are conditional. Clause 2 of the
guarantees is to a certain extent inelegant as it refer to the guarantors dis-entitlement to
withhold or pay the net amount due to the purchaser. But, if one understands the nature of the
bank guarantee, what is secured is the amount mentioned in each of them and not the entirety of
the contract amount. This Court accordingly rules against the petitioner on the issue of the
nature of the bank guarantees i.e. that being conditional; it is held that the instruments are
unconditional.

13.

So far as the other grounds raised, on behalf of the petitioner with regard to the alleged

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

13 of 16

fraud (since some drawings had been supplied) and that the defect in the guarantees and
furnishing of guarantees being not a condition enabling invocation of the two instruments are
concerned, it must be remembered, what must be kept in mind is that the bank guarantees are
autonomous commercial documents. The Court's power interdict and prevent the beneficiary
from receiving its proceeds has to be exercised in exceptional and rare circumstances where a
clear case of fraud has been made out. Such is the purport of the law declared consistently by
the Supreme Court for these last 25 years, from United Commercial Bank vs. Bank of India,
(1981) 2 SCC 766 down to the decision Himadri Chemicals Industries Ltd. (supra) referred to
above. The rationale invoking the bank guarantees given on behalf of the respondents was that
according to the contract, a clear bank guarantee for securing 10% of the advance amounts had
to be furnished; likewise a clear bank guarantee, by way of performance bond (for 5% contract
value), in terms of Clause 11 too had to be furnished. The bank guarantees furnished by the
petitioner were rolled up as they mentioned the intention to secure advances paid, towards
performance and also towards commissioning (which was the subject matter of the right to
retain 8% of the contract value).
14.

They covered only 10% of the contract.

In a normal commercial dispute, if this court were go into the merits of all the
contentions, it could perhaps be open for the petitioner to contend that the termination of
contract on such ground without further ado is not justified. However, that is not the case here;
those are matters for trial. What this court has to determine is whether the invocation on that

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

14 of 16

ground amounts a fraud or would be a factor resulting in irretrievable injustice, empowering
the Court to issue injunction.
15.

The authorities have consistently ruled that the beneficiary is entitled to realise a bank
guarantee in its terms of irrespective of any pending disputes upon the construction or
performance of the contract. The bank cannot rely upon the terms of the contract to embark
upon an enquiry about the justification of the invocation.

Courts should be slow and

circumspect in issuing injunction restraining operation of bank guarantees. Fraud which is
carved out as an exception, has been emphasised as one which should be “egregious” in nature,
committed in notice of the bank, which would sully the foundation of the guarantee or that the
invocation would result in injustice which would make it impossible for the guarantor to be
compensated later or result in irretrievable harm. The decision to invoke the two guarantees
was based upon a commercial determination that not furnishing proper guarantees amounted to
a breach of the contract. That decision cannot by any stretch of the imagination be called a
fraud.
16.

One last limb of the arguments made on behalf of the petitioner was that the impugned
invocations are motivated since they would result in circumventing the obligation of the
purchaser under Schedule 26 to pay cancellation charges. This contention in the opinion of this
Court is unmerited since the recovery of such charges can always be a subject matter of
arbitration proceedings; in any event no special equities or materials in support of such a plea

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

15 of 16

have been shown in this regard.
17.

For the above reasons, this petition has to fail. The interim order made in OMP 15/2008
on 9.1.2008 is hereby vacated.

The petitions i.e. OMP 15/2008 and OMP 19/2008 are

accordingly dismissed without any order on costs.
Order Dasti.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
JANUARY 24, 2008

OMP. 15/2008, OMP. 19/2008

16 of 16

