*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 458/2006
Reserved on : April 27, 2007
Date of decision : May 22, 2007
ASHOTUSH SHARMA
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. N.K. Sharma, Advocate
versus
C.B.I.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. R.M. Tewari

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

The question which arises for consideration in this revision petition is

whether the learned Special Judge took cognizance of the case on 13.7.2005. The
impugned order held in the negative and turned down an application by the
petitioner accused.
2.

According to the allegations levelled, the petitioner, a Drug Inspector, had

visited the wholesale Chemist shop of the complainant and noticed some
deficiencies which led to preparation of a memo, listing those deficiencies. It was
CRL.REV.P-458-06

1 OF 8

alleged that the petitioner demanded Rs. 5,000/- as a bribe. On the basis of the
complaint made subsequently, it was alleged that the complainant contacted the
petitioner again and a conversation between the two was recorded. It was further
alleged that at the behest of the petitioner, money was handed over to one Sh.
Sanjeev Garg, which was later recovered.

The petitioner was arrested and

thereafter admitted to regular bail on 13.5.2005 when the court required him not to
leave Delhi. This condition was modified on 13.7.2005 when the Court permitted
the petitioner to leave Delhi after intimating the Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI). On that date, i.e 13.7.2005, the petitioner was present in the Court. The
court made the following order:
“13.7.2005
Pr. Inspector Richpal Singh present
Defence counsel Sh. A.K. Bansal present
Accused is also present.
Charge-sheet filed. Case be checked and registered. It is stated that
sanction in this case has not yet been accorded. I.O. States that it
will take two months. Case is therefore, fixed for supply of copy to
19.10.2005. Copy of this order be furnished to the accused, free of
cost.
Sd. ASJ/13/07/2005”
3.

On 10.8.2005, the petitioner moved an application contending that

cognizance had been taken by the said order dated 13.7.2005 without filing of a
sanction and, therefore, he was entitled to be discharged. The application was

CRL.REV.P-458-06

2 OF 8

resisted by the CBI which submitted that no cognizance had been taken since the
petitioner accused had appeared before the court of his own accord, and also due to
the fact that the Inquiry Officer had mentioned that two further months were
required to obtain sanction.

The Court after hearing parties rejected the

application.
4.

Mr. N.K. Sharma, learned counsel contended that a fair reading of the order

dated 13.7.2005 shows that the Court had indeed taken cognizance as was evident
from its requiring the case to be checked and registered and posting the matter
further on 19.10.2005 for supply of copies. Since all this happened in the presence
of the petitioner, at that stage, the Court must be deemed to have taken cognizance
without existence of valid sanction and, therefore, the entire proceedings were
vitiated.
5.

Reliance was placed upon the judgments reported as Ajit Kumar Palit vs.

State of West Bengal and Anr., 1963 (1) Cri.L.J. 797; Devarapalli Laxminarayan
Reddy & Ors. vs. V. Narayana Reddy & Ors., 1976 Crl.L.J. 1361; Satya Narayan
Musadi and Ors. vs. State of Bihar, 1980 Crl. L. J. 277; Manoranjan Prasad
Choudhary vs. State of Bihar, 2004 SCC(Cri) 1213; R.S. Nayak vs. A.R. Antulay,
AIR 1984 SC 613 for the submission that the order in question amounted to
cognizance. It was submitted that having regard to the scheme of the Criminal
Procedure Code, which required steps to be taken at different stages, the direction

CRL.REV.P-458-06

3 OF 8

to supply copies on the next date of hearing revealed that the Court was of the
opinion that cognizance had to be taken and did so on that date. Admittedly, no
sanction existed then and therefore, further proceedings could not have been
continued; the petitioner had to be necessarily discharged.
6.

Mr. Tewari, learned counsel for the CBI opposed the petition and submitted

that the copy referred to in the order dated 13.7.2005 was the copy under Section
173(2) of the report. It was submitted that the order nowhere disclosed application
of mind to the facts or issuing notice to the accused, who merely happened to be
present in connection with an application moved by him for modification of bail
condition. The court did not apply its mind and in fact its reference to lack of
sanction and the statement of the Investigating Officer that two months time would
be required to obtain sanction gave a clue as to the nature of the order.
7.

The narrative shows no dispute about the facts of the case. The charge sheet

was filed on 13-7-2005. The accused was present in court, in connection with
variation of a condition for bail. The court recorded the statement of the IO that
sanction was awaited, and could be expected after two months; the matter was
adjourned for supply of copies, to a later date. The question is, whether the court
took cognizance. Indisputably, sanction was obtained later. It is contended that if
the order is construed as one taking cognizance, the trial is vitiated.
8.

"Cognizance" has not been defined in the Prevention of Corruption Act,

CRL.REV.P-458-06

4 OF 8

1988 or the Code of Criminal Procedure. There is considerable body of case law,
now as to its import. In State of Karnataka v. Pastor P. Raju,(2006) 6 SCC 728,
the Supreme Court held as follows:
"the word “cognizance” has not been defined in the Code of
Criminal Procedure. The dictionary meaning of the word
“cognizance” is — “judicial hearing of a matter”. The meaning of
the word has been explained by judicial pronouncements and it has
acquired a definite connotation. The earliest decision of this Court
on the point is R.R. Chari v. State of U.P AIR 1951 SC 207 wherein
it was held:
“… ‘taking cognizance does not involve any formal action or indeed
action of any kind but occurs as soon as a Magistrate as such
applies his mind to the suspected commission of an offence’.”
11. In Darshan Singh Ram Kishan v. State of Maharashtra AIR
1971 SC 2372 while considering Section 190 of the Code of 1898, it
was observed that:
“[T]aking cognizance does not involve any formal action or indeed
action of any kind but occurs as soon as a Magistrate applies his
mind to the suspected commission of an offence. Cognizance,
therefore, takes place at a point when a Magistrate first takes
judicial notice of an offence. This is the position whether the
Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence on a complaint, or on a
police report, or upon information of a person other than a police
officer.”
12. In Narayandas Bhagwandas Madhavdas v. State of W.B AIR
1959 SC 1118 it was held that before it can be said that any
Magistrate has taken cognizance of any offence under Section
190(1)(a) of the Criminal Procedure Code, he must not only have
applied his mind to the contents of the petition but must have done
so for the purpose of proceeding in a particular way as indicated in
the subsequent provisions of the Chapter—proceeding under Section
200 and thereafter sending it for inquiry and report under Section
202. It was observed that there is no special charm or any magical
formula in the expression “taking cognizance” which merely means
judicial application of the mind of the Magistrate to the facts
mentioned in the complaint with a view to taking further action. It
CRL.REV.P-458-06

5 OF 8

was also observed that what Section 190 contemplates is that the
Magistrate takes cognizance once he makes himself fully conscious
and aware of the allegations made in the complaint and decides to
examine or test the validity of the said allegations. The Court then
referred to the three situations enumerated in sub-section (1) of
Section 190 upon which a Magistrate could take cognizance.
Similar view was expressed in Kishun Singh v. State of Bihar 1993
(2) SCC 16 that when the Magistrate takes notice of the accusations
and applies his mind to the allegations made in the complaint or
police report or information and on being satisfied that the
allegations, if proved, would constitute an offence, decides to
initiate judicial proceedings against the alleged offender, he is said
to have taken cognizance of the offence. In State of W.B. v. Mohd.
Khalid 1995 (1) SCC 684 this Court after taking note of the fact that
the expression had not been defined in the Code held:
“In its broad and literal sense, it means taking notice of an offence.
This would include the intention of initiating judicial proceedings
against the offender in respect of that offence or taking steps to see
whether there is any basis for initiating judicial proceedings or for
other purposes. The word ‘cognizance’ indicates the point when a
Magistrate or a Judge first takes judicial notice of an offence. It is
entirely a different thing from initiation of proceedings; rather it is
the condition precedent to the initiation of proceedings by the
Magistrate or the Judge. Cognizance is taken of cases and not of
persons.”
13. It is necessary to mention here that taking cognizance of an
offence is not the same thing as issuance of process. Cognizance is
taken at the initial stage when the Magistrate applies his judicial
mind to the facts mentioned in a complaint or to a police report or
upon information received from any other person that an offence
has been committed. The issuance of process is at a subsequent
stage when after considering the material placed before it the court
decides to proceed against the offenders against whom a prima
facie case is made out..."

9.

The decision in Pastor Raju analyzed the principles relating to "taking

CRL.REV.P-458-06

6 OF 8

cognizance". The Supreme Court consistently from Chari, to the decision in
Khalid and culminating in Pastor Raju, ruled that the expression connotes
application of mind, and issuance of an order, after judicial application of mind. In
this case, the accused petitioner's presence was merely accidental; no notice was
issued for his appearance. The court was informed that no sanction had been
granted till that date and that the prosecution expected it to be issued in two
months. The court therefore, adjourned the hearing; while doing so, it added,
almost in an afterthought, as it were, that copies would be given on the next date.
However, the order is unclear as to what copies were to be furnished. The court
also did not require the presence of the accused on that specific date; notice for
that purpose was not issued. Therefore, although the order was made after a report
was filed, it cannot, in my opinion, amount to "taking cognizance" - there was no
judicial application of mind.
10.

There is, to my mind, yet another reason why this revision has to fail.

Section 19(3) of the Prevention of Corruption Act enacts as follows:

“19. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),—
*

*

*

(c) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on any other
ground and no court shall exercise the powers of revision in relation
to any interlocutory order passed in any inquiry, trial, appeal or
other proceedings.”

CRL.REV.P-458-06

7 OF 8

The above provision had been considered in Satya Narain Sharma -vsState of Rajasthan 2001 (8) SCC 607, where the Supreme Court held as follows:
"It is thus to be seen that this section provides:
(a) that no court should stay the proceedings under the Act on any
ground, and
(b) that no court shall exercise the powers of revision in relation to
any interlocutory order passed in any inquiry, trial, appeal or
other proceedings. "

The court had also noted that the legislative injunction against recourse to Section
397 was peremptory, and that sans a finding of failure of justice, the courts,
including High Courts, ought to desist from using revisional power. The court also
held that mere overruling of objections on the ground of sanction, would not result
in failure of justice, warranting exercise of revisional jurisdiction. The High Court,
therefore, has to respect, and follow the legislative mandate and make exceptions,
in rare and deserving cases, where manifest failure of justice is demonstrable. No
such prejudice or failure of justice has arisen in this case.
11.

In view of the above conclusions, I am of the opinion that this revision

petition is devoid of merits. It is accordingly dismissed, without order as to costs.
(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
MAY 22, 2007

CRL.REV.P-458-06

8 OF 8

