F-19
*
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : February 28, 2008.
ARB.P. 273/2007

+
MOHD. IQBAL

..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Sanjay Poddar, Advocate.

Versus
UOI

..... Respondent
Through Mr.C.Mohan Roy, Advocate.

CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This is a petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration

and Conciliation Act, 1996; the petitioner seeks reference of disputes
to arbitration.
2.

The pleadings and undisputed facts are that the petitioner

was awarded a work for water supply arrangements including
construction of new underground tank and its connection with
existing pumps house and other allied works for new washing lines at
New Delhi Yard (Lahori Gate Area). The work order was issued on

ARB.P. 273/2007

1 of 6

14.7.2003 by the respondents.

The petitioner/contractor was given

seven months to complete the work.

It is alleged that the

consideration agreed was approximately Rs.17 lakhs per month. The
petitioner further alleges that due to fundamental breach of terms of
contract, the work would not commence. These acts of omissions and
commissions, it is alleged included failure to handover the site of the
work and failure to handover the drawings till date etc.

In this

background, the respondents terminated the contract on 3.3.2004.
The petitioner sought by a letter dated 17.5.2004, compensation of
two counts and also cost of litigation/arbitration.

The respondent

received and acknowledged this letter on 24.5.2004. The petitioner
sought reference of the disputes to arbitration in accordance with
clause 64 of the Agreement/tender condition which binds the parties.
3.

It is alleged that the respondents by letter dated 30.3.2005

communicated that the General Manager had appointed an arbitral
tribunal. Yet the claims sought to be agitated in these proceedings
were not referred to the said tribunal.
4.

The respondent's reply avers, and its counsel urged,

during the hearing, that the three disputes mentioned in paragraph 8
of the petition cannot be referred as they fall with the excepted
category, in terms of clauses 21.5 and 9.2 of the special conditions of

ARB.P. 273/2007

2 of 6

Contract. The said two stipulations reads as follows:“21.5 - “No claim for idle labour and or
idle machinery etc. on any account will be
entertained.
Similarly no Claim shall be
entertained for business loss or any such loss.”

9.2 -“No material price variation or
wages escalation on any account whatsoever
the compensation for 'Force Majure' etc. shall
be payable under this contract except price
escalation clause payable as per price
escalation clause, if any, provided separately
in the tender documents.”
5.

Learned counsel has sought to place reliance upon the

decision of the Supreme Court reported as GENERAL MANAGER,

NORTHERN RAILWAY AND ANOTHER VS. SARVESH CHOPRA,
(2002) 4 SCC 45.

It was submitted that the Court considered and

interpreted the same conditions, i.e. clause 9.2 and 21.5.

After

noticing this as well as other contentions, Court held that two
categories of excepted matters existed in such a clause contract. One
was an absolute bar on reference of the dispute to arbitration and the
second clause comprised of disputes which were to be determined by
a departmental authority.
6.

Learned

counsel

submitted

that

the

claim

for

compensation of overhead expenditure at 10% of the contract value of
Rs.11 lakhs and compensation for loss of business profit amounting to
Rs.16.5 lakhs were expressly excluded from matters that could be
arbitrated. It was submitted that a careful reading of the Supreme
ARB.P. 273/2007

3 of 6

Court in Sarvesh Chopra (supra), would show that the Court upheld
the contention that similar claims were not arbitrable and in fact
allowed the appeal.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted, on the other

hand, that precise content of what are excepted matters would vary
from circumstance to circumstance and much would depend upon the
nature of the claim raised.

He relied upon the observations in

Sarvesh Chopra (supra), where the Court observed that the American
jurisprudence had developed so as to avoid the effect of such clauses
and permitted the contractor to claim in four situations, namely,
(i) where the delay is of a different kind from that contemplated by
the clause, including extreme delay, (ii) where the delay amounts to
abandonment, (iii) where the delay is a result of positive acts of
interference by the owner, and (iv) bad faith.
8.

It was submitted, by placing reliance on the reasoning of

the Supreme Court in that decision that the situations contemplated
under Section 55 of the Contract Act would also apply to limit the
exception rule in contracts prohibiting arbitrarility.
9.

The decision in Sarvesh Chopra (supra), is undoubtedly an

authority as to what kind of disputes cannot be referred to the
arbitration in the background of exception clauses.

The nature of

dispute sought to be raised were described in paragraph 5 of the

ARB.P. 273/2007

4 of 6

judgment.

Each of the claims had a co-relation with the time

stipulated and the damages claimed.
10.

In the light of the discussion, the Supreme Court, in that

decision, concluded in paragraph 18 that all the claims were covered
by excepted matters. However, in the course of its discussion, the
Court importantly noted the limitations to the exception rule and held
that there can be situations such an extreme delay, bad faith and
applicability of the Section 55 of the Contract Act would be pressed
into service to avoid or limit the exception clause.
11.

In this case, the dispute that is the subject matter of the

present petition has arisen on account of the termination of the
contract.

The correctness of the termination, i.e. whether it is in

conformity with the contract or justified in the circumstances of the
case or whether the petitioner can claim damages on the basis of the
materials is within the scope of this Court's jurisdiction.

What the

Court to see in the light of the Sarvesh Chopra (supra) judgment is
whether the disputes raised would be the subject matter of clauses
9.2 and 21.5, to be “excepted matters”. The claim No.2 as raised is
directly co-relative of the facts here, i.e. the termination. That has no
bearing on the issue of performance.

Whether the petitioner is

ultimately able to establish the case would depend on evidence. If the
Court accepts on respondent's plea, the result would be that although

ARB.P. 273/2007

5 of 6

the parties have agreed for arbitration as the dispute resolving
mechanism yet the justification or otherwise termination and the
logical corollary flowing would be outside the scope of arbitration.
Such a situation did not exist in the Sarvesh Chopra (supra) case.
Similarly, as far as a compensation for loss overhead expenditure is
concerned, it does not fall facially within the excepted clauses, i.e.
9.2 and 21.5.
12.

In the light of the above conclusion, the Court is of the

opinion that the disputes sought to be raised are arbitrable.

Since

the other disputes between the parties have already been referred to
arbitration

and

the

arbitral

tribunal

is

seized

of

them,

the

respondents are directed to refer the matter for arbitration to the
same arbitral tribunal for its decision in accordance with law, within
four weeks.
13.

All rights and contentions of the parties are hereby

reserved. The petition is allowed in the above terms. No costs.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
FEBRUARY 28, 2008
'sn'

ARB.P. 273/2007

6 of 6

