*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 349/2005
Reserved on : 15.5.2007
Pronounced on : 21.5.2007

KAMLESH

..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. S.M.Pandey and Ms Ramawati, Advocates.
versus

STATE & others

..... Respondents
Through Mr. V.K.Malik, APP for State
Shri. N.K. Sharma, Advocates.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat :
1.

This revision petition challenges an order of acquittal, by the Additional Sessions

Judge, under Section 304, Indian Penal Code, dated 8-2-2005.
2.

According to the prosecution, one Deepak @ Deepu was arrested by the Sarojini

Nagar police for offences punishable under the Arms Act; First Information Report (FIR)
being No. 364 of 96 was registered against him on 25.8.1996. It was alleged that on
29.8.1996, Deepak was taken to Safdarjung hospital for X-ray. He was taken to the

Crl.Rev.349/2005

1 of 6

hospital from Patiala House Courts in the custody of HC Girish Prasad, respondent No.2
and the respondent No.3, another policeman.
3.

Deepak escaped from the custody of police i.e. respondent No. 2 and 3 and could

not be traced. Case FIR No. 374 of 1996 was accordingly registered against him under
Section 224 I.P.C. and a police search party was involved in searching him. On
30.8.1996, at 4.20 AM, information was received at Police Station Sarojini Nagar that the
body of an unknown person had been left by some one in the casualty ward of Safdarjung
hospital. S.I. Rajender Pal was sent to the hospital. Soon thereafter, Smt. Kamlesh
Kumar, Addl. S.H.O. P.S. Sarojini Nagar too reached there. She inspected the dead body
and conducted enquiry and came to know that the dead body was of Sonu, the brother of
Deepak who had earlier escaped from police custody. She suspected that Sonu's body
had been left in Safdarjung hospital by the staff from her police station. She, accordingly
sent a written report, (ruqua) to the police station Sarojini Nagar leading to lodging of
FIR No. 375 of 1996 under Sections 304/34 IPC.
4.

During investigation of the case, it was found that respondents No.2 to 9 had gone

to Deepak's house, at D-58, Chanakaya Place and had brought Sonu, the deceased and
brother of escaped Deepak. This had been witnessed by Arvind Kumar, Smt. Geeta and
Km. Rsoopa, the father, wife and sister of Sonu. The respondents allegedly subjected
Sonu to interrogation and heavy beating to find out the where-abouts of Deepak as a
result of which he expired and on his death, his body was left in the Safdarjung hospital.
5.

That the respondent accused were arrested and put to Test Identification parade

where 14 witnesses were produced to identify them as the accused responsible for the
Crl.Rev.349/2005

2 of 6

death of Sonu. However, no witness could identify them. After the failure of the T.I.P. as
against respondent No.3, and after the case was transferred to Crime Branch for further
investigation, on 14.3.97, i.e. after 7 months of the incident, when the respondents were
on bail, respondent No.3 was shown to have been called in the office of Crime Branch,
Adarsh Nagar, Delhi where, three main witnesses namely Arvind Kumar, Smt. Geeta and
Km. Roopa, the father, wife and sister of the deceased were present. The three witnesses
allegedly identified the third respondent in the presence of the Investigating Officer in the
Crime Branch Office as one among the person who had arrested Sonu from his house on
29.8.1996. On the basis of the facts and evidence, the respondent accused were chargesheeted; the order on charge was made on 9.1.2001; to which they pleaded not guilty.
6.

During trial which commenced with the framing of charge on 9.1.2001 till

8.2.2005 when statements under Section 313 Cr.P.C. were dispensed with for the want of
evidence and judgment of acquittal was pronounced, the prosecution examined 18
witnesses.
7.

The revision petition is preferred by the mother of deceased Sonu; the State chose

not to prefer an application for leave to appeal. It is contended that the trial court fell into
error, in recording acquittal, since there was sufficient material, and evidence to convict
the accused, in the form of eyewitness testimony. Learned counsel submitted that the
evidence of the sister and wife of the deceased showed that the police had taken the
deceased into custody, and he was later found dead. This, coupled with circumstantial
evidence of his maltreatment, pointed to custodial death, at the hands of the accused, who
tried to cover up the entire incident, by cooking up a story.
Crl.Rev.349/2005

3 of 6

8.

Counsel took me through the evidence to say that the trial court was unduly

influenced by the discrepancies in testimony of the witnesses, who were admittedly
deposing 8 years after the incident. The court should have ignored those minor variations
and contradictions, and seen that the version put forward by the prosecution stood
established. These were sufficient to record conviction of the accused.
9.

It was also contended that the failure to identify the accused during the trial could

not have falsified the prosecution case, or led to its being disbelieved. Counsel contended
that the evidence overwhelmingly pointed to the respondent's complicity. The nature of
injuries, which were extensive, and 51 in number, and which cumulatively resulted in
death of Sonu, and circumstances, pointed to his being detained by policemen, who had
visited his home in plainclothes. All these established strong and irrefutable
circumstances about the accused's presence, and involvement. Counsel relied on the trail
court record, which was summoned in these revisional proceedings.
10.

The petition was opposed by counsel for the accused, who stated that apart from

the so-called identification of Head Constable Girija Prasad, Respondent-3, on 14-31997, much after the incident, and in a police station, where no one else was present,
there were no circumstance to link the accused with the incident. It was urged that no
witness could identify any accused during the trial, and they did not even support the
statements said to have been recorded during investigation.
11.

The trial court in this case recorded the deposition of 18 witnesses, including the

depositions of the father of deceased, i.e Arvind, his sister, Rupa (PW-5); Geeta (PW-17)
Raju (PW-10) and independent witnesses, said to have been present at the spot, when the
Crl.Rev.349/2005

4 of 6

deceased was arrested and taken away by 12 policemen, in a van. Each of the witnesses
had deposed in inquest proceedings; they had categorically mentioned the circumstances
under which the deceased had been taken away. However, two important features merit
consideration. One, in the Test Identification Parade, none of the accused could be
identified. Two, none of the eyewitnesses supported their earlier versions; they even
could not identify the accused, during the trial. It is no doubt true that the trial took place
after a considerable delay. Yet, in the absence of any connecting link between the accused
and the incident, or anything suggestive of their being instrumental in detaining the
deceased, it would be hazardous for the court to presume their involvement. The nature of
injuries on the person of the deceased, i.e 51 abrasions and burn marks, which led to
medical opinion that death occurred due to cumulative effect of the injuries, and on
account of shock, may perhaps raise suspicion about involvement of policemen; this is
supported by the general thread of allegations levelled during investigations, and in the
inquest. Yet, having regard to the standard of proof in criminal cases, where the
prosecution is duty bound to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
committed the offence, the court could not have, on the existing materials, recorded a
conviction.

Suspicion, however strong, cannot translate its proof unless convincing

materials and cogent corroboration, worthy of credence, are disclosed during the trial.
12.

As far as the petitioner's grievance is concerned, being the mother, her anguish is

understandable. Yet, the records show that she was not an eyewitnesses; the prosecution
did not cite her as such. Moreover during inquest, it transpired that she was in police
custody till 3-9-1996 at 9:00 PM. Suspicion, howsoever strong, can not translate into
Crl.Rev.349/2005

5 of 6

proof unless convincing materials and cogent corroboration, worthy of credence, are
disclosed during the trial.
13.

It is well established that in revisional jurisdiction, the High Court can interfere

with a finding or acquittal or conviction only if it is satisfied that on the materials existing
on the record, the approach or proceedings of the trial court were either without
jurisdiction, or were illegal, or were so erroneous that injustice resulted. Even in the event
of such conclusion, the court cannot reverse an order recording acquittal. It can remit the
case for reconsideration. Having regard to this limited jurisdiction, and after having
carefully examined the trial court record, as well as considered the contentions of parties,
I am satisfied that it would not be appropriate to interfere with the findings of the trial
court, or disturb the order of acquittal.
14.

In view of the above findings, this petition has to fail; it is therefore dismissed.

DATED: 21 May, 2007

Crl.Rev.349/2005

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

6 of 6

