8
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Delivered on May 23, 2007

+

CRL.REV.P. 110/2006
SATPAL

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Himanshu Upadhyaya, Advocate
versus

SHAKTIMAN & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through Mr. O.P. Saxena, APP for State

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This revision questions an order of acquittal. The accused/respondent was

charged with offences under Sections 460/302/380/34 of the Indian Penal Code
(IPC).
2.

According to the prosecution case, on 02.10.2000, the police in Narela

Industrial Area received information from a PCR about the murder of an old lady,
namely, Chatli Devi, aged 74 years. It was later discovered that she had been
strangulated . The deceased was sleeping in the gher in the veranda. She had
crl-rev-110/06

1 of 7

gone to bed on the previous night at about 9:30 p.m. and the rest of the family
remained indoors. She was discovered in that condition at about 5:15-5:30 a.m.
when the wife of her son Satpal went out in the morning for normal chores.
3.

The police discovered, during investigation, that the deceased's son, Satpal

had parked a vehicle, namely, a Maruti car. Investigations further revealed that
the front door was found twisted and the rear gate was opened and two speakers
were missing.
4.

The police investigation resulted in lifting of 13 chance prints besides

several exhibits. On the basis of statement of witness, Dalel Singh who said that
around 12:30 p.m. he noticed accused/respondents, namely, Shaktiman, Suresh
@ Bhure and Sunil @ Monu near the gher, they were searched and Satpal was
arrested. It was alleged that on the basis of his disclosure, two speakers were
recovered from the roof of his residence as also his clothes, namely, a T-shirt and
a pant. The prosecution alleged that Satpal helped them to arrest the other
accused. Pursuant to the arrests, recoveries of their clothes and a Saria, said to
have been used for commission of the crime were recovered on the statement of
accused Suresh @ Bhure.

Files pertaining to the trial had been split after

amendment to the Juvenile Justice Act since Satpal, the accused was below the
age of 18 years when the incident occurred. After recording the evidence and
considering the arguments of the prosecution and the defence, the trial Court, by
its impugned order dated 20.09.05 acquitted the accused.
5.

It is contended by Mr. Himanshu Upadhyaya, learned counsel that the trial

Court fell into a manifest error in not properly appreciating the material
crl-rev-110/06

2 of 7

circumstances, all of which pointed to guilt of the accused. He placed heavy
reliance upon the recoveries of the speakers, the blood splattered T-shirt and the
Saria all of which were found on the disclosure statement of the accused.
Counsel contended that these, coupled with the statement of Dalel Singh showed
that the accused were present at the site and were instrumental in commission of
heinous offence.
6.

Learned counsel submitted that the approach of the trial Court as regards

analysis of finger prints and the blood stains was erroneous. He contended that
PW-22 had clearly deposed about knowledge from the expert that palm prints
were of accused Satpal; however, it was overlooked by the trial Court.

He

submitted that the trial Court fell into error similarly in regard to analysis of the
evidence regarding the Saria as well as the blood stains on it.
7.

The trial Court considered the evidence presented to it. According to the

discussion in the impugned judgment, PW-5, Dalel Singh who had initially
implicated the accused, deposed to the contrary in the Court. According to him,
though the accused were residents of same village, they were not seen by him
standing, in any suspicious circumstances. The witness was also cross-examined
on behalf of the prosecution and he denied suggestion that he had seen the
accused at the relevant time as stated by him in the previous statement.
8.

The above discussion would show that the case set up against the accused

was entirely circumstantial in nature. Besides the testimony of PW-5, Dalel
Singh, three important circumstances were relied upon. The first one was the
recovery of 13 chance prints on the Maruti Van. These were sent for analysis of
crl-rev-110/06

3 of 7

the Finger Print Bureau.

PW-22, Inspector Sohanvir Singh had deposed that he

was told about the matching of the finger prints of Satpal with the sample finger
prints and that on the basis of this information he had interrogated and arrested
the accused. He also deposed that on 6th October, 2000, that Satpal was called to
the police station and his finger prints were taken. PW-13, namely, ASI Narendra
Singh, the finger print expert, however, deposed and also placed on record his
report. According to the report as well as the witnesses, the chance prints sent for
analysis did not tally with the prints of the accused, since the clear prints did not
match with the palm prints i. e. the latter were not clear for comparison. So far as
the blood stained T-shirt and other clothes were concerned, the accused Sunil and
his statement under Section 313, claimed that he had been wearing them when he
was beaten up by the police.

This T-shirt had been set for analysis and

serological report stated that though human blood was found, there was no
reaction for determination of the blood group. The blood group of the deceased
was 'O' group.

Therefore, that piece of vital circumstantial evidence was

inconclusive and did not point to the guilt or involvement of any of the accused.
Likewise, the T-shirt and blood stained pant recovered from Suresh too was held
not to be connected with the offence as blood stains could not be detected during
laboratory examination.
9.

So far as the recoveries of material objects i.e. iron rod/ Saria and speakers

are concerned, the Court observed that the rod was a very small piece of iron.
The Court further noted that it was extremely improbable that the accused would
continue to keep the Saria and that it was highly unlikely that for the purpose of
crl-rev-110/06

4 of 7

looting two speakers, the accused would have killed the deceased and that too in
such a brutal manner, through strangulation.
10.

The above analysis shows that charges were framed on the basis of

circumstantial evidence and there was no direct evidence except the statement of
PW-5. He, however, did not support the prosecution case and was declared
hostile. He stated in the Court during trial that the accused were not present at
the site. The prosecution had to fall back on the circumstances. The most
important circumstance which had impressed the Court into framing the charges
in the earlier stages of proceedings were the chance prints, the blood stained Tshirt and other clothes of the accused and the Saria/ iron rod. The Court relied
upon testimony of PW-13, the finger print expert who stated that the chance
prints recovered were unclear and did not match with the clear prints of the
accused, Satpal. This ruled out one substantial circumstance. As far as the blood
stained clothes were concerned, the Court again went by the report of the FSL
which stated that the blood stains would not be analyzed as they did not react.
The last circumstance, namely, the use of iron rod was held improbable having
regard to the totality of the circumstance.
11.

I have considered the submissions on behalf of the petitioner and also

carefully considered the impugned judgment.

The Legislature consciously

excluded provision for appeal against an acquittal to a third party, aggrieved by
the decision. Dominus litus in such case, is the state, which is entitled and in
many cases, duty bound to file leave to appeal applications. Apparently, in this
case the application was not preferred.
crl-rev-110/06

Therefore, the Court would have to
5 of 7

examine the findings of the trial Court through a restricted and circumscribed
revisional jurisdiction. The Court, if it is convinced that glaring infirmities or
illegalities have resulted in manifest failure of justice can intervene and set aside
the judgment acquitting an accused but it cannot convict the accused – it can
remit the matter for reconsideration.
12.

No doubt, conviction can be based solely on circumstantial evidence. It

has been said that men may lie, but circumstances do not. Yet, the law insists
that to find an accused guilty, the Court should be satisfied that not only the
circumstances have to be consistent with his having committed the act and
further that the Court should also be satisfied that the facts are such as to be
inconsistent with any other conclusion that the accused is guilty of the offence.
(Ref. Hunumant Govind Nargundkar -v- State of M.P. AIR 1952 SC 343; Sharad
Birdi Chand Sarda -v- State of Maharashtra 1984 (4) SCC 116.)
13.

The sum total of all the circumstances in this case do not add up to a

conclusion that the petitioner was guilty and that no conclusion other than his
guilt can be arrived at. Having regard to the nature of revisional jurisdiction, the
findings of the trial Court cannot be characterized as manifestly erroneous or
unreasonable.
14.

The revision petition, therefore, has to fail; it is accordingly dismissed.

S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
MAY 23, 2007
crl-rev-110/06

6 of 7

as

crl-rev-110/06

7 of 7

