*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : 21.8.2007
Pronounced on : 27.8.2007

+

W.P.(C) 3665/2007 & CM No.6907/2007
NISHA GOEL

..... Petitioner
Through:Ms. Nandini Sahni, Advocate.

versus
BHARAT VIDYAPEETH INST. & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through:Mr. Kailash Vasudev, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Sanjay K. Shandilya, Advocate and
Mr. Satyajit Saha, Advocate.
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate.
CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

% Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

The Petitioner invokes the writ jurisdiction of this court and claims a

direction to allow her to appear in the third trimester exams to complete her
Master in Business Administration (MBA) course.
2.

The brief facts necessary to decide this present petition are that the

Petitioner pursued her B.Sc (zoology) Hons. from the Indira Gandhi National

WP(C) 3665/2007

1 of 10

Open University ("IGNOU"); she appeared in the final examination in July
2006. She appeared in the B-MAT 2006 and GDPI conducted by the
Respondent no.1 and secured 164 th ranking. She was admitted in March
2006 in the two years MBA course/ programme (hereafter "the course").
3.

The lectures/ classes were scheduled to commence from 3.7.2006. The

petitioner could not submit her original documents as the B.Sc. results were
delayed. A sum of Rs. 2,47,000/- was paid towards admission, out of which
Rs.1,50,000/- was charged as the management quota fee. The Petitioner
submitted all her documents to Respondent No.1 on 23.3.2007. The course is
divided into six trimesters each of 13 weeks for teaching and examination
purposes. Trimesters I, II, III together constitute Part –I of the course while
trimesters IV, V, VI together constitute Part-II.
4.

The Petitioner allegedly attended her classes regularly; she appeared

in the first trimester exam and secured about 70% marks. She secured 65%
marks in her second trimester exams. She avers about her inability to submit
her original documents before 25.8.2006, as the results of IGNOU were
delayed. The Respondents did not object in this regard and her name was not
included in the list of students who had to submit the documents or complete
other formalities till January 2007. The Petitioner submitted that on
10.1.2007 her name appeared in the list of students required to submit
documents and complete formalities.
WP(C) 3665/2007

2 of 10

5.

The petitioner alleges that she was not allowed to appear in the third

trimester exams, held on 9th of May 2007, whereas she had already appeared
for the examinations in subjects, held on the 17th of April 2007 and 19th of
April 2007. It is averred that no reason or notice was given to her,
preventing her from appearing in the examination. The Respondents had
verbally stated that she would not be allowed to appear in her 3rd trimester
exams. The Petitioner submitted that she had completed all the formalities
as required by the college on 23.03.2007.
6.

The petitioner had paid her 3rd trimester examination

fees of

Rs.1145/-, she was also asked to pay an additional sum of Rs.800/- as late fees
for non deposit of documents on time. In these circumstances, she seeks the
declaration that the respondents should be directed to permit her to complete
the third triemester, and pursue the course further.
7.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner Ms. Nandini Sahani submitted

that the eligibility conditions as fixed by respondent No.1 for the said course
were:
(i)
“A graduate with bachelor or Masters Degree from any discipline who
has passed with minimum 45 marks in aggregate (40% in case of SC/ST
candidates) from a recognized University.
Or
The candidates in the final year Degree (Bachelors or Masters) are also
eligible to apply provided they complete their graduation requirements
including practical examination, viva, and assignments on or before the day of
WP(C) 3665/2007

3 of 10

admission to the institute of their choice. However such candidates will have
to produce marks statement of the qualifying examination at the time of
counseling. Under no circumstances will an extension of deadline be made.
The admission of student will however remain provisional until they produce
the other certificates on or before August 25th 2006 failing which admission
would automatically stands cancelled.
ii)

The candidate should be an Indian National.”

8.

Counsel urged that the Petitioner had appeared in her B.Sc. exam

(theory papers) in June, 2006 and later, her practicals. However, the result
was declared in November, 2006 and due to internal problems in the said
University the result of the practical papers got delayed till November, 2006.
When the result was announced it was declared that the petitioner had
cleared her B.Sc. (graduation) papers. Counsel contended that in another
writ petition filed by one Inder Sunil Verma against the respondents this
Court allowed the writ petitioner refund of his fees from the respondents and
a direction was issued to them to reconsider the case of that writ petitioner
for admission in the same academic year on the basis of the previous
entrance test.
9. The learned counsel further argued that the respondents took the sum of
Rs.2,47,000/- as fees from petitioner and after admitting her to the course as
well as allowed her to attend classes till 15.04.2007. And later allowed her to
appear in two examinations of her third trimester, in the month of April,
2007. The petitioner could thus not be punished for no fault of hers.

It

cannot be stated that she had misrepresented, played any fraud or
WP(C) 3665/2007

4 of 10

manipulated her admission. It was lastly submitted that the practical centre
of the IGNOU had shut down; this fact was not intimated to the petitioner.
As a result, she could not appear in the practical examinations of B.Sc;
therefore, there was delay in her clearing the examinations. Counsel also
submitted that just as in the case of Inder Sunil Vermal, the petitioner too
should be given full refund, and permitted admission.
10.

The learned counsel for the Respondent Institute relied upon the

letter of Indira Gandhi National Open University that the petitioner did
not qualify her B.Sc. degree course till December 2006 and was,
therefore,

ineligible

to

continue

in the MBA

course.

That

had

commenced in July 2006; she had been admitted, on her statement that
she was eligible. He further argued that on date when the session for
academic year 2006-2007 commenced, the petitioner had not qualified and
obtained graduate degree – B.Sc., with Zoology as a major subject from the
concerned university and that she concealed these relevant facts from them.
It was urged that sufficient time was granted to students who had not
submitted

proof

petitioner

was

of

fulfilling eligibility

unable

to

conditions.

Despite

this,

the

furnish any material showing that she had

fulfilled the eligibility criteria for admission, in July 2006, or at any
reasonable time thereafter.
11.

The Learned counsel contended that the petitioner obtained her

WP(C) 3665/2007

5 of 10

admission

to

the

MBA

course

by

concealing

facts,

making

false

representations and holding out that she had qualified at the B.Sc. degree
course. Counsel placed reliance on a letter of the Indira Gandhi National
Open University which stated that since the student did not appear in the
practical’s in three courses i.e. LSE- IIL, CHE – 7L and CHE-8L the
statement of marks given to her in June 2006 did not show completion of the
programme by the student in June 2006. The Petitioner appeared in
practicals in the above three courses only after June 2006 and successfully
completed them in the first attempt. Since the University conducts
examinations twice a year i.e. in June and December, and the student
completed all the requirements between June 2006 and December 2006, the
University declared her having successfully completed B.Sc. in December
2006 and the Marks – sheet and provisional Certificate was accordingly later
issued to her.
12.

The eligibility condition of the respondent no.1 for the M.B.A course is

that the candidates in the final year Degree (Bachelors or Masters) are also
eligible to apply for the said course provided they complete their graduation
requirements including practical examination, viva-voce and assignments on
or before the day of admission to the institute of their choice. The Petitioner
applied for a MBA course with Respondent no.1. On the date of her admission
she had not completed her B.Sc degree. She had completed her theory papers

WP(C) 3665/2007

6 of 10

but not her practical examinations. The Petitioner did not submit her
certificates on the date of admission; she appeared in the practicals only after
June 2006. Her admission was made in the month of March 2006.
13. According to the requirements the petitioner had to complete the theory
as well the practical examination before March 2006. The Petitioner did not
reveal the truth in order to buy time from the Institute. The Respondent no.1
institute in spite of being aware that the Petitioner had not submitted her
original certificates allowed her to appear in two trimester exams as well as
two papers of the third trimester exam. It was only after these two
examinations, that she was prevented from appearing in the later papers. It
is evident that the Petitioner obtained admission in the Institute, without the
basic eligibility criteria. During the course of hearing, after notice was issued
to IGNOU, it was admitted that the petitioner appeared in the practical tests
much later after June 2006; results were declared only in 2007.
14.The above facts would show that the petitioner did not fulfil the
eligibility condition of having completed the B.Sc course and being entitled
to a degree at the time of her admission to MBA. If the petitioner had
cleared all her papers while applying and obtained admissions to the course,
there would have been no difficulty. Mere submission of a certificate late,
under compulsion of circumstances-particularly if the University or
examining body had not issued it in time, would not have vitiated the
WP(C) 3665/2007

7 of 10

eligibility condition as she would have, in such case, been eligible. However,
here the petitioner clearly did not possess the eligibility; she had not
completed the practicals in time. Maybe, there was a difficulty, as claimed
by her, that the examination centre had been closed down. But that did not
relieve her obligation to make the necessary declaration, as she had not
appeared in the practical papers when she was admitted to the course nor
later, when she started attending classes. The correct position was explained
in this regard by the Supreme Court in Dolly Chhanda-vs- Chairman JEE
2005 (9) SCC 779 in the following terms:
"The general rule is that while applying for any
course of study or a post, a person must possess
the eligibility qualification on the last date fixed
for such purpose either in the admission
brochure or in application form, as the case may
be, unless there is an express provision to the
contrary. There can be no relaxation in this
regard i.e. in the matter of holding the requisite
eligibility qualification by the date fixed. This
has to be established by producing the necessary
certificates, degrees or mark sheets. Similarly, in order
to avail of the benefit of reservation or weightage, etc.
necessary certificates have to be produced. These are
documents in the nature of proof of holding of
particular qualification or percentage of marks secured
or entitlement to benefit of reservation. Depending
upon the facts of a case, there can be some relaxation in
the matter of submission of proof and it will not be
proper to apply any rigid principle as it pertains in the
domain of procedure. Every infraction of the rule
relating to submission of proof need not necessarily
result in rejection of candidature."

WP(C) 3665/2007

8 of 10

( emphasis supplied)
The decision reported as Preeti Srivastava (Dr.) v. State of M.P. ((1999) 7 SCC
120) is an authority for the proposition that laying down of eligibility criteria
and allied prescription of conditions are integrally connected with the
standards of education.
15.

The action of the Respondent no.1 in not allowing the Petitioner to give

her exams cannot be faulted. However, it cannot absolve itself of the blame
entirely, had it, within reasonable time, refused to further extend the time
for approving admissions, or receiving the documents. Although this lapse
cannot entitle the petitioner to a direction that she ought to be permitted to
continue in the course - since that would be plainly against the rules, yet I
am of the opinion that in the facts and attendant circumstances of the case,
the most appropriate course, in order to balance the equities between the
parties, would be to direct the first respondent to refund 75% of the entire
amounts (including management quota fee) collected by it from the
petitioner.
16.

In view of the above findings, the petitioner is not entitled to a

direction that she should be continued in the MBA course. However, a
direction is given to the first respondent to refund 75% of the amounts paid
by her towards tuition fees and all other amounts (including management

WP(C) 3665/2007

9 of 10

quota fee) collected from her, within six weeks from today. The petition is
partly allowed, in these terms. No costs.

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
August 27th, 2007

WP(C) 3665/2007

10 of 10

