*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005
Reserved on : 21st July, 2007
Date of Decision: 20th August, 2007

SANJIB GHOSE ROY

… PETITIONER
Through: Shri G.C. Mishra, Advocate

Vs.
G.S. ARORA & ORS

… RESPONDENTS
Through: Shri S.P. Batra, Advocate for R-1 and R-2
Shri Pawan Sharma, APP for R-3 State

CORAM:

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

This is a complainant's revision against the order of the Additional Sessions

Judge (hereafter "ASJ"). By that order, dated 14-5-2005, the ASJ set aside two
orders of the learned Metropolitan Magistrate ("the trial court"). The trial court, by
the first order dated 25-7-2003 had allowed an application under Section 311 and
summoned an additional witness. After her examination, by the second order,
dated 14-5-2004, it issued an order under Section 319, Criminal Procedure Code,
CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

1 of 15

summoning Shri G.S. Arora, and also observed that the accused Rattan Singh
appeared to have been involved in committing offences under Section 304, Indian
Penal Code (IPC).
2.

The facts of the case are that in execution proceedings for enforcement of a

decree, warrants of attachment of movable and immovable properties of judgment,
debtor Sh. Chiranjit Roy were issued by the court of Addl. Distt. Judge. The decree
holder was G.S. Arora, respondent before this court. The warrant of attachment
was assigned to Sh. Rattan Singh, bailiff (accused hereafter referred to as A-1). A1, met judgment debtor Sh. Chiranjit Roy with warrants of attachment along with
decree holder, on 2.1.995. He produced both warrants of attachment, disclosed his
identity as bailiff, stating that he had to execute the warrants. On that the judgment
debtor became nervous and wrote on the back of warrants that he had preferred
revision against the order of attachment. There was, however no stay of execution.
A-1 called the decree holder and asked if he agreed to stop the execution. The
decree holder did not however agree.
3.

The judgment debtor became more nervous. His wife informed that the

judgment debtor was a heart patient and if execution continued any unfortunate
mishap might occur. Seeing the condition of the judgment debtor, the decree
holder agreed to stop the execution and went away. A-1 submitted his report of
non-execution of warrant. Later it was discovered that the judgment debtor died on

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

2 of 15

2.1.95 and a case for commission of offences under Sections 304/451/384/34 IPC
was registered on the statement of wife of deceased Smt. Latika, Ghosh through
FIR No.21/95 dated 2.1.1995. A-1 was released on bail.
4.

The matter was investigated. A charge sheet was filed after investigation.

The trial court committed the matter to Sessions, holding that the case was triable
by the Court of Sessions. The ASJ, by a detailed order dated 26.10.1998 held that
no offence under Section 304 of IPC was made out. He accordingly directed return
of case file to the learned Metropolitan Magistrate. The trial court framed charge
under Sections 451/384/34 of IPC against A-1.

5.

In the meantime, complainant Smt. Latika Roy died. She was an eye witness

of the case. Five witnesses were examined and PW 1 Sanjeev Roy son of deceased
deposed on the basis of information given by his mother. On an application under
Section 311 Cr. P.C Mrs. Rajshree Ghosh was examined and on an application
under Section 319 Cr. P.C. Ltd., the trial court took cognizance of the offence
under Section 304 IPC against A-1 the respondent Shri. G.S. Arora, the decree
holder by its order dated 14.5.2004.
6. A-1's revision was premised on the ground that the order dated 14-5-2004 was
conjectural. He alleged that the trial court failed to consider that the ASJ had
earlier concluded that no case of offence under Section 304 of IPC was made out.

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

3 of 15

PW-6 was examined to fill up the lacuna, when no eye witnesses were left after the
death of complainant, Smt. Latika Roy. She did not allege that the deceased was
beaten by A-1 or the decreeholder. It was alleged that only a clerk was examined to
prove the postmortem report. The trial Court wrongly invoked section 319 Cr. P.C.
It failed to see that A-1 was discharging his duties as public servant i.e. bailiff. It
was similarly urged on behalf of Shri G.S. Arora that the trial court exceeded its
jurisdiction. Ms. Rajashri was examined after nine years; previously she never
claimed to be an eye witness. She was examined to fill up a lacuna. There was no
evidence that he inflicted any injury.
7.

The trial court, by order dated 14.5.2004 concluded that PW 6 and PW 1

deposed on oath that Sh. G.S. Arora and A-1 forcibly obtained signatures of the
deceased on some blank papers and gave beatings. The postmortem report showed
that the deceased had suffered injuries on his person. The contents of FIR that the
deceased had been given a simple push was doubted. The presence of G.S. Arora
and A-1 was not disputed. It held that death of a human being had occurred. The
court observed that the materials collected by police during investigation appeared
to be manipulated. It was held that the case was one of culpable homicide and
extortion; prima facie the offence under Section 304 IPC was attracted.
8.

The ASJ observed that the trial court's order of 25.07.03 under section 311

Cr. PC was made on the application dated 19.9.2002 on behalf of the prosecution,

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

4 of 15

introducing a new case altogether different from that of FIR. For the first time, it
was alleged that the deceased was beaten up.
by any person to deceased was made.

Earlier no allegation of beating

PW-6 introduced the story of beating

by lathi, danda, hockey stick, gun etc. This new case was introduced after more
than seven years. The ASJ held that the order under section 311 Cr. PC occasioned
miscarriage of justice. He also held that there was no justification for recourse to
Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
9.

Mr. G.C. Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the ASJ

fell into error. He firstly submitted that the court did not possess jurisdiction under
Section 397 to entertain the revision petition, since the orders of the trial court,
impugned by A-1 and the respondent, were interlocutory. He relied upon the bar
under Section 397(2) for the purpose. He relied upon the decision reported as
Superintendent and Remembrancer Legal Affairs, WB -vs- Ashutosh Ghosh 1979
(3) SCC 381 to say that a committal order could not be interfered with in revision.
He also relied upon the judgment in Parmeshwari Devi -vs- State 1977 (1) SCC
169, to say that a revision proceeding is not maintainable in such cases.
10.

Counsel relied upon four representations said to have been addressed by

Ms. Latika Ghosh, dated 22-1-1995,28-3-95, 26-1-1996 and 13-12-1996, to say
that she had wanted to place on record other facts, about assault on the person of
the deceased, resulting in his death. It was submitted that these were the basis of

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

5 of 15

the application under Section 311. The letters had mentioned about presence of
PW 6 Ms. Rajshri Ghosh Roy. The said PW-6 was examined on 28.02.2004. She
corroborated the allegation of an assault on the deceased; as a result, the court
acted within its jurisdiction in summoning G.S. Arora, under Section 319, and
taking cognizance under Section 304 IPC, against him and A-1. It was also
submitted that the postmortem report corroborated the version of PW-6, about
assault.
11.

Mr. S.P. Batra, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the case

was resistered on 2.1.1995 with the statement of Smt. Latika Ghosh Ex. PW 1/B.
She did not state that the accused were armed with Lathi, danda, hockey stick or
gun; she also did not allege that any weapon was used by any assailants against the
deceased. She never alleged that 9/10 persons armed with weapons went to her
house, or anyone assaulted with any weapon on the person of deceased. It was
alleged that forcible signatures of deceased were obtained on a piece of paper. Her
husband felt unwell, he sat down of sofa. She gave him water. He, however could
not drink it, and expired. Counsel submitted that the first two representations
addressed by the complainant, dated 22-1-1995 and 28-3-1995, were silent about
any assault. They did not mention about the presence of Ms. Rajshree. The
complainant only mentioned about presence of Shri Narayan Banerjee.
12.

Learned counsel submitted that the complainant had recorded two

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

6 of 15

statements, i.e on 2-1-1995 and later on 12-1-1995. In these, there was no mention
of any violence; the only allegation made was about A-1 forcibly obtaining
signatures of the deceased and his falling down on the sofa. The first statement
mentioned the presence of 9-10 persons. The statement of Sanjib Roy, the present
revisionist and son of the complainant, is on the same lines as his mother. Shri
Narayan Banerjee's statement under Section 161 Cr. P.C. also was on the same
lines. In these circumstances, the prosecution could not come out with an entirely
different version, about the presence of someone who had never figured, more than
8 years later.
13.

Counsel submitted that the later two representations of the complainant had

never seen the light of the day; they were not part of the record. They were
produced for the first time along with the application under Section 311. This
procedure was unheard of, since the prosecution never filed any report after any
further investigation under Section 173 (8). Basing itself on these, the court issued
the order for examination of Ms. Rajshree, who was never cited as a witness. Her
alleged presence was suspect; she was clearly brought in to fill the lacunae of the
prosecution. This led to the order under Section 319, Cr. PC.
14.

Counsel lastly submitted that the order of the revisional court could not be

called interlocutory, since it had a grave and prejudicial impact on both the
accused. The trial court's orders sought to put the respondent on trial after over 8

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

7 of 15

years, in the absence of any role attributed to him; it sought to take cognizance
against A-1 in respect of Section 304 IPC, a course of action which had been ruled
out by an ASJ as far back as in 1999; that order had attained finality.
15.

Learned counsel submitted that the revisional court rightly concluded that

recourse to Section 319 was unwarranted on the facts of the case; it had relied on
the judgment of this court, reported as Sandeep Sharma Vs. State 87 (2000) DLT
268.
16.

The trial court framed the charge on 4.2.99 after four years. PW 1 was

examined on 7.10.1999; he deposed on the basis of information given by his
mother. He did not state that Ms. Latika Ghosh informed him about his father
being beaten by hockey stick, danda, lathi or gun. He did not also depose about any
information about incident allegedly given by his wife PW 6. On 14.09.2000 PW
2, PW 3 and PW 4 were examined. They too did not mention about such incidents,
or the presence of Ms. Rajshri Ghosh Roy. PW 6 Rajshri Ghosh Rai was examined
on 28.02.2004. The revisional court noticed that she nowhere explained why she
was quiet for more than 9 years. It further noted that PW 1 did not state that his
wife was eye witness. It also noted that as per the death report, no mark was found
on the body.
17.

The revisional court reasoned that after the death of the deceased judgment

debtor, his rights and liabilities shifted to legal representatives; the decree holder

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

8 of 15

could enforce the execution against the son, wife and even daughter in law in place
of deceased. This according to it was a strong motive to implicate G.S. Arora in
the case by leading a coloured version, which was never the case of prosecution.
The court relied upon Section 78, IPC. It was of the opinion that there was no
recovery of any weapon. It was therefore concluded that the testimony of PW6 was
unacceptable as it was contrary to the case of prosecution. PW6 deposed
something which found no place in the FIR. The court also considered the
statement of PW-6, and doubted its veracity, concluding that allegations of beating
by A-1 and G.S. Arora were vague.
18.

In Parameshwari Devi's case (supra), the Supreme Court held as follows:
"The Code does not define an interlocutory order, but it obviously is an
intermediate order, made during the preliminary stages of an enquiry or
trial. The purpose of sub-section (2) of Section 397 is to keep such an order
outside the purview of the power of revision so that the enquiry or trial may
proceed without delay. This is not likely to prejudice the aggrieved party
for it can always challenge it in due course if the final order goes against it.
But it does not follow that if the order is directed against a person who is
not a party to the enquiry or trial, and he will have no opportunity to
challenge it after a final order is made affecting the parties concerned, he
cannot apply for its revision even if it is directed against him and adversely
affects his rights.
8. A somewhat similar argument came up for consideration before this
Court in Mohan Lal Magan Lal Thacker v. State of Gujarat AIR 1968 SC
733. The controversy there centred round the meaning of Article 134(1)(c)
of the Constitution and the Court examined the meaning of the words
"final" and "interlocutory". It was held that the meaning "had to be
considered separately in relation to the particular purpose for which it is
required" to be interpreted. No single test can be applied to determine
whether an order is final or interlocutory. Then it has been held by this

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

9 of 15

Court in that case as follows :
"An interlocutory order, though not conclusive of the main dispute
may be conclusive as to the subordinate matter with which it deals."
It may thus be conclusive with reference to the stage at which it is made,
and it may also be conclusive as to a person, who is not a party to the
enquiry or trial, against whom it is directed. As has been shown, the order
of the magistrate dated August 8, 1974 was not according to law and it
adversely affected the appellant, who was not a party to the enquiry or
trial, as it was solely directed against her. As is obvious, she could have no
opportunity to challenge it after the making of the final order, and such a
belated challenge would have been purposeless for it would have given her
no relief. So in so far as the appellant is concerned, the order of the
magistrate could not be said to be an interlocutory order and the revisional
courts erred in raising the bar of sub-section (2) of Section 397 against it."
It is apparent that there can be no thumb rule as to what constitutes an
"interlocutory" order; much would depend on the character of the order, and the
stage of the proceeding. In the present case, like in the above case, the cognizance
in respect of A-1, taken contrary to the orders of ASJ (which had become final)
and the order under Section 319 issued after 8 years, did prejudice both the A-1
and the respondent. The revision was therefore, maintainable.
19.

Section 319 of the Cr. PC has to be used sparingly, and in rare cases, where

the court is convinced that the person concerned has to be summoned. The law on
the subject was recently summarized as follows, by the Supreme Court, in Mod.
Shafi Vs. Mohd. Rafiq & Anr.2007 AIR SCW 3399. The court held as follows:
"Before, thus a trial court seeks to take recourse to the said
provision, the requisite ingredients therefore must be fulfilled.
CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

10 of 15

Commission of an offence by a person not facing trial must,
therefore, appears to the court concerned. It cannot be ipse dixit on
the part of the co9urt. Discretion in this behalf must be judicially
exercised. It is incumbent that the court must arrive at this
satisfaction in this behalf.
As interpretation of the above mentioned provision is now covered
by some decisions of this Court, we need not state ingedietns at this
stage.
In Municipal Corporation of Delhi Vs. Ram Kishan Rohtagi and
others (1983) SCC 1 a Division Bench of this Court while holding
that even if a person had not been sent for trial by the police, the
trial court would be entitled to invoke its jurisdiction after taking
evidence, stating
"19. In these circumstances, therefore, if the prosecution can at any
stage produce evidence which satisfies the court that the other
accused or those who have not been arrayed as accused against
whom proceedings have been quashed have also committed the
offence the court can take cognizance against them and try them
along with the other accused. But, we would hasten to add that this
is really an extraordinary power which is conferred on the court and
should be used very sparingly and only if compelling reasons exist
for taking cognizance against the other person against whom action
has not been taken. More than this we would not like to say anything
further at this stage. We leave the entire matter to the discretion of
the court concerned so that it may act accordingly to law".
This aspect of the matter has also recently been considered in
Yuvrag Ambar Mohite Vs. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2206)
10 Scale 369.
Respondent No.1 state that he was merely a witness. He had no say
in the matter. We thus fail to understand as to how, at this instance,
and , that too. at that stage, the High Court could entertain an
application under Section 482 Cr. P.C. The judgment and order
dated 26.08.2006 passed by the learned sessions judge was not even
an interim order affecting the rights of the parties. even revision
application there against could not have been maintained at that
CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

11 of 15

stage.
The trial judge, is noticed by us, in terms of section 319 of the code
of Criminal procedure was required to arrive at his satisfaction. If
he thought that the matter should receive his due consideration only
after the cross examination of the witnesses is over no exception
thereto could be taken far less at the instance of a witness and when
the State was not aggrieved by the same.
12.
From the decisions of this Court, as noticed, above it is
evident that before a court exercises its discretionary jurisdiction in
terms of section 319 of the Code of Criminal procedure, it must
arrive at the satisfaction that there exists a possibility that the
accused to summoned is in all likelihood would be convicted. Such
satisfaction can be arrived at Inter alia upon completion of the cross
examination of the said witness. For the said purpose, the court
concerned may also like to consider other evidence. We are
therefore, of the view that the High Court has committed an error in
passing the impugned judgment. It is accordingly set aside. The
appeal is allowed."
20.

As evident from the above, the court exercises its discretionary jurisdiction

under Section 319 Cr. PC upon recording satisfaction that there exists a possibility
"that the accused to summoned is in all likelihood would be convicted". Such
satisfaction can be arrived at upon completion of the cross examination of the said
witness. For the purpose, the court concerned should also consider other evidence.
21.

In this case, the contemporaneous statements of the complainant, Latika

Ghosh, dated 2-1-1995 and the supplementary statement dated 12-1-1995, did not
mention about any violence on the deceased. The other witnesses, i.e Sanjib Ghosh
Roy and Narayan Banerjee, too, did not mention about such incidents; none of

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

12 of 15

them even mentioned the presence of Ms. Rajshree, PW-6. The first two
representations of Latika Ghosh, to the Police Commissioner, dated 22-1-1995 and
28-3-1995 did not mention anywhere about violence of the kind spoken about by
Ms. Rajshree; indeed it does not even mention about the latter's presence. After the
death of Ms. Latika Ghosh, and after examination of prosecution witnesses, the
four representations were used to move an application under Section 311. These
too had not seen the light of day till then.
22.

While it is true that Section 311 Cr. PC. has been enacted with the purpose

of ensuring that vital evidence which is overlooked at earlier stages, is permitted to
be led, yet that power cannot be used to set up a case which was never alleged by
the prosecution. An order cannot be made, at least under circumstances as in the
present case. The representations which were used to make the order under Section
311 had not been placed on record; they were not part of the prosecution case.
They apparently were used in 1998 to move an application, which the prosecution
did not file. In Mohanlal Shamji Soni v. Union of India (1991 Supp (1) SCC 271)
the court cautioned against filling up lacuna in a criminal case, thus :
"It is therefore clear that the criminal court has ample power to summon
any person as a witness or recall and re-examine any such person even if
the evidence on both sides is closed and the jurisdiction of the court must
obviously be dictated by exigency of the situation, and fair play and good
sense appear to be the only safe guides and that only the requirements of
justice command the examination of any person which would depend on the
facts and circumstances of each case."
CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

13 of 15

The above proposition was approved in Rajendra Prasad-vs- Narcotic Cell 1999
(6) SCC 110.
23.

I am of the opinion, on a careful consideration of the record, that the trial

court erred in allowing the application under Section 311 and later proceeding
under Section 319, Cr. PC, summoning the respondent G.S. Arora. There was no
material pointing to grave suspicion that the accused to be summoned in all
likelihood could be convicted. Likewise, in the case of A-1, the trial court virtually
reviewed the order of the ASJ, who had ruled out framing charges under Section

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

14 of 15

304, IPC. For these reasons, the ASJ did not fall into any jurisdictional error, or
impropriety, in making the impugned order dated 14-5-2005.
24.

In the above circumstances, the petition must fail; it is accordingly

dismissed, without any order as to costs.

DATED:
20th August, 2007

CRL.REV.P. 850 of 2005

S. RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE

15 of 15

