14
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.M.C. 4637-38/2005
July 26, 2007
GANGA CONTRACTS & PROJECTS LTD.
Through none

..... Petitioner

versus
STATE & ANR.

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Ajit Warrier, Advocate for R-2.

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

None present for the petitioner. On the last date of hearing, the matter

was adjourned on account of bereavement in the family of the petitioner's
counsel.
2.

In these proceedings under Section 482 Cr.P.C. a quashing order in respect

of the criminal complaint filed by the second respondent (hereafter referred to as
the “complainant”) who alleged that the petitioner had committed offences
punishable under Section 138, Negotiable Instruments Act (hereafter “the Act”)

CRL.M.C. 4637-38/2005

1 of 4

has been sought.
3.

The complainant approached the criminal Court alleging that cheques

issued by the present petitioner some time in 2001, were dishonoured.
Complaint proceedings were initiated; the Metropolitan Magistrate issued a
summoning order. In the course of those proceedings (being complainant No.
397/1/2) the parties apparently arrived at a compromise and settlement. In
terms of the settlement, fresh cheques were issued by the present petitioner to
the complainant.
dishonoured.

However, those cheques upon presentation too were

The Court, therefore, recorded the factum of settlement and

dismissed the complaint case No. 397/1/02.
4.

After dishonour of the cheques issued as part of the compromise, the

complainant issued fresh notices calling upon the petitioner to satisfy its demand;
on non-compliance with the notice, the second proceedings alleging commission
of offences under Section 138/141 of the Act were filed being criminal complaint
No. 579/2005.
5.

The principal theme of this petition is that the complaint is not

maintainable since it pertains to the same cause of action inasmuch as the legal
liability is identical with the subject matter of the previous proceedings. The
contention sought to be advanced – as is apparent from the averments – in
respect of same cause of action, two proceedings cannot lie.
6.

The petitioner has relied upon a judgment of this Court reported as

Venkatesh Dutt -v- M/s M.S. Shoes East Ltd. 2004 (II) BC 19.
7.

I have considered the materials on record and heard counsel for the

CRL.M.C. 4637-38/2005

2 of 4

respondent/complainant. The facts show that the petitioner in this case had
defaulted inasmuch as the cheques earlier issued by it in satisfaction of its
liabilities, were not honoured. That led to filing of a criminal complaint. During
the course of those proceedings, the petitioner sought to compound the offence
and issued fresh cheques. The complainant accepted those cheques and as a
result the previous complaint was dismissed. However, the cheques were in
satisfaction of the basic liability. When the fresh set of cheques were presented,
they too were dishonoured. The question is whether the subsequent proceedings
are maintainable. The petitioner contends that they are not.
8.

I am of the considered opinion that the reliance placed on Venkatesh

Dutt's case by the petitioner is misplaced. The Court had in that case clearly
stated as follows:
“Once the parties enter into an agreement during the
pendency of such complaint or proceedings and complainant
accepts the cheques given by the accused in lieu of the subjectmatter of original complaint every cheque gives rise to a fresh
cause of action if it, on presentation is dishonoured as in that
case original complaint becomes extinct. Aggrieved person has
a right to file as many complaints as may cheques were given
to him as every cheque under the Act provides as independent
and fresh cause of action to the aggrieved person.”
9.

All that the Court was concerned with in those proceedings was whether

two parallel proceedings, one relating to the original cheque and the second
relating to the subsequent cheque could proceed simultaneously. The Court held
that they could not. But the Court before doing so clarified that it is open to the
payee of a cheque aggrieved on account of dishonour to approach the Court each
time the cheque is dishonoured.
CRL.M.C. 4637-38/2005

The dishonour of a cheque constitutes an
3 of 4

independent cause of action, entitling the payee to seek recourse to summary
proceedings. Any other view would defeat the objectives of the Act, by importing
considerations which are unsupported by the statute and its plain terms; it would
aid the canny and unscrupulous drawer adopting the stratagem of a pretended
compromise.
10.

In view of the above discussion, I am of the opinion that this petition is not

maintainable. It is accordingly dismissed.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
JULY
as

26, 2007

CRL.M.C. 4637-38/2005

4 of 4

