4
*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CS(OS) 506/2004
Decided on April 21, 2008
ATLAS CYCLE (HARYANA)
..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Sudhir K. Makkar, Advocate.
versus

ATLAS PRODUCTS

..... Defendant
Through Mr. Sindhu Sinha, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters to local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat: ( OPEN COURT)

1.

In this suit the plaintiff has sought the following reliefs:"The Defendants, their Directors, servants, agents,
representatives, distributors and assigns be restrained by
a permanent injunction restraining them from using
“SALTA” or any other mark or name deceptively or

CS(OS) 506/2004

page no. 1 of 8

confusingly similar to the trade mark “ATLAS”, either as
their trade mark or part of their trade mark or indeed as
part of their corporate name in respect of bicycles and
bicycle parts or in any other manner whatsoever
infringing the registered trade mark(s) of the Plaintiffs or
passing off its goods as and for the goods of the
Plaintiffs;
The Defendants, their Directors, servants,
agents, representatives, distributors and assigns be
ordered by a decree of mandatory injunction to hand over
to the Plaintiff all goods, packaging cartons, unfinished
products etc. bearing the trade mark ATLAS or any other
trade mark or name which is deceptively or confusingly
similar thereto. The Defendants be also ordered to hand
over all dies, plates, blocks, moulds, matrix, transfers,
negatives etc. bearing the trade mark “SALTA” or any
other deceptively or confusingly similar trade mark or
name;
The Defendants be called upon to allow
inspection of their accounts to assist in ascertaining
profits made by the Defendants by their unauthorized
user of the trade mark “SALTA” and a decree be
accordingly passed in favour of the plaintiff for the
amount found due;
Costs of the present suit be awarded in
favour of the Plaintiffs and against the Defendants;
Any other relief which the Hon'ble Court
thinks fit and proper in the circumstances of the case be
CS(OS) 506/2004

page no. 2 of 8

allowed in favour of the Plaintiffs and against the
Defendants.”
2.

At the initial stage of hearing on 13.5.2004, on issue of

application under Order XXXIX Rule 1 & 2 CPC this court issued the
following order:“This is an application filed by the plaintiff
praying for a temporary injunction restraining the
defendants, their servants, agents, distributors, stockists
and all others from using the trademark “SALTA” or any
other trademark which is deceptively or confusingly
similar to the trademark “ATLAS” of the plaintiff, either
as their trademark or part of their trademark or part of
their corporate name in respect of bicycles and bicycles
parts and/or passing off the goods under the said
trademark during the pendency of the present suit.
The plaintiff is the registered proprietor of
the trademark “ATLAS” . Details of the aforesaid
registration of the plaintiff is given in paragraph 4 of the
application. The registration was obtained by the plaintiff
as far back as August 18, 1952 and since then the plaintiff
has been using the aforesaid trademark for the last about
50 years. The defendant No.1 introduced in the market
bicycles under the trademark 'House of Atlas'. Being
aggrieved by the aforesaid action on the part of defendant
No.1, the plaintiff filed a suit in this Court which was
registered as Suit No. 882/2002. By judgment and order
CS(OS) 506/2004

page no. 3 of 8

dated September 27, 2002 this Court granted a temporary
injunction in favour of the present plaintiff restraining the
said defendants from using the trademark 'House of Atlas'
or any other mark which may be deceptively similar to the
plaintiff's trademark 'ATLAS' in respect of bicycle and
bicycle parts till the disposal of the said suit. However,
this court also made it clear that there would be no
injunction in respect of the user of the corporate name by
the first defendant. As presently the defendants 2 and 4
have started a new firm by the name of defendant No.3
and have started manufacturing bicycles and bicycle parts
using the name 'SALTA' as its trademark in relation to
bicycles and bicycle parts, therefore, the present suit is
filed in this court along with the present application
seeking for temporary injunction. It is the stand of the
plaintiff that the word 'SALTA' is derivative of the words
'ATLAS' as when the word 'ATLAS' is spelt in reverse
alphabetical order the same results in the trademark of the
defendants, i.e. , 'SALTA'. Both the plaintiff and
defendant No.3 deal in the same goods, i.e. , in relation to
the bicycles and bicycle parts. It, therefore, prima facie
appears that there is an intention of using the trademark of
the plaintiff in a reverse manner so as to pass off the
goods of the defendants as that of the plaintiff.
It is also stated in the application that to the
knowledge of the plaintiff the bicycles of the defendant
NO.3with the trademark 'SALTA' have bow reached the
market, whereas such a statement is denied by the counsel
CS(OS) 506/2004

page no. 4 of 8

appearing for defendants 3 and 4 contending, inter alia,
that the said defendant No.3 is already in the market with
the bicycles under the trademark 'SALTA'. Counsel
appearing for the defendants submits that the said
defendants have already applied for the registration of the
said name 'SALTA'. However, no such registration under
the trademark 'SALTA' is granted in favour of the
defendant No.3 till date by the competent authority. I am
also usefully refer to three judges decision of the Supreme
Court in Cadila Health Care Ltd. V. Cadila
Pharmaceuticals Ltd, (2001) 5 S.C.C. 73. In the said
decision the Supreme Court has held that a trademark is
essentially adopted to advertise one's product and to make
it know to the purchaser, and that it attempts to portray
the nature and, if possible, the quality of the product and
over a period of time the mark may become popular. It
was further held that it is usually at that stage that other
people are tempted to pass off their products as that of the
original owner of the mark, and that is why it is said that
in a passing off action, the plaintiff's right is against the
conduct of the defendant which leads to or is intended or
calculated to lead to deception. The plaintiff in the
present case is in the market manufacturing and marketing
bicycle and bicycle parts with the trademark 'ATLAS'
over a period of 50 years, whereas the defendant No.3 has
now tried to enter the market with the reverse alphabets of
the trademark 'ATLAS' of the plaintiff with the temptation
to pass off their products as that of the original owner of
CS(OS) 506/2004

page no. 5 of 8

the mark. I am of the prima facie opinion that the only
intention of the defendant to adopt a trademark with the
reverse alphabets as that of the plaintiff is to catch on the
goodwill and reputation of the plaintiff. This, of course,
is my prima facie and tentative opinion for the purpose of
deciding whether or not an interim injunction should be
granted at this stage.
Considering the facts and circumstances of
the case, I issue notices on this application to the
defendants. Mr. Kamal Nijhawan, Advocate, accepts on
behalf of the defendants. Reply could be filed within four
weeks. Rejoinder thereto, if any, could be fled before the
next date.
However, in the light of the discussion
aforementioned and considering the fact that a prima facie
case is made out at this stage for grant of ad interim
injunction at this stage, an order is passed restraining the
defendants, their servants, distributors, stockists and all
others acting on their behalf from using the word
'SALTA' or any other mark or name which could be said
to be deceptively or confusingly similar to the trademark
'ATLAS' of the plaintiff, and/or from passing off the
goods of the said defendants as that of the plaintiff till the
next date. I am also of the opinion that unless such
protection is granted the plaintiff would suffer irreparable
loss and injury.
The injunction application shall be taken up
for final arguments on the next date.
Renotify on July 8, 2004.
CS(OS) 506/2004

page no. 6 of 8

A copy of this order be given dasti to the
counsel for the parties.
May 13, 2004

3.

Dr. Mukundkam Sharma, J.”

The above order has subsisted till date. The defendants

have filed the written statement

and the plaintiff has also filed its

replication. Subsequently the defendant filed its affidavits.
4.

Learned counsel today submitted that the defendants have

agreed not to use the mark, objected to by the plaintiff i.e. “SALTA” in
respect of bicycle and bicycle parts.

The affidavit on behalf of the

defendant No.1 firm was filed by Sh. Ashwath Kapur, dated 12.3.2008,
enclosing a copy of the minutes of the Board Meeting dated 5.11.2007,
authorizing the filing of it. The affidavit has been placed on the record.
Sh.

Arun Kapur, the defendant No.2 has also filed an affidavit.

Similarly, Sh. Akshay Kapur has filed an affidavit as defendant No.4 and
defendant No.3, on the same day i.e. 12.3.2008.

A copy of the Board

Resolution dated 8.11.2007 of the defendant authorizing him to file the
affidavit has also been placed on the record. Learned counsel for the
defendant states that the suit may be decreed in terms of the affidavits.
CS(OS) 506/2004

page no. 7 of 8

5.

In view of the statement made and after considering the

affidavits, a decree shall issue against the defendants in terms of prayer
(a) of the suit.
All the applications are disposed of in the above terms.
No costs.

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
APRIL
pkv

21, 2008

CS(OS) 506/2004

page no. 8 of 8

