*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CRL.REV.P. 688-689/2005
Reserved on : July 9, 2007
Date of decision : July 26, 2007

MANGI LAL AGARWAL & ANR.
..... Petitioners
Through Petitioner in person
versus
STATE OF NCT OF DELHI
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. O.P. Saxena, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

Yes

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

In this revision, under Section 397, Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter

"the Code") the petitioners (complainant/ informants, referred to as such
hereafter) question an order of the metropolitan magistrate, accepting the
cancellation report filed by the police.
2.

Briefly, the facts necessary to decide this petition are that the complainants

executed two separate sale deeds to convey first floor of property being no. E-126,

CRL.REV.P. 688-689/2005

1 of 7

Lajpat Nagar-I. They alleged however that possession was not handed over. The
complainants alleged that the vendee/accused, respondents in these proceedings
kept Rs. 10 lakhs as loan on the understanding that they (the complainants)
would be paid the amounts after the possession was given to them. The
complainants alleged that the premises were to be vacated by them, after
completion of construction of their alternative house, in Jaunapur Village. They
further alleged that according to the understanding, the possession was to be
retained by them till the end of February, 2001. However, on 13th February,
2001, nine persons (seven men and two women) trespassed into their house, and
tried to talk about obtaining possession. At that time, the first petitioner was not
present; soon, he joined the second petitioner. He called the police. After
investigation, a cancellation report was filed. After hearing parties, including the
complainants, who had protested the report, the trial court accepted the final
report, and closed the case.
3.

The trial court, in its order, recorded that the two sale deeds were executed

on 19-12-2000 and 29-1-2001, as also two possession letters on the same dates.
The first letter recited that possession would be handed over after repayment of
Rs. 10 lakh by the purchaser, on 29-1-2001. The second letter mentioned that
possession was handed over on the date of its issue, i.e 29-1-2001. The
Investigating officer reported that there were sufficient materials indicating that
the possession was handed over actually on that date; the sale was complete. He
also reported that the complainant had permitted the purchasers to keep their

CRL.REV.P. 688-689/2005

2 of 7

goods, in the premises, in a bedroom with a toilet. The purchaser/accused also
commenced some renovation work; however, the complainants were permitted to
continue in the premises for a few days on humanitarian grounds, since their
house at Mehrauli had not been completed. The police recommended closure of
the case. The complainants protested; they led evidence. They deposed that the
entire consideration for the property had not been paid by the accused;
consequently there was an understanding that the possession would not be
handed over to them till the balance of Rs. 10 lakhs was paid. It was also stated
that the workers of the accused were permitted to carry out repairs; at that stage
the complainants were not aware of the fraudulent intention of the accused/
respondents, to cheat them. Apparently, the purchasers/ accused also filed a
counter complaint, which led to FIR No. 335/2002. In that case, the police
recommended closure, after investigation. The closure report was accepted; no
cognizance was taken by the court.
4.

The trial court, after noticing the materials, concluded that the elements of

the offence of house trespass were absent, in view of the two sale deeds and the
possession letters admittedly executed by the complainants. These evidenced that
possession was handed over. The court also noticed that there was a dispute
about payment of Rs. 10 lakhs; another factor considered was that the
complainant had filed a civil suit for possession; she was given possession as per
terms and conditions of the sale deed on 10-8-2003. A possession letter, signed
by one complainant (M.L. Agarwal) as well as the accused (Manish Gupta) as

CRL.REV.P. 688-689/2005

3 of 7

confirming parties, was relied upon. The court concluded that the evidence
indicated that symbolic possession of the property was handed over to the
accused; it inferred that they had no intention to commit the offence of criminal
trespass. The court relied upon the decision reported as Giri Bala Sahu -vsProba Misra 1974 Crl LJ 1972.
5.

The complainant, Shri Mangi Lal Agarwal argued that the police, during

the investigation, seemingly, overlooked the fact that the complainants were in
“actual physical possession” of the premises. This could be easily verified from
neighbors, flower and newspaper delivery persons, and by records of the landline
telephones connected, in the premises, showing the calls made by the
complainants. It was urged that the entry into, and presence of the accused at the
premises, without the permission of the complainants was easily verifiable from
the records of various complaints made to the Police number and the Vigilance
Department of the Police.

It was submitted that the complainants had

complained to secure the eviction of the trespassers. The accused trespassed three
times during a span of five days, and each time had to be evicted by the Police.
The complainants had provided details of all these complaints to the
Investigating Office (“I/O) who did nothing.
6.

It was urged that the I/O, failed to investigate, collect evidence and bring

the evidence on records in order to prove or disprove the above-mentioned two
ingredients.

He instead chose to file the cancellation report. The petitioner

submitted that he had expressed concern about dishonesty of the I.O. Enough

CRL.REV.P. 688-689/2005

4 of 7

credible evidence was collected to establish these.
7.

It was submitted that the circumstances which persuaded the court to

accept the final report were not material; the court should have probed deeper as
there were sufficient materials to reject the report and take cognizance of the
offence.
8.

Section 441 of the Indian Penal Code, defines criminal trespass, as an act

whereby a person enters upon property in the possession of another with intent
to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of
such property etc. It is clear, therefore, that trespass is committed by the
intention on the part of the trespasser to commit an offence or to intimidate,
insult or annoy etc. When the trespasser has that blameworthy mind in effecting
the entry into the property in possession of some others, he is said to have
committed the offence of criminal trespass. In this case, the admitted
circumstances are that the complainant received substantial amounts; according
to them some dispute existed about the remaining amount to be paid by the
accused. It is also an undisputed fact that the accused were permitted to carry out
some repairs in the premises; the complainants allege, however, that they were in
exclusive possession. The trial court considered the materials, particularly the
two possession letters. Although it did not premise its conclusions, on those, the
court was satisfied that the symbolic possession of the property was given to the
accused. On these facts, the court held that the basic ingredient of criminal
trespass, i.e intention to insult, intimidate or annoy any one in possession of

CRL.REV.P. 688-689/2005

5 of 7

property was not discernable.
9.

After considering the submissions and averments and also examining the

materials, I find no reasons to upset the order of the court below. The question as
to whether the complainant was in possession at the time, when the nine persons
went to the premises, is a matter of inference, to be gathered from the statement
of parties, documents and surrounding circumstances. The court, after
considering the letters, deeds and the fact that substantial amounts had been
admittedly paid to the complainant, concluded that the accused could not be
considered strangers; symbolic possession was with them. This was on the basis
of the amount paid to the complainant as well as other facts such as the admitted
presence of the accused's employees in the premises. I do not find the order or
approach of the court below to be irregular or contrary to law; it has also not
unjustifiably accepted the cancellation report submitted by the police.

CRL.REV.P. 688-689/2005

6 of 7

10.

The revision has to fail, for the reasons disclosed above. The petition is

accordingly dismissed; in the circumstances, however, without costs.

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
JULY 26, 2007

CRL.REV.P. 688-689/2005

7 of 7

