*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.M.C. 4662/2005
Reserved on :July 19, 2007
Decided on : July 27,2007
M/S. TEXMACO LTC.

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Pradeep Kumar, Advocate

versus
STATE AND ANR.

..... Respondents
Through : Ms. Santosh Kohli, Advocate

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

The present petition is preferred against the impugned order dated 24.05.2005 passed by the

learned trial court.
2.

The brief facts necessary to decide this present petition are that the Petitioner company

acquired the proprietary rights in respect of M/s. Birla Mills as well as the latter's housing colonies by
virtue of a scheme of compromise and arrangement in 1983. M/s. Birla Cotton Spinning and Weaving
Mills had installed a mill in Delhi known as Birla Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mill located at Kamla
Nagar. The mill had more than 3000 employees and had 900 quarters in its nearby vicinity. The quarters

CRL.M.C. 4662/2005

1 of 6

provided accommodation to the employees. The quarters/residential colonies are popularly known as
New Birla lines, Old Birla lines, Shivaji Lines, Khilonawala Bagh etc. They were allotted by the company
to its employees on license basis. The allotments were allegedly made with the terms and conditions
that the employee would be entitled to reside in the quarter so long as he continued in employment
and would vacate it and handover the vacant possession back to the company upon cessation of his
employment.
3.

The Respondent no-2 joined the services of the company on 14.11.1948. He was allotted

quarters bearing no. 78 on 10.4.1980 and quarters no.79 on 9.7.1976 Old Birla Lines, subject to the
terms and conditions of licence and allotment letters of the said dates. The charges for the use and
occupation of the quarter were Rs. 2.75(Rs. Two and seventy five paise) The Respondent No.2 ceased to
be in employment of the Petitioner Company with effect from 30.03.1987. It is averred that the
Respondent was bound to vacate the quarter which he did not despite the alleged requests and
reminders from the company. The Petitioner Company thereafter filed a complaint case under Section
630 of the Companies Act 1988.
4.

The company was closed down with effect from 30.11.1996 and none of its employees who

were in service on the effective date 30.11.1996 vacated the quarters. The company filed similar
complaints under section 630 of the Companies Act. In the matter relating to Respondent no.2 , the
court took cognizance and he was granted bail. It is alleged that the second respondent has been
illegally and unauthorizedly occupying the accommodation since the last 18 years without paying any
rent.
5.

The petitioner filed an application under Section 452 Cr.P.C. for securing possession of the

premises, pending disposal of the proceeding under Section 630, Companies Act.

CRL.M.C. 4662/2005

2 of 6

6.

The trial court by its order dated 24.5.2005 dismissed the application under section 452 of the

code. The extracts of the order are as follows;
“The beneficent provision contained in section 630(1)(b) of the Act has
been enacted by the Legislature with the object of providing summary
procedure for retrieving the property of the company. The companies
Act is a special enactment having precedence over the code as it
explicitly provides the mode for retrieving the property of the
company in the hand of its past employees as noticed above. If the
prayer made in the application is allowed, it would be contrary to the
legislative intent contained in sec.630(1)and (2) of the Act and would
amount to nullifying the provision empowering the court to give
direction to the past employee for delivery of the possession of the
property of the company within a time fixed by it after finding him
guilty under section 630(1) of the Act. Undoubtedly the accused has
succeeded in prolonging the trial of this case for 18 years which has
defeated the very object of providing summary procedure for such
matters for speedy retrieval of the property of the company but that
cannot be a ground for awarding the relief prayed by the complainant
in this application. The application under section 452 of the code is
without merit and liable to be dismissed”

7.

The Learned counsel for the Petitioner Shri J.V.Rana contended that the petition under

Section 452 of the Code is maintainable as all ingredients of the section are fulfilled. The
Respondent no.2 can be directed to deliver the possession of the quarter to the Petitioner
company. He further contended that the provisions of Section 630 of the Companies Act are
beneficial and specially enacted to provide speedy relief to the company for retrieval of
possession of its property. The Learned counsel urged that a complaint under section 630 is in the
nature of a summary trial as per the Code but the present case has already taken 17 years and the
beneficial provision of section 630 of the Companies Act has been defeated.
8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgments of the Calcutta High Court

reported as Tata Tea Ltd. vs. Fazlur Rahman, 2001(104) Com.Case 718 and Metal Box (India)

CRL.M.C. 4662/2005

3 of 6

Ltd. vs. State of West Bengal, 1999 III-LLJ(Supp) 1349. It was contended that the company's
right to retrieve his property, is explicit and is statutory right in view of Section 630 of the
Companies Act. Learned counsel contended that the power to restore possession even during the
pendency of criminal proceedings is well recognised by virtue of that provision as well as the two
decisions cited.
9.

The trial court which considered the application of a present petitioner took into

consideration the text of Section 452(1). It was of the opinion that the Court's power to make an
appropriate order for disposal to any person claiming to be entitled to possession of the property,
a document produced before it or its custody or regarding which any offence appears to have
been committed, has to be read in the context of the term “inquiry” defined in Section 2(g). It
also analysed Section 630 of the Companies Act. The Court concluded that the trial in the
proceedings has not yet been completed since the petitioner was yet to prove that the accused was
allotted the quarter in question during the course of his employment and that he failed to hand it
back after termination of his services. The Court also considered the objections raised by the
respondent accused about the locus standi of the present petitioner to institute and prosecute the
complaint under Section 630.
10.

I have considered the materials on record, as well as the submissions of the petitioner.

The Calcutta High Court in the Tata Tea Ltd. case intervened and directed the accused exemployee to vacate the premises in exercise of its inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
Likewise, in the Metal Box(India) Ltd. case too the Court invoked its inherent powers under
Section 482 and directed the accused to vacate the premises. In neither decision did the Calcutta
High Court have any occasion to consider the inter-play between Section 452 Cr.P.C. and
CRL.M.C. 4662/2005

4 of 6

Section 630 of Companies Act – which has been done by the trial court in the present case.
11.

It is undoubtedly a fact that the proceedings were initiated way back in 1988 and have not

culminated or achieved finality. The trial has not been completed and apparently has dragged
on. The reasons for this are, however, unclear. From the factual narrative itself the original
owner (M/s. Texmaco Ltd.) entered into a scheme of compromise arrangement which was
sanctioned by this Court. Thereafter, the successor entity closed down operations and sought to
recover the other premises. In these circumstances, it would be imprudent for the Court in
exercise of its inherent power to virtually short cut and forestall a trial (where the parties have
contested) and virtually allow the complaint. Undoubtedly, Parliamentary intention in enacting
Section 630 of the Companies Act was to ensure a speedy resolution of disputes relating to
possession of company's immovable properties. Yet that does not mean that what ordinarily
should be done at the final stage, ought to be done at the interim stage. In my opinion, recourse
to such interlocutory power should be in exceptional situations and not in all cases. In these
circumstances, where the dispute itself pertains to entitlement of the property and its possession,
the Court should slow in exercising its powers under Section 452.
12.

In view of the above, I am not persuaded by the submissions on behalf of the petitioner

that the trial court's approach or the impugned order was either illegal or in any manner improper.
13.

The petition, therefore, has to fail. It is accordingly dismissed without any order as to

costs.

July 27, 2007

CRL.M.C. 4662/2005

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J

5 of 6

CRL.M.C. 4662/2005

6 of 6

