*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.M.C. 2183/2005 & CRL.M.C. 2184/2005
Date of decision : April 25, 2007

ARUN GUPTA & ANR.

........Petitioner
Through: Mr. Imran Ahmad Abbasi, Advocate

versus
STATE

..... Respondents
Through Mr. R.K.Kapoor, Mr. Govind Kaushik,
Advocates for complainant.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat : (Open Court)
1. In this petition the relief claimed is for quashing of criminal proceedings arising
from a first information report (FIR) registered on 25.8.2004 alleging
commission of offences under Sections 120B/406/409/420/467/468/471/477A
IPC, by the petitioner-accused.
2. The facts are briefly that during April, 2002, the complainant (one

CRL-MC-2183/05 & 2184/05

1 of 8

N.S.Hoon)was approached by Sh. Sunil Singhania, an agent of M/s. O.J.
Financial Services Ltd., owned by the petitioners. Shri Singhania persuaded the
complainant to invest funds and shares with the petitioners, i.e. Gupta brothers
assuring to pay 18% interest per annum in order to maximize the yield on his
investment subject to a minimum investment of Rs. 1.00 Crore per year. The
complainant was also allegedly assured payment of further additional incentives
on extra income.
3. With a view to ensure the investment in a proper manner, the complainant
visited the offices of M/s O.J.Financial Services Ltd. Persuaded by the big
fleet of working staff and apparently progressive investment report of M/s.
O.J.Financial Services Ltd., he decided to invest his hard-earned money in share
market schemes of the petitioners in April, 2002, in order to secure a fixed
interest amount as returns on his total investment, on monthly basis. It was
mutually agreed that interest on shares would be calculated on the basis of
fluctuating market rates. All the actions for utilization of funds provided to
M/s. O.J.Financial Services Ltd. were to be performed by them, in respect of
shares of the complainant.
4. The complainant not only invested his money but also due to the petitioners'
persuasion, motivated one of his acquaintances, Mrs. Meera Ahuja also invested
amounts

in

M/s.

O.J.Financial

CRL-MC-2183/05 & 2184/05

Services

Ltd.

On

the

petitioners'

2 of 8

recommendation, the complainant invested Rs. 30 lakhs through pay Order at
the agreed interest of 1.5% p.m. and Mrs. Ahuja deposited an amount of Rs.7.5
lakhs in April, 2002 with M/s. O.J.Financial Services Ltd. The complainant
alleged that without intimating any tenable reason or justification, the Gupta
brothers (i.e. petitioners) discontinued the monthly payment of Rs. 45,000/made on account of interest w.e.f. October, 2003 and did not honour the
commitment made to him. Similarly, the company did not pay interest amount
of Rs.11,000/- to Mrs. Meera Ahuja from the month of November, 2003.
5. It was further alleged that two cheques amounting to Rs. 7.5 lakhs (for the
return of principal amount) and Rs. 11,000/- as the monthly interest of
November, 2003 (drawn upon M/s Ganpati Securities) given by Shri Sunil
Singhania to Mrs. Meera Ahuja were dishonoured. On enquiring the position,
the owner of company failed to give proper reply for non-payment of interest
amount. Since the response of the owner of Company was not satisfactory, no
option was left for the complainant to sue against the said company. According
to complainant, Shri Sunil Singhania (the middle man), Shri Arun Gupta and
Naveen Gupta, the petitioners, in furtherance of a criminal conspiracy,
dishonestly and fraudulently induced him through misrepresentation, false
assurances, and forgeries of various documents including documents akin to
valuable securities like agreements and delivery instructions etc. to cheat him

CRL-MC-2183/05 & 2184/05

3 of 8

and misappropriate his amount and shares.
6. It was alleged that during investigation the allegation about payment of Rs.
1,39,50,000/- by complainant through 10 cheques was established. It was also
alleged that the complainant's brother paid Rs. 30 lakhs through a pay order and
Ms. Meera Ahuja paid Rs. 10 lakhs through a cheque in favour of M/s
O.J.Financial Services Limited. A statement revealed that the complainant had
received amounts in excess of Rs. 6 lakhs in 8 instalments from M/s.
O.J.Financial Services Limited for about 6 months by cheques; likewise Ms.
Meera Ahuja received

Rs. 2,40,000/- in 8 instalments. According to the

investigation, M/s O.J.Financial Services was also furnished with shares
amounting to Rs. 1.11 crore of various companies.

After investigation, a

charge-sheet was filed.
7. Mr. Vinay Garg submits that there is nothing on record to show that Sunil
Singhania had any relationship with the petitioners. Further there is no shred of
documentary or other evidence to substantiate the plea that the petitioners
deposited cash or shares in lieu of payment of interest. It was submitted that
valuation of the shares on the basis of fluctuations in the market could never be
a fixed one and therefore question of paying fixed monthly interest or amounts,
as alleged was a figment of the imagination of the complainant.

Counsel

submitted that shares have 4 different rates on any single day. Therefore the

CRL-MC-2183/05 & 2184/05

4 of 8

entire version of depositing shares to enable the complainant, to obtain a fixed
income is utterly implausible or impracticable.
8. Counsel urged that the transaction whereby the shares were handed over, was in
furtherance of a legitimate agreement under which the petitioners as brokers,
were mandated to sell them. Heavy reliance was placed upon certain documents
said to have been executed by the complainant, i.e. Member Client Agreement,
Risk Disclosure Agreement, Sub-broker-Client Agreement dated 1.5.2002 and a
letter dated 29.4.2002 issued by the complainant. Additionally counsel placed
reliance on a letter dated 20.10.2003 allegedly issued by the complainant,
evidencing receipt of contract notes for the transaction of share transfer etc. It
was submitted that all these showed that shares were received in the normal
course of business, in commercial transactions and the shares were not meant to
be kept as security or use for the purpose of ensuring monthly payments. At any
rate no such arrangement existed in writing.
9. Learned counsel contended that the reality of the entire transaction between the
parties was that the complainant wished to hand over securities and engage in
share trading. This is evidenced by his willing execution of various commercial
documents. In case he had any difficulty in recovering the amounts the proper
and legal course for him would have been to institute civil action or file
recovery suits and not lend a criminal clock to the transaction and lodge a first

CRL-MC-2183/05 & 2184/05

5 of 8

information report.

Learned counsel contended that even though the

prosecution filed a charge sheet it is still open to this court to assess all the
materials and if satisfied that relief is justified, proceed and quash the FIR under
Section 482 Cr. P.C. He relied upon the judgment reported as M.L.Bhatt Vs.
M.K.Pandita and Ors. , JT 2002 (3 SC) 89.
10.I have considered the submissions on behalf of the parties as also the first
information report and the charge sheet filed.
11.The parameters of jurisdiction of a High Court under Section 482 of the
Criminal Procedure Code are well-defined. The court can invoke it and quash
criminal proceedings (including the first information report) if such FIR or
complaint, read as a whole does not disclose the commission of any offence or
offences alleged. Further, the court can also quash the proceedings if it is
satisfied that they were initiated due to mala fides or that if all allegations are
assumed to be true, no offence can be made out; or that the allegations are so
inherently improbable so as to be discarded.
12.In this case, the complainant alleged that substantial amounts were paid to the
petitioners. This apparently is based on documentary evidence and also appears
to have been accounted for in the books available with the petitioners. In
addition the complainant and the other investors who had followed his example,
were paid monthly amounts for some time before such payments were

CRL-MC-2183/05 & 2184/05

6 of 8

discontinued. The cheques issued to one of the investors were not honoured.
The petitioners, apparently failed to repay the principal amounts.

Their

justification is that the amounts and the shares received were towards share
transactions – they rely on a number of documents. Some of these documents
are alleged to be forged. The police conducted an extensive investigation and
sought the expertise of auditors whose report is part of the charge sheet.
13.All the above materials in my considered opinion do not square up to any
permissible ground on which this court can exercise its jurisdiction under
Section 482. It certainly cannot be said that the FIR taken as a whole or that
even if all its contents are assumed to be true, do not disclose commission of
any offence. The points raised by the petitioners may be valid and can be
certainly urged in the course of further proceedings, in the defence. Yet they are
disputed questions of fact. The investigations resulted in a charge sheet. In these
circumstances, it would be unsafe for the court to conclude that no materials
exist indicating the offence. Whether the materials and evidence collected are
sufficient or otherwise to frame a charge and whether they constitute legal

CRL-MC-2183/05 & 2184/05

7 of 8

evidence is a matter which would be appropriately gone into by the trial court;
this court cannot pre-judge that exercise and comment on it.
14.In view of the above conclusions I am satisfied that the relief claimed cannot be
granted. All rights and contentions of the petitioners available in law, are
hereby reserved; nothing mentioned in this order shall be construed as an
expression on any of the merits of the case.
15.The petitions therefore fail and are dismissed.

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
APRIL 25th, 2007
mm

CRL-MC-2183/05 & 2184/05

8 of 8

