24
*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Delivered on August 23, 2007
W.P.(C) 8976/2005
M/S EXCEL BUSINESS LINKS P.LTD
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Upamanyu Hazarika with
Ms. D. Phookan, Advocates
versus
UOI & ORS.

CORAM:

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Ramesh Babu M.R., Ms. Manisha Singh,
Mr. Srinjoy Banerjee, Advocate
Mr. Rajiv Mehra for UOI

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?
Yes

.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Yes

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:(Open Court)
1.

Rule. Mr. Ramesh Babu, Mr. Srinjoy Banerjee and Mr. Rajiv Mehra waive

notice of rule. With consent of parties, the matter was heard finally.
2.

The petitioner seeks a direction for quashing of decisions of the Reserve

Bank of India (RBI) dated 4th September, 2000 and an order of the Appellate
Authority constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act dated 13th February,
2003.
3.

The appellant is a non-banking financial institution. After the amendment

W.P.(C) 8976/2005

1 of 6

of the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1934, by Act 23 of 1997 (which
was brought into force on 09.01.97), non-banking financial institutions were
prohibited from conducting business without obtaining certificate of registration
under Chapter III B of the Act. One of the condition was that the institution
should have had a net owned fund of Rs. 25 lakhs or such other amount not
exceeding Rs. 200 lakhs as the RBI notified. This condition was to an extent
relieved by a “window” provision, namely, Section 45 IA (3) that allowed existing
non-banking financial institutions with net owned fund of less than Rs. 25 lakhs
to function for three years from 09.01.97 provided that such company, within
three months of fulfilling the requirement of possessing net owned fund informed
RBI for that purpose.
4.

It is not disputed that the petitioner applied for the grant of licence in

terms of Section 45 IA on 5th July, 1997. Its application continued to remain
pending. It is claimed that on 2nd January,2000 the petitioner informed the RBI
that it had “almost” achieved the maximum NOF required for grant of certificate.
5.

Mr. Hazarika, learned counsel relied upon on the copy of a subsequent

letter dated 20th April, 2000 of the petitioner. It was claimed that on 26 th May,
2000 the Bank was informed that the net owned fund (NOF) stipulated under the
Act i.e. Rs. 25 lakhs had been achieved. A certificate was requested for. Learned
counsel also relied upon copies of inter se correspondence between the petitioner
and the Bank by which the RBI had sought for details such as audit balance sheet
and other particulars, in support of the petitioners' claim that its institution had
achieved the stipulated conditions.
W.P.(C) 8976/2005

2 of 6

6.

Learned counsel contended that the petitioner was not afforded a

reasonable opportunity of hearing before the RBI issued the rejection order on
04.09.2000. Counsel contended that the petitioner's office had shifted and the
respondent was duly informed about that.

The order was appealed against.

Counsel contended that the Appellate Authority was informed about the change
of address of the petitioner on 5th December, 2003. Nevertheless, the Appellate
Committee proceeded and made the impugned order rejecting the appeal without
affording a reasonable opportunity.
7.

Learned counsel for the RBI resisted the petition. He relied upon the text

of Section 45 IA and contended that the three year period expired on 8th January,
1997. Counsel contended that the letter dated 02.01.2000 relied upon was not
part of the RBI record and has been produced in these proceedings for the first
time. He, however, did not dispute that the subsequent letter dated 26 th May,
2000 was received by the respondent and some inter se correspondence was
exchanged between the parties. Nevertheless, counsel contended that in terms of
Chapter III B, there was an absolute bar in consideration of the such application
since admittedly it recorded that the requisite condition had not been achieved
within the time. The NOF was allegedly achieved after the expiry of the three
years period.
8.

Section 45 IA, to the extent it is relevant is extracted as below:
“45IA. Requirement of registration and net owned fund.-(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter or in any
other law for the time being in force, no non-banking financial
company shall commence or carry on the business of non-banking
financial institution without-

W.P.(C) 8976/2005

3 of 6

(a) obtaining a certificate of registration issued under this
Chapter; and
(b) having the net owned fund of twenty-five lakh rupees or
such other amount, not exceeding two hundred lakh rupees, as the
Bank may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(2)Every non-banking financial company shall make an
application for registration to the Bank in such form as the Bank
may specify:
Provided that the non-banking financial company in existence
on the commencement of the Reserve Bank of India
(Amendment)Act, 1997 shall make an application for
registration to the Bank before the expiry of six months from
such commencement and notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (1) may continue to carry on the business of a
non-banking financial institution until a certificate of
registration is issued to it or rejection of application for
registration is communicated to it.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
non-banking financial company in existence on the
commencement of the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment)
Act, 1997 and having a net owned fund of less than twentyfive lakh rupees may, for the purpose of enabling such
company to fulfil the requirement of the net owned fund,
continue to carry on the business of a non-banking financial
institution(i) for a period of three years from such commencement; or
(ii) for such further period as the Bank may, after
recording the reasons in writing for so doing, extend,
Subject to the condition that such company shall, within
three months of fulfilling the requirement of the net owned fund,
inform the Bank about such fulfilment:
Provided that the period allowed to continue business under
this sub-section shall in no case exceed six years in the aggregate.”
9.

The above provision was inserted by an amendment made in 1997; the

amendment was brought into force on 09.01.97. The object of inserting Chapter
III B was apparently to bring within the fold of RBI regulation all non-banking
financial institutions and ensure their accountability to depositors. Section 45 IA
is a non obstante clause and enacts an absolute bar in respect of functioning of
non-banking financial institutions which do not possess NOF of less than Rs. 25
W.P.(C) 8976/2005

4 of 6

lakhs. That bar is lifted to an extent in the case of NBFCs in what is termed a
window period of three years. That window period expired on 08.01.2000. In
this case, the claim of the petitioner is that it achieved the stipulated condition of
having a NOF of Rs. 25 lakh sometime in January, 2000. Even if the text of that
letter were to be taken into consideration – although the document is disputed –
the claim is not that the NOF achieved was Rs. 25 lakhs, but that the petitioner
had attained “almost” Rs. 25 lakhs. In these circumstances, the petitioner's claim
of being eligible under Section 45 IA (3) as an existing NBFC entitled to carry on
its business itself is rather vague. As far as the issue as to whether the Bank was
obliged to consider the request for certificate is concerned, it is not disputed that
the documents admitted by the Bank relate to the period May, 2000 onwards.
The mere circumstance that the Bank engaged in certain correspondence did not,
in my opinion, itself entitle the petitioner to claim that the RBI was obliged to
permit it to function beyond the window period. As far as the application of the
proviso is concerned, facially it carves out a qualification as it permits functioning
of NBFCs which apply within the time period indicated (three years, before
08.01.2000) for a maximum period of six years. The petitioner clearly did not fit
that description.
10.

As regards the complaint of violation of principles of natural justice is

concerned, I am of the opinion that the allegations in that regard are vague and
unspecific. No date has been mentioned as to when the petitioner had shifted the
office. A bland allegation has been made that the appellate body did not give
sufficient opportunity. On the other hand, a plain reading of the order would
W.P.(C) 8976/2005

5 of 6

indicate that a notice had been issued on 04.08.03. For the above reasons, the
claim in these proceedings cannot succeed.
11.

The petition is dismissed as unmerited. No costs.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J

AUGUST
as

23, 2007

W.P.(C) 8976/2005

6 of 6

