*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on February 13, 2007
Decided on February 26, 2007

+ CRL.REV.P. 929/2006
RAKESH CHAUHAN

........Petitioner
Through Mr. R.K.Sharma, Advocate
Versus

THE STATE & ANR.

....Respondents
Through Mr. V.K.Malik, Advocate for the State

CORAM
Mr. Justice S.Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S.Ravindra Bhat :
1. The petitioner had preferred these proceedings under Section 482 Code of Criminal
Procedure; later at his request it was converted into revisional proceedings under
Section 397/401 Criminal Procedure Code.
2. The petitioner is an accused in a first information report (FIR) registered on 23.2.2004.
Originally it alleged that he was guilty of offences under Sections 365, 354, 342, 324
and 34 IPC. As per the statement of the informant/prosecutrix, she and the petitioner
were members of an organization/NGO. It was alleged by her that the petitioner sent
ward for her requesting that she visit him at his factory; when she went there, the
CRL.REV.P. 929/2006

1 of 7

petitioner and his three associates were allegedly seated there. It is also claimed that
the prosecutrix/complainant was taken in a car, to a house and locked with the other
three persons. She alleged that the three other boys caused hurt and held her in
wrongful confinement for three days. It is alleged that the incident occurred on
20.3.2004 and she was kept in wrongful custody till 22.3.2004 when she effected her
escape.
3. The petitioner claims that after recording her version in the FIR, the
complainant/prosecutrix again made another statement the next date i.e. on 23.3.2004
which was contradictory. On the basis of the allegations the petitioner was allegedly
medically examined twice.
4. The petitioner alleges that the medical opinion was to the effect that these injuries
were not as a result of self infliction; however there were no allegations of rape. It is
alleged that the petitioner's mobile phone was seized; it however did not match with
the description of the prosecutrix's version during the course of the investigation. It is
also alleged that 6 persons were examined but none of them corroborated with the
complainant's story. Subsequently on 1.4.2004, pursuant to orders made by the court
on earlier dates, the prosecutrix's statement was recorded by the Magistrate

under

Section 164 Code of Criminal Procedure. In the course of this statement, she alleged
that threats were held out that if certain documents in her custody were not returned to
the petitioner, she would be ruined. In the course of this statement it was also alleged
that the petitioner committed rape on the prosecutrix.
5. The police filed a charge sheet, in which it was alleged that the petitioner had
CRL.REV.P. 929/2006

2 of 7

committed offences under Sections 365/354/342/324 and also 376 (2)(g) IPC. The
learned Additional Sessions Judge, by her order dated 14.8.2006, framed charges
under Sections 342, 365,324 and 376 (2)(g) of the IPC.
6. The charges framed in so far as they relate to Section 376(2)(g) are impugned by
learned counsel. It was submitted that the prosecution version is suspect because the
complainant in her most contemporaneous versions, given to the police, on 22.3.2004
and 23.3.2004, never mentioned about her being sexually assaulted any time during
her so called illegal confinement. It was contended that the only allegations levelled
were about being forcibly kept in custody, and blade injuries being inflicted on various
parts of her body. Her applications for re-medical examination, though repeatedly
made, were rejected by the court. In these circumstances, the court ought not to have
lent credence to her version, made 8 days after the incident, on 1.4.2004, in the course
of a statement under Section 164 Cr.. P.C.
7. Learned counsel contended that besides the major loophole in the prosecution story, in
as much as there was no corroborative material through medical evidence, the court
ought to have seen that the complainant was in the habit of levelling false allegations
with a view to tarnish the image of respectable persons.
8. Learned counsel submitted that the complainant had on an earlier occasion also alleged
sexual assault against some one else, which was subsequently found to be baseless. It
was also alleged that the complainant's motive was to maliciously tarnish the
petitioner's image, and get back at him since there were other disputes with him.
Counsel also submitted that the complainant was also a prolific litigant engaging in
CRL.REV.P. 929/2006

3 of 7

false allegations and seeking to extort money.
9. Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the prosecution story, supported by
the statements recorded on several dates were not merely that the petitioner had
wrongfully confined the complainant but also that he had sexually assaulted her.
Learned counsel submitted that no doubt the complainant did not mention about such a
sexual assault at the earliest point; yet that did not falsify the case or constitute a fatal
infirmity. It was submitted that the entire matter, having regard to the seriousness of
the offences and the statement made under Section 164 deserves to be tried.
10.Learned counsel however relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Santosh
Kumar Vs. State of M.P. [2006 (3) Crimes 339] to say that just because no injuries
were found on the vital parts of a prosecutrix would not be a ground to hold that no
rape or sexual assault had been committed. All these, it was submitted, are matter of
trial and the court would have to satisfy itself after considering each and every material
on record.
11.The facts of this case, as the above narration would reveal that the petitioner and the
prosecutrix apparently knew each other; according to her version, the petitioner had
called her to his place, and later conspired to take her around in a car and,
subsequently kept her in illegal confinement. She also alleged that the petitioner and
his associates had inflicted injuries upon her person. These have received broad
corroboration by medical evidence. The question is whether in the absence of a
specific mention of rape in her earlier statement, her subsequent allegation made under
Section 164 about commission of that offence, cannot be taken into consideration
CRL.REV.P. 929/2006

4 of 7

while framing the charge.
12.While framing charges for offences, the court is expected to apply its mind to all the
available materials produced before it by the prosecution. If it is prima facie satisfied
that the charge requires to be framed, it should proceed to do so. The court should not
of course function as an adjunct of the prosecution – if in the course of its
consideration of materials, it can conclude that the evidence presented does not call for
framing of one or the other charge, it can refuse to do so.
13.In this case, the peculiar fact highlighted by the petitioner, in the pleadings as well but
the course of hearing was that the complainant/prosecutrix graphically mentioned
about assault to her person, during the three days period when she was allegedly kept
in illegal confinement. In two of her statements made immediately after she fled the
place, no mention of rape or sexual assault had been made. Her attempt to secure an
order for re-medical examination was turned down. the statement recorded under
Section 164 was later i.e. 1.4.2004. The question therefore is whether the court on
these circumstances can infer that the accusations of rape and the charge framed for
commission of that offence, cannot be made out at all on the basis of the existing and
available materials.
14.The Supreme Court in Santosh Kumar's case (supra) had considered whether in the
absence of material injuries substantiating allegations of rape, on the person of the
prosecutrix a court could convict the accused. The court held that the entirety of
evidence in such circumstances has to be weighed and that the mere fact that no
injuries were found, could not by itself a ground to rule out rape and that the entire
CRL.REV.P. 929/2006

5 of 7

prosecution story is false.
15.In the present case too no doubt the nature and description of injuries at the stage when
the prosecutrix lodged the FIR, did not point to sexual assault. Yet she got the
statement recorded under Section 164 where she unambiguously alleged rape. At the
moment the trial of the accused has not concluded and all the witnesses have not
spoken on behalf of both the parties. Though it may be tempting for the court to
intervene and draw inferences, the nature of exercise at the time of framing of charges,
in my opinion precludes meticulous weighing of probabilities of the evidence and
materials. Therefore it would be unsafe to rule out the allegations on the basis of their
being improbable or untrue, or lacking in corroboration.
16.As regards the submission of the petitioner that the prosecutrix's past conduct makes
her a suspect person and an undesirable element, those materials in my considered
opinion, could not have been looked into by the trial court in view of the judgment
of the Supreme Court in State of Orissa Vs.Debendra Nath Padhy,2005(1) SCC
568,where the court had held that at the stage of framing the charges, the defence

CRL.REV.P. 929/2006

6 of 7

version cannot be seen to conclude the probabilities of the case.
17.For the foregoing reasons, the petition cannot succeed. Accordingly, it is dismissed
without any order as to costs.

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
FEBRUARY 26, 2007
mm

CRL.REV.P. 929/2006

7 of 7

