*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+
CONT.CAS(C) 445/2004
Reported
Reserved on: 9th July, 2007.
Date of decision: 26th July, 2007

NEERAJA MEHRA

..... Petitioner
Through Petitioner in person
versus

RAKESH MEHTA & ANR.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Anil Grover, Advocate for the contemnor.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
Order on Sentence:
1.

By judgment and order dated 25th May, 2007, I had convicted the respondent Sh.

M.M. Dhayia for having committed contempt of this court on the finding that his conduct
amounted to wilful and deliberate dis-obedience of Court's order.

The matter was

adjourned for hearing the contemner on the point of sentence. The petitioner as well as
the contemner's counsel were heard on 9th July, 2007.
2.

The contemner filed an affidavit on 6.7.2007 tendering his unqualified and sincere

apology to the Court. He deposed about his blemishless 20 years record of service in the

CONT.CAS(C) 445/2004

1 of 5

MCD and also alluded to repeated outstanding ratings given by his superior authorities.
He further deposed that on 7.4.2006, MCD dispensed with his services along with those
of 17 other Executive Engineers without following any departmental proceedings.

3.

Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the contemner submitted that the apology

tendered to the Court is unconditional and worthy of acceptance. It was submitted that
the contemner's transgressions were not of such a magnitude as to impel this Court to
punish him a prison term, or impose fine. Learned counsel adverted to proviso to Section
12(1) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.

That provision enables the Court to

discharge an accused or remit the punishment awarded on apology being made to the
satisfaction of the Court. Counsel also relied on the explanation to Section 12(1) and
submitted that such apologies need not be rejected even if they are conditional. It was
submitted that in view of the unconditional apology and the repentance shown by the
contemner the Court should adopt a lenient view.

Reliance was placed upon the

judgment reported as Chandan Mitra And Anr. in re: (Suo Motu Contempt Petition) 1998
(8) SCC 554 and State of Haryana Vs. Nauratta Singh And Ors. 2000(3) SCC 513.
4.

The petitioner who argued the case herself opposed the request for complete

remission and submitted that finding of the Court clearly disclosed wilful and
contumacious conduct. It was submitted that the contemner was fully aware of the
consequences of his actions and inactions and being a senior officer fully aware of his
responsibility failed in the discharge of his duties. He also withheld material facts from
the Court which defeated the Court's directions.
CONT.CAS(C) 445/2004

It was contended that in such
2 of 5

circumstances, the Court should not hesitate to impose an appropriate sentence. As to
what the sentence would, was best left to the discretion of the Court.
5.

This court had convicted the contemner for wilfully withholding materials and

indulging in conduct that defeated previous directions. The question is what should be
the appropriate order on the point of sentence.
6.

The proviso of Section 12 empowers the Court to remit the sentence or discharge

the accused if an apology is made by him to its satisfaction. In this case, the conduct of
the contemner in virtually subverting the Court's orders has been documented by the
judgment convicting him.
7.

In E.T. Sunup -vs-C.A.N.S.S. Employees Association and Anr. 2004 (8) SCC683,

the Supreme Court, even while not sentencing a public official for contempt, and
imposing fine, held as follows:

"It has become a tendency with the Government Officers to
somehow or the other circumvent the orders of Court and try to
take recourse to one justification or other. This shows complete
lack of grace in accepting the orders of the Court. This tendency of
undermining the court's order cannot be countenanced. This Court
time and again has emphasized that in democracy the role of the
Court cannot be subservient to the administrative fait. The
executive & legislature has to work within Constitutional frame
work, and the judiciary has been given a role of watch dog to keep
the legislature & executive within check."
In T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad through the Amicus Curiae-vs-Ashok Khot and Anr.
(2006) 5SCC 1, the Supreme Court emphasized the importance of exercising contempt
jurisdiction appropriately to secure compliance with orders of court, in the following
CONT.CAS(C) 445/2004

3 of 5

terms:
"19. Proceedings for contempt are essentially personal and
punitive. This does not mean that it is not open to the Court, as a
matter of law to make a finding of contempt against any official of
the Government say Home Secretary or a Minister. While contempt
proceedings usually have these characteristics and contempt
proceedings against a Government department or a minister in an
official capacity would not be either personal or punitive (it would
clearly not be appropriate to fine or sequest the assets of the
Crown or a Government department or an officer of the Crown
acting in his official capacity), this does not mean that a finding of
contempt against a Government department or minister would be
pointless. The very fact of making such a finding would vindicate
the requirements of justice. In addition an order for costs could be
Page 2533 made to underline the significance of a contempt. A
purpose of the court's powers to make findings of contempt is to
ensure the orders of the court are obeyed. This jurisdiction is
required to be co-extensive with the courts' jurisdiction to make
the orders which need the protection which the jurisdiction to
make findings of contempt provides. In civil proceedings the court
can now make orders (other than injunctions or for specific
performance) against authorized Government departments or the
Attorney General. On applications for judicial review orders can
be made against ministers. In consequence such orders must be
taken not to offend the theory that the Crown can supposedly do no
wrong. Equally, if such orders are made and not obeyed, the body
against whom the orders were made can be found guilty of
contempt without offending that theory, which could be the only
justifiable impediment against making a finding of contempt. (See
M v. Home Office (1993) (3) All ER 537."
8.

These proceedings have dragged on for over two years; they have spanned

innumerable Court hearings. Although the right of litigant or any person accused of
contempt to contest the charges, cannot be disputed, a singular factor which is of
importance is that the contemner is a senior public official of the MCD. If he had, at the
first instance, appeared before the Court and admitted to the facts which have resulted in

CONT.CAS(C) 445/2004

4 of 5

adverse findings against him, considerable hearing time would have been saved.
8.

On an overall conspectus facts and attendant circumstances, I am of the opinion

that the contemner appears to be genuinely repentant of his conduct. This is a fit case
where sentence is not called for, because
"The quality of mercy is not strain'd.
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath.
It is twice blest:
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes."
--From Merchant of Venice (IV, I, (184-186)
In the circumstances of the case even while accepting the apology, the contemnor is
directed to bear the costs of these proceedings quantified at Rs. 40,000/-. The same shall
be paid to the petitioner within two weeks. Ordered accordingly.

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
JULY 26, 2007

CONT.CAS(C) 445/2004

5 of 5

