Reported
11
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 789/2003
April 20, 2007

N.P.SINGH

..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Sunita Bhardwaj, Advocate
versus

UOI & ORS.

..... Respondent
Through Ms. Anjana Gosain for AAI

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This petition seeks review of the judgment dated 13.12.05 disposing off

WP(c) 789/03.
2.

Although several grounds were alleged in the petition, Ms. Sunita

Bhardwaj, learned counsel urged that the petition is premised primarily on the
conclusion in paragraph 6 of the judgment ie. that no documents were produced
on the basis of which the claim to the post of Assistant Technical Officer was
W.P.(C) 789/2003

1 of 3

made w.e.f. 07.02.96 being erroneous. She relied upon a portion of the Annexure
P-38 filed along with the rejoinder, which it was submitted, is a full text of
Annexure P-10. In that document, the Airports Authority of India, the employer,
had listed some officials promoted to the post of Assistant Technical Officer on
07.02.96, without undergoing the test, who were granted a window period of one
year to enable to do so. That relief was granted to about 75 officers shown
between serial No. 49 to 124. Counsel submitted that in view of this position, it
was apparent that the petitioner also was entitled to same treatment . This,
according to her constituted a material error on the face of the record requiring
review.
3.

Ms. Anjana Gosain, learned counsel for the Airports Authority of India, on

the other hand, contended that there is no error since the condition now sought
to be relied upon was never pointed out during the course of hearing. It was
submitted that the petitioner was denied the one time benefit through flexible
complementing scheme, since he was on unauthorized leave during that period.
4.

Ms. Sunita Bhardwaj, submitted that the period of unauthorized leave was

regularized by a subsequent order and that in October, 1998, the petitioner had
been exonerated of all charges in the pending disciplinary proceedings.
5.

The above facts would show that the notice of the Court at the time of

hearing was not brought to the condition Nos. 3 and 4 in the order dated
07.06.96 which had granted promotion, by the flexible complementing scheme to
124 eligible persons. This was actually noticed in para 6 of the judgment; though
the record did contain the relevant material. This, in my opinion, did constitute
W.P.(C) 789/2003

2 of 3

sufficient cause requiring review as the petitioner clearly fell within the said class
of persons who were granted a years' time to clear the test.
6.

Having considered the materials on record and the circumstances,

particularly, that the petitioner had been exonerated of all charges in 1998 and
the further fact that his period of unauthorized absence (at that time
contemporaneously in 1996) was subsequently regularized, I am of the opinion
that even though it would not be appropriate for the Court to direct the
respondent authority to grant promotion with effect from the date it was granted
to others, yet, the petitioner has made out a case for re-consideration of the
materials by it.
7.

In view of the above conclusion, the judgment dated 13.12.05 is modified

to the extent that the Airports Authority of Indian shall consider the claim of the
petitioner to be treated at par with the others who were promoted by order dated
07.02.96 and if found suitable grant him the same opportunity as was granted to
them. It is made clear that this exercise shall be conducted by the Airports
Authority of India on an overall consideration of all the factors relevant for the
purpose and completed within 10 weeks from today. The

order

shall

be

communicated directly to the petitioner.
8.

The review petition and is allowed to the above extent.
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J

APRIL 20, 2007
as

W.P.(C) 789/2003

3 of 3

