*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on May 21, 2007
Decided on May 25, 2007

+

Crl.Rev.345/2007 and CRLM.A. 5718-19/2007

RASHEED MASOOD

….Petitioner
Through: Mr. H.R. Khan Suhel, Mr. Rashid Harshim, Mr. Saif
Khan, Advocates.
Vs.

CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

….Respondent
Through: Mr. R.M. Tewari, Advocate.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

%
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

The present revision petition is preferred by the Petitioner for setting aside the

order on charge under Section 120-B/420/467/468/471 I.P.C. and Section 13 (1)(d), 13
(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act passed by the Special Judge by an order dated
CRL-REV-345/07

1 OF 11

27.01.2007.
2.

The brief facts necessary to decide this present petition are that the State of

Tripura does not have any medical college of its own. Consequently some MBBS and
BDS seats are allocated every year from Central Pool by the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Government of India in various Medical Colleges of the country. These seats
are made available to the State of Tripura for allotment of eligible students from the state
on the basis of merit. The Government of Tripura constituted the Tripura Board of Joint
Entrance Examination (hereafter referred to as "TBJEE") in the year 1988 for the
selection of candidates through joint entrance examination held every year.

The

candidates were nominated on the basis of merit. The Eligibility criteria for candidates to
appear at the Joint Entrance Examination was that the candidate or his parents should
have resided in Tripura continuously for a period of 10 years or more at the time of
issuance of certificate and the candidate should have passed HSC conducted by Tripura
Board of Secondary Examination or equivalent. In case the candidate is not a permanent
resident of Tripura and his parents are officer(s) on deputation to the Govt. of Tripura or
officer in the Central Govt. working in Tripura and had served in Tripura for a period of
3 years or more and passed HSE from an Institute of Tripura, then too, the candidate is
deemed eligible.
3.

It is alleged that the Adnan Masood, co-accused of the petitioner, being the son of

his brother was resident of Solanee Puram, Roorkee, UP and was ineligible to appear in
CRL-REV-345/07

2 OF 11

JEE conducted by TBJEE, he did not appear in the Entrance Examination. His name was
recommended for admission in the MBBS course out of the Central Pool Quota reserved
for the residents of the State of Tripura. According to the prosecution, despite his
ineligibility and despite his not having appeared in or cleared the Joint Entrance
Examination conducted by TBJEE, his name was recommended for admission in the
MBBS course out the Central Pool Quota reserved for the residents of the State of
Tripura, by a letter dated 6-8-1990.
4.

It was further alleged that 17 MBBS & 2 BDS seats were allocated for the

candidates of Tripura as per the records available with the Directorate of Health Services,
of the State; as per the file of Department of Health and Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare 22 MBBS and 4 BDS seats were allocated to the State of Tripura. 5 MBBS and
2 BDS seats were allegedly suppressed and concealed from TBJEE and Directorate of
Health services, Govt. of Tripura. It was alleged that in 1990-91 co-accused Gurdial
Singh was the Resident Commissioner, Govt. of Tripura and the petitioner was the then
Minister of State for Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of India.
5.

It is alleged that the co-accused Adnan Masood got his name nominated from

Gurdial Singh in the 1st year MBBS course in Patna Medical College, Patna, Bihar in
academic year 1990-91 from the Central Pool Quota of Tripura. He was admitted to the
course in that College. According to the prosecution (CBI) the petitioner, allegedly
entered into criminal conspiracy with Gurdial Singh and the said third accused, Adnan
CRL-REV-345/07

3 OF 11

Masood. The co-accused Gurdial Singh allegedly issued a nomination letter in favour of
Sachidanand Dwivedi to facilitate his admission in Patna Medical College. The court
framed charges against the petitioner, Gurdial Singh and co-accused Adnan Masood,
under Sections 468/420/471 IPC and Section 13 (1)(D), 13 (2) of Prevention of
Corruption Act. The co-accused was declared a juvenile by Special Judge.
6.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the nomination letter was issued

by the Resident commissioner, co accused Gurdial Singh, who was aware about the
enhancement of seats. The information regarding the enhancement of seats was intimated
to the Govt. of Tripura through its Resident Commissioner, who should have duly
informed about it. The counsel further submitted that the co-accused Adnan Masood was
an eligible candidate who had the necessary qualifications for admission to the medical
institution; he could not be penalized merely because of the relationship with the
petitioner; nor could the latter be penalized and made ot face criminal trial merely
because his nephew, who was otherwise eligible, was granted a medical seat at Patna
Medical College. There was no question of any misconduct, or cheating, much less
inducement to part with property with dishonest motive, since the petitioner, as minister,
merely facilitated the enhancement of the quota for the relevant year. This was at the
behest of the Government of Tripura and the then Chief Minister of the State, who kept
visiting him, complaining of lack of opportunity to the students, due to non availability of
institutions. The petitioner, being minister, helped in the decision to enhance the Tripura
CRL-REV-345/07

4 OF 11

quota; however, after that action, and its due intimation to the State, he ceased to play
any role. There was no material, much less any legally sustainable document or
circumstance, linking his alleged role in filling the seats through ineligible candidates.
7.

The learned counsel submitted that the enhancement of 5 MBBS and 2BDS seats

were intimated to the Govt. of Tripura. He further submitted there is no direct proof to
show his involvement. Counsel submitted that the assuming about complicity or
involvement of Gurdial Singh did not, and ought not to lead to an inference that the
petitioner, a minister, whose involvement was nowhere documented, was part of a
conspiracy, or that he had a hand in the illegal or wrongful acts. In any case, no wrongful
gain was shown to have accrued to the petitioner.
8.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Bihar

v. Ramesh Singh ((1977) 4 SCC 39 where the Court observed as follows:
"Strong suspicion against the accused, if the matter remains in the region
of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at the conclusion of
the trial. But at the initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which leads
the Court to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
committed an offence then it is not open to the Court to say that there is no
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The presumption of
the guilt of the accused which is to be drawn at the initial stage is not in the
sense of the law governing the trial of criminal cases in France where the
accused is presumed to be guilty unless the contrary is proved. But it is only
for the purpose of deciding prima facie whether the Court should proceed
with the trial or not. If the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to
adduce to prove the guilt of the accused even if fully accepted before it is
challenged in cross-examination or rebutted by the defence evidence, if
any, cannot show that the accused committed the offence, them there will be
CRL-REV-345/07

5 OF 11

no sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial."

These principles were reiterated in Union of India -vs- Prafulla Kumar Samal AIR
1979 SC 366. Reliance was also placed upon the decision in Dilawar Babu Kurane -vsState of Maharastra AIR 2002 SC 564. It was contended that in the absence of any shred
of evidence connecting the petitioner with the alleged illegal activities or wrongdoing,
the tenuous piece of evidence, i.e statement of the PW-12, and Bipin Behari Mathur were
insufficient to raise a grave suspicion, which was the appropriate standard requisite for
framing a charge, according to the decision in Kurane's decision.
9.

The Special Judge by his order dated 27.01.2007 charged the Petitioner and the

other accused, of the offences under Sections 120-B/420/467/468/471 IPC and under
Section 13 (1)(d), 13 (2) of Prevention of Corruption Act,1988. The court held that
prima facie, the materials strongly pointed to grave suspicion against the accused's
conspiracy to cheat Directorate of Health Services, Government of Tripura; accused No.1
dishonestly and fraudulently forged and issued the nomination letter dated 6.08.1990 in
favour of Adnan Masood though he was ineligible for admission in MBBS course being
not a resident of Tripura; Gurdial Singh used the format of Directorate of Health
Services while issuing the nomination letter and he committed criminal misconduct by
abusing his position as a public servant and used that forged nomination letter by sending

CRL-REV-345/07

6 OF 11

the same to Patna Medical College. The role of the Petitioner was that being the Minister
of Health holding the independent charge of the Ministry by abusing his official position
as public servant he concealed / suppressed 5 MBBS and 2 BDS seats of Central Pool for
the academic year 1990-91 meant for residents of Tripura; he and Accused No.1 (Gurdial
Singh) deprived the residents of Tripura of their right to get admission in said College.
10.

The evidence discussed by the trial court, in the impugned order, indicates that the

State of Tripura did not have adequate access to medical education for its students. This
constrained eligible students from realizing their potential. A method was evolved by the
Central Government to offset this disadvantage, to a certain extent, by creating new seats,
and nominating eligible candidates from the State. The procedure for filling those seats
was through a Joint Entrance Examination. Students who qualified, were nominated to
the Central seats, in various colleges throughout the country, according to their merit,
based on a merit list drawn for the purpose. The creation of seats in various Central or
centrally aided/ funded institution was undertaken by the Central Ministry; intimation
was sent to the appropriate department of the State as and when new or additional seats
were created, or made available in the quota. The State, at its end used to send the names
to the Central Government, for nomination to the concerned college or colleges. This was
on the basis of merit, determined from the result of the joint entrance test, in which
eligible students of Tripura could compete.
11.

At the relevant time, the petitioner was the Minster of state in the Centre; the co-

CRL-REV-345/07

7 OF 11

accused Gurdial Singh was the Resident Commissioner of Tripura, at Delhi. Both knew
the mechanism. The prosecution alleged that Gurdial Singh used this knowledge to
manipulate a situation whereby for the relevant year, i.e 1990-91 though seven medical
and dental seats were sanctioned or created at the Central level, appropriate intimation
was not sent to the Government of Tripura. This resulted in a circumstance where the
seats could be filled, by nomination in the Central institutions, within the Tripura quota,
from among rank outsiders, who were plainly ineligible, and who had not competed in
accordance with the established procedure, or qualified. The petitioner is seeking to
distance himself from the whole affair alleging to be in the dark, and not involved at any
stage, save the role played in the creation or sanction of the additional seats.
12.

The evidence for framing of charge against the petitioner was that Gurdial Singh

used to visit him in connection with creation of the seats; the role played by the petitioner
in the creation of the seats; the statement of Shri Bipin Bihari Mathur, OSD, who stated
that some persons used to visit the office of the Petitioner to enquire about the release of
the Tripura quota, and the fact that the creation of additional seats was not intimated to
the Tripura Government. The trial court dealt with the peculiar nature of the offence of
criminal conspiracy and after analysing the attendant circumstances, proceeded to frame
charges for the offences against the petitioner and other co-accused. The close
relationship of the co-accused beneficiary, son of the petitioner's elder brother, his
ineligibility, i.e not being resident of Tripura, or not having competed in the JEE,
CRL-REV-345/07

8 OF 11

testimonies of various witness, led to the framing of charges. PW-12, Professor in the
Patna Medical College, clearly deposed about Adnan's ineligibility, and grant of
admission, nevertheless, because he was a nominee of the Minister, i.e the petitioner.
13.

In Yash Pal Mittal v. State of Punjab (1977) 4 SCC 540 the Supreme Court

discussed the nature of criminal conspiracy, and stated that it is an understanding, an
agreement, concert, or league that is the ingredient of the offence. It was held that:
"... It is not necessary that all the conspirators must know each and every
detail of the conspiracy as long as they are co-participators in the main
object of the conspiracy. There may be so many devices and techniques
adopted to achieve the common goal of the conspiracy and there may be
division of performances in the chain of actions with one object to achieve
the real end of which every collaborator must be aware and in which each
one of them must be interested. There must be unity of object or purpose but
there may be plurality of means sometimes even unknowns to one another,
amongst the conspirators. In achieving the goal several offences may be
committed by some of the conspirators even unknown to the others. The only
relevant factor is that all means adopted and illegal acts done must be and
purported to be in furtherance of the object of the conspiracy even though
there may be sometimes misfire or over-shooting by some of the
conspirators."

14.

In Mohammad Usman Mohammad Hussain Maniyar v. State of Maharashtra

(1981) 2 SCC 443 it was held that for the offence under Section 120-B IPC, the
prosecution is not compelled to prove that the conspirators expressly agreed to do or
cause the illegal action; the agreement can be proved by necessary implication. In Noor
Mahammad Mohd. Yusuf Momin v. State of Maharashtra (1970) 1 SCC 696 it was held
CRL-REV-345/07

9 OF 11

that Section 120-B IPC makes the criminal conspiracy as a substantive offence which
postulates an agreement between two or more persons to do, or cause to be done, an act
(which includes omission) by illegal means. If the offence itself is to commit an offence,
no further steps need be proved, to carry the agreement into effect. In Shivanarayan
Laxminarayan Joshi v. State of Maharashtra (1980) 2 SCC 465 the Supreme Court
underlined that a conspiracy is hatched in secrecy and it is impossible to adduce direct
evidence in proof. The offence can be only proved largely thorugh inferences, drawn
from acts or illegal omission committed by conspirators in pursuance of a common
design. All these principles were restated and applied in Ajay Agarwal -vs- Union of
India AIR 1993 SC 1637.
15.

The Petitioner's role, which persuaded the trial court to frame the charges, were

his note which culminated in the increase of seats; the visits of Gurdial Singh, to him,
before and after increase in the Tripura quota; and the statement of some witnesses about
these incidents. The close and undeniable relationship of the beneficiary with the
petitioner, is an added ground which focuses the needle of suspicion at him.
16.

The above analysis would show that at the relevant time, Tripura was in need of

access to medical education; a novel method of nomination in Central or Centrally aided
institutions was devised; eligible students from the state, determined through a
competitive test held by that government were nominated. This assured some access in a
Centrally available resource, specifically to such students, disadvantaged on account of
CRL-REV-345/07

10 OF 11

their birth or domicile in an educationally backward state. The stratagem employed by
co-accused, and the petitioner, as per the allegations was that the demand for creation of
seats was acceded to; yet the increase was suppressed from the State authorities.
Resultantly, seven more seats or resources were available, but the State could not
nominate eligible students, as it was kept in the dark. This facilitated filling up of those
seats by persons who could not be considered eligible. As to how such persons became
aware of the new seats, and what method could have been adopted in the normal course
if the seats went unfilled from students of Tripura, are matters of detail; for the purpose
of this discussion it is sufficient to note that only few persons in the know of the seats
were Gurdial Singh, the petitioner and the beneficiaries. In this contextual background,
the role of the petitioner might ultimately be limited. However, at this stage, his
involvement in the criminal conspiracy to commit the acts which are offences he is
charged with, cannot be ruled out.
17.

For the above reasons, I find no infirmity or illegality in the impugned order on

charge. The petition has to necessarily fail; it is accordingly dismissed.
DATED: 25th May, 2007

S. RAVINDRA BHAT
JUDGE

CRL-REV-345/07

11 OF 11

