*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : August 17th, 2007
Date of decision: August 20th, 2007

+

W.P.(C) 5040/2007
VINOD KUMAR

..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Pooja Dutt, Mr. Narender Dutt, Advocates

versus
THE HEAD & DEAN FMS UNIVERSITY
OF DELHI AND ANR.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Mariarputham, Advocate

CORAM:

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

%Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1. The petitioner claims a mandatory order to the respondent to withdraw the result
declared on 24.4.2007 and quash a letter issued to him on 29.4.2007; these had the
effect of rejecting his candidature to the MBA (Part-Time) Programme in the Session
2007-2010, conducted by the Faculty of Management Studies (hereafter “FMS”),
Delhi University.
2. The petitioner's father was a disabled defence personnel; he died on 22.12.2004. The
WP(C) 5040/2007

1 of 6

petitioner had applied in January, 2007 for admission to the Part-Time Three Year
MBA Programme (hereafter referred to as “the Course”). There were 140 seats in the
course; including seven seats for children/wards of defence personnel. The petitioner
appeared in the common admission test held for purposes of admission to the course
on 21.4.2007. He was called for interview on 24.4.2007, after verification of his
testimonials.

It is averred that the respondents declared the results of the C/W

reserved category of Defence Personnel seats – only three candidates were offered
admission but not the petitioner. He claims to have performed well in the interview.
3. On 29.5.2007 Petitioner was informed by the FMS that he did not fulfill the eligibility
criteria of having three years of experience as an “Executive” or an Administrator in a
commercial, industrial or Government establishment – so his candidature had been
cancelled. The said letter reads as under :
“This is to inform you that your representation was considered by
Faculty of Management Studies at its appropriate level, and it
was decided to convey to you that you do not fulfill the eligibility
criteria of having at least three years experience as an Executive
or an Administrator in a commercial, industrial or government
establishment.”
4. It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the decision of the respondents is
unsustainable. It is so averred in the petition and contended by Ms. Puja Anand that
the petitioner had ample experience to fulfill the description of the term “Executive”.
She relied upon the description of work experience after graduation, disclosed to the
Faculty in the application form. The same reads as follows :

WP(C) 5040/2007

2 of 6

Organization(s) Designation(s)

From

KFC(Kentucky Customer Care 1 June 1998
Fried Chicken) Executive
Pizza Hut
Floor
October 2000
Supervisor
Planning
Junior
22nd August
Commissioner, Translator
2003
Government of
India

To

Monthly Salary

September 2000 4500/May 2002

8500/-

till date

14770/-

5. Learned counsel submitted that the respondents acted arbitrarily in taking the position
that the petitioner was ineligible. It was not open for them to put forward such a
contention as he was permitted to appear in the examination and participate in the
interview. This clearly established that at the stage of screening, the FMS and the
University formed an opinion that he answered the description of an “Executive” with
three years' professional experience. Counsel also contended that in the absence of any
criteria or definition as to what is the content of the expression “executive”, that term
should be given a literal meaning. In its most general sense it means an organ or wing
of the Government. She relied upon Roget's Thesaurus, particularly its definition of
the term “Executive”. According to the description it includes an agent which would
embrace a multitude of persons having diverse roles. Counsel also relied upon the
expression

“Executive” in K.J. Iyer's Dictionary (11th Edn. 1997) which terms

“Executive” as that branch of the Government which puts the laws into execution as
distinguished from the legislative and judicial branches.
6. Mr. Mariarputham, learned counsel for the respondents relied upon the stipulation in
the Admission bulletin which reads as follows :
WP(C) 5040/2007

3 of 6

“Candidates should have at least three years experience as an
executive or an administrator in a commercial, industrial or
government establishment after passing the Bachelor's Degree
Examination”
7. Counsel also relied upon the programme structure

set out in the Bulletin of

Information, which described that the MBA (Part-Time) Programme is specifically
designed to be in synchronicty with participants career paths. The participants are
expected to maintain full time employment. The programme structure also indicates
that the FMS curricular and

environment foster essential management skill,

knowledge and attitudes; classmates in turn share their diverse management
backgrounds. The description of the prgoramme structure concludes in the following
terms :
“The two synergize to provide participants with the
insight and capacity to make successful on the job contribution,
preparing them for higher executive responsibility.
This
programme has several streams of specialization”
8. The term “Executive” has not been admittedly defined or spelt out in the bulletin. In
such circumstances, the Court has to fall back upon the normal grammatical meaning.
Extrinsic aids to construction of such an expression would be general dictionaries.
The Merriman – Webster on line Dictionary defines “Executive” as “someone who
exercises administrative or managerial control”. Black's Law Dictionary defines an
“Executive employee” as follows :“An employee whose duties include some form of managerial
authority and active participation in the control, supervision and
management of the business often shortened to executive.”

WP(C) 5040/2007

4 of 6

Likewise, The Shorter Oxford English Disctionary (5th Edn.) states that
“Executive” means :
“A person in an executive position in a business; a person skilled
in executive or administrative work; a business man, a business
woman.”
9. The above discussion would show that a common theme or idea which recurs in all
the definitions of the term “Executive” is the element of managerial control. If one
construes this from the perspective of the programme objectives contained in the
bulletin, it is evident that the intention of the course is to promote continuing
education on a Part-Time basis for professionals who are engaged in actual
administrative or managerial capacities and who fall within the general rubric of the
term “Executive”. Mere loose employment of the term for any one job or its liberal
use is insufficient to enable a candidate to be eligible.

Having regard to the specific

objective for which the Three Years Part-Time course is designed and has been
offered, I am of the opinion that not all candidates but only those who perform
managerial, administrative or executive functions in that sense of the term, can be
admitted to the course. It is not academic brilliance or performance of a candidate in
his graduation which might, otherwise, entitle him or render him eligible to apply for
a full time course which is relevant here; the course is designed in a sense as a
continuing education programme to enhance academic capacities of professionals. In
view of these, I am satisfied that none of the posts held by the petitioner, (i.e.
customer care executive, floor supervisor or Junior Translator)

WP(C) 5040/2007

answers the

5 of 6

description of “Executive”.
10.For the above reasons this petition has to fail. It is accordingly dismissed without any
orders as to costs.

August 20, 2007

WP(C) 5040/2007

( S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

6 of 6

