4
*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
IA No. 3139/2007 in CS(OS) 505/2007
Date of Decision 23rd April,2008
U.K. PAINTS(INDIA) PVT. LTD
..... Plaintiff
Through Mr. Harish Malhotra, Sr. Advocate
with Ms. Priyanka Kakkar, Advocate.
versus
MR.JAGDISH RAI

1.

..... Defendent
Through Ms. Priyanka Kakkar, Advocate and
Mr. P.S. Lalli, Advocvate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
Whether reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
Yes.

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes.

Yes.

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat :(OPEN COURT)
IA No.3139/2007 (under O. XXXIX Rule 1 & 2 CPC)

1.

This court had dealt with this application and recorded a

detailed order at the ad interim stage, but before the written statement
CS (OS) 505/2007

page no. 1 of 9

was filed, on 19.3.2007 restraining the defendant from creating any
third party rights in, and encumbering or parting with possession of the
suit property till further orders.
2.

The Court

had, however, indicated that the matter would

be heard in detail on a later date.
3.

The plaintiff seeks a decree for specific performance of an

agreement dated 21.9.2006, for purchasing an industrial plot. The
agreed consideration was Rs.3.6 crores.
defendant

was

paid

Rs.36,00,000/-,

It is not disputed that the
constituting

10%

of

the

The suit property is in the form of leasehold rights.

In

consideration amount at the stage of execution of the agreement.
4.

terms of the lease deed, its alienation or transfer is impermissible
without the prior approval/consent of the lessor i.e. Directorate of
Industries. The stipulation in the agreement (to sell) therefore was that
the defendant would obtain such permission within 75 days .

The

parties also recorded the minutes of the meeting on the same day i.e.
21.9.2006, whereby, they agreed that in case the said time period was
not adhered to it would be further extended by 30 days.
5.

It is contended that by the counsel for the defendant that

CS (OS) 505/2007

page no. 2 of 9

period was to end on 6.12.2006 and in terms of the minutes of the
meeting on 4.1.2007 at the latest.
6.

This Court on 19.3.2007 considered the contentions of the

parties and recorded as follows:
"Having heard counsel for the parties, at this
stage I am not inclined to permit the defendant to create
any mortgagee or encumberence in respect of the suit
property. It would be for the defendant to show that it
is not the defendant who is responsible for the failure to
obtain the conversion from leasehold to freehold. The
defendant will have ample opportunity to put forward its
case when he files his written statement and reply to the
present application in this respect. As at the present,
there is no material before the Court to come to the
conclusion, even at the prima facie stage, that the
conversion of the property from leasehold to freehold
has not taken place without any failure or default on the
part of the defendant and despite his efforts in this
regard.
So far as the question of payment of Court
Fees is concerned, counsel for the plaintiff submits that
the claim of damages is only in the alternative, and he
undertakes that in case the alternative relief is decreed
by the court, the plaintiff would pay the deficient Court
fees as and when directed by the Court. The objection
with regard to Court Fees may also be raised by the
CS (OS) 505/2007

page no. 3 of 9

defendant in his written statement and will be
considered in detail after the pleadings are complete.
Having considered the merits of the case,
prima facie, I am of the view, that the plaintiff is entitled
to interim protection. Accordingly, I hereby restrain
the defendant from creating any third party rights in,
encumbering or parting with possession of the suit
property till further orders."
7.

Counsel for the defendant relied upon the written statement

and also the documents filed along with it.

According to her, the

defendant had taken all reasonable steps towards discharging his
obligation to apply for conversion.

She relied upon letters dated

4.10.2006, 13.11.20006 and 30.11.2006 written to the Commissioner of
Industries, seeking permission to convert the property from leasehold
to freehold. It was also contended that the defendant continued to visit
the Directorate with a view to pursue these applications and did all he
could reasonably do for the conversion. It was submitted that, in spite of
these and in spite of compliance of directions such as payment of
deficient amounts, etc. (the proof of which has been placed on record)
the Commissioner did not pass any orders, which would have enabled
the parties to effectuate the agreement.
CS (OS) 505/2007

page no. 4 of 9

8.

Learned counsel contended that since the defendant was not

at fault, there was no question of the plaintiff moving the court and
seeking an order. It was also submitted that the plaintiff waited till the
end of March to approach the Court and seek reliefs in the present suit.
In these circumstances, the Court should not confirm interim order. In
the alternative the counsel urged the court at least permit the defendant
to create an encumbrance. Learned counsel relied upon a letter written
by In Tech Digital Technology on 28.3.2007 and submitted that the said
concern was willing to set up a digital printing business in India, which
would be carried for and on behalf of the defendant, by his son.
9.

Learned counsel further urged that the objective of the

agreement between the parties was to help the defendant to over come
his crisis at the stage when it was executed, as he was in need of money.
However, the parties were conscious of the rising prices and therefore,
had stipulated that the property would be converted within a time bound
manner. In the event of such course of being rendered impossible the
parties were to be relieved of their respective obligations.
10.

Learned Senior counsel for the plaintiff/applicant reiterated

the submissions made in the application.
CS (OS) 505/2007

He also relied upon the
page no. 5 of 9

previous order of the court dated 19.3.2007.

Learned counsel

contended that none of the stipulations in the agreement,

which

admittedly bind the parties, placed a time limit for the execution of the
sale deed.

It was submitted that having regard to the principles

underlying under Section 59,52 and 55 of the Contract Act the contract
should be construed as one containing intervening obligations of the
defendant.

The obligations of the plaintiff could not be construed as

preceding those of the defendant and the latters' conduct in the present
case as well as the request made today to permit encumbrance of the
property if allowed, would permit the defendant to benefit from his
own wrong.
11.

Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner has made out

a prima facie case for the grant of an injunction and its confirmation.
He submitted that if the defendant were to be permitted to create third
party rights, financial institutions who would have greater legal
remedies independent of the present proceedings would be created, that
would injure the interests of the plaintiff irrepairably.
12.

The court has considered the pleadings of the parties and

the documents placed on record. It is undoubtedly correct that the
CS (OS) 505/2007

page no. 6 of 9

agreement does mention a 75 days' time limit. The parties also agreed
to extend that period for another 30 days. What cannot be lost sight of
however is that, the stipulation concerns the obligation of the defendant
to obtain conversion of the property. In such circumstances, the court is
unimpressed by the defendant's contention that the stipulation has the
effect of placing a time limit upon the validity of the agreement itself.
The construction placed by the defendant that it was the time limit of the
agreement is prima facie untenable. Firstly, no part of the agreement
says so;

secondly, the time limit pertains to the obligation of the

defendant and it does not concern the mutual obligations or duties of the
parties and; thirdly, the time limit of 75 days described is aimed more
at the convenience of the parties to have the sale deed executed, as is
evident from the stipulation that such a limit of time is necessary to
obtain stamp paper etc.
13 .

In view of the above circumstances, the court is of the

opinion that the defendant has not been able to show any cogent or
valid ground

why the interim order made on 19.3.2007 should be

varied.
14 .

So far as the contention of the defendant that he should be

CS (OS) 505/2007

page no. 7 of 9

permitted to encumber the property to enable him to carry on business
effectively is concerned, reliance has been placed upon a letter dated
28.3.2007.

The court cannot be unmindful of the fact that creation of

such third party rights, particularly in favour of financial institutions
could potentially result in an irrepairable injury to the plaintiff. Such
financial institutions have now extended rights in law to deal with
properties in the event of default in repayment schedules by their
borrowers.

Therefore, the plaintiff's likelihood of prejudice would be

considerable and the matter would not be confined to one where the
adjustment of consideration at the

stage of final judgment, can be

conveniently gone into by the Court.

The amplitude of powers of

public financial institutions to seize assets and put them to sale, without
recourse to court, would result in incalculable prejudice and foreclose
the plaintiff's rights.

15 .

In view of the above reasons,

the interim order made on

13.9.2007 is confirmed. The defendant shall not encumber or part with
possession of the suit property, or alienate it or any part of it, during
the pendency of the suit.
CS (OS) 505/2007

IA No.3139/07

is disposed of in the
page no. 8 of 9

above terms.
CS (OS) 505/2007

List for framing of issues on 25.8.2008.

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
APRIL
pkv

23, 2008

CS (OS) 505/2007

page no. 9 of 9

