37
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : May 22nd, 2007

+

CRL.M.C. 4574/2005
G.D.GOYAL

versus
STATE & ANR

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Sameet Nandwani, Advocate

..... Respondent
Through Mr. and Mr. O.P.Saxena, APP for State
Mr. D.D.Singh, Advocate for R-2

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

% Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1. This petition under Section 482 calls for quashing of criminal proceedings so far as the
present petitioner is concerned. He was summoned by order dated 10.10.2001 in a
complaint proceedings initiated by the first respondent.
2. The complainant M/s Zuari Leasing & Finance Corporation Ltd. alleged that M/s
Haryana Steel and Alloys Ltd. had issued several hundies to the tune of Rs. 62 lacs.
The hundies were discounted and in terms of the settlement they were to be paid on the
due date. M/s Haryana Steel and Alloys Ltd. had issued a cheque for payment of
amount on various dates. In respect of one of the cheques, dated 12.10.1998, it was
CRL.M.C. 4574/2005

1 of 5

alleged that when presented the instrument was returned on account of insufficient
funds.

Notice was allegedly issued and upon non-payment by the drawer, the

complaint was filed.
3. In the complaint the present petitioner was not impleaded as a party accused. The
relevant paragraph dealing with vicarious liability of the directors, who are said to
have been instrumental in managing the affairs of the company are as follows :“3. That the respondent No. 2 to 6 are the Directors of
Respondent No.1 and are authorised and liable for the acts of
respondent No.1 company. Moreover the respondent No. 2 to 6
are concerned about and responsible for day to day running of the
company and as such are liable for the same.
4. That the respondent No. 1 M/s Haryana Steels and
Alloys Limited through Respondent No. 5 & 6 has approached the
complainant for the purpose of discounting of Hundies. The
respondent No.1 through the respondent No. 5 & 6 requested the
complainant to discount the Hundies to the respondent No.1, to the
extent of Rs. 62,00,000/- (Rupees Sixty Two Lakhs only).”
4. The trial court issued process and proceeded with the matter. Apparently along with
the complaint a copy of the annual report of the accused company Haryana Steel and
Alloys Ltd. was filed as Exhibit P-4. During the course of the proceedings the
complainant caused an affidavit to be filed by way of evidence on 10.10.2001. That
affidavit of the complainant's authorized representative stated inter alia as follows :
“3. That the respondent No. 2 to 6 are the Director/person
incharge for running the affairs of the respondent company.
Beside this Sh. Narindra Goel, O.P. Goel and G.D. Goel are the
other Directors who were responsible for running the day-today affairs of the company. The copy of details as provided the
respondent company and is responsible for the affairs
alongwith Sh. O.P. Goel and Sh. G.D. Goel is exhibit P-4.”
5. Learned counsel contended that the trial court fell into grave error in not seeing that as

CRL.M.C. 4574/2005

2 of 5

complaints originally framed and preferred, nowhere mention any role of the petitioner
and that the requirements of Section 141 had to be strictly complied with. In such
cases, that the complainant has to aver with specificity the role of the concerned
director and as to how he was involved in managing the affairs, or being in charge of
the affairs of the company.
6. Learned counsel relied upon the decision in SMS Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs. Neeta
Bhalla and Another, (2005) 8 SCC 89; Saroj Kumar Poddar Vs. State (NCT of Delhi
& Anr.) 2007(2) SCALE 36 and Everest Advertising Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State, Govt. of NCT
of Delhi & Ors., 2007 (3) Supreme 699. It was contended that the material sought to
be relied on was also available, when the complaint was filed. The complainant
deliberately chose not to implead the petitioner and proceeded against the other
directors. In the absence of any details as to the role or involvement of the petitioner,
being mentioned in the complaint it was not open to the court during the course of
proceedings to have summoned him.
7. The petition was resisted by the complainant Mr. D.D.Singh, learned counsel
submitted that the order of the trial court dated 10.10.2001 cannot be read in isolation
and has to be seen along with Exhibit P-4 which clearly disclosed that Shri G.D.Goel
the present petitioner was a director at the relevant time. All that the witness did was
at the stage of his deposition, through affidavit to bring these facts to the notice of the
court and the impugned order has to be construed as one under Section 319 in the
circumstances of the case.
8. The law as to what should be the kind of pleading in cases concerning offences under
CRL.M.C. 4574/2005

3 of 5

Section 138/141 of Negotiable Instruments Act was reviewed and re-stated in SMS
Pharmaceuticals's case (supra). It has been subsequently followed in Saroj Kumar
Poddar's case (supra) and N.K.Wahi Vs. Shekhar Singh & Ors., 2007 (4) SCALE 188.
The court has ruled that in order to fasten vicarious liability the complaint has to
specifically mention or attribute some role to the accused director. The judgment in
Everest Advertising's case (supra) clarified the requirement by stating the specificity in
all averments should include a statement that the accused director was involved in
negotiation or was party to some agreement etc. that may be made in a general manner.
9. On a proper application of law declared by the Supreme Court in SMS
Pharmaceuticals's case (Supra) as clarified in Everest Advertising's case (supra), it has
to necessarily follow in the present case is that the complainant did not assign or
attribute any role to the petitioner at any relevant time. It also emerges that at the
relevant time the complainant was aware about Exhibit P-4 and deliberately chose to
exclude the petitioner's name from the array of parties as an accused. Further para 3 of
the affidavit of Shri Rohtash Kumar nowhere states or assigns any kind of specific role
of the petitioner in respect of issuance of the cheque or his involvement in the
transaction. In these circumstances the criminal proceedings as far as the present
petitioner are concerned were clearly beyond jurisdiction.
10.In view of the above findings the petition has to succeed. It is accordingly allowed.
The impugned order dated 10.10.2001 summoning the present petitioner is hereby
quashed.
(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
CRL.M.C. 4574/2005

4 of 5

JUDGE
MAY 22, 2007
mm

CRL.M.C. 4574/2005

5 of 5

