*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on: November 10, 2006
Delivered on: July 27, 2007.

+

REVIEW PETITIONER NO. 328/2005 IN W.P.(C) 745/1987

VINOD KAPUR & ORS.
..... Petitioners
Through Mr. N.S. Vashisht, Advocate
versus
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through Mr. Jhunjhun Sarkar, Mr. Sachin
Navani for L&B and LAC

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT:
1

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

By these proceedings, review of the judgment and order of this Court dated 17th

December, 2004, in which the writ petition No. 745/86 was disposed off, has been
claimed.
2.

In the writ petition a declaration under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act

RP No.328/2005 in WP(C) 745/87

1 of 5

dated 07.06.85 was questioned on various grounds. The suit lands had been notified
under Section 4(1) of the Act on 25.11.80. This Court had considered the averments on
behalf of the petitioner and delivered final judgment dismissing the petition. The present
review petition is premised on the ground that the petitioners' predecessors-in-interest had
filed objections under Section 5-A of the Act which was not brought to the notice of the
Court. It was contended that this circumstance amounted to sufficient cause to enable
this Court to review the judgment and order dated 07.12.04,s dismissing the writ petition.
3.

The relevant averment in the review petition, which is the mainstay of the entire

review proceeding reads as follows:
“That the above petition came up for final disposal on 17.12.04
along with other writ petitions before this Hon'ble court when the same
was dismissed by this Hon'ble Court with the other listed Writ Petitions. It
is pertinent to mention here that the petitioners in para 8 of the above said
Writ Petition have wrongly mentioned that the petitioners along with other
land owners within the revenue estate of village Chattarpur who were also
aggrieved by the Section 4 notification, filed there objection under Section
5 of the Land Acquisition Act, to which no personal hearing to the
objectors have been afforded by the Collector and no report in respect of
objections of the objector have been forwarded to the Government of
India. It is necessary and in the interest of justice here to point out that
the predecessor and interest i.e. Mr. R.L. Sahni filed his 5-A objection
with regard to the land in question and inadvertently at the time of filing
of the above said Writ Petitions the same could not be highlighted which
resulted in dismissal of Writ Petitions.”
4.

Mr. N.S. Vashisht, learned counsel on the basis of the above averments submitted

that the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of declaration given by this Court in the
judgment dated Balakram Gupta -v- Union of India 37 (1989) DLT 150 (referred to in the
main judgment as “Balakram-II”).

A Division Bench of this Court had, by that

decision, invalidated the acquisition on the ground of non-compliance with the principles
RP No.328/2005 in WP(C) 745/87

2 of 5

of natural justice in regard to hearing and disposing objections to land acquisition, so far
as the petitioner/objectors were concerned.
5.

Mr. N.S. Vashisht, learned counsel submitted that at the time of filing the writ

petition, the relevant averment in Paragraph 8 was that no objection under Section 5-A
had been preferred after Notification under Section 4(1) was issued. Counsel contended
that this was an inadvertent omission because at that time, the predecessors in interest
who had title to the suit lands, had in fact preferred objections. Counsel contended that
the mistake in pleadings ought not to visit the litigant with harsh consequences and that
the present petitioner was entitled to the declaration in Balakram-II as he undisputedly
fell within the class of litigants legitimately entitled to be called as objectors to the
acquisition.
6.

The review proceeding was opposed by the respondents. It was submitted that the

petitioner was expected to support his case in all material particulars and aver all the
grounds that should have been urged, at the time he approached the Court. If indeed the
petitioner was entitled to be treated as an objector, he would have said so, in the first
instance, in 1986. He chose not to do so for the period of 18 years when the proceedings
were pending. He only woke up after the judgment was delivered and claimed that his
predecessor was an objector in the review filed before this Court.

Counsel also

contended that apart from this, the review should not be entertained as it is belated.
7.

The judgment of this Court disposing off the petition was rendered in a batch of

cases where one of the contentions raised was that the declaration of law in Balakram-II
operated as a judgment in rem, thus, entitling all land owners whose lands were notified
RP No.328/2005 in WP(C) 745/87

3 of 5

for acquisition to relief. This Court had negatived the contention on the basis of three
rulings of the Supreme Court, namely, Abhay Ram -v- Union of India 1995 (5) SCC 421;
Delhi Administration -v- Gurdip Singh Uban 1999 (7) SCC 44 (hereafter called “UbanI”) and Delhi Administration -v- Gurdip Singh Uban 2000 (7) SCC 296 (hereafter called
“Uban-II”). In those judgments, the Supreme Court clearly ruled that the declaration as
to invalidity of the Notifications enured only in favour of the petitioners before the Court,
in Balak Ram-II.
8.

The facts of this case would disclose that the Notification in question was

published on 25.11.1980. Initially, the question raised was whether the validity of that
period lapsed automatically after three years. That doubt was cleared by a Full Bench
ruling in Balakram-I (Balakram Gupta -v- Union of India Air 1987 Delhi 239). The
respondents proceeded to issue a declaration under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act
on 07.06.85. The petitioner admittedly was not the owner of the lands. Neither the
averments in the writ petition nor in the review petition furnish any details as to when the
present petitioner acquired title.

Admittedly, the present petitioner did not file any

objections under Section 5-A; no documentary evidence is forthcoming in the review
petition. The only basis on which relief has been claimed now is that its predecessor-ininterest had preferred an objection under Section 5-A.
9.

It is a well settled law that review jurisdiction is available to a litigant where he

can satisfy the Court that despite due diligence he could not secure material evidence or
documents which would have otherwise altered the decision of the Court. A review is
also maintainable if new evidence comes to light which has material bearing on the
RP No.328/2005 in WP(C) 745/87

4 of 5

decision. In the present case neither of these prerequisites have been satisfied. The
circumstances urged in support of the claim for review are those which were always
available to the petitioner. He did not choose to urge them in the petition or during the
course of the proceedings.
10.

In view of the highly circumscribed scope of the review proceedings, we are

satisfied that no plea has been made out for exercise of such jurisdiction. Accordingly,
the petition is dismissed as being devoid of merits. All interim orders are hereby vacated.

( RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

July 27, 2007.

RP No.328/2005 in WP(C) 745/87

(T.S. THAKUR)
JUDGE

5 of 5

