19
*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Delivered on August 23, 2007
W.P.(C) 163/1981
HANS RAJ SHARMA
..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Rekha Aggarwal, Advocate
(Counsel for the Delhi High Court Legal Services
Committee)
versus
UOI

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Suresh Kait, CGSC with Ms. Parbhati Lal,
Yogesh Verma for UOI

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?
Yes

.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Yes

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:(Open Court)
1.

The petitioner has challenged an order of the Deputy Secretary,

Government of India, Department of Rehabilitation dated 2nd December, 1980
whereby in exercise of suo moto jurisdiction under Section 33 of the Displaced
Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 he was asked to deposit an
amount of Rs. 1398/-. The petitioner sought and was provided legal aid by the
Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee.

W.P.(C) 163/1981

1 of 5

2.

Quarter Nos 5 and 6, Motia Khan were allotted to Smt. Maya Devi, the

petitioner's mother. According to the terms she had to pay consideration in seven
equal instalments. Payments were later segregated. The rights for Quarter No. 6
were transferred to the petitioner by the Settlement Commissioner's office. He
was required to pay the proportionate amount of the quarter so allotted to him.
It is not disputed that he did so. In fact the impugned order records that the
amount of Rs. 4321.83/- by way of cash payment and adjustment was made. In
this background, he was issued a show cause notice on 31.3.67 asking him to
deposit Rs. 3290/- for the quarter. This show cause notice was challenged by
him.
3.

The settlement Commissioner by his order dated 31.08.68 decided in

favour of the petitioner. The operative portion of the order reads as follows:
“I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner. It is not
clear from the record as to how that amount of Rs. 3290/0 has
been worked out by the Managing Officer. The notice dated
31.3.1967 calls upon the petitioner to pay up the subsequent
instalments due on 31.10.1966 amounting to Rs. 3290/-. The
notice, to say the least, is vague and leaves the recipient no wiser,
as I find from the record that no separate agreement was executed
within the petitioner in respect of Quarter No. 6 and it was only a
departmental arrangement to receive half of the price under the
original agreement from Shri Hans Raj.I am given to understand
that this amount has been worked out after enhancing the cost of
these quarters. It is not clear from the record as to how this had
been so done. However, if the price of the quarter has been
enhanced, I see no justification for doing the same as under the
terms of the agreement executed between the Department and Smt.
Maya Devi, the value of the quarters could not be enhanced much
less unilaterally.
In view of what has been said above, I quash the demand
created as a result of the notice dated 31.03.1967. However, if any
amount is due from the petitioner towards the balance price of the
quarter transferred to him under terms of the agreement dated
W.P.(C) 163/1981

2 of 5

15.10.1959 and as consequence of the subsequent splitting up of the
quarters, the M.O. shall take appropriate steps to recover the
same.”
4.

The additional demand made by respondents was thus held to be

inapplicable and they were permitted only to recover costs of the balance of the
quarter transferred to him in terms of the agreement.
5.

The revisional authority appears to have woken up after 12 years and

reopened the entire matter. The circumstances which led to the reopening of the
proceedings are unclear.

By the impugned order the revisional authority

proceeded to hold that full payment would mean that the cost of the quarter
along with arrears of rent to be paid.

The Central Government formed the

opinion that there was a mistake in valuation and on this score, the petitioner had
to pay enhanced amount. On this reasoning, the order dated 31.08.68 was set
aside; additional demands were made from the petitioner.
6.

In these proceedings, Rule was issued on 01.04.81. During pendency of

the petition an interim order was made.
7.

Learned counsel for the respondent justified the impugned order and

submitted that Section 33 of the Act did not prescribe any period of limitation
within which the revisional authority could exercise its jurisdiction. Counsel
contended that once a mistake in valuation was discovered, the authority could
act and recover the admitted charges in a non-discriminatory manner without
reference to any point of time.
8.

I have considered the materials on record. While it is no doubt true that

W.P.(C) 163/1981

3 of 5

Section 33 of the Act does not prescribe for a period of limitation yet the
revisional authority has to be alive to the circumstances of each case. The said
provision reads as follows:
“33.Certain residuary powers of Central Government:- The
Central Government may at any time call for the record of any
proceeding under this Act and may pass such order in relation
thereto as in its opinion the circumstances of the case require and
as is not inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this
Act or the rules made thereunder.”
9.

In this case the revisional authority has proceeded to exercise jurisdiction

and reinstated a demand 12 years after it was set aside.
sparingly

and

in

cases

where

there

are

This power is to be used

glaring

discrepancies

or

misrepresentations. The revisional authority, however, appears to have taken
upon itself to reapprise valuation on the basis of a mistake said to have been
committed by the Central Government. By its nature, the power is to be used in
circumstances as would cure an illegality or irregularity in the orders of any
subordinate authority. It cannot be resorted to unless the order in question
occasions failure of justice, or is in some manner deleterious to public interest.
None of these conditions existed; the petitioner was rudely stirred after he could
legitimately assume that the matter had achieved a quietus.

The amount

demanded on the basis of such revaluation too was not so significant as to make
any difference. Therefore, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
10.

In view of the above findings, the petition has to succeed. The impugned

order is hereby set aside. Rule made absolute. No costs.

W.P.(C) 163/1981

4 of 5

S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
AUGUST
as

23, 2007

W.P.(C) 163/1981

5 of 5

