*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on : April 21, 2007
Date of decision : May 24, 2007

+

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004 & Crl.M.A.No.10351/2004
DEVENDER PRASHAD
..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Sunita Jonwal, Advocate
Versus
SHANTI DEVI & OTHERS
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. O.P. Saxena, Advocate for the State.
Mr. I.C. Tewari, Advocate.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

% Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. The revision petition challenges the order passed by the Learned Additional Sessions Judge
(hereafter “trial Court”) on 16.09.2004. The accused respondents were acquitted of charges
under Sections 304-B/498-A Indian Penal Code (IPC).
2. The brief facts necessary to decide this petition are that the petitioner is the father of Ms. Anju
(hereafter referred to as “the deceased”). The deceased and Ashok Kumar (hereafter referred
to as “the husband”) were married on 12.02.1993. Three children were born out of the
wedlock. The deceased died an unnatural death on 13.08.1997; she succumbed to extensive
burn injuries.

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

1 of 11

3. The Petitioner alleged that after 12 days of marriage, the deceased complained to him that she
was being harassed for dowry, by the husband and the other accused respondents.

The

mother-in-law and sister-in-law (Jethani) Vimlesh used to harass and beat her. It was alleged
that in 1996 the husband allegedly visited the Petitioner and took him on his scooter to a
Society in Mandawali. He thereafter put a bottle in the Petitioner’s mouth and demanded a
plot of 50 sq. yards along with Rs. 2 lakhs. It is alleged that the husband used to beat the
deceased and his children.
4. The prosecution alleged that one day prior to alleged unnatural death of the deceased, the
husband beat her up in the Petitioner’s presence. The petitioner was also pushed out of the
house. On 13.08.1997 at 9.30 A.M., the deceased's mother was informed that she was
hospitalized due to burn injuries.

She was sure that the brutal act was committed by the

husband and his relatives i.e. the other Respondents.
5. The prosecution case was further that the deceased had died an unnatural death, within 7 years
of her marriage. She was also subjected to dowry harassment and cruelty in her matrimonial
home.

The petitioner and his wife, i.e. parents of the deceased made specific allegations

against all the Respondents.
6. The Trial Court framed charges under Sections 304B/498A/34 IPC against all the accused. It
acquitted the other Respondents and convicted the husband, under Section 304 IPC. The
present petition is directed against the acquittal of the Respondents.
7. The extracts of the order of the trial court dated 16.09.2004 are as follows;
“in the absence of any direct or substantive evidence against the accused persons
namely Shanti, Dinesh, Suresh and Smt. Vimlesh, and the fact that when two views from
the evidence are possible, the view favorable to the accused should be adopted and
benefit of doubt should be extended to such accused and the fact that the fact that

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

2 of 11

prosecution has failed to prove any demand soon before the death of the deceased
Anju, by the accused Shanti, Dinesh, Suresh and Smt. Vimlesh and there is lack of any
corroborative evidence. I hereby acquit accused persons namely Shanti, Dinesh, Suresh
and Smt. Vimlesh for the commission of the offence punishable u/s. 304B, IPC by giving
benefit of doubt to them”.

The materials on record in this case amply prove, as discussed and noticed hereinabove,
that “soon before the unnatural death of Anju, which took place within seven years of
her marriage, she was subjected to cruelty and harassment both for and in connection
with a demand for dowry by her husband Ashok and that the facts brought on record
further prove the existence of a proximate and live link between the effect of dowry
demand and the concerned death. The incident of cruelty and demand is not remote in
time. The evidence on behalf of accused persons of DW1 to DW3 does not inspire any
confidence and is also not relevant. I have gone through the case laws cited by the
Ld.

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

3 of 11

Counsel for the accused Ashok, but I do not find them helpful to the case a accused
Ashok, as the facts of those cases differ from the facts of present case. Accused Ashok
Kumar has miserably failed to substantiate his defence or rebut the main allegations
and presumption u/s. 113B of the India Evidence Act……
Hence in view of the above facts. I have no hesitation to hold that in view of the
evidence on record as well as presumption under Section 113-B of Indian Evidence act,
that accused Ashok Kumar has failed to rebutt the presumption. Hence, prosecution has
proved that on 13.08.1997 at A-355, Janakpuri, Delhi, accused Ashok being husband of
deceased Anju caused dowry death of deceased Anju, which is punishable u/s. 304B, IPC.
8. Ms. Sunita Jonwal, learned counsel, submitted that the trail court fell into manifest error in
improperly appreciating the materials and evidence on record, which were sufficient to lead to
conviction of all the accused respondents, and not merely the husband. She relied upon the
testimonies of PW-1 and PW-2, parents of the deceased, who maintained in their statements
under Section 161, as well as 164 (recorded before the Magistrate) about the repeated and
specific acts of cruelty and dowry harassment meted out to the deceased, throughout her
married life. It was submitted that the marriage took place on 12-2-1993, and the death
occurred due to 100% burns on 13-8-1997, i.e within seven years of the marriage. The facts
clearly made out applicability of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act. The court therefore, had to
see and weigh the material circumstances with greater care in view of legislative recognition of
vulnerability of women, in such situations.
9. It was submitted that the deposition of PW-1 established that about 15 days prior to her death,
the deceased told him that all the accused, i.e the husband, his mother and both his brothers
used to repeatedly beat her, press that the sum of Rs. 2 lakhs, and a plot measuring 50 square
yards should be given to them. This was corroborated by the testimony of PW-3. Counsel
submitted that there was no worthwhile cross examination on this aspect. Therefore, the trial
court ought to have held that the incident was a direct and natural consequence of the demand
for dowry, soon before death of the deceased; it was reasonable, in the absence of any
explanation, much less cogent explanation, of the accused, about the attendant circumstances

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

4 of 11

to conclude that such death was caused due to the demand. Learned counsel relied upon the
judgments reported as Kans Raj -vs- State of Punjab 2000 (3) JCC, (SC) 665; Venu Gopal -vsState of Karnataka 1999 Cr. LJ 29 (SC); Vidya Devi -vs- State of Haryana 2004 (1) CCC (SC) 148.
10. Learned counsel urged that the trial court committed grave error in not giving any weight to the
letters written by the deceased to her parents, which had been produced, as Ex A and Ex-B; in
which she leveled specific allegations of dowry demands. It was submitted that these
documents were admitted by the accused; they disclosed their guilt. Hence, the prosecution did
not have to prove contents of the letters. It was also contended that the contradictions, and
discrepancies pointed out by the defence, i.e the petitioners were minor and inconsequential in
nature.

They, in any case, could not have deflected from the only finding that should have

been rendered, on a correct appreciation of the evidence, i.e the guilt of all the accused.
11. Shri I.C. Tewari, learned counsel opposed the petition. He submitted that this court cannot reappreciate evidence, and materials, as if it were exercising appellate jurisdiction. The legislature
advisedly and deliberately did not permit orders of acquittal to be challenged by informants;
only the State could seek leave to appeal, which could be given in some, and not all cases. As far
as the petitioner is concerned, he was unable to point to any single instance or ground which
could persuade the court to exercise the restricted and circumscribed jurisdiction under
Sections 397/401.
12. Learned counsel for the accused relied upon the statements recorded in the inquest
proceedings, particularly by PW-1 and PW-2, and submitted that these were recorded on 14-81997. Both parents of the deceased did not say anything about role of any accused, except in
the most general and vague manner. It was contended that the accused were living separately
away from the couple's matrimonial home. The evidence, established that the accused mother-

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

5 of 11

in-law had sold some property to enable the deceased and Ashok, the husband, to live together
separately; they did so. It was submitted that all the serious allegations which could link the
incident with ingredients under Section 304-B did not admittedly pertain to the respondent
accused. In the totality of the facts, the trail court acted within the bounds of law in acquitting
the other accused.
13. The records of the trial Court were called for.

Counsel for the parties relied upon the

depositions and statements, in support of the contentions.
14. The deceased Anju died of extensive (100%) burn injuries. Two children were born out of the
wedlock. The death occurred within seven years of marriage. Her husband was convicted on
both counts. The question is whether there was insufficient material, and evidence to convict
the other accused, of both, or either offence.
15. PW-1 and PW-3 are the most material witnesses; they are parents of the deceased. The
petitioner, PW-1, in his deposition stated that he had witnessed the husband severely beating
his daughter and strangling her. When he tried to rescue her the accused gave him fist blows
on his face and also gave a knee blow, pushed him outside the house and asked him to take his
daughter away.

He also stated that he was abusing loudly. People had gathered there and

advised him not to take back his daughter at that time. Thereafter he went away to spend the
night in a relative’s place. He deposed that the next day he went to the husband’s mothers
place at Janakpuri, when the accused Vimlesh informed him that Anju had sustained burn
injuries and was admitted at RML Hospital, New Delhi. The Petitioner stated that he went to
RML Hospital at about 8 P.M and his daughter expired at about 8.10 P.M. The police had
recorded his statement and he signed it. The police did not record his wife’s statement. The
Petitioner stated in his statement that after about 15 days of marriage the accused Shanti,

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

6 of 11

Dinesh, Suresh and his wife Vimlesh and her husband Ashok demanded dowry.

He further

stated that at the time of the incident his daughter was living in the upper portion of the house
and the ground floor was vacant. The Petitioner further stated that no members of the public
had come into the place of occurrence before he reached there.
16.

PW-3: Smt. Vijaywati mother of the deceased stated that at the time of marriage they had
given articles of dowry to the accused, beyond their financial capacity. After a fort-night of
marriage, the husband, mother-in-law Shanti, sister-in-law Vimlesh and brothers of accused
namely Raju and Suresh started harassing them for more dowry. They were demanding a cash
of Rs. 20,000/- and a plot of land measuring 50 square yards, This was informed about 15 days
prior to death. They used to threaten the deceased with death if those demands were not met
with. PW-2 stated that on 13.08.1997, at about 9.30 A.M. some neighbours of the accused
informed her that Anju had been set on fire by accused persons. She further stated that her
daughter expired on the same evening at 5.30 P.M. PW2 further stated that the deceased had
disclosed that the husband and his brothers treated her badly and harassed her for dowry.

17. The trial Court discussed the above evidence, and also the statements recorded during the
inquest. On the basis of its overall assessment of the materials, it concluded that the husband’s
guilt had been established. It proceeded to convict him, under Section 304-B. So far as other
accused were concerned, the Court concluded that there was no substantive evidence against
them, indicative of their role in threatening Anju with cruelty or harassment, soon before the
death, for purposes of dowry, warranging conviction for that offence.
18. The analysis of Ex.PW-1/A (statement of PW-1 in the inquest) and Ex.PW-3/A (statement of PW3 in the inquest) disclose that both had identically deposed as to the role of the husband in the
demand for dowry, just before the date of incident, when he asked to be paid Rs.2 lakhs,

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

7 of 11

besides purchase or handing over of a 50 square yard plot. PW-1 also mentioned about the
incident when he was threatened on that account. However, there was a significant variation
when the deposition was recorded in court, after some time. This time, though the names of
other accused were mentioned by PW-3, no specific details were given. The trial Court felt that
this material was insufficient to record conviction of the other accused. The offence under
Section 304-B is a serious one; courts should refrain from convicting accused in the absence of
convincing proof, beyond reasonable doubt that the death was solely on account of harassment
for the purpose of dowry, soon before the incident. It has been held (Ref. Sunil Bajaj vs. State
of M.P. AIR 2001 SC 3020; State of Orissa Vs. Niranjan Mohapatra 2005 SCC (Crl) 1251) that
inconsistent statements and contradictions should not be ignored, specially if they are of
relatives of deceased. As far as appreciation of two documents are concerned, they were not
exhibited in the proceedings, and marked in evidence. It would be extremely unsafe, at this
stage, to rely on these documents when they were not put to the accused, at the trial.
19. On an overall consideration of these facts I am of the opinion that the findings of acquittal
recorded by the trial Court in relation to the respondent accused so far as it relates to Section
304-B IPC does not require interference.
20. The above findings, however, are not conclusive of the matter. All the accused admittedly were
charged with committing offences under Section 498-A. The trial Court did not of convict the
accused the husband Ashok Kumar of that offence. However, the discussion by the trial Court
shows that it completely ignored analysis of the evidence viz-a-viz the charge relating to Section
498-A IPC.
21. The difference between Section 304-B IPC and Section 498-A IPC, both of which deal with a
species of matrimonial offence, cannot be lost sight of. When the Indian Penal Code was

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

8 of 11

amended, the legislature consciously inserted these two provisions. Section 498-A deals with a
general kind of behavior which may include cruelty with the object of illegal demands for dowry
[sub-clause(b) ]. However, Section 304-B was enacted as a distinct offence where an unnatural
death occurs on account of dowry demand soon before the incident. At this stage it would be
relevant to notice Section 498-A, which reads as follows :“498A. Husband or relatie of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such
woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.- For the purpose of this section, “cruelty” meansa) Any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to
commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
mental or physical) of the woman; or
b) Harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or
any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable
security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such
demand.”
22. It would be immediately apparent that besides the charge of cruelty on account of dowry
harassment, other acts of cruelty are also culpable and if proved, punishable. The distinction
between Section 304-B and Section 498 which in certain situation might overlap yet have
distinct zones of operations, was commented upon by the Supreme Court in K. Prema S. Rao Vs.
Yadla Srinivasa 2003 (1) SCC 217.
23. What emerges from the above discussion is that the trial Court, which was expected to consider
the evidence on the basis of the charges as framed, completely failed to do so, as regards
Section 498-A, so far as the respondents are concerned. This in my opinion constitutes a glaring
irregularity which has to that extent vitiated its findings. However, this Court in view of Section
401(3) which specifically debars the High Court from reversing a finding of acquittal and return

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

9 of 11

one of conviction, the most appropriate course

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

10 of 11

would be to desist from further discussion of the evidence on this aspect and remit the matter
for consideration by the trial Court.
24. In view of the foregoing discussion, the revision petition is partly allowed. The case shall be reexamined afresh, so far as the present accused respondents are concerned, as regards the
charge under Section 498-A, IPC. The Court shall endeavor to complete the proceedings after
hearing both parties and render its judgment limited, to the point of remission within six
months from the date of receipt of the file. The petition is partly allowed in the above terms.

May 24, 2007

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

CRL.REV.P. 717/2004

11 of 11

