*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003
Reserved on 20.04.07
Pronounced on : May 28, 2007
CRL.REV.P. 548/2003

1.

A.K.JOSHI

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Naveen Malhotra, Advocate
versus

STATE (THR.CBI)
2.

..... Respondent
Through Mr. R.M.Tiwari, Advocate

CRL.REV.P. 583/2003
MOHD.SALEEM KHATRI
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. M.P.Singh, Mr. K.K.Singh, Advocates
versus

STATE THR. C.B.I.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. R.M.Tiwari, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

% Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

This revision challenges an order dated 15-3-2003 by which the petitioners

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

1 of 14

were charged with committing offences under Sections 420 and 511 Indian Penal
Code (IPC) read with Sections 468/471, read with Section 120-B and Section 12 of
the Passports Act.
2.

Briefly, the facts are that Section 111 (d) of the Customs Act, 1962, enacts

that any goods, imported, or or attempted to be imported or brought within the
Indian Customs Waters, contrary to any prohibition imposed under the is liable to
confiscation. It was alleged that during the relevant period import of cars without
valid

import licence/customs clearing permit was restricted/prohibited under

Clause 3(1) of Imports (Control) Order, 1955 issued under Clause 3 of Imports &
Exports (Control) Act, 1947 read with Public Notices No. 21-ITC/92-97 dated
26/6/92 and Public Notice No. 197-ITC/(PN)/90-93 dated 16/8/91 issued by the
Chief Controller of Imports and Exports, Central Government. These prohibitions
were deemed to have been imposed under Section111 of Customs Act, 1962.
According to conditions laid under Public Notice dated 16/8/91 payment for the
imported car should not have been remitted from India, payment for duty of motor
vehicle should be have been made in foreign exchange unless specially exempted
from the public notice and the importer cames back to India for permanent
settlement with declaration to that efect before Customs; he should have stayed
abroad at least for two years. Another condition was that import of passenger car
not exceeding 1600 cc capacity could be made for a new car, otherwise a car

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

2 of 14

having capacity of 1600 CC or more should have been in use of the importer for
more than a year before his return to India.
3.

The accused petitioners were proceeded for offences against by the CBI,

which investigated into allegations of forgery, fabrication of documents and
cheating, besides violation of provisions of the Passports Act, in regard to import
of nine Honda cars. The CBI, after carrying out investigations, filed a charge sheet,
alleging that there was sufficient materials to charge Mohd. Salim Khatri (A-1),
M/s Sealand (India) (A-2) and Shri A.K. Joshi (A-3).
4.

According to allegations eight bills of entry were processed by staff of the

customs department. No bill of entry was filed in respect of import of car in the
name of Kolavayal Gangadharan. In none of the 9 cases formal orders for out of
charge of the goods were given. The bills of entry were taken over by the DRI
Officers before the final assessment of the goods and scrutiny of the documents.
No payment of Customs duty was also made for import of any of the cars. It was
alleged that investigation with various passport offices revealed that the above
passports were issued by the respective passport offices; addresses shown on them
were altogether different from what were shown in the Bills of entry for import of
the nine Honda Cars. The passport holders were not found at Delhi addresses
shown in the bills of entry. Passport application in respect of Shri K. Gangadharan
only was available and the rest had been destroyed by Passport Offices due to

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

3 of 14

efflux of time.
5.

The CBI alleged that photographs and signatures of Shri Paul Daniel

Mohandhas, Shri K.S. Shanmugam, Shri P.H. Anthru and Shri J.M.A. Wahab on
passports in their names were forged. Investigation at Banglore revealed that both
Shri Mohd Ahmed and Shri K. Gangadharan are did not exist at the addresses
shown in passports issued in their names. There were interpolations in the identity
number, date of issue, date of expiry etc. in the passport in the name of Shri K.
Gangadharan. Investigation at Hyderabad disclosed that Sheikh Hussain Saheb
was not traceable at the given address in the passport. The investigations at
Regional Passport Office, Mumbai, showed that it issued passport in favour of one
Shri G.R. Bhumayya a resident of Jangapally PO Tottapally, Dist. Kareem Nagar,
Andhra Pradesh. He had gone to Delhi and had given his passport for Rs. 5,000/to Shri Khatri (A-1) and Joshi (A-3) for import of car in his name. Shri Khatri and
Shri Joshi had obtained his signatures on various papers. Actually, he had not
imported/purchased any car.
6.

It was also alleged according to investigation that the passport of Shri R.P.

Shridharan was genuine, with his photographs and signature. He gave a signed
statement before DRI that he had given his passport for Rs. 5,000/- to Shri Mohd.
Salim Khatri and Shri A. K. Joshi at Delhi. He had not purchased any car; nor did
he import any car. It was alleged that according to investigation each passport had

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

4 of 14

Transfer of Residence (TR) entries; the Unaccompanied baggage centre of
Customs at Air Cargo Complex, Sahar, disclosed that such entries in passports of
Sh. Mohd. Sahib, J.M.A. Wahab, Sh. K. Shanmugam, Sh. P.H. Anthru, Sh. Mohd.
Ahmed, Shri K. Gangadharan, Shri Paul Daniel Mohandas were bogus as no such
clearance was given to them. Likewise, there was no emigration clearance entry in
passport of Shri G.R. Bhumauyya.
7.

According to CBI, none of the eight cases, at the time of assessment, the

passports were checked by Customs to verify if there were any TR entries and
departure and arrival entries of the passport holders. Except in case of passports of
Shri R.P. Sreedhan and Shri G.R. Bhumayyha, entries of transfer of residence and
emigration clearance particulars in the remaining seven passports were forged.
Not only this, investigation

proved that Shri Mohd. Ahmed and Shri Seikh

Hussain Saheb are non existent. The photographs and signatures in the passports
in the names of Shri P.H. Anthru, Shri Paul Daniel Mohandas, Shri K.
Shanmugam, Shri J.M.A. Wahab were replaced. These aspects showed forgery of
the passports. They were obtained in fictitious names of Shri Mohd. Ahmed and
Shri Seikh Hussain Saheb from the Passport Office, Bangalore and Hyderabad,
respectively. In case of passport in the names of Shri P.H. Anthru, Shri Paul
Daniel Mohandas, Shri K. Shanmugam, Shri J.M.A. Wahab, forgeries were made
as regards photographs and signatures by replacing them after the passports were

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

5 of 14

issued by the concerned Passport Offices.
8.

According to investigations of CBI, Savings Bank Accounts were opened in

the names of nine passport holders with Oriental Bank of Commerce, Sarva Priya
Vihar Branch, Kalu Sarai, New Delhi. The bank is located in the building owned
by Khatri Brothers. The accounts wre opened in the year 1992 between 31/1/92
and 7/2/92 with initial cash deposit of Rs. 500/-. One of the accounts i.e. account
No. 3185 in the name of Shri Seikh Hussain Saheb was introduced by Shri Mohd.
Salim Khatri. The address of Shri Seikh Hussain Saheb shown in the Account
Opening Form is C/o Mr. Salim, 83/1, Adhichini, New Delhi. Shri Mohd. Salim
Khatri has a workshop in the name of M/s Technic Automobiles Pvt. Ltd. at 83/1,
Adhichini, New Delhi.
9.

In the case of the other 8 accounts, addresses shown in ledger sheets is

83/1, Adhichini, New Delhi. First pay in slips by which the accounts were opened
with initial deposit of Rs. 500/- showed the address either as C/o Mr. Salim or as
c/o Salim, 83/, Adhichini, New Delhi. Usually there were two transactions - first
deposit of Rs. 500/- for opening of the account and second for withdrawal of Rs.
600/- leaving very meagre balance in the accounts in the name of Shri R.P.
Sreedharan, Shri Mohd. Ahmed, Shri K. Gangadharan, Shri K., Shanmugam, Shri
P.D. Mohandas and Shri P.H. Anthru. Patterns of withdrawal and use of accounts
in in all the cases were similar. The last withdrawal of Rs. 450/- from the account

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

6 of 14

of Shri Seikh Hussain Saheb and Rs. 3300/- from the account of Shri G.R.
Bhumayya was made by Shri Surinder Saini. Investigation revealed that Shri
Surinder Saini had withdrawn the amount from these accounts on the instance of
Shri Mohd. Salim Khatri and had given the withdrawn amount to him.
The Government Expert on Questioned Documents (GEQD) opined that signatures
were of Surinder Saini on the back of the cheques. GEQD has also identified
signatures of Shri A.K. Joshi on the Bills of Entries and of Shri Mohd. Salim
Khatri on account opening form of Shri Shaikh Hussain Saheb.
10.

It was alleged that for violations of Customs Act, the Department of

Revenue Investigation, filed complaint before ACMM, Patiala House Court after
obtaining sanction of Collector of Customs, Delhi under Sections 132 & 135 (1)(a)
of Customs Act, 1962 against Shri Mohd. Salim Khatri and Shri A.K. Joshi. The
investigation by CBI revealed commission of offences u/s 120B, IPC r/w 420/511,
468 & 471 IPC and Section 12(1)(b) and (d) of the Passport Act, 1967 by Shri
Mohd. Salim Khatri, M/s Sealand (India) and Shri A.K. Joshi. Sanction order for
prosecution of Shri Mohd. Salim Khatri, M/s Sealand (India) and Shri A.K. Joshi,
was issued by the competent authority Lt. Governor of NCT of Delhi under
Section 15 of Passports Act, 1967 is enclosed in original.
11.

Learned counsel contended that there was no evidence to show that the

petitioners ever induced anyone to part with property, dishonestly, or that they had

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

7 of 14

forged or fabricated the materials. No loss was established; the cars imported by
the nine persons were entered in Bills of Entry, according to instructions given by
them. The petitioner A-3 was a customs agent, who merely acted on the
representation of the importers. It could not be said that the entry of the cars were
based on a fraudulent intention to cheat anyone; if there was any revenue loss, that
issue had been gone into by the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal, which completely exonerated both the accused of the charges of evasion
of duty. The revenue angle having been cleared, the petitioners could not be
accused of any other offence.
12.

It was submitted that the alleged forgery or duplication of passports, could

not be fastened upon the petitioners, who had no role in that regard; in any event,
the prosecution had no evidence to connect them with such incident. In these
circumstances, the offences under Section 468/471 were unsustainable. Similarly,
the allegation of cheating were not only far fetched, but baseless. As regards the
charge of contravention of Section 12 of the Passports Act, it was contended that
the petitioners could never be arrayed for it, since they had not used or allowed to
the passports, to be used.
13.

The impugned order was defended by learned counsel for CBI, who

submitted that apart from the revenue angle, i.e loss to the customs department, the
modus operendi adopted by the petitioners, was ingenious; they sought to

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

8 of 14

circumvent import restrictions, by devising methods for importing the Honda cars,
without paying duty. These included using genuine passports, for illegal purposes;
manipulating entries in travel and passport documents, using tampered passports,
and in some cases dubious documents, because the passports were not found in any
of the addresses mentioned. At least two of the alleged importers had in their
statements, recorded, categorically stated that their passports were used by the
accused, for import of cars, upon payment of money by them.
14.

Learned counsel submitted that the pattern of acts committed by the accused

petitioners revealed a deep rooted conspiracy; in all the cases, the so called
importers were said to have opened bank accounts, with identical amounts; they
were identified by the first accused, and the third accused facilitated the entire
process, his involvement was clearly found in the issuance of the Bills of Entry. It
was alleged that the exoneration of the petitioners, in the departmental, or
adjudication proceedings, did not imply that they could not be charged with
offences under the Indian Penal Code, if the evidence collected, indicated their
complicity.
15.

The findings of CESAT, which were relied upon, may be extracted below:
“Upon examination of the evidence on record and the submissions of
both the sides, we are of the opinion that the charges made against the
present appellants are not well supported by evidence. Even if the
passport used were false in the sense that Indian Nationals had
travelled abroad to work under false/assumed identities, as the present
appellants were not involved with the preparation of such false

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

9 of 14

documents (passport) for such travels, they would not be guilty in
regard to the present imports. Prima facie, even the preparation of
these false documents could not have been with the intention to avail of
the import benefits, inasmuch as the persons had gone out of India well
before the issue of the circular in question. May be, for various
reasons they chose to travel abroad under false documents. But that
does not support the present findings against the appellants as they had
not arranged the false documents so as to benefit from the imports.
The involvement of Shri Salim Khatri could be only to facilitate the sale
of cares after imports and to derive some financial advantage from it.
Such a brokerage activity is not illegal under the Customs Act or any
other law. The clearing agent also would appear to have been only
filling papers in the normal course of his business for clearing
imported goods. Their statements are of not much relevance in the
face of the evidence on record. Therefore, penalties could not be
imposed based on those statements.”

16.

A reading of the order of the Tribunal would show that it rested its findings

on the basis of certain assumptions, i.e that the involvement of the petitioners
could not be said to be illegal, as they sought to facilitate the sale of the cars.
However, the order does not show deeper analysis of certain salient details, such as
commonality of pattern of opening of bank accounts; the use of passports by the
first accused; the witnesses deposed that he gave Rs. 5000/- to them to use the
passport, for importing the cars. As regards the third petitioner, his use of those
passports, without the performance of journey by the so-called importers, and
issuance of the Bill of Entry, shows his knowledge, of the fraudulent nature of the
transactions. In some judgments of the Supreme Court, reported as P. Jayappan v.
S.K. Perumal, First Income-Tax Officer, Tuticorin 1984 (Supp) SCC 437; Commissioner

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

10 of 14

of Income Tax. Mumbai v. Bhupen Champaklal Dalai and Anr. (2001) 3 SCC 469

and Surkhi Lal v. Union of India (2005 (3) JCC 1788 it was held that the
exoneration of someone, in departmental or adjudication proceedings did not mean
that he could not be prosecuted for offences on the same facts. This court analyzed
all the relevant decisions, in Sunil Gulati -vs- R.K. Vohra 2007 (1) SCC 207 and
held that findings in departmental or adjudication proceedings would not amount
to resjudicata and initiation of criminal proceedings in these circumstances cannot
be treated as double jeopardy as they are not in the nature of "prosecution".
17.

The above facts would show that nine Honda cars were sought to be

imported without paying import duty. The first accused runs an auto workshop,
and also deals in cars. The evidence disclosed in the charge sheet shows that he
facilitated opening of accounts; some

ostensible account holders, who never

actually imported the car, deposed that their passports were given to the first and
third accused, they also received Rs. 5000/- for giving the passports. Two passport
holders were not traceable; the address furnished in the savings bank, (the branch
being in the same premises as the first accused's) were that of the first accused. He
introduced the account holders. Some of the passports were tampered; all of them
had fake TR entries. The Bill of Entries were issued at the behest of the third
accused. In these circumstances, the impugned order on charge cannot be said to
have been made without application of mind was untenable. The materials do
CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

11 of 14

disclose prima facie, grave suspicion about involvement of the accused petitioners,
in respect of the acts complained.
18.

Section 12 of the Passports Act reads as follows:
"12. Offences and Penalties :(1) Whoever (a) contravenes the provisions of Section 3; or
(b) knowingly furnishes any false information or suppresses any
material information with a view to obtaining a passport or travel
document under this Act or without lawful authority alters or attempts
to alter or causes to alter the entries made in a passport or travel
document; or
(c) fails to produce for inspection his passport or travel document
(whether issued under this Act or not) when called upon to do so by the
prescribed authority; or
(d) knowingly uses a passport or travel document issued to another
person; or
(e) knowingly allows another person to use a passport or travel
document issued to him,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or
with both.
(2) xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx.

(3) Whoever contravenes any conditions of a passport or travel document
or any provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder for which no
punishment is provided elsewhere in this Act shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
(4) xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx

xxxxx....".

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

12 of 14

19.

One of the conditions for attracting the offence under Section 12, is a

person knowingly using the passport or travel document of another person (Section
12(d)). The facts of this case show, prima facie, that passports issued to some of
the ostensible importers, were used to bring in the cars, when they never intended
to do so; they were given money for that purpose. They had not imported the cars.
Therefore, I see nothing wrong in the framing of this charge.
20.

As regards the direct involvement of the third accused, it has been

established that he made the Bill of Entry in all the cases. They contained
particulars of fictitious and suspect transactions, besides false details of false and
fabricated passports. Two witnesses stated that they handed over passports to A-1
and A-3, in exchange for money. His role at this stage indicates a grave, prima
facie suspicion of having participated in the commission of the offence, as well as
the conspiracy.
21.

In view of the above findings, there is no infirmity with the order on charge.

It is made clear that the observations in this order were made for the purpose of
considering the correctness of the charges framed, and were not a reflection of the
merits of the matter, or the defence of the petitioner accused. The petition fails,
and is dismissed.

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

13 of 14

DATED: 28th May, 2007

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J

CRL.REV.P. 548/2003 & CRL.REV.P. 583/2003

14 of 14

