*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Pronounced on: 24.02.2009

+

W.P. (C) 3720/2007
DR. BUDDH PRIYA RAHUL

..... Petitioner

Through: Petitioner in person.
Versus
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI & ORS.

..... Respondents

Through: Mr. Somdutt Kaushik, Advocate.
Mr. Anurag Mathur, Advocate.
Mr. Praveen Khattar, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
1.

Whether the Reporters of local papers
may be allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be
reported in the Digest?
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J. (ORAL)
This proceeding, under Article 226 of the Constitution seeks issuance of an

appropriate writ restraining the Respondents No. 2 and 3 from interfering with the
petitioner‟s registration, as a doctor, and a direction to allow him to join the postgraduate degree course of MS Orthopaedics for the session of 2007-08. It also seeks
an order to quash the letter, dated 4.5.2007 issued by the Delhi Medical Council (fourth
respondent, hereafter “DMC”) whereby the petitioner‟s registration was withdrawn. A
WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 1 of 21

further order to quash the inquiry proceedings, initiated against the petitioner is also
sought.
2.

The petitioner had joined the MBBS course offered by the Maulana Azad Medical

College, Delhi (hereafter “MAMC”) in the year 2001. He was issued a MBBS passing
certificate on 13.3.2006 on the basis of which, he applied for a provisional registration
with the DMC and received the provisional certificate on 14.03.2006. The petitioner
started his one year compulsory rotatory internship and on its completion the Internship
Completion Certificate (hereafter “ICC”) was issued to him on 23.3.2007. The petitioner,
on the basis of this ICC, applied to the DMC for issuance of a registration on 26.3.2007.
The registration certificate was issued on 3.4.2007. On 10.2.2007, the petitioner
appeared in the Post Graduate Medical Entrance Test, Delhi (“PGMET”) under roll no.
30117. He secured second rank among the schedule caste candidates and stood 48 th in
the general merit. He was called for counseling on 12.4.2007 when he opted for MS
(Orthopaedics) at MAMC, for which a letter dated 12.4.2007 was issued to him.
Petitioner had deposited a demand draft for Rs. 7,000/- favouring the University of
Delhi. He reported to the Dean, MAMC and further deposited a sum of Rs. 10,000/towards college security and also furnished a surety bond, dated 12.4.2007 to the tune
of Rs. 1,50,000/-.
3.

On 26.4.2007the Registrar (Academic) of MAMC issued a letter addressed to the

Staff Surgeon, L.N. Hospital for the medical examination of the petitioner. Further by
letter dated 1.5.2007 of the Registrar (Academic) the HoD (Head of Department),
Orthopaedics Dr. Anil Dhall, was informed that the petitioner was provisionally selected

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 2 of 21

for the course; the letter directed him (the petitioner) to submit a joining report. He
reported to the HoD, Orthopaedics for joining the course, but was not allowed to do so.
4.

The petitioner alleges discovering that his name was not on the list of awardees

of the MBBS degree and the same was not awarded to him, without assigning a reason.
A letter, dated 4.5.2007 was received by him on 8.5.2007 from the Registrar, DMC
informing him that his registration certificate was withdrawn since his internship
completion certificate had been cancelled, by MAMC authorities. On the same day the
petitioner received a telephone call from Dr. J.M. Kaul (fifth respondent) and he was
directed to meet her on 9.5.2007 at 10 A.M. When he reported on the said date a
memorandum, dated 9.5.2007 was handed over to him whereby he was directed to
appear before the inquiry committee on 10.5.2007 at 12 A.M. in connection with the
charges made against him. However, no documents were provided to him apprising him
of the allegations and he was further directed to furnish a written explanation of the
alleged misconduct within 24 hours. The petitioner sent a letter dated 10.5.2007
requesting extension of time for filing of the written explanation, but the same was not
granted.
5.

The respondents counter the allegations put forth in the petition stating that the

petitioner had approached the court with unclean hands and suppressed material facts
alleging that he had forged signatures of the coordinators/In charge on the attendance
records and manipulated in the process of obtaining the ICC.
6.

In the counter affidavit, the University of Delhi states that the MAMC had

informed that the ICC was issued to the petitioner inadvertently and there was shortage
of attendance on his part. This, according to the University, rendered him ineligible for

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 3 of 21

the ICC; the certificate was withdrawn/ cancelled. It is also averred that a show cause
notice was issued to the petitioner to which, he did not respond; details of the said show
cause notice are however not provided. Further it is stated that the university, after
considering the matter, offered the seat secured by the petitioner in the MS (Ortho)
course to another candidate on 29.5.2007 and that the petitioner was informed of the
same by a letter on the same date.
7.

The DMC in their counter affidavit admit that a certificate of registration dated

3.4.2007 was issued to the petitioner by them but the same was withdrawn as a
consequence of their receiving a communication (letter dated 1.5.2007) from the MAMC
that the ICC was issued (to the petitioner) inadvertently, since on a scrutiny it was
discovered that he was short of attendance. The ICC stood cancelled on this ground.
On the basis of this letter, the DMC withdrew the certificate of registration by order,
dated 4.5.2007.
8.

The petitioner, Mr. Budh Priya Rahul, who argued the case, submitted that the

MAMC denied any fair opportunity to him; it did not properly notify him of any charge,
and gave him no chance to defend himself. According to the petitioner, the MAMC‟s
alleged notice, intimating about the holding of an inquiry on 27th April, 2007, was never
received by him. He submitted that by then, the authorities had already decided the
course of action they were going to adopt. They also held meetings termed as enquiry
proceedings, and determined to blight his career. Under these circumstances, the action
in withdrawing the ICC certificate was illegal.
9.

It was urged, by placing reliance on some documents, that on the basis of the

material on record of MAMC itself, the charge of the petitioner having not attended the

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 4 of 21

rotatory internship was unfounded. The MAMC‟s explanation about having carried out
an enquiry on the 19th, 24th, 27th and 30th April 2007, is unsustainable in law. The
petitioner was never intimated about the precise nature of charges levelled against him,
or even appraised of the documents and materials forthcoming and sought to be relied
upon by the authorities to conclude as they did, that he had forged the records so as to
obtain the ICC, which culminated in his registration with the Delhi Medical Council, and
his getting admission in the MS Orthopaedics course. He alleges that the respondents
have in fact concocted the story of constituting an enquiry to frustrate his case, since he
was an outstanding scheduled caste candidate. He states that the records produced
before the court, revealing as they do, that enquiry was held on four separate dates did
not involve him and straightaway led to the cancellation of the certificate on 1.5.2007.
The petitioner came to know about cancellation of his ICC when the fourth respondent's
letter of 4.5.2007 was received by him on 8.5.2007. He further alleges that on that day
i.e. 8.05.2007 he was telephonically informed about the need to attend the meeting of
the enquiry committee conducted by the University on the next day i.e. 9.5.2007. On
that day he was handed over a memo, which did not even mention or whisper about the
so-called enquiry proceedings, which had been held in April 2007.
10.

The petitioner contends that the Registrar (Academics) of MAMC was a member

of the said so-called committee, which clearly implied that he was fully aware that the
ICC was being enquired into and likely to be cancelled. Yet he signed the two letters,
one dated 26.4.2007 addressed to the Staff Surgeon, Lok Nayak Hospital requiring the
petitioners' medical examination and further requesting a report. The Registrar
(Academics) also wrote to the third respondent, namely Head of Department

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 5 of 21

(Orthopaedics) on 1.5.2007 intimating about the Petitioner‟s provisional selection, for
admission to the MS Orthopaedics course. These, urges the petitioner, clearly
demonstrate that in reality there was no enquiry proceeding that allegedly found him
guilty of any malpractice or misconduct.
11.

The petitioner denies that he was ever involved in any misconduct. He contends

that he attended all the compulsory subjects of his rotatory internship programme, and
was entitled to the ICC. In this regard, he urges that the allegation that he did not attend
the internship programme for the department of Medicine, is in fact false and
unfounded. He relied upon copies of four death certificates prepared as Medical Officer
during his posting in the department of Medicine and countersigned by senior doctor of
the department. It is argued that the MAMC‟s contention about the attendance records
having been stolen, is a convenient one. He argues that the MAMC does not dispute his
assessment reports, and their genuineness, which are deliberately withheld. According
to him, the ICC is issued after considering the assessment reports from all departments.
12.

The MAMC urges that the petitioner managed to get the ICC after forging the

signature of the coordinator/ in charge of the training programme and the records of the
Heads of Department showed that he had not completed internship in Medicine,
Surgery and Orthopaedics. According to the MAMC, the attendance register showed
that the petitioner did not report for duty throughout the postings in the department of
Surgery. Counsel contended that the allegations levelled against the petitioner were
serious and a number of records are alleged to have been forged by him. The unit-wise
attendance register of internship of the interns posted at the various disciplines or
departments showed that the petitioner was absent. It is alleged that the senior resident

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 6 of 21

in the surgery department appears to have struck off the remark „Absent‟ into
„Satisfactory‟. The petitioner's assessment card of rotating internship was similarly
tampered with and the surgery postings were blank. The HoD of Medicine stated that
the petitioner never attended his posting, in that department during his compulsory
rotatory internship and the attendance register of interns were stolen from the
Department. The MAMC relies upon the statement of Dr. A.K. Kakkar, Head of
Department, Surgery and of Dr. Richa Dewan, HoD, Medicine, to say that the petitioner
never attended both the programmes in surgery and medicine during his compulsory
rotating internship period.
13.

The University contends that the eligibility requirements for admission to the

MD/MS course is contained in the Bulletin of Information for the post graduate degree
course, Session 2007. Para 2.5.1 of the Bulletin states that the candidate should have
qualified the MBBS examination and have completed satisfactorily, one year
compulsory rotating internship; the certificate for this purpose should be produced by
31 March 2007 and a candidate had to possess Full Registration with the Delhi Medical
Council. The university admits that the petitioner was called for counselling and he
opted for the MS course in Orthopaedics. However, before the process of admission
was completed and he could join the course, some anonymous complaint was received
that he had not completed his internship and that the ICC was procured by fraud. The
matter was therefore referred to MAMC for its comments. MAMC informed the university
that the certificate was issued to the petitioner inadvertently and that there was in fact a
shortage of attendance on his part, which rendered him ineligible for ICC. MAMC also
informed university that the previously issued certificate was withdrawn.

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 7 of 21

14.

The preceding discussion reveals that there is no dispute to the following facts:
a) The petitioner was admitted in the MBBS Course at MAMC in the year 2001,
b) He was granted a provisional registration with the Delhi Medical Council on
14.3.2006 pursuant to which, he started the one year compulsory rotatory
internship
c) He was issued an Internship Completion Certificate on 23.3.2007, under
signatures of the Dean, MAMC.
d) On the basis of this certificate the Delhi Medical Council on 3.4.2007 granted him
the certificate of registration.
e) The petitioner appeared in the Post Graduate Medical Entrance Test (PGMET)
on 10.2.2007 and was successful; he ranked second among the scheduled caste
candidates.
f) He attended the counseling held on 12.4.2007 and opted for the MS
(Orthopaedics) Course, for which he deposited all the required fees, as and when
demanded.
g) The respondents state that the internship completion certificate was issued due
to an inadvertent mistake, and that the petitioner had not actually completed his
internship as per the records of the Heads of the concerned departments.

15.

From the documents produced it is evident that the Petitioner was issued an

Internship Completion Certificate on 23.3.2007 under signatures of the Dean, MAMC
wherein it was clearly stated that he had completed his Compulsory Rotatory Internship
(one year programme) in the associated hospitals of the college as a resident intern
from 16.3.2006 to 15.3.2007 under 10 (8+2) different postings. The internship postings

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 8 of 21

under challenge are- a period of two months, i.e. in the department of Medicine, and two
months in the department of Surgery (1 & 1/2 months) including Orthopaedics (15
days). The respondents have produced the records of the MAMC, which include the
enquiry proceedings held by the committee, in April, 2007.
16.

The MAMC state that one Dr. A.K. Kakkar, HoD, Surgery had produced the

attendance register of the unit wise posting of interns in his department and that it
clearly reflected that the petitioner remained „absent‟ throughout his posting in the said
department and that this register has been counter signed by one Dr. Jagdish Chander,
Professor of Surgery. The respondents state that the remark „absent‟, against the
petitioner‟s name, was scored out and one Dr. Rajender Singh, Senior Resident
Department of Surgery, put „satisfactory‟ instead, on 13.3.2007, whereas the remark
„absent‟ was put on 5.1.2007, alleging manipulation of records. On a perusal of the said
attendance record it transpires that Dr. Jagdish Chander had signed the attendance of 4
interns on 4.1.2007, and the petitioner‟s attendance was verified on 5.1.2007, by the
same person who had later, on 13.3.2007, scored out the „absent‟ remark and put
„satisfactory‟ instead, and who according to the respondents is Dr. Rajender Singh.
Further, the respondents have placed on record a letter, dated 10.5.2007, stated to be
the original letter of confession by Dr. Rajender Singh, wherein he admits to writing
„satisfactory‟ in place of „absent‟ and alleges to have done so on the insistence of one
Prem, peon of Surgery department who suggested that as Dr. Lal has already given
„satisfactory‟ to the petitioner even he should do the same. Significantly, this was never
part of the MAMC enquiry, which was held on four dates; the minutes of those meetings
do not record or reflect this fact.

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 9 of 21

17.

What is also apparent from the record is that the said Dr. Pawanindra Lal, had

verified the attendance record of the all the interns, including the petitioner on 5.1.2007
and placed a remark „Report Satisfactory‟, later, in contradiction of his earlier stand,
stated that the petitioner had attended only two days of PGMET Cell posting, which is
revealed from the record of proceedings of the Inquiry Committee on 24.4.2007. The
questions to be considered in these circumstances are firstly, if at all there was any
manipulation/forging in the attendance records on 13.3.2007, then on what basis did Dr.
Lal give a „satisfactory‟ remark on 5.1.2007 and secondly, why was any disciplinary
action not taken against the co-perpetrator, nor was it attempted to discover who he
was. The relevant pages of the „assessment card‟ of the petitioner, which are a part of
the MAMC records, further reveals one Dr. V.K. Ramteke of the said department had
also cast his signature, adjacent to the alleged forged signature of Dr. Jagdish Chander,
verifying that the petitioner had availed „nil‟ leaves during his internship and a detail of
the procedures performed by the petitioner during the period of his posting i.e. from
16.11.2006 to 31.12.2006, was also provided there. Keeping these in mind one fails to
understand why was Dr. Ramteke never asked to join the inquiry committee
proceedings. The petitioner had also produced a copy of the certificate dated 13.3.2007,
by Dr. V.K Ramteke, stating that he did not avail of any leave for the period of internship
i.e. 16.11.2006 to 13.12.2006 in the department of surgery, that document is not denied
by the respondents.
18.

The petitioner was posted at the department of Orthopaedics from 1.11.2006 to

15.11.2006. From the record of inquiry proceedings held on 30.4.2007, it appears that
attendance records of the petitioner were submitted by Dr. A.K. Dhall, HoD,

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 10 of 21

Orthopaedics along with a letter dated 28.4.2007. On the basis of these records it was
concluded that discrepancies were reflected in the attendance register and that the
petitioner was given the remark „unsatisfactory‟ and was also asked to repeat posting
for fifteen days. As per the said letter of Dr. A.K. Dhall, Dr. Brijesh Jain (Sr. Resident In
charge of Intern Posting) noticed that the attendance register was signed by the
petitioner, whereas he had attended only three days of his orthopaedics training and
recorded that the signatures were proxy and his performance was found unsatisfactory
and he was required to repeat his posting for 15 days. Further, this position was also
brought to the notice of one Dr. Sumit Sural (Associate Professor), who recorded on the
attendance sheet that the intern should meet the HoD. It is unclear whether a notice to
this effect was put on the board or that such direction was communicated to the
petitioner by any other means. The assessment card contained the office seal on behalf
of Dr. Dhall, on which his signature is present, though the same is illegible.
19.

The petitioner was posted at the department of Medicine from 1.5.2006 to

30.6.2006. The posting at the said department (as per the inquiry proceedings held on
24.4.2007), Dr. Hira, Professor of Medicine, stated that the signatures present on the
assessment card were not his, but forged. Dr. Richa Diwan, HoD Medicine stated that
petitioner never attended his posting at the said department and further stated that the
attendance register of the interns was stolen from the department, relying upon the
letter dated 28.4.2007 written to the Registrar (Academic) by Dr. Diwan. From the
inquiry proceedings on 30.4.2007 it transpires that one Ms. Deepti, Intern, was sent as a
replacement of the petitioner in Dr. H.S. Heera‟s unit. In support of this the respondents
placed on record, a communication, dated 27.4.2007 and reply dated 28.4.2007,

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 11 of 21

exchanged between Dr. Diwan and Dr. Heera. A copy of joining report by Dr. Deepti is
also placed on record, on which signature of Dr. Amit is also present. It is stated that
Dr. Deepti replaced the petitioner for the said posting on 8.5.2006. On a closer look at
the dates on the joining letter, there appears to be overwriting, it appears as if 8.8.2006
is made to look as 8.5.2006. Further, signatures of both Dr. Diwan and Dr. Heera are
present on the Assessment Card of the petitioner along with their office seals, although
same are alleged to be forged. The Internal Assessment report, on the basis of which
the intern is entitled to an Internship Completion Certificate, of the said department
shows that Dr. H.S. Heera gave the petitioner a „satisfactory‟ remark. Nowhere has it
been alleged during the course of inquiry proceedings by Dr. H.S. Heera that his
signature on the Assessment Report of Interns was forged. Considering that this report
is the basis for issuance of the Internship Completion Certificate, which is a document
entitling students to the award of the degree and permanent registration with the
Medical Council, it is difficult to understand as to why all these discrepancies were not
noticed at the relevant time and why all these only surfaced after the petitioner cleared
his PGMET and got selected for the MS (Ortho.) and was asked to join the course.
20.

The petitioner was posted at the department of Medicine from 1.5.2006 to

30.6.2006, at the department of Orthopaedics from 1.11.2006 to 15.11.2006 and at the
department of Surgery from 16.11.2006 to 31.12.2006. The ICC was issued to the
petitioner on 23.3.2007. If these discrepancies in the records were indeed present at the
relevant time or that the petitioner really remained absent altogether during the said
posting periods, it is beyond comprehension why these discrepancies were not pointed
out by the person in charge of the postings at the relevant time and on what basis was a

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 12 of 21

favourable assessment report sent from each department. These discrepancies
highlight that someone or some people were willing and ready to conclude the
petitioner‟s guilt.
21.

The record of the inquiry proceedings held on 19.4.2007 show that it was

decided to issue a memorandum to the petitioner instructing him to appear before the
committee. A memorandum dated 20.4.2007 is placed on record, whereby the petitioner
was directed to appear before the committee on 27.4.2007; a courier slip is also
annexed in support of this, according to which the memorandum was dispatched at
Agra address of the petitioner. Yet no proof of the petitioner‟s receipt is annexed. In this
memorandum the petitioner was informed that he had not completed his compulsory
rotatory internship in the department of Surgery, Medicine and Ophthalmology.
Interestingly he was not asked to appear for inquiry on 24.4.2007. He was also not
informed about the complaints against him, which led to the inquiry into his internship.
The trigger for this inquiry was concededly an anonymous complaint, which alleged that
he manipulated his results in the PGMET. Further, the memorandum did not inform the
petitioner of the charges leveled against him. No facts were alleged in the
Memorandum; no statement of imputations as to what he had to meet, or the
statements and materials recorded or collected till then, made a part of the
memorandum.
22.

The committee (of inquiry) despite resolving to call the petitioner, on 27 th April,

2007, met on 24th April, 2007. After recording the presence of 8 officers, i.e. Dr. JM
Kaul, Academic Officer, Dr. Rashmi Babbar, Incharge internship, Dr. S.M. Haider,
Registrar (Academics); Dr. AK Kakkar, HoD, Surgery, Dr. P. Lal, Professor of Surgery,

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 13 of 21

Dr. Richa Dewan, HoD Medicine, Dr. H.S. Heer, Professor and Head of Unit Medicine
and Dr. G.K. Ingle, Professor & Head of P& SM (Preventive and Social Medicine) the
document recorded as follows:
“ The Enquiry Committee constituted for the purpose of enquiring into the
noncompletion of Compulsory Rotatory Internship by Mr. Budh Priya Rahul
consisting of Dr. JM Kaul, Academic Officer, Dr. Rashmi Babbar, Incharge
internship, Dr. S.M. Haider, Registrar (Academics) had met today on 24 April
2007.
To look into the matter in detail, today Dr. AK Kakkar, HoD, Surgery, Dr. P. Lal,
Professor of Surgery, Dr. Richa Dewan, HoD Medicine, Dr. H.S. Heer, Professor
and Head of Unit Medicine have been requested to insist the enquiry committee
and bring all the records in their possession pertaining to the completion of
Compulsory Rotatory Internship by Mr. Budh Priya Rahul.
Dr. AK Kakkar HoD Surgery, has produced the attendance register of internship
rotation, Unitwise of interns posted in his department. The attendance register
clearly reflected that Mr. Budh Priya Rahul did not report for duty throughout the
postings in the department of Surgery. The said remark has been totally entered
in the attendance register and has been countersigned by Dr. Jagdish Chander,
Professor of Surgery. The record of unit wise rotation reflected that in front of the
name of Mr. Budh Priya Rahul, ' absent ' is marked which is being later cut and '
Satisfactory ' has been written in its place thereafter. The said word ' satisfactory‟
was written on 13 March 2007 by one doctor Rajender Singh, senior resident in
the surgery department. The signature of rotation in charge is shown to be done
on 5 January 2007. This clearly reflected that the word „satisfactory‟ has been got
written through some manipulation much after the signature of rotation in charge
to stop however he has attended two days of PGMET Cell posting as informed
by Dr. P. Lall, Incharge, PG MET Cell.
In view of the above circumstances, it was deemed appropriate to call for
Assessment Card of rotating internship That which is deposited by the students
in the Academic Section after completion of Internship. The said record was
called from the Academic Section. The Assessment Card submitted by the
concerned Intern, further revealed that the said record was also tempered/forced
and also the Surgery posting was blank.
Dr. Richa Dewan HoD Medicine, stated that Mr. Budh Priya Rahul never
intended his posting in the department of Medicine during this Compulsory
Rotatory Internship. She further submitted that the attendance register of interns
was stolen from the Department so that the Committee requested the HoD
Medicine to submit any other records which would pertain to internship.

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 14 of 21

Considering the seriousness of the aforesaid matter, it has been decided that
records from the departments of Medicine And Ophthalmology be called so as to
verify the attendance record of Mr. Budh Priya Rahul. Now the committee will
meet on 27 April 2007 for further proceedings in the matter."
23.

The deliberations of the Enquiry Committee of 27 th April, 2007, disclose that Dr.

JM Kaul, Academic Officer, Dr. Rashmi Babbar, Incharge internship, Dr. S.M. Haider,
Registrar (Academics) were present. The proceedings are recorded as follows:
“ it is 12:30 PM now. Mr. Budh Priya Rahul has not appeared before the Enquiry
Committee.
There is overwhelming evidence pointing towards tempering of records of
attendance pertaining to Mr. Budh Priya Rahul, which clearly establishes that he
has not completed his Compulsory Rotatory Internship in the department of
Surgery and forgery has been done in the Assessment Card in possession of Mr.
Budh Priya Rahul pertaining to his completion of Compulsory Rotatory Internship.
Considering the fact that the matter is very serious, the records from the
Department of medicine, orthopaedics and ophthalmology have been called for
to further verify the completion of attendance by Mr. Budh Priya Rahul in those
departments. The enquiry committee has decided to meet again on 30 th April
2007.”
24.

The deliberations of 30th April, 2007 record the presence of the same department

heads as in the case of 27th April. The proceedings records as follows:

“The records sent attached with the letter dated 28 April 2007 by Dr. Richa
Dewan, HoD Medicine, have been paid used in the day. It has been noted that
Mr. Budh Priya Rahul never joined duty in Dr. H.S. Heera‟s Unit and Ms. Deepti,
Intern, percent as a replacement of Mr. Budh Priya Rahul in the said Unit.
The records submitted along with letter dated 28th April 2007 by Dr. AK Dhall,
HoD orthopaedics That also reflected discrepancies in the attendance register
pertaining to Mr. Budh Priya Rahul. It has been noted that he was given the
remark „ Unsatisfactory‟ and was asked to repeat posting for 15 days.
Considering the statements of Dr. A.K. Kakkar, HoD Surgery, Dr. Richa Dewan,
HoD Medicine and Dr. A.K. Dhall, HoD orthopaedics and their relevant records it
is establish that Mr. Budh Priya Rahul has not completed the Compulsory
Rotatory Internship in the above-mentioned departments during his posting. It is
WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 15 of 21

further noted that Mr. Budh Priya Rahul did not turn up in spite of memorandum
sent to his home address.
In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the following are the
recommendations of the Enquiry Committee:
1. It has been noted that Mr. Budh Priya Rahul has not completed his
Compulsory Rotatory Internship in the departments of Medicine, Surgery and
Orthopaedics. Hence he may be asked to repeat the Internship period in the
aforesaid departments for the remaining period.
2. In view of the noncompletion of Compulsory Rotatory Internship, The
Internship certificate issued by this institution to Mr. Budh Priya Rahul may be
withdrawn and intimation to this effect may be sent to Medical Council of India
and Delhi Medical Council for further necessary action at their end.
3. Further an enquiry may be extended to fix the responsibility how the
Internship Completion Certificate was issued to Mr. Budh Priya Rahul.”
25.

A consideration of the MAMC records and files reveal that the Petitioner was

never invited to join the inquiry committee proceedings held on 19th, and 24th April,
2007. There is no proof of his having received the memorandum, dated 20.4.2007. The
MAMC did not show if he was supplied any documents in connection with the
allegations leveled against him. On 8.5.2007, the Petitioner was, for the first time,
instructed to appear before the Inquiry Committee (of the University) on 9.5.2007, to
which he complied and thereafter, he was issued a Memorandum dated 9.5.2007
directing him to explain within 24 hours the reasons for the alleged forgery and why any
disciplinary action should not be taken against him for his alleged misconduct. He was
further directed to appear before the committee with a written explanation on 10.5.2007
at 12 a.m. This document too, though termed a show cause notice, is bereft of any
details, or specifics of any allegations made. Shockingly, the suggested disciplinary
action had already been taken against the Petitioner as by letter dated 1.5.2007 his
Internship Completion Certificate was withdrawn as a result of which, he was not issued
his M.B.B.S degree and his registration with the Delhi Medical Council was also
WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 16 of 21

cancelled by letter dated 4.5.2007, which was received by him on 8.5.2007, issued by
the Registrar of the Council.
26.

From the counter affidavit filed by the University of Delhi it appears that it

unanimously took the decision to cancel the admission of the petitioner to the MS
(Orthopaedics) course and the seat was offered to another candidate in the counselling
held on 29.5.2007. This decision was conveyed to the petitioner by a letter. It has not
been denied by the respondents that the Registrar (Academic), who was also a member
of the inquiry committee, issued the two letters dated 26.4.2007 (for the medical
examination of the petitioner) and 1.5.2007 (informing the HoD, Orthopaedics about the
selection of the petitioner for the said course). It is noteworthy that before the issuance
of these letters the inquiry committee had already been constituted and two meetings
had also been conducted. Further the person who issued these letters was also on the
board of the inquiry committee, who had knowledge of the pending inquiry against the
petitioner.
27.

The petitioner had also relied on replies by the University in answer to queries

posed by him under the Right to Information Act stating that he had been awarded a
degree in medicine, for the year 2007, after completion of the requisite practical training.
The respondents advert to some proceedings before the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Commission. In view of the preceding discussion and conclusion, it is
held that those proceedings are not in any manner being prejudiced by the judgment of
this court.
28.

The processes and procedures followed by the authorities of the MAMC were in

stark negation of the well settled and universally applicable principles of natural justice.

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 17 of 21

The audi alteram partem (opportunity to be heard) rule, which is the first part of the
principle of natural justice, demands that before any adverse action is taken against
anyone for his misconduct or alleged delinquency, notice setting forth clearly and
unambiguously, the details of his wrongdoing and calling upon him to furnish his
explanation, should be given to him. This rule was explained by the Supreme Court in
Canara Bank v. Debashish Das AIR 2003 SC 2041, in the following manner:
“The first and foremost principle is what is commonly known as audi alteram
partem rule. It says that no one should be condemned unheard. Notice is the first
limb of this principle. It must be precise and unambiguous. It should appraise the
party determinatively the case he has to meet. Time given for the purpose should
be adequate so as to enable him to make his representation. In the absence of a
notice of the kind and such reasonable opportunity, the order passed becomes
wholly vitiated. Thus, it is but essential that party should be put on notice of the
case before any adverse order is passed against him. This is one of the most
important principles of natural justice. It is after all an approved rule of fair play…”

In Food Corpn. of India v. State of Punjab, (2001) 1 SCC 291, 297 while dealing with a
similar issue, it was held that:
“Notice to the affected person mandated in the section is not an empty formality;
it is meant for a purpose. A vague and unspecific notice will not provide
reasonable opportunity to the notice to file objection meeting the
reasons/grounds on which the amendment of the assessment list is proposed to
be made. Such a notice cannot be taken to be complying with the statutory
requirement.”
29.

Here, it can be observed from the record that neither the memorandum issued to

the Petitioner on 20th April, 2007 by MAMC, nor the show cause notice, issued by the
University, on 9th May, 2007, outlined the specifics of any allegations. It did not say how
and for what misconduct, the authorities proposed to withdraw the ICC. Thus, these
documents could not be termed as notices at all. Furthermore, the authorities had
substantially determined the petitioners‟ guilt on 24th April, 2007 itself, even before the
WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 18 of 21

date fixed for the inquiry proceeding. The petitioner‟s complaint of being unfairly dealt
with, is not insubstantial. The inquiry proceedings allege serious misbehavior and
misconduct of the petitioner, including forgery. Strangely, the respondents did not
choose to press criminal charges. Moreover, the statement of those whose signatures
who appear to have been allegedly forged, or copied, also does not even appear to
have been recorded. The respondents were in a hurry to apparently “get on” quickly
with the job of completing the inquiry. There was no attempt on their part to pause and
reflect the serious consequences that would inevitably have followed due to their
determination, and the necessity of following a minimum fair hearing procedure. The
professional reputation and right of the petitioner, a bright student who had ranked
second in the entrance examination, was given a go-bye. In this connection the
observations of the Supreme Court in Institute of Chartered Accountants v. L. Ratna
1986 (5) SCC 537, may be usefully extracted:
“But perhaps another way of looking at the matter lies in examining the
consequences of the initial order as soon as it is passed. There are cases where
an order may cause serious injury as soon as it is made, an injury not capable of
being entirely erased when the error is corrected on subsequent appeal. For
instance, as in the present case, where a member of a highly respected and
publicly trusted profession is found guilty of misconduct and suffers penalty, the
damage to his professional reputation can be immediate and far-reaching. "Not
all the King's horses and all the King's men" can ever salvage the situation
completely, notwithstanding the widest scope provided to an appeal. To many a
man, his professional reputation is his most valuable possession. It affects his
standing and dignity among his fellow members in the profession, and
guarantees the esteem of his clientele. It is often the carefully garnered fruit of a
long period of scrupulous, conscientious and diligent industry. It is the portrait of
his professional honour. In a world said to be notorious for its blase attitude
towards the noble values of an earlier generation, a man's professional
reputation is still his most sensitive pride. In such a case, after the blow suffered
by the initial decision, it is difficult to contemplate complete restitution through an
appellate decision. Such a case is unlike an action for money or recovery of
property, where the execution of the trial decree may be stayed pending appeal,
WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 19 of 21

or a successful appeal may result in refund of the money or restitution of the
property, with appropriate compensation by way of interest or mesne profits for
the period of deprivation. And, therefore, it seems to us, there is manifest need to
ensure that there is no breach of fundamental procedure in the original
proceeding, and to avoid treating an appeal as an overall substitute for the
original proceeding.”

30.

Fair procedure, reasonableness and non-arbitrary conduct of every state agency

are the unshakeable pillars on which the edifice of equality rests. The procedure
adopted by the respondents, in not providing the petitioner a hearing before withdrawal
of the Internship Completion Certificate, which led to the cancellation of his Delhi
Medical Council registration and non-issuance of the M.B.B.S. degree, is thus an
arbitrary action, unsupportable by any account. What the respondents have adopted is
farthest from the concept of fairness; they have mocked at it, and made every attempt to
deny fairplay to the petitioner. It is well known that the more serious the consequence,
the stricter should be the adherence to canons of fairplay and non-arbitrariness. The
consequence is that denial of proper and fair procedure has resulted in a slur on the
petitioner‟s name and reputation, loss of two years in his career, as well as cast a
shadow on his conduct; unheard, he is deemed a forger.
31.

In view of the above discussion, the court is of the opinion that the writ petition

has to succeed. Consequently, the withdrawal of ICC certificate is hereby quashed. The
University shall take appropriate steps to restore the petitioner‟s degree. Since his
admission to M.S. (Orthopaedics) was cancelled and seat allotted to someone else,
complete restitution is not possible. In the circumstances, the MAMC, the University and
the Delhi Medical Council shall pay to the petitioner, costs quantified at Rs. 1,00,000/(Rupees One lakh only), within four weeks from today. The amount of Rs. 50,000/- shall

WP (C) 3720/2007

Page 20 of 21

be paid by MAMC; and Rs. 25,000/- each shall be paid by the Delhi University and the
Delhi Medical Council. The petitioner shall be paid these amounts within the period
stipulated.
The Writ Petition is allowed, in the terms indicated above.

FEBRUARY 24, 2009

WP (C) 3720/2007

S. RAVINDRA BHAT
(JUDGE)

Page 21 of 21

