20
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CRL.REV.P. 651/2006
July 20, 2007

VIJAY KUMAR (JUVENILE) THRU KA
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. R.S. Gupta, Advocate
versus
STATE

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
FIR No. 306/2005
Under Sections 302/307/34 IPC
P.S. Sultan Puri
1.
This petition is directed against an order of Additional Sessions Judge rejecting an
appeal filed by the present petitioner. His bail application was declined by the Juvenile
Justice Board on 3.5.2006.
2.

The applicant as well as his father were arrayed as accused in regard to the

incident alleged to have occurred on 27.2.2005. It was alleged that in the course of an
altercation the accused inflicted injuries on one Tara Chand who subsequently died. The
petitioner, at the relevant time, was a juvenile. The Board, after considering the attendent
CRL.REV.P. 651/2006

1 of 3

circumstances, was of the opinion that the petitioner's apparent delinquency was on
account of lack of parental control. It was influenced by the circumstances that the
father, a co-accused, was involved in the same. The appeal met with the same fate.
During pendency of the present petition, this Court had enlarged the petitioner on interim
bail on 13.2.2006. The Court, on subsequent dates, extended the bail and required the
I.O. to report about the conduct of the applicant petitioner during the interregnum period.
3.

Learned counsel for the State submitted on instructions from ASI Premveer Singh

that the conduct and behaviour of the petitioner has so far been satisfactory. This Court
had on 13.10.2006 also considered the Social Investigation Report. (SIR). The Court had
observed that even though no details of bad company were forthcoming, the SIR had
recommended that the petitioner should be given constructive time and he needed to be
kept under effective supervision.
4.

Having seen the materials on record as well as the conduct of the petitioner which

appears to be satisfactory, I am of the opinion that the ends of justice would be sub-served
if the mandate of Sub-section 12 is followed in both letter and spirit. The provision
enjoins courts to grant bail as a rule save in excepted categories. I am satisfied that none
of the excepted conditions apply in the present case – there is no evidence pointing to the
petitioner's likelihood of association with a known criminal. Likewise his release cannot
endanger him physically or psychologically. On an overall conspectus of the facts, ends
of justice subserve in enlarging him on bail.
5.

In the above premises, the petition deserves to be allowed. The interim bail

granted to the petitioner is hereby confirmed on the same terms. The Petitioner is also
CRL.REV.P. 651/2006

2 of 3

directed to report to the Board once every month. Additionally, the I.O. shall file his
report once every month to the Board during pendency of proceedings.
The petition is allowed in the above terms.
Order Dasti.
S. RAVINDRA BHAT,J
JULY
dkg

20, 2007

CRL.REV.P. 651/2006

3 of 3

