*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Delivered on May 25, 2007

+

CRL.REV.P. 164/2007
MOHD. ADNAN AFTAB
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. I.Q. Alvi with Mr. Sheikh Issar Ahmed, Advocates
versus
THE STATE, NCT OF DELHI
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for State

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be Yes
allowed to see the judgment.?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes
in the Digest?
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This revision is directed against an order of the Additional Sessions Judge

dated 12.02.07 by which he confirmed the order of the Juvenile Justice Board,
declining bail.

The petitioner along with co-accused was charged with

committing offences under Sections 302/377/34 IPC. The incident in this case
occurred on 21/22.07.2006.
2.

The relevant part of the order of the Juvenile Justice Board reads as

follows:

crl-rev-164/07

1 of 5

3.

“SIR of delinquent received which is based on personal
interview and SIR from local DPO is awaited. SIR of delinquent
shows that his father is a Government servant in UP while his
mother is a house wife. He has two elder sisters both of whom are
married while his younger brother is studying. Juvenile is having
companion influence and the probation officer has observed that
Juvenile is known his co-accused Shehzad since last some years and
both belonged to Nagina. They both were residing in same locality
and had intimacy. They habitually wandered in nearby jungles
and that delinquency arose as a consequence of the intimacy. The
delinquent in the present case committed murder of one person
along with his co-accused which consequent of unnatural sexual
behaviour. The delinquent was residing at Delhi to pursue his
studies without any supervision and control of any of his family
members, who were residing at Bijnore (UP). The reason for which
the offence was committed has also the manner in which it was
committed with the adult accused (co) make us believe that release
of delinquent at this stage would defeat the ends of justice and
would also be against the moral physical and psychological well
being of the juvenile who appears to be in need of counselling for
behavioural modification.
Hence, application for bail filed on behalf of the delinquent is
rejected.”
The applicant was detained on 29.07.2006. He has been in custody ever

since then.

By order dated 20th March, 2007, the trial Court records were

requisitioned.

They reveal that a Social Investigation Report (SIR) dated

22.11.2006 was on the record. The report states that the petitioner is intelligent
and quite active, he had cleared the UP Board examination, at the Standard XII
level and paid sufficient interest in studies. He was admitted to the Draftsman
course from the Apex Care Centre, New Delhi.

The report noted that the

petitioner's father maintains discipline at house, and that he is emotionally
attached to family members. The family has good social and economic condition;
his father is an Engineer in the U.P. Jal Nigam. The report was of the opinion
that the petitioner developed intimacy with the co-accused, who lived in the same

crl-rev-164/07

2 of 5

locality. It recommended that he is young and has sufficient interest in studies;
his parents and relatives are anxious about his future.
4.

The learned counsel for the State in this present case, opposed the grant of

bail on the ground that the alleged act said to have been committed by the
juvenile along with the co-accused was one of great moral degradation and itself
would demonstrate the perversity of the mind of the juvenile.
5.

The definition of a 'delinquent juvenile' means a juvenile who has been

found to have committed an offence. Section 12 of the Act deals with right of bail
to the juvenile. Sub-Section (1) provides that, when any person accused of a
bailable or non-bailable offence, and apparently juvenile, is arrested or detained
and is brought before a Board, he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the time being in
force, be released on bail with or without surety but he shall not be so released if
there appear reasonable grounds for believing that such release is likely to bring
him into association with any known criminal or expose him to moral, physical or
psychological danger or that his release would defeat the ends of justice. Subsection (3) provides that when such person is not released on bail under subsection (1) by the Board it shall, instead of committing him to prison, make an
order sending him to an observation home or a place of safety for such period
during the pendency of the inquiry regarding him as may be specified in the
order.
6.

Section 12 mandatorily provided that a juvenile, even “apparently a

juvenile” should be released on bail. All Courts dealing with such situations must
crl-rev-164/07

3 of 5

give full meaning to its provisions, as also the object of the Act. Bail has to be
granted to a juvenile, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force. The
exception, i.e. likelihood of moral or psychological danger to the juvenile or his
coming to contact with a known criminal should be prima facie made out. (Refer
Prakash -v- State of Rajasthan 2006 (112) Crl. LJ 1373; Vijendra Kumar Mali
-v- State 2003 (109) Crl. LJ 4612; Vicky Vikram Singh v- State 2003 (112) Crl.
LJ 1892).
7.

The Board, in its discussion of the merits of the bail application, in my

opinion, considered irrelevant factors. The intimacy developed by the Petitioner,
with co-accused, unsupervised stay and education in Delhi, are not permissible
exceptions, under Section 12 which authorise refusal of bail. The materials on
reward should strongly indicate:
(1)

possibility of contact with known criminal.

(2)

exposure to moral or psychological danger of the delinquent.

(3)

his release would defeat ends of justice.
These factors, and none else can permit a Board or Court to refuse bail.

Unfortunately, the Board, after discussing the intimacy of the petitioner with coaccused and his becoming wayward, concluded that his would defeat the ends of
justice.
8.

This court has repeated, time and again that the mandate of section 12

cannot be thwarted. This would imply that the board and the court should address
themselves strictly to the rule, and carefully scrutinize the case to be satisfied if the

crl-rev-164/07

4 of 5

materials point to any of the exceptions. If they do not, bail cannot be refused. This
Court has emphasized that discussion on merits of the application, as in the case of an
application under Section 439, Cr.P.C. on considerations of “ends of justice” in that
context are unwarranted. (See Manoj Vs. State 2006 (3) JCC 1478; Arvind vs. State
1999(2) JCC (Del) 311, Master Abhishek Vs. State 2005 (6) AD (Del) 18).

The

expression “ends of justice” is not an abstract incantation, but rooted in the context of
the Act. The welfare of the juvenile is the focus of enquiry and scrutiny. Mere recourse
to such terms without showing how ends of justice would be defeated, is a negation of
the Act, and would render Section 12 meaningless.

9.

For the above reasons, the revision has to be allowed. Accordingly, the

petitioner is directed to be enlarged on bail on his father furnishing a personal
bond in the sum of Rs. 25,000/- and two sureties of the same amount to the
satisfaction of the Board.

The father shall also report to the Board once a month

about the activities of the petitioner.
The petition is allowed on the above terms.
Order dasti.
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
MAY 25, 2007

crl-rev-164/07

5 of 5

