*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

R.P. 298/2005 in W.P.(C) No. 15759/2004
Reserved on : July 20, 2007
Delivered on : July 30, 2007

SH. G. KAR

..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Gulab Chandra, Mr. Vishal Sinha,
Advocates
versus

FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA AND ANR. ..... Respondent/Review
petitioner
Through Mr. Ajit Pudussary, Advocate for
respondent/Review Petitioner.

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

% Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.
This is a review petition. It seeks recall of the order dated 31.08.2005 and
restoration of W.P.(C) 15759/2004.
2.

The order sought to be reviewed had directed that the amounts credited in

the Provident fund account of the petitioner (respondent here) should be disbursed
to him within four weeks. While doing so the Court had recorded a statement on
WP(C) 15759/2004

1 of 6

behalf of the review petitioner (the Food Corporation of India,

which was

respondent in the original writ proceeding and shall be hereafter referred to as
“FCI”) that the amounts along with the employer's matching contribution would be
released if the employee/writ petitioner filled the prescribed proforma. The writ
petitioner had sought a direction to the FCI to release the payment of Contributory
Provident Fund.
3.

The petitioner was an employee of the FCI. According to the averments in

the writ petition, he was placed under suspension w.e.f 27.3.1991 and a case was
registered under Sections 120B/420/467/471IPC and provisions of the Prevention
of Corruption Act. He had challenged the departmental proceedings by filing a
writ petition being No. 618/1999. That was rejected on 12.4.2004. Subsequently,
the petitioner was dismissed from service.
4.

The main ground upon which the present review proceedings are premised

are that the petitioner along with the V.P. Hasija and others, who were working in
the CPF Department of the FCI, allegedly embezzled amounts to the tune of Rs.
61 lakh by making short payment to 2004 employees and staff members of the
Corporation. On the basis of this alleged mis-conduct, departmental proceedings
were filed.

Later, an application under Section 11 of the Criminal Law

Amendment Act, 1944 was made for attachment of the properties. The application
was however, rejected on 4.7.2005. The FCI also relies upon Regulation 27 of the
WP(C) 15759/2004

2 of 6

Regulations framed by it known as the Food Corporation of India Contributory
Funds Regulations, 1967.
5.

Mr.

Ajit Pudussary, learned counsel for the FCI submitted that the

statement made on behalf of the FCI that amount would be disbursed was without
authority and that in a case of this kind there was no question of consent; even if
recorded it could not bind the FCI. It was urged that in the event of the petitioner
being convicted of the offences, and also the FCI succeeding in its appeal in the
attachment proceedings, it would be very difficult to recover the amounts, if the
direction is not reviewed.
6.

Learned counsel relied upon Regulation 27(c) and submitted that the FCI

would be within its rights to deduct the entire amount due to liability incurred by
the member of the fund i.e. the writ petitioner.
7.

Mr. Gulab Chandra, learned counsel for the respondent opposed the review

petition.

He contended that Regulation 27, as it stands, does not authorise

forfeiture of the provident fund amounts.

It is contended that the previous

Regulation before amendment, permitted deduction from the provident fund of an
employee, if he was dismissed from service. It was contended that on the contrary
such forfeiture is impermissible in view of circular 11 of 1999 dated 2nd April,
1999 and the corrigendum issued on 1.6.1999 by the FCI. He submitted that there

WP(C) 15759/2004

3 of 6

is no authority to deduct contributions in the event of dismissal of an employee, as
sub-clause (a) of Regulation 27(1) was deleted.
8.

I have examined the materials on record and carefully considered the

submissions. It is an undeniable fact that the writ petitioner was dismissed from
service. This fact was disclosed by him in the writ petition. He also disclosed the
pending criminal proceedings drawn against him. The petition had been pending
for about a year when the basis of a statement by FCI's counsel it was disposed. At
that stage, all the facts which are sought to be urged in these review proceedings
were within the knowledge of the FCI. Its counter affidavit is singularly bereft of
the particulars sought to be urged now.

The

counter affidavit was filed in

February 2005. It nowhere mentioned about filing of an application under Section
11 seeking attachment of the writ petitioner's properties nor was reliance placed on
Regulation 27.

Equally, allegations about the writ petitioner's liabilities or

outstanding payment were not urged much less averred. In these circumstances,
there is no question of the FCI stating that these facts were not within its
knowledge or they came to light subsequently or could not be pleaded despite
exercise of due diligence.
9.

The question which this court had to consider is whether sufficient grounds

have been made out for recalling the main order. Undoubtedly, a counsel is
expected to act within the authority given to him expressly or impliedly. In the
WP(C) 15759/2004

4 of 6

absence of his affidavit, or the affidavit of a responsible officer that the counsel
was informed of all the facts which are now placed, before the court it would be
unfair for the court to comment upon his conduct, or conclude that the statement
was unauthorsied. Nevertheless, since the FCI is a statutory corporation and deals
with public funds, the Court has to consider whether its submissions are otherwise
feasible.
10.

Regulation 27 as it originally stood, provided, by sub-clause (a) the power

to effect deductions from the employer's contribution in the event of dismissal.
Undisputedly, that power has now been withdrawn; that provision as re-produced
in the review petition, only confers powers to deduct amounts towards liability
incurred by the employee. I am of the opinion that the previous history of the
provision constitutes a bar to the use of the power under Regulation 27(1)(c). If
the intention was to enable FCI to completely forfeit its contribution to the
employees provident fund account, in the event of dismissal, that would have been
more explicit. The deletion of an express power is pointer to the fact that the
Corporation consciously and deliberately withdrew that condition, i.e deduction
from the fund in the event of forfeiture.

The second reason why I am not

persuaded to accept the ground urged is that Regulation 27(1)(c) authorises
deductions in the event of liabilities incurred. The expression “liability” would
mean, a determined legal liability. Apart from the fact that the writ petitioner is
WP(C) 15759/2004

5 of 6

facing criminal proceedings, there is no material suggesting that he owes any
money or that FCI itself had determined his liabilities and quantified them in any
manner known to law. It is averred that the attempt to secure his assets by seeking
recourse to the Criminal Law Amendment Act were not fruitful. Therefore, even
otherwise Regulation 27(1)(c) is inapplicable.
11.

My conclusion is also supported from the Circular No. 11 of 1999 and a

corrigendum issued in that regard where the trustees of the Provident fund of the
FCI decided to, in the absence of any guidelines recording forfeiture to follow the
provisions of Section 10 of the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952.

Section 10 of the

Employees Provident Fund and

Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 prescribes that amounts standing to the credit
of any member of a provident fund are not in any way be liable to attachment
under any decree or order of Court in respect of debt or liability incurred by him.
12.

In view of the above conclusions, I am of the opinion that no ground for

review has been made out. The petition is accordingly dismissed without any
order as to costs.
July 30, 2007

WP(C) 15759/2004

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

6 of 6

