3
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

IAs4689/2000, 8243/2007, 2883/2004, 5828/2000; & 1958/2008
IN
CS(OS) 1007/2000
Reserved on : February 27 , 2008
Pronounced on : March 31st, 2008
SHRI ANIL BHASIN
versus

..... Plaintiff
Through Mr.Naresh Thanai, Advocate

SHRI VIJAY KUMAR BHASIN & ORS.
....Defendant
Through Mr.Virender Sood with Mr.Anshuman
Sood, Advocate for defendant No.2.
Mr.Mukesh Kumar Verma with Mr.I.S.Suri,
Advocate for defendants No.4 & 5.
Mr.Sunil Sabharwal with Mr.Parvesh Khanna,
Advocates for defendant No.1 with parties in person.
Mr.Vijay Kishan with Mr.Vikram Jetly,
Advocate for defendant No.3.
CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

This judgment will dispose of the issues framed on 27.2.2008 so far

as they concern the properties mentioned in the Will of the testatrix – Late Smt.

CS(OS) 1007/2000

1 of 19

Raj Rani Bhasin.
2.

The facts necessary for deciding this case are that Shri Rajender Kumar

Bhasin, the father of the plaintiff and the defendants, executed a registered Will
dated 25.1.1980. In its terms, all his movable and immovable properties were
bequeathed to his wife – Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin. Shri Rajinder Kumar Bhasin died
on 18.9.1982. In terms of his Will, his wife – Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin became the
absolute owner of all the movable and immovable properties. She expired on
3.10.1998.
3.

The plaintiff claims a preliminary decree for partition of various

properties mentioned in paragraph 4 of the plaint. These concern four items of
immovable properties and other movable properties/assets. It is further averred
that despite various attempts by the plaintiff with the defendants, the latter failed
to partition or render an account or give his due share. The plaint averments
further advert to a Will dated 9.8.1989 propounded by defendants No.4 and 5,
the daughters of late Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin. The plaintiff disputed the veracity
and genuineness of the Will and further alleged that it was executed under
misrepresentation.
4.

The defendants filed their written statements. Defendants No.4 and

5 have filed a common written statement disputing that the Will propounded
was not genuine. They also denied that the plaintiff was in joint possession or in
constructive possession of the property. They generally denied other allegations.
CS(OS) 1007/2000

2 of 19

The defendant No.3, in his written statement, has denied that the property
situated at Ashoka Estate, 24, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi – 110001 and the
property bearing No.2-R, 2

nd

Floor, D.C.M.Building, 16, Barakhamba Road, New

Delhi -110001 are liable to be partitioned. According to him, the said properties
were acquired by him with his funds.
5.

The suit though instituted in 2000, continued for several years.

During its pendency, defendant No.2 filed an application under Order XXVI
Rule 9, i.e. IA No.4961/2004, for appointment of a Local Commissioner. This
application was allowed on 28.10.2005. The Local Commissioner appointed by
the Court filed his report, about having visited Oriental Bank of Commerce, Old
Rajinder Nagar Branch and opening of certain lockers. He reported among other
articles, a brown envelope containing the Will of Late Shri Rajender Kumar
Bhasin and containing another Will dated 3.5.1995 of Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin was
found. The same were taken into custody. After considering the arguments on
behalf of the parties, this Court referred the disputes for a possible mediated
settlement.

A number of hearings took place where the plaintiff and the

defendants participated in the proceedings.
6.

Eventually on 28.1.2008, this Court recorded that the parties agreed

to settle their disputes with reference to entitlements outlined in the Will of Smt.
Raj Rani Bhasin. The matter was subsequently adjourned to 14.2.2008. On the
CS(OS) 1007/2000

3 of 19

latter date, the Court noted that all parties were present with their counsel. The
statement of counsel that the validity or genuineness of the Will of their mother,
i.e. late Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin dated 3.5.1995 was not disputed.

The Court,

therefore, felt that there was possibility of decreeing a suit in part, as far as it
concerned the items of properties mentioned in the said Will. On 27.2.2008, this
Court heard counsel and while reserving the order recorded as follows:“Learned counsel submitted that two disputes, visa-vis construction and interpretation of the Will as regards
the distribution of the property mentioned in the said Will,
have to be resolved by the Court. The said issues,
according to the submissions of the counsel for the parties,
are framed as follows:1. What is the entitlement of the parties to the
immovable properties in the Will?
2. The entitlement of grand children under the Will to
the shares/securities, of whom they were the
nominees along with testatrix Raj Rani?
3. Relief.
Counsel submit that the suit may be decreed partly
in terms of the items mentioned in the said will, on
the basis of the decision of this Court, on the above
issues.”
7.

The arguments accordingly were heard on behalf of the parties. Before

dealing with the issues, it would be necessary to extract the relevant part of the
Will. The testatrix in the recital stated that the previous will dated 9.8.1989 stood
superseded. She referred to the present parties as her family members and
described the properties, both immovable assets and movable properties. While
describing the movable properties, she gave particulars in relation to the
nominee and the relationship of the said nominee with herself.
CS(OS) 1007/2000

4 of 19

“IMMOVEABLE ASSETS:
1)
House No.11/5, Old Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi, comprising of ground floor,
first floor and second floor (Barsati and temporary structure of two rooms set). Acquired
through estate and will of my late husband, Shri Rajinder Kumar Bhasin duly registered
with Sub-Registrar on 25-1-80 vide No. entered as No.196, Vol.152 from pages 100 to
101.
2)
Office Flat in Gopal Dass Bhawan, comprising of 350 sq.ft. super area vide No.9,
6th Floor, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi built area which is at present on rent on
monthly basis through a common lease deed dated 11th October, 1994. The flat was
purchased through Agreement to Sell on 28.10.1992 from Gopal Dass
Estate and Housing Pvt. Lrtd., a company havin g its registered office at 28,
Barakhamba Road, New Delhi 110 001 (builders)”
8.

The testatrix expressed the desire that after her death, house No.11/5, Old

Rajinder Nagar, should be reconstructed by all her sons and divided in the form
of flats. The said intention is manifested from the following conditions:“It is my wish that after my death House No.11/5,
Old rajinder Nagar, New Delhi will be reconstructed by all
my sons and after the re-construction, the property will be
divided in the form of flats amongst my sons in the
following manner:
a)
Ground floor should go to my other son Mr. Anil Kumar Bhasin
b)
First floor should go to my other son Mr. Vinod Kumar Bhasin
c)
Second floor should go to my son Mr. Shyam Sunder Bhasin
d)
Top floor with all roof rights to Mr. Vijay Kumar Bhasin.”
If at all they construct the basement that will be
property of all the four sons in equal shares”.
9.

The testatrix further went on to describe in some detail how

reconstruction would be made and from what sources of income, assets etc. She
further stated as follows:CS(OS) 1007/2000

5 of 19

“However, the unit, details as referred to
above, whether in the form of Master-gain,
FDRs or shares etc, nominated in the names
of my grand children shall remain in their
names and the receipts of the same on
maturity will be put or renewed whatsoever is
possible at that time in the accounts of my
grand children only under the guardianship
of their parents either mother or father and
nobody shall have any right, lien or interest
over the same to use the said assets in the
name of grand children for any other purpose.
It is also my and my husband's wish that out
of the above said FDRs, units, jewellery,
Rs.One lac shall be given to the Management
of Khukhran Bhawan being constructed in
Haridwar. This amount of Rs.One lac shall
be given in the joint name of my husband &
Brother in law with Rajinder Kumar Bhasin
& Shri Ram Prakash Bhasin respectively,
donated by Mrs. Raj Rani Bhasin.”
10.

Arguments were addressed on the first issue, i.e. entitlement of the

parties to immovable properties in the Will. The parties stated that it is not
possible to reconstruct upon the house and, therefore, the second part of the
bequest, retaining the status quo in regard to occupation of the property and, on
the one hand, the parties residing there and the devolution of interest concerning
the Fixed Deposits and other movable assets to the second defendant has to
operate. It was contended on behalf of the second defendant that this
arrangement would necessarily mean that he is entitled to all the Fixed Deposit
amounts, indicated in the will and in addition, would be entitled to the market
value of an amount equivalent to one-fourth share in the immovable property.

CS(OS) 1007/2000

6 of 19

11.

Mr. Virender Sood, learned counsel contended that the second defendant

has a share in the said immovable property. Though it is not possible, at the
moment, to reconstruct upon the same, the rights of the said second defendant
have been preserved.

Therefore, as and when the other brothers decide to

reconstruct the property, the second defendant would necessarily get his share.
Since this would lead to uncertainty, the only possible solution and reasonable
construction of the Will would be to hold that the second defendant is entitled to
equivalent in monetary terms, of one-fourth of the said property in addition to
the value of the FDRs etc.
12.

Counsel on behalf of the other parties, i.e. the plaintiff and the defendants

other than the second defendant denied the submissions. It was urged on their
behalf that the bequest was a clear one. The first option given to the legatees, i.e.
sons, was to reconstruct the property. Even the manner for doing so is indicated.
In the event of the first option becoming unfeasible and the sons not being
agreeable to reconstruct upon the property, the occupiers/resident in the
property were to get it absolutely. In lieu of his share, defendant No.2 was
entitled to the cash and fixed deposits lying in different bank accounts. The
second defendant again now contends that he is entitled to a one-fourth share in
the property and also the cash and securities; that was not the intention of the
testatrix.

If the parties had agreed to reconstruct upon the property within

reasonable time after death of the testatrix and if such option were feasible in the
CS(OS) 1007/2000

7 of 19

first instance, the second defendant could certainly have claimed a share.
However, he cannot get a share in the property on a later date and also enjoy the
cash and security.
13.

From the above narration, it is evident that two rival interpretations

to the Will are given by the parties. On the one hand, the second defendant
Vinod Kumar Bhasin, who is residing elsewhere, claims one-fourth share in the
property whenever it is constructed, as well as the proceeds of the Fixed Deposit
Receipts, National Savings Certificates etc. which belonged to the testatrix. This
interpretation is disputed by other parties, all of whom contend that the title to
the Old Rajinder Nagar property belongs to the plaintiff and the other
defendants who are in occupation of it, and that the second defendant cannot get
a one-fourth share in the absence of re-construction; he is entitled only to the
monies in the Fixed Deposits, Saving Accounts, National Saving Certificates etc.
14.

Section 82 of the Indian Succession Act states that the meaning of

any clause in a Will has to be collected from the entire instrument and all parts of
it are to be construed with reference to each other. In the decision reported as
Navneet Lal Alias Rangi Vs. Gokul And Others, (1976) 1 SCC 630, the Court
held inter alia that in construing the language of a Will, it is entitled to put itself
into the testator's armchair and is bound to bear in mind also other matters than
merely the words used. The Court has, therefore, to consider the surrounding
circumstances, the position of the testator, his family relationship, the probability
CS(OS) 1007/2000

8 of 19

that he would use words in a particular sense and so on. But all this, however, is
solely as an aid to arriving at a right construction of the will. The Court also held
that the true intention of the testator is to be gathered not by attaching
importance to isolated expressions but by reading the will as a whole with all its
provisions and ignoring none of them as redundant or contradictory.
The Court clarified, however, that every disposition contained in the Will, to the
extent, it is capable of given effect to, should be given effect to unless the law
prevents such a course. This ruling has been subsequently followed in the other
judgments (See Gopala Menon -Vs-Sivaraman Nair and Ors AIR 1979 SC 1345;
Bajrang Factory Ltd. –vs- University of Calcutta 2007 (7) SCC 183).
15.

On an application of the principle underlying Section 82 and the

judgments of the Supreme Court, this Court has to give effect to the true
intention of the Will, by transposing itself, if necessary, to the arm chair of the
testatrix. The first part of the disposition bequeathing the immovable property,
brings out the intention that in case the legatees to the property reconstructed it,
all the sons of the testatrix were to get an equal share.

The testatrix was,

however, conscious of the probability of such a conditional bequest not
materializing. She, therefore, provided an alternative that in case reconstruction
were not possible, the occupants of the house would become the legatees,
acquiring title to it and that the second defendant, i.e. Vinod Kumar Bhasin in

CS(OS) 1007/2000

9 of 19

such case would get the entire proceeds for Fixed Deposit Receipt, National
Saving Certificates etc.
16.

This intention appears to be categorical as it has been placed at the

latter part of the Will.

The testatrix also provided this as an alternative

disposition in the event of lack of agreement between the existing occupiers of
the house to construct it. Taken together the first part of the dispossession has to
be read as conditional but limited in point of time. If the Court were to construe
the first option in the abstract and without fixing any point in time, the bequest
and the condition of reconstruction would be indefinite.

A reasonable

construction, therefore, would be that reconstruction as an option had to be
either within reasonable period of death of the testatrix or reasonable period
when the parties were to settle the issue of reconstruction. In this case, the first,
i.e. reasonable period from the death could not have been applicable as the
parties were fighting each other in multifarious litigations. Therefore, the second
event, i.e. reasonable period from the date of settlement about the issue of
reconstruction would apply.
17.

Now there is no dispute that the present occupants of the property,

i.e. the plaintiff and defendants No.1 and 3 are not agreed to its reconstruction. It
is not the defendant No.2's case either that they should be compelled to adopt
that course. Therefore, in the absence of consensus as to the reconstruction of the
structure, the second option becomes operative. In this Court, the Will clearly
CS(OS) 1007/2000

10 of 19

states as follows:“It is also possible that after my death all my sons
do not agree to construct the house, then they will stay as
they are staying in the same house and my other son, Vinod
Kumar Bhasin, who is staying separately will ge t all
proceeds on encashment of FDRs, NSCs etc. rather the
whole of this amount on account of FDRs, NSCs and
balance jewellery after distributing to my daughters will be
the property of my son Vinod Kumar Bhasin so that justice
is also done to him.
Regarding my Flat No.9, 6th floor, Gopal Dass Bhawan, Bara Khamba
Road, New Delhi which is at present on rent, it is my wish that the rent of
this flat should go to my two daughters in equal shares namely Mr. Kiran
Suri and Mrs. Sangita Sawhney. It is also my wish that after my death
the ownership rights of the flat without any reservation shall be
transferred in the names of these two daughters only as referred in this
para and none else out of my sons or my grand children shall have any
claim over the same.”
18.

The intention is crystal clear; Vinod Kumar Bhasin, the second

defendant who is undeniably staying separately has to get all proceeds from the
FDRs, NSCs etc.

The intention to exclude him from the enjoyment of the

immovable property in the absence of reconstruction is clear from the words “so
that justice is also done to him”. If the intention were that Vinod Kumar Bhasin
would get the proceeds of FDR, NSCs as also his share in the property on a later
date, the testatrix need not have used such expressions at all.
19.

In view of the above discussion, this Court is of the opinion that

upon a true construction of the Will since the parties have not agreed to
reconstruct upon the property being 11/5, Old Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi,

CS(OS) 1007/2000

11 of 19

Vinod Kumar Bhasin, the second defendant, would be entitled to all the proceeds
of the FDRs, NSCs and as far as enjoyment and the interest in the said
immovable property concerned, it would devolve upon the plaintiff and
defendants No.1 and 3. The said issue is answered accordingly.
20.

The second issue is regarding the entitlement of grand children, in

terms of the Will to the shares/securities of which they are nominees. Here the
question requiring decision is confined to the disposition as regards the Master
Gain Units (UTI) 92 and 6 Years National Savings Certificates. The testatrix
owned securities in the form of Master Gain Units, Shares, Life Insurance policies
and Master Equity Plan, second year's National Saving Certificates and the post
office account, National Saving Certificates etc. In one part of disposition, the
testatrix had indicated that the Units whether in the form of Master Gain, shares
etc. are nominated in favour of the grand children:
“.....shall remain in their names and the receipts of the
same on maturity will be put or renewed whatsoever
is possible at that time in the accounts of grand
children of Lt.Mrs. Raj Rani only under the
guardianship of their parents either mother or father
and nobody shall have any right, lien or interest over
the same to use the said assets in the name of grand
children for any other purpose.”
21.

It is contended that this disposition has to be respected and that Vinod

Kumar Bhasin who is otherwise entitled to cash, FDRs and other amounts,
cannot claim such specified securities.

CS(OS) 1007/2000

12 of 19

22.

It was contended on behalf of Vinod Kumar Bhasin, the second

defendant, that the succeeding part of disposition naming him as heir, in FDRs,
NSCs supersede the intention to bequeath anything in favour of the grand
children and that all shares National Saving Certificates, securities, Fixed Deposit
Receipts etc. would vest with him.
23.

While dealing with the first issue, the Court had observed that it

has to, wherever necessary, transpose itself in the arm chair of the testator to
discern the true intention of the bequest. As early as, in 1963, in Pearey Lal Vs.
Rameshwar Das, AIR 1963 SC 1703, the Supreme Court held that where there is
some conflict in the will, the Court should reconcile it to give full effect to every
word used in the document and an interpretation furthering such a result should
be preferred to one which would have the effect of cutting down the clear
meaning of the words used. It was also held that if one of the two reasonable
constructions would lead to intestacy, that should be discarded favouring a
construction which does not bring out any such hiatus.

Similarly in

Ramachandra Shenoy vs. Mrs. Hilda Brite, AIR 1964 SC 1323, it was held that if
there are two repugnant provisions conferring successive interests, the first
interest creating interest being valid and the subsequent cannot take effect, the
Court construing the Will should proceed to the farthest extent to avoid
repugnancy so that effect is given to every testamentary intention as far as
possible. This judgment and rule of construction was followed later in Kaivelikkal
CS(OS) 1007/2000

13 of 19

Ambunhi (dead) by LRs.-Vs- H. Ganesh Bhandary AIR 1995 SC 2491 and also in
Bajrang Factory Ltd.’s case (supra).
24.

The seeming conflict in this case is whether all Fixed Deposit Receipts and

amounts lying in various securities such as National Saving Certificates, Fixed
Deposit Receipts, Units, Shares etc. would accrue to the second defendant. In the
first part of the concerned disposition, the testatrix made a specific reference to
Master Gain Units, of which nominees were, at the time the Will was made, her
grand children. These have been described in the very first part of the movable
property section. The latter section of the Will, dealing with the alternative
bequest in favour of the Vinod Kumar Bhasin, (which was the subject matter of
issue No.1) states that he would get all proceeds on encashment of FDRs, NSCs
etc. and all amounts in such accounts and items of jewelry after distributing them
to the daughters would be his property. The question is whether the earlier
intention to give the named securities to the grand children is superseded and
whatever was in their name when the Will was made, would become the
property of the said Vinod Kumar Bhasin.
25.

If one applies the two cardinal canons of construction, referred to above,

the Court is under a duty to attempt a reconcile, the seeming incongruent and
conflicting provisions of a Will; it is also under a duty to avoid intestacy and
adopt a construction that would not render one part of the Will meaningless. If
these are to be kept in mind, the interpretation suggested by the second
CS(OS) 1007/2000

14 of 19

defendant, would undoubtedly lead to supercession of the first part which
specifically deals with bequests in favour of the grand children.
26.

Now, there is no dispute that all grand children were nominees of Master

Gain Units (UTI) 92 Series. As many as eleven grand children have been named
as existing nominees. The total number of Units shown is about 26,000. These
grand children were nominees of 13,500 Units. The disposition favouring Vinod
Kumar Bhasin specifically refers to “FDRs, NSCs etc.” It also bequeaths to him
the residue of interest after the named items are taken by the daughters.
Although the reference of jewelry, to an extent widens the scope of dispossession
in favour of Vinod Kumar Bhasin, an application of the two principles of
construing a Will referred to earlier would result in giving effect to the specific
disposition in favour of the grand children so far as it concerns Master Gain
Units (UTI) 92 only. In other words, the “specific” reference to Master Gain
Units (UTI) 92 in respect of the grand children nominees and the specific
reference to FDRs, NSCs etc. reveals the intention of the testatrix that these
specified items of movable property have to go to the respective persons named
as their legatees. Thus, according to this Court, Vinod Kumar Bhasin, the second
defendant would be entitled to all FDRs, NSCs, shares and other securities except
the Master Gain Units(UTI) 92 in respect of which the eleven grand children
were named as specific nominees. The legatees for those Units would be the
grand children. The residue or balance quantity of Master Gain Units (UTI) 92
CS(OS) 1007/2000

15 of 19

would have to devolve upon Vinod Kumar Bhasin.
27.

It is, therefore, held that the second defendant is entitled to FDRs,

NSCs, shares and all other securities except the Master Gain Units (UTI) 92 series
units, standing in the name of grand children as nominees, whose particulars are
disclosed in the Will. This issue is answered accordingly.
28.

In view of the above findings and in view of the concession

recorded by the parties accepting the admitting Will dated 3.5.1995, the
properties have to be shared according to the Will, in the following manner:
“a-1) The ownership right of flat No.9, 6th Floor, G opal Dass
Bhawan, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi shall be transferred in the
names of Defendants No.4 and 5 (daughter of late Smt. Raj Rani
Bhasin) in equal shares and they would also be taken by
Defendants No.4 & 5. No other son or grand child of late Smt. Raj
Rani Bhasin shall have any claim over the said flat;

a-2)

One Lachhi Har weighing 53.320 gms shall fall in the share

of Mrs. Sangita Sawhney (Defendant No.5) who would be the
exclusive owners thereof;

a-3)

Two Karas weighing 33.500 gms shall fall in the share of Smt.

Kiran Suri (Defendant No.4) who would be the exclusive owner
CS(OS) 1007/2000

16 of 19

thereof;

b-1)

Shri Shyam Sunder Bhasin (Defendnat No.3) shall have the

exclusive right to ground floor of house No.11/5 Old Rajinder
Nagar, New Delhi, where he is staying since before the death of late
Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin and no other child or grand a child of late Smt.
Raj Rani Bhasin shall have any claim over and in respect of the
same;

b-2)

Shri Anil Kumar Bhasin ( Plaintiff) shall have exclusive right

to first floor of house No.11/5 Old Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi,
where he is staying since before the death of late Smt. Raj Rani
Bhasin and no other child or grand child of late Smt. Raj Rani
Bhasin shall have any claim over and in respect of the same;

b-3) The Legal heirs of Defendant No.1 (Shri Vijay Kumar
Bhasin), who are Mrs. Shashi Bhasin (widow of late Defendant
No.1), Shri Anshuman Bhasin and Shri Arjun Bhasin (sons of late
Defendnat No.1), shall have exclusive right to the entire second
floor of house No.11/5 Old Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi, where they
were staying since before the death of late Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin
CS(OS) 1007/2000

17 of 19

and no other child or grand child of late Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin shall
have any claim over and in respect of the same;

c)

All FDRs, Saving Accounts in Banks, NSCs, Master Units,

LIC Policies, UTI Master equity plans certificates and other shares,
debentures and securities and any increment in the above in the
form of interest, dividend bonus, rights etc. The whole of jewelry,
after what has been bequeathed and given to Defendants Nos.4 &
5, as mentioned in paragraphs (a-2) and a-3) above and all other
moveables of Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin including moveable properties
lying in Trunks, Almirah etc. in the family House at 11/5 Old
Rajidner Nagar and the items mentioned in the Inventory prepared
by Local Commissioner in this suit; shall become the absolute and
exclusive properties of Vinod Kumar Bhasin (Defendant No.2)
subject to the condition

(d) concerning bequest to the

grandchildren, of the 13,500 Master Gain – 92 Units. A sum of
Rs.85,000/- of late Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin lying with Shri Vinod
Kumar Bhasin and some jewelry of late Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin lying
with Shri Vinod Kumar Bhasin shall also become the exclusive
property of Shri Vinod Kumar Bhasin (Defendant No.2). The Court
also directs the Financial Institutions and Banks to pay interest and
CS(OS) 1007/2000

18 of 19

any increment thereon to the financial instruments mentioned
above.

(d)

the right and beneficiary interest in the Master Gain Units

(UTI) 92 concerning a total 13500 Units, of which the eleven
nominees standing in the Will of Late Smt. Raj Rani Bhasin shall
respectively devolving upon them to the extent indicated in the
Will. The residue of interest in such Master Gain Units (UTI) 92
shall be the property of second defendant, Vinod Kumar Bhasin.”
29.

It is open to the parties to effectuate the terms of the above

directions.

The suit is partly decreed in the above terms.

IAs4689/2000,

8243/2007, 2883/2004, 5828/2000; and 1958/2008 stand disposed in the above
terms.
CS(OS) 1007/2000
The suit has been partly decreed by a separate judgment today
placed on the file.
List on 16th July, 2008 for further proceedings concerning other
items of properties mentioned in the suit.

MARCH 31, 2008
'sn'
CS(OS) 1007/2000

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
19 of 19

