16
*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Delivered on May 31, 2007
CRL.REV.P. 643/2005
ARUN KUMAR
versus
MEENU KUMAR

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. A.S. Chadha & Mr. J.N. Aggarwal,
Advocates
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Alok Agarwal, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be yes,but without
disclosing allowed to see the judgment.?
the names of the
parties.
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
disclosing
parties.

yes,but without
the names of the

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

This petition seeks interference with the order of the Additional Chief

Metropolitan Magistrate (hereafter referred to as “the trial Court”) dated 9th
June, 2005. The trial Court was dealing with an application under Section 125
Cr.P.C. filed by the respondent/ wife. The trial Court proceeded to grant interim
maintenance of Rs. 5,000/- per month w.e.f 01.06.05.

crl-rev-643-05

1 of 8

2.

The marriage between the parties took place on 08.10.99. It is a common

case of the parties that the complainant/respondent was the second wife of the
petitioner who had three major married children from his first marriage. It is
also a fact that the complainant too had three children from her earlier marriage.
The allegations in the complaint, inter alia, extended to mis-behaviour and acts
of cruelty. It was alleged that the petitioner/ husband had vast assets and was in
possession of income to the tune of Rs. 78,000/- per month. It was stated that
the petitioner had seven immovable properties. The trial Court after considering
the materials, directed the petitioner to pay Rs. 5,000/- per month to the
complainant.
3.

This order has been impugned for two reasons. One, that the Court has

overlooked Section 125 (4) which stipulates, inter alia, that if the wife lives in
adultery there would be no order for maintenance including interim
maintenance. Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon an affidavit filed by
one Mr. Ashok Soni dated 05.04.05. In that, the deponent suggested, inter alia,
that the complainant/wife stayed with him. The affidavit was filed in support of
an application seeking pardon in a criminal complaint filed by the present
petitioner against his wife and that deponent. It is submitted that the police filed
a final report in those proceedings before the concerned Court.
4.

Learned counsel contended that in the light of the above facts, the

respondent/wife was dis-entitled to any relief and, therefore, the approach of the
trial Court in granting interim maintenance was irregular and liable to be
interfered with.
crl-rev-643-05

2 of 8

5.

The petition was resisted on behalf of the complainant/ respondent. It was

contended on her behalf that the petitioner has vast properties and by his conduct
in not complying with the Court's orders (which had restrained him from
dispossessing the complainant from the properties where she was residing) he
has forfeited his right to press this petition. It was also contended that the
provisions of Section 125 (4) Cr.P.C. have also to be considered in the light of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 which entitles the
aggrieved spouse to have a residential right in the matrimonial home.
6.

Learned counsel for the respondent/wife relied upon the judgment of the

Punjab & Haryana High Court in the case reported as Jagir Singh -v- Jasbir
Kaur 2005 Crl.L.R. 572.
7.

The above factual matrix would show that the complainant applied for

maintenance under Section 125 Cr.P.C.

The trial Court, after considering the

averments proceeded to award the amount of Rs. 5,000/- per month as interim
maintenance. The contention of the petitioner, to the extent that the trial Court's
order does not deal with the averments in the reply of the petitioner/husband, is
correct. Facially, there is no discussion by the trial Court about the reply of the
husband who is the petitioner. The question, therefore, is whether this amounts
to an illegality which requires to be set aside having regard to the circumstances
of this case.
8.

Section 125 Cr.P.C. to the extent it is relevant reads as follows:
“ 125.Order for maintenance of wives, children and
parents- (1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or
refuses to maintain-

crl-rev-643-05

3 of 8

(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether
married or not, unable to maintain itself, or
(c)his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married
daughter) who has attained majority, where such child is, by
reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury unable to
maintain itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or
herself,a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such
neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly
allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or
mother, at such monthly rate, as such magistrate thinks fit, and
to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time
to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a
minor female child referred to in clause (b) to make such
allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is
satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if married,
is not possessed of sufficient means.
[Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the
pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly allowance for the
maintenance under this sub-section, order such person to make a
monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of his wife or
such child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding
which the Magistrate considers reasonable, and to pay the same
to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided also that an application for the monthly
allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses for
proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as possible, be
disposed of within sixty days from the date of the service of
notice of the application to such person.
Explanation – For the purpose of this Chapter(a) “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of
the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) is deemed not to have
attained his majority;
(b) “wife' includes a woman who has been divorced by, or
has obtained a divorce from, her husband and has not
remarried.
(2) xxxxxxx xxxx xxxxx xxxx
(3) xxxxxxx xxxx xxxxx xxxxx
(4)
No wife shall be entitled to receive an [allowance for the
maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of
proceeding, as the case may be,] from her husband under this
crl-rev-643-05

4 of 8

9.

section if she is living in adultery, or if, without any sufficient
reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if they are living
separately by mutual consent.”
In this case, the reply of the husband was filed on 19.11.03. There appears

to be a supplementary affidavit which was replied on 26.03.04 by the wife. It is
stated by counsel that the affidavit of Shri Ashok Soni was brought on record of
the trial Court through an application dated 15.04.05. The affidavit of Shri Ashok
Soni is dated 05.04.05
10.

In the judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Jagir Singh's case

the Court held as follows:
“ In this petition, counsel for the petitioner raised two-fold
submissions, firstly, that since the petitioner has alleged that the
respondent-wife is living in adultery, therefore, no interim
maintenance can be granted to her in view of amendment made
in sub-section (4)of Section 125 Cr.P.C. by the Legislation vide Act
No. 50 of 2001. Vide this amendment words “allowance for
maintenance or the interim maintenance and expenses of
proceedings, as the case may be”, have been added in sub-section
(4), which provide that no wife shall be entitled to receive an
allowance for maintenance or interim maintenance if she is living
in adultery. Learned counsel for the petitioner, thus, contends
that intention of sub-section (4) is very much clear that no wife,
who is living in adultery, shall be entitled to any allowance
including interim maintenance. It is further contended that
world “allowance” not only includes the initial maintenance
amount, but includes the interim maintenance amount also.
Therefore, the respondent-wife, in the case in hand, who is living
in adultery, is not entitled to any allowance under sub-section (4)
of Section 125 Cr.P.C. Secondly, he submitted that respondent
No.2 is major, therefore, she is not entitled for maintenance.
However, he admitted that respondent No.2 is still unmarried.
5. I have considered the aforesaid two submissions made
by the learned counsel for the petitioner and am not inclined to
accept the same. In my view interim maintenance cannot be
denied to the respondent-wife merely on the ground that
petitioner-husband has made an allegation that she is living in
adultery. Denial of interim maintenance just on the basis of such
an allegation would not be justified until and unless the allegation
crl-rev-643-05

5 of 8

11.

is substantiated by any cogent evidence by the husband”
Learned counsel for the petitioner sought to distinguish the decision in the

case on the ground that factual matrix was facially different and this was not a
case of mere allegation but there were some other proofs also.
12.

The contextual backdrop of each case would of course differ, yet the ratio

of the decision by the Punjab & Haryana High Court is that the Court must adopt
a cautious approach, and should not rush into presumption on the basis of
allegations. The allegation can be in the form of reply or affidavit. In this case
what emerges from the record at least today is that the petitioner has sought to
bring on record the affidavit of the person who was seeking pardon.

The

genuineness or otherwise of such an affidavit and the circumstance under which
it was sworn cannot be divorced from the facts of this case. It is true that the trial
Court has not adverted to it but there cannot be an assumption that this was
pressed, and yet consciously not adverted to.
13.

Another aspect which has to be seen is that the contents of the affidavit are

untested; though the deponent mentioned that the complainant stayed with him,
the next assumption that such a residence amounted to adultery, would be
drastic.

In any form of proceeding, to conclude adultery, where civil

consequences spelt out under Section 125 (4) are to be inferred, the party likely to
be affected has to be given reasonable and fair opportunity to meet and rebut the
charge. Though Section 125 Cr.P.C. is in the nature of a welfare measure, and
perhaps falls within the description of “special provision” under Article 15 (3) of
the Constitution, the exception under Section 125 (4), loaded as it is in gender

crl-rev-643-05

6 of 8

unequal terms, against the woman, has to be made recourse to with care and
circumspection. The enacting part of Section 125, which entitles a woman to
maintenance, makes makes no distinction whether the cause for her approaching
the Court is adultery or infidelity of the husband; yet, the possible effect, viz
estrangement and the situation of her living in adultery, is sought to ground a
denial of that welfare measure.

Without entering into the logic of this

enforcement of morality through the legal process - which has to receive a wider
debate, what can be said is that the Court should loath to rush into conclusions or
a priori assumptions, since Section 125 (4) enacts an exception. It should be
satisfied about the soundness of such a charge, and cannot be content to elevate
allegations into findings.
14.

In view of the above discussion and after taking into consideration the

overall conspectus of the facts of this case, I am of the opinion that the trial Court
should proceed and dispose off the application under Section 125 Cr.P.C finally
within four months.
15.

It is a matter of record that the petitioner has already paid 50 per cent of

the amount which works out to Rs. 60,000/-. The balance shall be deposited in
the trial Court to be appropriated having regard to the final outcome of the
proceedings under Section 125 Cr.P.C. The parties shall appear before the trial
Court on 10th July, 2007.
The petition is disposed off in the above terms.
Order Dasti.
S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
crl-rev-643-05

7 of 8

MAY 31, 2007
as

crl-rev-643-05

8 of 8

