*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006
Reserved on : 15.5.2007
Pronounced on : 31-5-2007

KULBHUSHAN PARASHER
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, Senior Advocates
versus
STATE through CBI

..... Respondents
Through Ms. Mukta Gupta, Advocate

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat :
1.
The applicant is accused of having committed offences punishable under
Sections 3 and 4 of the Official Secrets Act, read with Section 120-B, Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (hereafter "IPC").
2.

According to allegations, the Indian Navy found that sensitive and classified

information was being leaked. To ascertain the source and extent of leakage of
classified informations, the Indian Navy constituted a Board of Inquiry. On the

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

1 of 11

basis of findings of the court of inquiry and the board of inquiry, Sambajee Lal
Surve of Indian Air Force Capt. Kashyap Kumar, Commander Vijender Rana and
Commander V.K. Jha were dismissed from the services. Apparently, the names of
some private persons including retired defence officers also figured during the
inquires, against whom action was not possible under inter alia the Navy Act. The
Central Government referred the matter to Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
for initiating criminal proceedings against all the involved persons.
3.

The CBI registered case NO. RC 2(A)/2006/ACU-IX/CBI/ New Delhi on

20.03.2006 under Section 120-B IPC & Sec. 3(1) (i) & 5 of the Official Secrets
Act, 1923. According to allegations in the FIR, reliable information was received
from the Ministry of Defence that the then Wing Commander Sambhajee L. Surve
of India Air Force, the then Commander Vijender Rana, the then Commander
Vinod Kumar Jha, the then Captain Kashyap Kumar, all of the Indian Navy, in

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

2 of 11

collusion with private persons, inter alia, the applicant Kulbhushan Parashar, Ravi
Shankaran, Wing Commander (Retired) S.K. Kohli, Mukesh Bajaj, Ms. Rajrani
Jaiswal and unknown person of a communication company called “Atlas”
conspired to unathorizedly trade in classified documents/ informations relating to
Ministry of Defence, Central Government, which, if disclosured was likely to
affect the sovereignty of India. During investigation, CBI conducted searches,
under Section 11(2) of the Official Secrets Act. Six persons, including the
applicant were arrested in April, 2006; an accused, Ravi Shankaran, who allegedly
conspired with them, could not be arrested, as he was out of the country. His
passport was revoked and the Central Government, is making efforts to have him
brought back.
4.

It was alleged that investigations established that for the purpose of

collecting and obtaining sensitive information relating to safety, secruity and
sovereignty of the nation, accused petitioner Kulbhushan Parashar and Ravi
Shankaran in conspiracy with each other allured the serving defence officers,
namely, SL Surve and Vijender Rana by way of providing them with gifts and
allurements in cash and kind. In furtherance of the conspiracy, the petitioner
purchased and provided and provided pen drives to SL Surve and Vijender Rana,
for the purpose of enabling them to copy sensitive information relating to national
security from secured computer systems of Navy and computers of Air force. The

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

3 of 11

petitioner, acting in a manner prejudicial to the safety and interest of the State,
caused the collection and receipt of sensitive information unauthorisedly by way of
3603 pages of information in a Pen – drive, which was recovered from accused SL
Surve and 3264 pages in "Jet" Flash Pen-drive, which was recovered from accused
Vijender Rana as well as by way of exchanging e-mails with the intension to
promote his business interests.
5.

It is submitted by Learned senior counsel, Mr. Mukul Rohtagi that the

applicant was arrested on 5.04.2006 and was remanded to CBI custody; he was
later sent to judicial custody on 19.04.2006. Since then, he has been in jail. The
trial court refused him bail. Counsel submitted that the charge sheet in this case
was submitted long back, on 3-7-2006.
6.

Counsel submitted that the petitioner, a retired naval officer, who had

started his business, has been falsely involved in the matter. It was submitted that
no incriminating material has been recovered from the applicant; there is also no
material circumstance, linking him with anything that can even remotely constitute
offecences under Sections 3 and 5 of the Official Secrets Act.
7.

Learned counsel submitted that the only material fact which the prosecution

could point to was the so called recovery of pen drives on 13-4-2006; yet that
factor could not be termed incriminating, because nothing incriminating was found
in those pen drives. Further, and more importantly, the pen drives had been handed

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

4 of 11

over over seven months before their recovery, and the chances of their being
tampered with, or worked upon were very real. Counsel relied upon D-12, the
seizure memo, which reads as follows:
"Today in the presence of independent witnesses S/sh. Mukesh Kumar
Roy, Administrative Officer & Sanjeev Kumar Arora, Higher Grade
Assistance, both from Life Insurance Corporation, Vigilance Department,
Jeevan Bharati Bldg., Tower-2. Cannaught Place, New Delhi. Cdr. Anupan
Kaushal, as mentioned above, produced a Pen drive of silver grey colour,
make “Transcend” with Sr. No. written on plastic part, visible after
removing the cap, as “72989-0314-OC-6C” in unsealed condition. He
informed that the same was handed over by Ex. Cdr.. Vijender Rana on
07.08.2005 to him. Thereafter, forensic analysis was conducted by Cdr. S.
Dutta by directly (without write block) accessing it and taking its image on
more than one occasion. Thereafter, the Pen Drive has remained in the
possession of Cdr. Anupam Kaushal since then. This pen drive was again
accessed yesterday by Cdr. Dutta in his presence in order to identify that
whether the same is the one which he had received from Vijender Rana or
not as he was having two other pen drive containing two clones of the Pen
Drive recovered by Air Force authorities from Sambajee Lal Surve. The pen
drive has been sealed in the presence of the above mentioned witnesses
under the signatures of all present."
8.

It was submitted that on the basis of such flimsy material, no case could be

made out against the petitioner, much less a case of grave suspicion. Therefore, he
was entitled to bail.
9.

Ms. Mukta Gupta, learned counsel for the State, opposed the

application. She submitted that the petitioner, in conspiracy with co-accused
acted in a manner prejudicial to the safety and security of the nation by way
of obtaining and exchanging classified information, which is critical for the
security of the nation, unauthorisedly, by way of exchanging e-mails and using
BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

5 of 11

internet voice and text messaging facility with the intention to promote his
ostensible business interests. According to investigation S.L. Surve, in conspiracy
with the petitioner, compromised sensitive information pertaining to national
security by copying classified official files into non-official pen drives,
given by the petitioner. The pen drives were passed on to the petitioner, for
illegal gratification, received by co-accused in the form of mobile phones,
cash cards, air tickets, taxi services, cash as well as accepting his

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

6 of 11

hospitality on various occasions. A mobile phone received by S. L. Surve from the
petitioner was used by Ms. Raj Rani Jaiswal, with whom the said S.L. Surve had
extra marital relations. He was in unauthorized possession of sensitive information
of classified nature running into 3603 pages relating to national security whose
disclosure has serious implications.
10.

Counsel submitted that the petitoiner also conspired with Vijender Rana

and Ravi Shankaran and compromised sensitive and critical information pertaining
to national security by unauthorized use of non-official pen drive on the DNO
LAN by way off passing on the same to unauthorized persons and with it may be
passed on to some persons outside India. He (Rana) had unauthorized possession
of sensitive information running into 3264 pages on the Jet Flash pen drive. He
unauthorisedly took an official computer from the DNO to his residence on the
instance and consent of V.K. Jha the then Joint Director Naval Operations
(Systems) and (Administration & Coordination) which was used to exchange
sensitive information with unauthorised persons viz the petitoner and Ravi
Shankaran through e-mails. Vijender Rana received substantial illegal gratification
from the petitioner, in various forms – cash, payment of telephone bills, the
installation of land line telephone at his residence, hiring of taxis and air tickets
etc. in lieu of providing critical information related to national security by
misusing his official position. Likewise, co-accused V.K. Jha had unauthorizedly

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

7 of 11

given an official computer to Vijender Rana's residence at 7/73, Arjun Vihar, New
Delhi which was used by the latter to transmit sensitive information having serious
implications on national security related to 'Sir Creek' and various Patrol Boats
specifications, to the petitioner and co-accused Ravi Shankaran. As Joint Director
Naval Operations (Systems) and (Administration & Coordination), V.K. Jha had
not the accounting of the official portable media (Pen drive) as per standing orders
and he also allowed illegal use of Pen drive in DNO which facilitated the leakage
of sensitive information to the petitioner and Ravi Shankaran. The petitioner was
an active party, and conspirator to all these illegal acts.
11.

It was submitted that according to investigation the petitioner maintained

close association with various officers of Ministry of Defence, both from the
services and staff, for obtaining sensitive information and favours in the
commercial purchases of the Ministry of Defence. The 'Tiff' and 'PDF' documents
running into 369 pages were recovered from the Jet Flash Pen drive. They

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

8 of 11

prima facie are related to the petitioner and point to the involvement of more
defence officers and other private persons (who are not named in the present FIR)
in the collection and passing out of sensitive defence information.
12.

It was submitted that the allegation that the pen drives were tampered, as

they had been in the custody of Cdr. Kaushal who had worked on them, is
unfounded, since a "clone file" containing the contents was created; that was
worked upon. The pen drive itself was not tampered or worked upon. It was
submitted that contents of the pen drives were sought to be erased; yet some vital
clues could be recovered, which pointed sufficiently to illegal gratification
received, and the nature of information passed on. In view of these circumstances,
the applicant was not entitled to bail.
13.

The above discussion would show that leakages were found in the offices of

the Indian Navy; a court and Board of inquiry was held. The matter was later
entrusted to the CBI, which seized materials, and documents. It proceeded to arrest
several officers, and retired officials, including the applicant. The materials and
circumstances put against the petitioner are that he had furnished unauthorized pen
drives, which were bought by him; those were used by other co-accused, serving
officials, to copy and transmit classified and sensitive information relating to
national security. It was also alleged that the serving officers were in constant
touch with the petitoner, and other co-accused, through e-mail and on line chatting,

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

9 of 11

when they passed on sensitive information, which amounted to offences under the
Official Secrets Act. The applicant's defence is that nothing incriminating was
found in his possession; that the pen drives do not contain any comprehensible
information and that the entire prosecution version is premised on conjectures. It
was also submitted that the possibility of evidence tampering could not be ruled
out.
14.

The charge sheet in this case has defined the role of the petitioner, as one of

the conspirators who connived with the serving officers. The latter passed on
information to the applicant, through pen drives bought by him. The pen drives
were used by the serving officers on official computers, which was irregular;
classified information was copied and passed on. Apart from this link, the other
allegation is that the petitioner was involved in passing on illegal gratification and
favours to the co-accused, in exchange for the information. Additionally, it is
alleged that the applicant also received such classified information through e-mail
and internet chatting, with other co-accused. Although the applicant has sought to
raise a doubt about the genuineness of a pen drive, stating that the possibility of its
being tampered cannot be ruled out, yet the prosecution states that a clone file was
created, which was worked upon, and not the contents of the pen drive.
15.

In considering applications for bail, apart from the period of custody or

detention, which is a relevant circumstance, other factors, such as the nature of

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

10 of 11

accusation and the severity of punishment in case of conviction and the nature of
supporting evidence; reasonable apprehension of tampering with the witness or
apprehension of threat to the complainant; Prima facie satisfaction of the court in
support of the charge, have to be considered by the court. In the present case, there
are several circumstanes which prima facie appear to connect the applicant with
the incriminating features, such as evidence of his being instrumental in giving or
offering illegal gratification; his being receipient of classified infromation through
e-mail and chatting, and also his supplying the unauthorized pen drives used to
copy sensitive and forbidden information, which were passed on to him.
16.

On an overall conspectus of the facts, and having regard to the severity of

the offences and allegations, I am of the considered view that it would not be
appropriate to grant bail to the applicant. In these circumstances, the application
has to fail; it is accordingly dismissed.

DATED: 31 May, 2007

S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J

BAIL APPLICATION NO. 1940 of 2006

11 of 11

