*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

OMP 284/2003 and IA No. 6597/06
Reserved on : February 29, 2008
Pronounced on : March 31st, 2008

KANTI BHAI DHAMANI

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. S.B. Upadhyay, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Pawan Upadhyay, Mr. Rohit Kumar Yadav,
Mr. Bikram Dekar, Advocates

versus
ASHWANI K. GOENKA & Ors.

..... Respondent

Through Ms. Malvika Rajkotia, Mr. Jayant Mehta,
Ms. Jyoti Srivastava, Advocates for respondent No.1.
Mr. Ashu Bhanot, Advocate for respondent No.2.
CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat

1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

In this petition, under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation

OMP 284/03

page no. 1 of 29

Act, 1996 (hereafter called “the Act”) the petitioner seeks setting aside of the
Award dated 25.8.2001 (hereafter called “the impugned award”) passed by the
third respondent.
2.

According to the averments, the petitioner and second respondent are

husband and wife, their marriage was solemnized in 1980. It is alleged that in
1982 the petitioner and his wife came into contact with the first respondent
(since deceased), as the later was dealing in non-ferrous metals. The parties
joined hands in a business relationship.

It is claimed that some time

thereafter, the petitioner became aware of the first respondent's involvement
in criminal cases i.e. FIR No. 151/1998 where he was alleged to have
committed offences punishable under Sections 409/420 IPC. The petitioner
further claims that his wife, under the influence of the first respondent and the
third respondent registered various complaints against him.
3.

It is alleged that on 8.2.2002, the second respondent registered a First

Information Report (FIR) against the Petitioner alleging commission of
offences under Section 498A.

According to the complaint of the second

respondent, the relationship had turned hostile for 3-4 years. It is also alleged
that the respondent attempted to extract money from the petitioner. It is
further alleged that the first respondent later implicated in the petitioner in a
false criminal case and registered an FIR 316/2002. The petitioner was taken
into custody. He relies on an order dated 11.10.2002 of this Court in W.P.(C)
1026/2002 where the matter was directed to be enquired into by the District
OMP 284/03

page no. 2 of 29

and Sessions Judge.
4.

It is contended that during the course of police remand, the petitioner

was forced to sign 50-60 written papers and 20-25 plain papers which he
highlighted in an application to the Court. It is claimed that taking advantage
of the said position, the respondents filed an EX. 114/2003 in March 2003
claiming enforcement of the impugned Award said to have to have been made
on 25.8.2001.
5.

It is contended that the petitioner was not aware of the Award said to

have been made on 25.8.2001 and became aware of it only on 16.5.2003 when
his counsel had detected the pendency of the execution proceedings.

The

petitioner was thereafter represented on 12.7.2003 in the execution proceeding,
when he learnt that an ex-parte award was made saddling him with liabilities
to the tune of Rs. 6.5 crores. It is alleged that no copy of the Award was ever
sent to him.
6,

The impugned Award is challenged on the ground of fraud played

upon the petitioner and it being based on false and fabricated documents.
7.

The petitioner further relies upon the fact that the impugned Award

was supposed to have been made on 25.8.2001 whereas the Execution was
filed in March 2003. It is claimed that the real story was that blank signatures
were obtained in September 2002 during his police remand.

Since the

petitioner had filed an application, highlighting the illegality on the part of the
police and the respondent, they kept waiting for outcome of the said
OMP 284/03

page no. 3 of 29

application; the writ petition was later disposed of on 21.2.2003 as the charge
sheet had been filed. It is claimed that the Award surfaced subsequently. At
the time of institution of the present proceedings, the petitioner was in jail,
having been arrested on 6.9.2002.
8.

After notice was issued, the legal heirs of the first respondent i.e. Smt.

Savitri Devi Goenka entered appearance and caused a reply to be filed. Apart
from several technical objections, the ground pressed for rejection of the
petition is that it was filed in July 2003, beyond the period of limitation. It is
alleged that the petitioner had complete knowledge about the making of the
Award.

It is alleged that a copy of the Award was sent to the parties

including the petitioner through registered post A/D letter dispatched on
7.9.2001.

In these circumstances, it is claimed that the objections are

hopelessly barred in view of Section 34(3) of the Act.
9.

The respondent contests the allegations about the petitioner's counsel

coming to know the existence of the Award on 16.5.2003 and detection of the
execution case for the first time on 15.7.2003. It is claimed that the petitioner
conceded that he had filed Civil Suit 86/2004 which was pending before the
Civil Judge challenging the Award. The same was however, later withdrawn.
10.

The respondent No.1 does not deny that the petitioner was arrested on

6.9.2002 in connection with an FIR lodged by the late Ashwani Kumar
Goenka. It is claimed that the petitioner was given documents of the charge
sheet dated 5.12.2002 by the Inquiry officer in the Court of Sh. M.C. Gupta,
OMP 284/03

page no. 4 of 29

Metropolitan Magistrate. They included documents pertaining to the Award.
It is also urged that the record of the arbitration was seized from the third
respondent on 9.9.2002 and it is part of the judicial record pending before the
Metropolitan Magistrate, later summoned by this Court, in the present
proceedings.
11.

It is claimed that the petition is not supported by an affidavit of Kanti

Bhai Damani.

The respondents dispute the authority of Hetal Damani,

daughter of the petitioner to file the present proceedings. It is also averred
that the entire record of the charge sheet in the criminal proceedings were
furnished to the petitioner on 5.12.2002. He applied through his counsel on
13.3.2003 for inspection of the record. The record included the seizure memo
dated 9.9.2002 along with the original record of the Arbitrator.

It is,

therefore, alleged that the petitioner had full knowledge of the award and
could have taken effective steps to approach the Court in a timely manner.
12.

It is also alleged that the petitioner and his wife i.e. the second

respondent continue to live as husband and wife and that the sureties for
grant of bail to the petitioner, at Police Station, Tilak Marg were his wife's
brother. It is alleged that if indeed the relationship were strained, as alleged,
such surety would not have appeared to have him released.
13.

Mr. S.B. Upadhyay, learned senior counsel submitted that late Ashwini

K. Goenka was Managing Director of Savitri Metal Pvt. Limited. He had
criminal antecedents and several cases were pending against him.
OMP 284/03

He

page no. 5 of 29

developed intimacy with the second respondent i.e. the petitioner's wife. On
29.4.1993 an agreement was executed between the second respondent and
Savitri Metal Private Limited whereby she was appointed as authorized agent
of the company. Counsel further stated that the petitioner's conduct and
business were not liked by his wife and Ashwini K. Goenka and they
attempted to oust him from their life and business. As a result, the second
respondent got the petitioner implicated in a matrimonial dispute and filed
FIR 83/2002 alleging offences under Sections 498-A/406 I.P.C. It is also
claimed that the petitioner left Delhi in October 2001 and settled in
Ahmedabad.

He filed a writ petition seeking the quashing of the First

Information Report (FIR). He was arrested upon a visit to New Delhi on
6.9.2002 and detained in police custody for 14 days. He was later remanded to
judicial custody till 31.10.2003 when he was eventually released on bail. Its
counsel submitted that during police custody, the petitioner was taken to a
room in Qutub Hotel where the late Ashwini Kumar Goenka, respondents 2
and 3 and others tortured him physically on one pretext or the other. Counsel
also relied upon an affidavit filed in W.P.(C) 1026/2002 alleging that he was
forced to sign various papers including documents belonging to arbitration
proceedings.
14.

Learned counsel submitted that the falsity of the so called arbitration

proceedings is evident from no mention of it in the First Information Report or
in the charge sheet filed in the criminal proceedings lodged by Ashwini K.
OMP 284/03

page no. 6 of 29

Goenka. It is claimed that the complicity of the Ashwini K. Goenka and the
second respondent is clear form that that though the second respondent who
is the petitioner's wife was named as an accused in the FIR, yet he bequeathed
50% of his property in her favour in a Will. Probate proceedings are pending
in this Court in respect of the said Will.
15.

Counsel invited a reference to the original award and submitted that its

false and fabricated nature is apparent, on a bare glance as some typed sheets
are stuck to stamp paper. It was also alleged that the falsity of the Award is
further apparent from the fact that the second respondent had named the
petitioner as an accused and despite this the petitioner is alleged to have
consented to having the matter referred to arbitration by her father i.e. the
third respondent. It is submitted that the said FIR alleging commission of
offences under Section 498A I.P.C. was lodged on 8.2.2002. It was submitted
that even in the FIR there is no mention of the Award although the second
respondent alleged that the petitioner had cheated or mis-appropriated funds
of Ashwini K. Goenka and had compromised with him to pay money of which
he got premature bonds of RBI encashed. Learned counsel submitted that
upon an overall conspectus of the sequence of the events it is very clear that
there was no arbitration agreement and that no arbitral proceedings were ever
held; the so called proceedings were not arbitration proceedings in the eye of
the law since no copy of the Award was ever received by the petitioner and he
came to know about the same when his counsel met him in jail on 17.7.2003.
OMP 284/03

page no. 7 of 29

Learned counsel also submitted that the reliance placed on the postal receipt
dated 7-9-2001 ipso facto, establishes nothing as the third respondent’s affidavit
itself discloses that the award was not disclosed. The petitioner never received
it; indeed the late Ashwini Goenka never even asserted any rights in relation
to the award, even though it purported to award him the amount of Rs. 6.5
crores with interest at 20% p.a; it was only after the petitioner was taken into
custody and subjected to torture and also made to sign several sheets of paper,
that were misused to create fabricated documents, that the award surfaced, in
the form of an execution petition. In fact there was no arbitration proceeding,
or award and no such document was sent to the petitioner, ever.
16.

Learned counsel submitted the present petition has to be construed

within time. He relied upon the decision reported as Bharat Bhushan Bansal vs.
U.P. Small Industries Corporation Ltd. Kanpur, 1999 (1) RAJ 378 SC as well as
Pramod Chiman Bhai Patel vs. Lalit Constructions & Anr., 2003(4) RAJ 171
Bombay to say that in the absence of a valid arbitration agreement, further
proceedings and award said to have been taken or made further to it are a
nullity. He adverted to the document dated 5.8.2001 and submitted that it
never can be construed as an arbitration agreement because Ashwini K.
Goenka was not a party to it, even assuming the petitioner to have signed it,
though it was not so signed. He also submitted that there is absolutely no
proceeding before the Court indicative of any compliance with the mandatory
provisions of the Act showing that the petitioner and Ashwini K. Goenka ever
OMP 284/03

page no. 8 of 29

submitted their disputes for reference and decision to the third respondent
D.P. Jain in accordance with law.
17.

It was also submitted that a delivery of an arbitral award under Section

31(5) is not a idle formality and is a matter of substance. It was contended that
for delivery of the arbitral award to a party affected it should be received by
him. This sets into motion several period of limitation prescribed under the
Act. He relied upon the decision reported as Union of India vs. Tecco Trichy
Engineers and Constructions, 2005 (4) SCC 239. Learned counsel submitted that
apart from not mentioning about the Award in the FIR lodged by the second
respondent even Ashwini K. Goenka made no mention about it in FIR
316/2002 dated 10.7.20902. Learned counsel placed reliance on the contents of
the said FIR and submitted that these circumstances go to show that the socalled arbitral proceedings and Award cannot be construed to be so in the
eyes of law. The affidavit of Sh. D.P. Jain a certified copy of which has been
placed on the record was filed in the criminal proceedings. It clearly states
that he had not despatched the Award to Ashwini K. Goenka.
18.

It was submitted that the entire circumstances in which the award was

procured are shrouded in extremely suspicious circumstances. It is also
unreasoned, and therefore illegal, being contrary to Section 31 and the public
policy in India. It does not disclose compliance with any form of legal or other
proceeding, as mandated by Section 24; for these reasons, it has to be set aside
as patently illegal.
OMP 284/03

page no. 9 of 29

19.

Learned counsel for the first respondent Ms. Malvika Rajkotia

submitted that the Award has assumed the force of a decree and consequently
execution proceedings were filed for its enforcement. Ashwini K. Goenka
died and is legal representative i.e. the mother had been substituted in the
present proceedings.

Counsel submitted that the petitioner has no-where

spelt out how he became aware of the Award. Even the present petition was
not filed with his affidavit. The precise date on which the petitioner became
aware of the Award is also not disclosed. It was contended that the statement
that the Award was not received at the address, cannot be accepted at the face
value because the second respondent i.e. petitioner's wife continues to reside
there.
20.

Learned counsel contended that this Court should not on the basis of

the pleadings and lack of particulars, go into details as to whether the notice of
the Award was served and whether the parties were bound by an arbitration
agreement.

The criminal proceedings, learned counsel submitted led to

seizure of the original award as well as the receipt dispatching the same to the
petitioner and Ashwini K. Goenka. These are part of the judicial files, since
the criminal proceedings were summoned for consideration by the Court.
21.

Learned counsel submitted that the entire story about matrimonial

discord between the petitioner and the second respondent cannot be accepted
since there no divorce proceedings are pending between them. She relied
upon the letter dated 5.8.2001 showing that an arbitral agreement existed
OMP 284/03

page no. 10 of 29

between Ashwini K. Goenka and petitioner. The petitioner and the second
respondent referred the same to the third respondent. The respondent after
considering the points of view of both parties made his Award on 25.8.2001.
This was subsequently dispatched to the parties, on 1.9.2001. If the petitioner
was aggrieved, he would have preferred objections immediately upon receipt
of the Award. He did not do so and has now come forward giving all kinds of
excuses for the delay.
22.

Learned counsel contended that while there is no doubt about certain

facts such as the petitioner's arrest and his release in October 2003 yet there is
ambiguity or no explanation about important and material aspects such as no
express authorization to file the present proceedings; no separate pleading
indicating the details as to how the petitioner became aware of the award; no
explanation as to why the petitioner could not have been aware of the award,
even if he is deemed not to have received it in September—October 2001, at
least in December 2002 when copies of documents were furnished to him.
Learned counsel submitted that the respondent No.2 has not denied the
receipt of the Award.

She too was a party to the proceedings and she

continued to live in the premises. Her relationship with the petitioner cannot
be considered as a strange since no divorce proceedings or any other
matrimonial proceedings are pending between them
23.

Learned counsel relied upon a judgment of this Court reported as Delhi

cantonment Board vs. Daulat Rai & Sons, 2001 (60) DRJ 167 and stated that this
OMP 284/03

page no. 11 of 29

Court has no discretion in the matter of entertaining a petition under Section
34 once the period prescribed under Section 34(3) i.e. the outer limit of 120
days from the receipt of arbitral award lapses.
24.

A factual narrative discloses a very peculiar and if one may so express,

unique set of facts. Before dealing with the discussion on the merits of the
submission, it would be necessary to extract the letter dated 5.8.2001 which is
has acted as reference to arbitration in this case:
“To,
Shri D. P. Jain (Arbitrator)
C/o K.D. Saga & Co.
D-1, Punjabi Basti,
Nangloi,
Delhi
Reg: Arbitration in respect of dispute between Kanti Bhai
Damani, Kusum Damani
& Ashwini Kr. Goenka.
Respected Sir (Babuji),
This is reference to the above and discussion held with you
with me alongwith Kusum and proceeding held on various
dates.
In this connection I would like to inform you that Shri
Ashwini Kr. Goenka has demanded a sum of more than Rs.12
Crores but I am not in position to make payment of the entire
12 crores as I have already spent a sum of Rs.3.5 crores on
various heads including Income Tax payment of Rs.2 crores
and rest of the amount is invested by me in the name of your
grand children and relatives and different financial
institution.
As such I would request you to get the case settled at a sum
which is reasonable and which I have indicated to you
verbally. Further I request you to kindly grant at lest one
year's time to me to make the payment.

OMP 284/03

page no. 12 of 29

I hope you will do the needful in the interest of your daughter
(Kusum) and Grand children.
Thanking you,
Yours truly,
(Kanti Bhai Damani & Kusum Damani)
FU-42, Pitampura, Delhi-110085”
25.

A schedule containing list of items has been annexed to the said

document. The Award in this case bears the date 25.8.2001 on which day the
third respondent signed it. The same reads as follows:
"BEFORE SRI D.P. JAIN, NO. D-1, Punjabi Basti,
Nangloi, New Delhi.
BETWEEN
Sri Kanti Bhai Damani son of Sri P.O. Damani and Smt. Kusum
Lata Damani w/o Kanti Bhai Damani, Residing at No. FU-42,
Pitampura, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as "the First
Party")
AND
Sh. Ashwini K. Goenka residing at No. H -538, RIICO Industrial
Area, Bhiwadi (hereafter referred to as "the Second Party")
AND WHEREAS Kusum Damani is my daughter. Sri Kanti
Bhai Damani is my son-in-law are carrying on business jointly
and / or severally as brokers and commission agents in aluminium
trade having their place of business at No. FU-42, Pitampura,
New Delhi and they did the business as broker and commission
agent for Ashwini Kumar Goenka and his companies during the
last 7 years i.e. from 1992-1999.
AND WHEREAS the first party while working as agent/broker of
the second party has collected huge amount of more than Rs.12
Crores by selling of Aluminium and its products to various
OMP 284/03

page no. 13 of 29

existing and non-existing firms by setting and collecting payment
from buyers of second party, during the period 1995 to 1999 when
the second party was suffering from various diseases and sale of
metal was totally looked after by the first party. And the first
party has kept huge amount with them on account of the second
party and the financial position of the second party has
deteriorated and he has come to know about the above fact and in
this process approximately Rs.12 crores are lying with the first
party.
AND WHEREAS the second party had made various enquiries
and investigations and came to know that the first party has kept
with them an amount of more than Rs.12 crores in the manner
detailed above. Therefore, the disputes between the parties have
arisen and the second party have asked for return of the said
money from the first party. To resolve such disputes among the
parties I Sri D.P. Jain son of Late Sri K. M. Jain was appointed as
Arbitrator by mutual consent of all the parties to settle all the
differences between the parties once for all. The parties hereto
agreed that the decision of Sri D.P. Jain shall be final and binding
on all the parties.
AND WHEREAS I Sri. D.P. Jain held various meetings among
the parties to adjudicate the disputes and difference between the
parties and after discussing the matter at length with both the
parties I am giving the following Award in the following manner:AWARD
a)
It has been represented by the First Party that out of the
total sum of Rs.12 Crores he has spent approx. Rs. 3.5 Crores on
various heads including Income Tax payment of Rs.2 Crore and
other amount has been deposited and invested in the name of their
children in various banks/financial institutions and relatives etc.
b)
The first party has submitted that in full and final
settlement they are ready to pay a sum of Rs.6.5 Crores and asked
for six months time to do the same. The Second party has accepted
if subject to condition that the entire amount to be paid within six
months from the date of award failing with which first party will
pay a sum of Rs.12 Crores.
c)
Although the second party is not agreeable to receive any
amount less than Rs.9 crores, but I, on considering the
submissions made by the respective parties and after obtaining the
OMP 284/03

page no. 14 of 29

consent of all the parties pass the following Award.
(i)
The first party shall refund in aggregate the Sum of
Rs.6.5 Crores to the second party within a period of 6 months from
the date of Award after encashing all the RBI Bonds lying with
him and selling the properties except the properties purchased
before 1994 and / or transferring the properties in the name of the
second party as well as recovering the deposits lying with his
parties, relations, banks, financial institutions, etc.
( ii ) It is recorded that all the ornaments lying with the
first party shall remain with them and the second party shall not
make any claim against their ornaments.
( iii) In case the first party fails to repay the said money
within the aforesaid agreed period of 6 months, the second party
shall be entitled to recover the whole amount of money as per law
and the first party shall be liable to pay interest also to be
calculated @ 20% with yearly rest.
D.P. JAIN
Arbitrator"
26.

Copies of letters which are in dispute, allegedly enclosing the award,

written to Ashwini Goenka on 1.9.2001 and to the present petitioner are also
on the record. The postal receipts bear the date 7.9.2001 and are attached to it.
These documents were seized from the residence of the third respondent, the
arbitrator, who is also the Petitioner's father-in-law,

in the criminal

proceedings arising out of FIR 316/2002. The petitioner alleges that whilst he
was in custody, signatures were obtained from him. during the police remand
on several blank sheets of papers which were subsequently used by the
respondents 2 and 3 in connivance with Ashwini K. Goenka in support of the
theory that an Award was made. The FIR by the second respondent against

OMP 284/03

page no. 15 of 29

the petitioner alleging commission of offences under Sections 498-A and 406
was lodged in early 2002. The FIR naming the petitioner and others including
the respondent No.2 emanated from a complaint dated 13.5.2002 by Ashwini
K. Goenka. The FIR was eventually lodged on 10.7.2002 and the charge sheet,
filed on 4.12.2002. A copy of the charge sheet is part of the record. It has fully
extracted the complaint by Ashwini K. Goenka. An interesting feature of this
document is that the complainant, Ashwini K. Goenka alleged that the
petitioner and the respondent No.2 confirmed that they cheated him and
siphoned away money and in the presence of D.P. Jain promised to return his
money. The relevant part of the said FIR reads as follows:
"The said Kanti Bhai Damani and Kusum Damani in connived and
conspired with the above named persons have cheated & deceived me
fraudulently and dishonestly by inducing me to hand over my goods
to them and misappropriate the goods for their wrongful gain and to
cause wrongful loss to me. Their such acts have caused irreparable
loss damage and harm in my body, mind, reputation as well as loss of
my property. Their said acts have caused wrongful loss to me and
wrongful gain to them.
The said Kanti Bhai Damani and Kusum Damani and
in collusion & conspiracy with each other have also committed offence
for forgery and fabricating false bills, vouchers, invoices and money
receipts and thereby they made wrongful gain causing wrongful loss
to me. They forged the documents for the purpose of cheating me and
criminal breach of trust and fraudulently and dishonestly used the
same for the purpose of committing aforesaid criminal offences.
During various discussions, the said Kanti Bhai
Damani and Kusum Damani have confirmed to have cheated me and
siphoned away the money and from time to time in the prersence of
Sri. D.P. Jain and promised me to return my money. Kanti Bhai
Damani and Kusumlata Damani tendered their apology for their above
acts and promised to refund my money. However, when I demanded
my money both Kanti Bhai Damani and Kusumlata Damani on one
pretext or the other did not pay my money I was regularly visiting
their residence. I am in possession of casssette recorded conversation
OMP 284/03

page no. 16 of 29

with Kusum Damani, D.P. Jain and Hetal Jain regarding the above.
They now threaten me that they are powerful, influential and wealthy
people and they can purchase every body/anybody and they do not care
for me. They even threaten me to evaporate me from this world if I
would dare to demand my money from them or to lodge this FIR with
police. He is also threatening me that he will implicate me in various
false cases and shall put me in trouble. "
27.

From the above it would appear that at least till the date of the lodging

of the charge sheet in December 2002, Ashwini K. Goenka was unaware of the
existence of the Award. His version about the petitioner’s liability was that the
latter promised to return moneys to him (Goenka) in the presence of the third
respondent, i.e D. P. Jain. The Award became part of the criminal proceedings
under FIR 316/2002 when it was recovered from the premises of the third
respondent. The copy of an affidavit filed in Court by D.P.Jain, the third
respondent, is also on record. The material portion of the same reads as
follows:
"That in the third / last week of May, 2001 , I received a letter from
my daughter Kusum Late Damani, when I cam to know about the
misappropriation of money by my son-in-law using my daughter as a
tool. That I and my daughter tried to persuade him to settle the
dispute and save the entire family. My son-in-law used to beat my
daughter on petty issues.
4.
However, my son-in-law agreed to appoint me as arbitrator to
settle the dispute between my daughter, son-in-law and Ashwini K.
Goenka as per the request of my son-in-law, I acted as an Arbitrator
and settle the dispute after hearing both the parties and passed an
Award dated 25.8.2001. As my son-in-law came to know that I have
passed an Award he threatened me not to communicate the same to
Sh. Ashwini K. Goenka, otherwise, consequences would be better. As
such I did not give the copy of Award to Mr. Ashwini K. Goenka and
kept it with me but informed him subsequently."

OMP 284/03

page no. 17 of 29

28.

As against the above, it is contended on behalf of the first respondent

that the petitioner has not disclosed vital facts such as his counsel applying for
inspection on 13.3.2003 in the criminal Court and that the second respondent's
relationship with the petitioner at best is ambiguous. It was also contended
that the petition is not maintainable since Kanti Bhai Damani did not affirm an
affidavit in its support; the supporting affidavit was executed by his daughter,
who is not authorized to do so.
29.

The first question which arises is whether there is any substance in the

petition of the respondents that the petitioner was aware of the proceedings
and has approached the Court belatedly. The judgment in Delhi Cantonment
Board's case and the text of Section 34(3) made it clear that any objection to an
Award has to be filed within the time prescribed i.e. 90 days and if for some
reasons deemed sufficient by the Court beyond the such period but within an
extended period 30 days. There is no dispute that if these rules were to be
applied strictly in this case, petition is facially barred. The petitioner has
however, relied upon the judgment reported in Tecco Trichy Engineers &
Constructions for the submission that the date of publication is with reference
to knowledge of the Award. In that judgment the Supreme Court held that
the delivery of an arbitral award is not a matter of mere formality and is one
of substance. This would imply that the arbitral award has to be received by
the party, upon which several period of limitation including an application for
setting aside the Award is set into motion. It was held crucially that delivery
OMP 284/03

page no. 18 of 29

of the copy of the Award has the effect of conferring certain rights on the
party as also entitling a litigant, the right to exercise those rights on expiry of
period of limitation. The delivery of copy and receipt of it, by each party
constitutes an important stage in the arbitral proceedings.
30.

It is, therefore, necessary to decide whether the petitioner's submission

that he became aware of the award only in July, 2003 has some substance.
Before proceeding with that it would be necessary to deal with one
submission about the maintainability of proceedings. It is no doubt true that
the affidavit in support of the present petition, was sworn by Hetal Damani;
yet one cannot unmindful of the fact that as on that date the petitioner was in
custody; he had been arrested on 6.9.2002 in connection with FIR 316/2002
lodged by Ashwini K. Goenka.

The subsequent pleadings such as

applications filed in the case and the replication has been signed by him.
31.

On a consideration of the allegations contained in the FIR against the

petitioner in FIR 316/2002, extracted in the charge sheet filed in December
2002, it is apparent that Ashwini K. Goenka even if aware of the submission of
disputes to reference and subsequently the Award, maintained a studied
silence in that regard, about its existence. He specifically adverted to the third
respondent and the role played by him, in his complaint. Nevertheless, the he
omitted any mention of the Award. Equally, the second respondent had also
not adverted to the Award in her complaint or First Information Report. The
judicial records contained in both the FIRs as well as the documents in the
OMP 284/03

page no. 19 of 29

criminal proceedings were summoned by order dated 15

th

December, 2006,

and have been considered by this court.
32.

The affidavit by Sh. D.P. Jain the third respondent—Arbitrator also

bears out the fact that the Award was not made known to Ashwini K. Goenka;
yet from amongst the documents seized from his premises, a letter identical to
the one written to the petitioner on 1.9.2002 along with the postal receipt
dated 7.9.2001 was taken into custody. If the said postal receipt in respect of
the petitioner's letter were to be given credence there is no doubt a similar
notice could have been received by Ashwini K. Goenka about the award. A
bare perusal of the Award would also show that it is a piece of paper stuck on
stamp paper. Though it adverts to proceedings, as a matter of fact no other
documents exist in the record of the criminal proceedings or before this court
indicating of any arbitral proceedings.
33.

From a conspectus of the above facts, this Court is of the opinion that

even though some doubts about the possibility of the petitioner's knowledge
of the Award and the maintainability of the proceedings have been raised,
such as the absence of his affidavit filed at the initial stage the fact that his
counsel inspected the record of criminal proceedings on 13.3.2003 etc. on a
balance of probabilities, it can be held the Award was not published or made
known to Ashwini K. Goenka as well as the present petitioner.

In the

circumstances, on a proper application of the law in Tecco Trichy Engineers and

OMP 284/03

page no. 20 of 29

Construction it had to be held that the petitioner became aware of the Award in
the circumstances, described by him in the present petition, in July 2003, after
the late Ashwini Goenka filed the execution proceeding. The present petition
under Section 34 is, therefore, maintainable.
34.

The second issue which arises for consideration is whether the

document dated 5.8.2001, can be described as a valid arbitration agreement.
Section 7 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 defines what is an
arbitration agreement. Section 7(3) states that an arbitration agreement shall
be in writing. Section 7(4) states that an arbitration agreement is in writing if
it is contained either:
a)

in a document signed by the parties;

b)

an exchange of letters, telegrams or other means of

communication which provide record of the agreement; or the exchange of
statement of claims and defence in which existence of agreement alleged by
one party is not denied by the other.
35.

The decisions of the Supreme court in K.K. Modi Vs. K.N. Modi (1998) 3

SCC 573 and Jagdish Chander Vs. Ramesh Chander, (2007) 5 SCC 719 are
authorities on the point that any proceeding in order to qualify the description
of arbitral proceedings must be founded on an agreement which complies
with Section 7. In the latter case the Court specifically held that the mere use
of the word "arbitrator" or "arbitration agreement" in a clause will not make
document on arbitration agreement, if it does not otherwise amount to one
OMP 284/03

page no. 21 of 29

under Section 7. In this case the sole document relied upon by the respondent
—of which there is no advertecnce through any contemporaneous writing by
the Ashwini K. Goenka during his life time, is the one dated 5.8.2001.
Genuineness apart even if it is accepted at face value, what is apparent that it
is signed by the petitioner and the second respondent; it requests the third
respondent to get the case settled at reasonable sum indicated to him verbally
and further requests a year's time to make the payment. The only indication
as to arbitration is to the mention to that expression in the subject reference
contained in the letter. This document was not signed by Ashwini K. Goenka.
There is not a single document written by Ashwini K. Goenka concurring to
any arbitration agreement or even treating the letter dated 5.8.2001, written to
the third respondent as an arbitration agreement. In fact the letter was not
even marked to him. In these circumstances, the Court is of the opinion that
the letter dated 5.8.2001 cannot be construed as an arbitration agreement.
36.

The relevant provisions of the Act, dealing with the arbitration

agreement, and regularity of proceedings reads as follows:
“7 ARBITRATION AGREEMENT.
(1) In this Part, "arbitration agreement" means an agreement by the parties to
submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may
arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether
contractual or not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a
contract or in the form of a separate agreement.
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
OMP 284/03

page no. 22 of 29

(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in (a) a document signed by the parties;
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other
telecommunication which provide a record of the agreement; or

means

of

(c) an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the existence of the
agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other.
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause
constitutes an arbitration if the contract is in writing and the reference is such
as to make that arbitration clause part of the contact.
Xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

24 HEARINGS AND WRITTEN PROCEEDINGS.
(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall decide
whether to hold oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral
argument, or whether the proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of
documents and other materials :
Provided that the arbitral tribunal shall hold oral hearings, at an appropriate
stage of the proceedings, on a request by a party, unless the parties have agreed
that no oral hearing shall be held.
(2) The parties shall be given sufficient advance notice of any hearing and of
any meeting of the arbitral tribunal for the purposes of inspection of
documents, goods or other property.
(3) All statements, documents or other information supplied to, or applications
made to the arbitral tribunal by one party shall be communicated to the other
party; and any expert report or evidentiary document on which the arbitral
tribunal may rely in making its decision shall be communicated to the parties.
Xxx

xxx

xxx

xxx

31 FORM AND CONTENTS OF ARBITRAL AWARD.
(1) An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the
members of the arbitral tribunal.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), in arbitral proceedings with more than
one arbitrator, the signatures of the majority of all the members of the arbitral
tribunal shall be sufficient so long as the reason for any omitted signature is

OMP 284/03

page no. 23 of 29

stated.
(3) The arbitral award shall state the reasons upon which it is based, unless (a) the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given, or
(b) the award is an arbitral award on agreed terms under section 30.
(4) The arbitral award shall state its date and the place of arbitration as
determined in accordance with section 20 and the award shall be deemed to
have been made at that place.
(5) After the arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered to each
party.
(6) The arbitral tribunal may, at any time during the arbitral proceedings,
make an interim arbitral award on any matter with respect to which it may
make a final arbitral award.
(7) (a) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in so far as an
arbitral award is for the payment of money, the arbitral tribunal may include
in the sum for which the award is made interest, at such rate as it deems
reasonable, on the whole or any part of the money, for the whole or any part of
the period between the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on
which the award is made.
(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall, unless the award
otherwise directs, carry interest at the rate of eighteen per centum per annum
from the date of the award to the date of payment.
(8) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, (a) the costs of an arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal;
(b) the arbitral tribunal shall specify (i) the party entitled to costs,
(ii) the party who shall pay the costs,
(iii) the amount of costs or method of determining that amount, and
(iv) the manner in which the costs shall be paid.
Explanation : For the purpose of clause (a), "costs" means reasonable costs
relating to (i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and witnesses,
(ii) legal fees and expenses,
OMP 284/03

page no. 24 of 29

(iii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration, and
(iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral proceedings
and the arbitral award.”

37.

The most peculiar feature of this case is that no proceedings or their

record is available. As held in the earlier part of the judgment, the parties did
not enter into an arbitration agreement, valid and answering to the description
under Section 7 of the Act. The question is whether the award discloses any
infirmity of the kind, mentioned in Section 34. Serious exception was taken to
the legality of the award, on behalf of the petitioner. It was urged that though
a colossal liability of Rs 6.5 crores has been fastened upon him, the award was
never preceded by any hearing; no records or proceedings as mandated by
Section 24 took place. The arbitrator, who is a party before the court, has not
chosen to file an affidavit. The second infirmity, said to attach itself to the
award, is the absence of reasons.
38.

The hallmark of every judicial, or quasi judicial proceeding, is its

regularity. Unlike an administrative act, such proceedings have to conform to
a modicum of regularity, where the parties presence (or absence) is noted, the
dates of the tribunal assembling to transact its business are recorded, and the
proceedings too are appropriately minuted or recorded. Of course, if the
proceedings assume formality, there has to be a greater degree of
elaborateness in the record keeping. This lends transparency and avoids the
odium of secrecy and clandestine transactions. Section 24 assures certain
OMP 284/03

page no. 25 of 29

minimum standards of what should be contained in arbitral proceedings.
Section 31 on the other hand, embeds a non-negotiable standard in that every
arbitrator has to disclose the reasons for the award. This is in striking
departure to the previous law, which did not enact such a requirement. These
essential ground rules were enacted as mandatory because the arbitral
mechanism replaces the more formal method of dispute resolution; the parties
are left free to refer their disputes to a chosen adjudicator. Yet, the function
discharged by the arbitrator is no less crucial; though the proceedings are less
formal, nevertheless there have to be proceedings. The standards imposed by
the Act are absolute and unalterable; some provisions may not be mandatory
in the sense that their breach would not render the award a nullity; but some
fundamental conditions, integral to the integrity and regularity of the
proceedings are mandatory; their breach would invalidate the award and the
adjudicatory process itself.
39.

Intervention of courts with awards of arbitral tribunals is confined to

grounds enacted under Section 34. The Supreme Court, in Oil & Natural Gas
Vs, Saw Pipes Ltd. 2003 (5) SCC 705 scrutinized this provision, and held that
interference was permissible on grounds of public policy, which in turn was
explained as the award being contrary to:
(a ) Fundamental policy of Indian Law;
(b) the interest of India; or
( c ) Justice or morality;
OMP 284/03

page no. 26 of 29

( d ) in addition, if it is patently illegal.
40.

Saw Pipes was affirmed in Hindustan Zinc Ltd. Vs. Friends Coal

Carbonization 2006 (4) SCC 445 and Mc Dermott International Inc Vs. Burn
Standard Co. Ltd. 2006 (11) SCC 181. It is not every error, even egregious,
whether it is factual or legal, that can be the basis of judicial interdiction with
the award of an arbitrator. The threshold for a challenge is considerably high;
certainly, it is higher than what was contemplated in the old Arbitration Act,
1940. The four indicators mentioned in Saw Pipes is a pointer to something
striking, and prominent, which should impel the court to use its jurisdiction.
Otherwise, the challenge mechanism would add a layer of substantive
litigation in the judicial system – a result perhaps contrary to the intention of
the law-makers.
41.

An award made on the basis of an invalid agreement would be a

nullity. Such an award would be coram non judice. The law in this behalf in
India is clear and explicit. An order passed by a Tribunal lacking inherent
jurisdiction would be a nullity. Where such a lack of jurisdiction is established,
the same goes to the root of the matter. [Balvant N. Viswamitra and Others v.
Yadav Sadashiv Mule (Dead) Through LRS. and Others, (2004) 8 SCC 706]. In
Dharma Prathishthanam v. Madhok Construction Pvt. Ltd. [(2005) 9 SCC 686 the
Supreme Court held that where the appointment of an arbitrator and the
reference of a dispute to him is void ab initio, and the resulting award would
also be liable to be set aside being totally incompetent or invalid.
OMP 284/03

page no. 27 of 29

42.

The question of regularity of proceedings, and the validity of awards

which were not preceded by provisions mandating the manner of conducting
proceedings, and unreasoned awards, was dealt with expressly in the Saw
Pipes decision, in the following terms:
"The question, therefore, which requires consideration is - whether the
award could be set aside, if the arbitral tribunal has not followed the
mandatory procedure prescribed under Sections 24, 28 or 31(3), which
affects the rights of the parties ? Under sub-section (1)(a) of Section 28
there is a mandate to the arbitral tribunal to decide the dispute in
accordance with the substantive law for the time being in force in
India. Admittedly, substantive law would include the Indian Contract
Act, the Transfer of Property Act and other such laws in force.
Suppose, if the award is passed in violation of the provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act or in violation of the Indian Contract Act, the
question would be - whether such award could be set aside ? Similarly,
under sub-section (3), the arbitral tribunal is directed to decide the
dispute in accordance with the terms of the contract and also after
taking into account the usage of the trade applicable to the transaction.
If the arbitral tribunal ignores the terms of the contract or usage of the
trade applicable to the transaction, whether the said award could be
interfered ? Similarly, if the award is a non-speaking one and is in
violation of Section 31(3), can such award be set aside ? In our view,
reading Section 34 conjointly with other provisions of the Act, it
appears that the legislative intent could not be that if the award is in
contravention of the provisions of the Act, still however, it couldn't be
set aside by the court. If it is held that such award could not be
interfered, it would be contrary to the basic concept of justice. If the
arbitral tribunal has not followed the mandatory procedure prescribed
under the Act, it would mean that it has acted beyond its jurisdiction
and thereby the award would be patently illegal which could be set
aside under Section 34."
43.

In this case, there are absolutely no documents indicating if, and

whether any procedure was followed by the arbitrator; the documents
produced before him and considered by him, or even the dates of hearing. As
is evident from the award, it is bereft of reasoning. Therefore, little is left to
OMP 284/03

page no. 28 of 29

discern that it is contrary to provisions of Section 24 and 31(5) of the Act. It
seeks to cast a huge liability on the petitioner, to the extent of Rs. 6.5 crores.
No reasons which persuaded the arbitrator to award such an amount, with
20% interest p.a are apparent. The circumstances in which it was drawn are
shrouded in mystery, to say the least. Sustaining a document which facially
does not answer the description of an award, or even a legally enforceable
document would be giving judicial shelter to an unsupportable transaction.
Therefore, on the basis of materials existing on the record, the court is of the
opinion that the award is contrary to public policy, embodied in provisions of
the Act; it cannot pass the judicial muster.
44.

The petition, OMP. 284/2003

is accordingly allowed. All pending

interlocutory proceedings are hereby disposed of in the above terms. The
records of the Criminal proceedings shall be returned to the concerned Courts.
Order Dasti.

MARCH 31st 2008

OMP 284/03

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

page no. 29 of 29

