*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Judgment: 30th July, 2007

+

CRIMINAL REVISION NO. 408/2007
SANDEEP (IN J.C.)
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. K.K. Manan, Mr. Gaurav Goswami and
Mr. Rishikesh Chaudhary, Advocates
versus
THE STATE NCT OF DELHI
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for the State.

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat : (Open Court)
1.

This revision is directed against an order of the Additional Sessions Judge dated

13-6-2007, which had rejected the appeal preferred by the revisionist against the order of
the Juvenile Justice Board, declining bail to him.
2.

According to the prosecution, the petitioner was involved in an incident, where his

maternal uncle, Bijender was murdered. The prosecution alleged that the deceased
resented a relationship alleged to have been existing between his wife, and the present
1 of 5

Crl. Rev. No.408/2007

petitioner, his nephew (sister's son), who lived with him. It was alleged that the petitioner
entered into a conspiracy with one Puran along with the deceased's wife; pursuant to their
designs, Bijender was killed.
3.

The grounds which impressed the courts below to decline bail, were that the

petitioner lacked parental supervision, since he had lost his father at a young age; his
grandparents could not control him. It apprehended that he would be able to influence the
material witnesses.
4.

Learned counsel urged that the petitioner was not even named in the first

information report; he was implicated much later. The final report has already been filed;
the petitioner has suffered incarceration for nearly two years, since 26-8-2005. The courts
were not justified in declining bail, as none of the grounds mentioned in the orders fell
within the exceptions under Section 12 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
5.

The petition was opposed by the learned APP, who submitted that even though

Section 12 mandates that bail is to be ordinarily given, there are three well recognized
exceptions and the present case falls within those. It was submitted that the role of the
petitioner was clear, and his involvement, undeniable. Therefore, it would be in the
interests of justice not to enlarge him on bail.
6.

Section 12 of the Act reads as follows:
"12. Bail of juvenile - (1) When any person accused of a bailable or non-bailable

2 of 5

Crl. Rev. No.408/2007

offence, and apparently a juvenile, is arrested or detained or appears or is
brought before a Board, such person shall, notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or in any other law for the time
being in force, be released on bail with or without surety but he shall not be so
released if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that the release is likely
to bring him into association with any known criminal or expose him to moral,
physical or psychological danger or that his release would defeat the ends of
justice.
(2) When such person having been arrested is not released on bail under subsection (1) by the officer in charge of the police station, such officer shall cause
him to be kept only in an observation home in the prescribed manner until he can
be brought before a Board.
(3) When such person is not released on bail, under sub-section (1) by the Board
it shall, instead of committing him to prison, make an order sending him to an
observation home or a place of safety for such period during the pendency of the
inquiry regarding him as may be specified in the order."
7.

The court, in Mohd. Feroz @ Bhola-vs-State 2005 -v- State (3) JCC 1313 held that

Section 12 mandates one to be released where the person is apparently a juvenile, unless,
there are reasonable grounds for believing that such release is likely to bring him into
association with any known criminal or expose him to moral, physical or psychological
danger or that his release would defeat the ends of justice. The question of bail, it was
held, was not a question of mercy so far as the said provision was concerned. It was
mandatory requirement; it stipulates that such a person, who is apparently a juvenile,
"shall be released on bail". Shashi Kumar Saini v. The State : 2005 VI AD Delhi 200,is a
case where the court granted bail to the juvenile after considering the Social Investigation
Report. In Master Niku Chaubey v. State : 2006 (2) JCC 720; this court ruled that the
nature of the offence is not a consideration for grant of bail, to the juvenile. The only

3 of 5

Crl. Rev. No.408/2007

considerations are those spelt out by Section 12, which requires bail to be granted unless
the court feels that the release of the juvenile is likely to bring him into association of any
known criminal or expose him to moral, physical or psychological danger or that his
release would defeat the ends of justice. It has been also held that seriousness of the
allegations or gravity of the charges are not relevant in the case of a juvenile accused's
request for bail.
8.

I have carefully examined the original records. No doubt, charges have been

framed in this case. The Social Investigation Report has analysed that the petitioner
lacked parental supervision, and his grandparents could not exercise control over him.
Now these may be causes for objectionable behaviour, or indeed delinquency. But the
manner in which this report has been construed by the courts below is disquieting. The
courts have not applied their minds as to whether release of the petitioner would expose
him to physical or psychological danger, or bring him into association with a known
criminal. Sans those considerations, the fall back upon the ubiquotous “interests of
justice” clause was a mechanical exercise. While examining a bail application, gravity of
the offence is not a predominant criteria.

9.

I am satisfied, on the basis of materials available on record, that the petitioner is

entitled to grant of bail, under Section 12. Accordingly, the orders of the court below are
hereby set aside. The petitioner is hereby enlarged on bail, subject to his near relative

4 of 5

Crl. Rev. No.408/2007

furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs. 30,000/- and one surety of the same amount
to the satisfaction of the Juvenile Justice Board. The petitioner shall maintain good
conduct, for the duration of trial; he shall also report once every two months to the Board,
in addition to attending the trial on the various dates fixed in that regard. The IO shall
also supervise the petitioner, and report in that regard to the Board once every two
months.
10.

The petition is allowed, subject to the above terms. Order dasti.

DATE:
30th July, 2007

5 of 5

(S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

Crl. Rev. No.408/2007

