IN TH E

•

HIGH COUR T OF DE L H I

AT NE W

DE L H I
•

+
SATYA PRAKASH

CR. REVN0. 350/20 0 6

Dated: 3 1 January, 200 7

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. D.C.Sharma, Advocate

versus
THE STATE NCT OF DELHI

..... Respondent

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allo w e d to see the judgm ent.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judg m e nt should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr.Justice S. Ravindra Bhat: (Open Court)
1.

This revision proceeding impugns the judg m e nt and order of the Additional

Sessions Judge, where by the conviction and sentenc e impos ed by the Metropolitan
Magistrate, against the petitioner here, was upheld.
2.

The petitioner, driver of a “Blueline” bus, was charged with rashly and negligently

causing the death of one Uma Devi on 16- 9- 2004. She was alighting from the bus, when,
suddenly the petitioner accelerated the bus; as a result, she fell do wn fro m the vehicle.
The passeng er was run over by the rear whe el of the bus; after she was rem o v e d to the
hospital, she succu m b e d to the injuries. The courts belo w convicted the petitioner under
Crl.Rev.No.350/06

1 of 4

Sections 279/304A, IPC, and sentenc ed him to underg o simple imprison m e nt for six
m o nths for the offenc e under Section 279, with fine of Rs. 10 0 0/- and simple
imprison m e nt for one year, for the offenc e under Section 304- A, and fine of Rs. 3000/- .
3.

The prosecution exa min ed nine witnesses, of who m two, nam ely PW-4 and PW-5

were eye witness es. Both were cross examin ed. They testified to the incident, whereby the
bus accelerated, even while the deceas ed, was getting do wn from the bus, leading to her
fall, and her being crushed under the vehicle. PW-4 was a co- passeng er, and PW-5 was
an eye witness. Learned counsel sub mitted that the deposition of the said two witnesses do
not establish that the petitioner drove in a rash or negligent manner; rather it suggests, at
the highest that the deceas ed did not take care while getting do wn. It was also urged that
the driver, in any case, could not see wh o was alighting or getting into the bus, as it was
the duty of the conductor to notify when the vehicle had to leave.
4.

Both the courts belo w have considered the sub missions made on behalf of the

petitioner accused. At one stage, doubt had been raised as to the identity of PW-4, i.e
whether he was really the person that witnessed the event, or so m e o n e else with the sam e
nam e; the argum ent did not find favour with the trial court, which held that there was no
doubt in that regard, and also that the petitioner was indeed the driver of the bus. In the
absenc e of any denial in regard, as to the identity of the driver of the bus, and the
particulars of the accident, the only question that has to be considered is whether the
courts belo w fell into any error in the appreciation of eviden c e or gravely erred on
application of law, as to warrant interferenc e under Section 397 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
Crl.Rev.No.350/06

2 of 4

5.

Section 397 of the Code, enables the court to exercise revisional jurisdiction. It is

a jurisdiction to interven e and correct errors of law, and jurisdiction, if such errors result
in miscarriage of justice. Though understandably cast in wide terms, such pow er cannot
be converted routinely into appellate, and certainly not second appellate jurisdiction. In

Bansi Lal v. Laxman Singh ((1986) 3 SCC 444, the Supreme Court held that the
court cannot substitute its view, in exercise of revisional jurisdiction, merely if it
thinks another conclusion is possible; there have to be strong grounds for it to
render such findings.

6.

The natural and material witnesses, i.e PW-4 and PW-5 have spoken to the

role of the petitioner, and ho w he callously accelerated the bus, even while the
passeng er had not fully alighted; she was crushed under the vehicle. Even if for the
mo m e nt, small discrepancies in the deposition were to be considered, those do not
fatally under min e the prosecution version. I am therefore satisfied that the findings
of the courts belo w do not call for interferenc e.

7.

The second question pertains to sentence. Here, the courts belo w took all

the considerations into account, and impos ed simple imprison m e nt for one year
and six months, respectively to the petitioner, both to be undergon e concurrently.
The maxi mu m sentence for the offence under Section 304- A is two years. I am of
the opinion that no special factors exist, to warrant interferenc e with the award of
Crl.Rev.No.350/06

3 of 4

sentence.
8.

In view of the abov e discussion, the revision petition cannot succe ed; it is

accordingly dismissed.
DATED: 31 January, 2007

Crl.Rev.No.350/06

S. RAVINDRABHAT, J

4 of 4

