5
*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Delivered on May 31, 2007
CRL.M.C. 6255/2005
MANISH BAJAJ

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Sunil Mehta, Advocate

versus
THE STATE

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Pawan Sharma, APP for State
Mr. Quyam-ud-din for respondent No.2

CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat (Open Court)
1.

The petitioner seeks intervention of this Court under Section 482 Code of

Criminal Procedure in respect of an order of the Learned Additional Sessions
Judge dated 25.11.05 whereby he cancelled the bail granted to the petitioner.
2.

The facts necessary for the decision in these proceedings are that the

petitioner got married to the second respondent on 31.01.01. A child was born
out of the wedlock.

The complainant/ second respondent lodged a First

Information Report (FIR) on 8th July, 2004 in the police station, Paschim Vihar
alleging commission of offences under Section 498A/ 406/323/341/506/34 IPC.

CRLMC-6255/05

1 OF 11

3.

The petitioner and his father was arrested on 10th July, 2004. His father

was released after three days on regular bail by the Learned Additional
Metropolitan Magistrate on 13.07.04. The petitioner's application for regular bail
was listed on 21.07.04. On that date, his father and the second respondent/
complainant apparently entered into a compromise. The petitioner's father held
himself out as his power of attorney. In terms of the compromise, it was agreed,
inter alia, that the petitioner and the complainant would move for mutual
consent divorce and also that the complainant/wife would be entitled to Rs. 16.5
lakhs in full and final settlement.
4.

The Court considered the bail application as well as the submissions on

behalf of the parties including the joint statement that compromise had been
arrived at. The applicant's bail order was allowed in the following terms.
“ 21.01.2004
Present:
Sh. M.S. Vinayak adv. for applicant
APP for State with IO
Complainant with Sh. M. Qamuddin
Both sides submit that parties have amicably settled. Photo
copy of the settlement deed has also been placed on record today.
In view of the settlement between the application and the
complainant aside, there is no opposition for allowing this
application. Hence, this bail application is allowed and applicant
is ordered to be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond in
the sum of Rs. 15,000/- with one surety of the like amount to the
satisfaction of the concerned trial Court. Copy of the order be
given dasti to the parties as prayed.”
It is not disputed that subsequent to the above order, the petitioner was
released from judicial custody, in terms of the order. The sum of Rs. 5 lakh was
paid on 21st July, 2004, on that date itself, to the respondent-wife.

CRLMC-6255/05

2 OF 11

5.

The complainant/wife through her counsel sought to effectuate the

settlement on 4th August, 2004. A notice was sent to the petitioner to cooperate
in the signing of the joint petition for mutual consent divorce under Section 13B
of the Hindu Marriage Act. Apparently, this did not meet with any success.
Therefore, the complainant applied to the Court on 14.09.04 for cancellation of
bail granted earlier.
6.

In the application under Section 439 (2) Cr.P.C., the contention sought to

be raised by the petitioner, inter alia, was that the time for effecting the
compromise had not matured, in the sense, that one year period stipulated under
Section 13 B of HMA had not elapsed.

This is apparent from the following

extract of the order of the trial Court dated 17.01.05:
“The accused persons have denied in their reply that they
have obtained the bail fraudulently or that they are not
interested in honouring the Compromise Deed and even in reply
to the complainant's legal notice Arjun Dev and Madhu Bajaj, the
executants of the Compromise Deed had stated that they were
always ready to honour the compromise by persuading their son
to file divorce petition which in any case could be filed only after
expiry of one years period of separation between husband, wife
which was to start from 03.07.04. It has also been stated in the
reply that the compromise Deed has been executed between the
complainant and her father in law and mother in law only while
her husband was in judicial custody and so he is not a party to
that compromise deed.
As far as the plea taken by accused Manish Bajaj, the
husband of the complainant, that the compromise deed is signed
by his parents only and he himself is not a party to that is
concerned I am of the view that, that plea is not acceptable
because even though he is not a signatory to that Deed and he
was in jail but when his bail application came up for
consideration before this Court on 21.07.04 it had been stated by
his counsel also that parties had compromise and as noted
already a copy of the compromise deed was also placed on
record. So, even if the husband himself had not signed the
CRLMC-6255/05

3 OF 11

compromise Deed which, as noted already is signed by his father
acting as his attorney he has to be considered as a part to that
compromise.”
7.

The trial Court apparently accepted the position of the present petitioner

that even though he was not the signatory of the deed, it was not his intention to
resile from the commitment and the petition for divorce could not have been filed
before the the expiry of the one year mandatory separation period between the
husband and the wife. On this ground, the Court felt that it need not go into the
question at that stage as to whether the accused, i.e. the present petitioner had
obtained the bail by playing a fraud upon it. The Court, therefore, rejected the
application. The operative part of the Court's order dated 17.01.05 is as follows:
“As far as the request of the complainant for cancelling the
bail of the accused persons on the ground of non-fulfillment of the
terms of compromise as noted above, is concerned I am of the
view that since it has been stated on behalf of the accused persons
that they never had any intention of not honouring their
commitment and that the petition for divorce cannot be filed
before the expiry of one year of separation between the husband
and wife and which position in law was not seriously disputed
from the side of complainant also I need not go into the question
at this stage as to whether the accused persons can be said to
have obtained the bail by playing fraud upon the Court and also
whether this court can cancel the bail or not on the ground of
non-fulfillment of the terms of the compromise Deed and all these
points can be considered if at all in future the accused persons
refused to honour the compromise Deed.
So, at this stage I dismiss the application of the
complainant for cancellation of bail.”
8.

The complainant/wife thereafter moved the Matrimonial Court under

Section 151 C.P.C. seeking to compel the petitioner to cooperate and sign the joint
petition to effectuate the compromise and have the dissolution effected.

CRLMC-6255/05

4 OF 11

However, the petitioner declined to do so. Therefore, another application under
Section 439 (2) was moved. This was eventually allowed by the Court on 25.11.05
by the impugned order.
9.

The material portion of the impugned order reads as follows:
“Perusal of the above orders shows that the Ld. Court
granted bail for the reason that the parties had agreed to part
their ways peacefully. Perusal of the record shows that one
counsel had represented all the respondents i.e. respondent
Manish Bajaj, his father, Arjun Dev Bajaj, mother Madhu Bajaj
and his sister Vinita Rawal. Settlement deed is also signed by
Arjun Dev Bajaj as the attorney of Manish Bajaj. It also bears
the signatures of two witnesses. Parents of Manish Bajaj named
Arjun Dev Bajaj and Madhu Bajaj have also separately signed
the agreement as second party. With the aforesaid submission
whether respondent Manish Bajaj wants this Court to proceed
against his father Arjun Dev Bajaj for falsely representing as his
attorney? Had he not appointed his counsel as attorney in
whose favour he signed vakaltnama and who he represented
him in the Court? Whether the conduct of the respondent
Manish Bajaj does not amount to contempt of Court? The
answer to the aforesaid questions is in the positive. Respondent
Manish Bajaj cannot be allowed to wriggle out of the
compromise on a false and too technical a ground when for the
purpose of grant of bail to himself and his family members, he
agreed to the settlement deed. In the circumstances,he has no
right to remain enlarged on bail. Present application for bail is
hence allowed. Bail granted to the respondent Manish Bajaj is
cancelled.”

10.

Learned counsel for the petitioner urged that the impugned order is

unsustainable because the Court virtually sat in review and exercised its power to
cancel the bail after earlier declining to do so on 17.01.05. It was contended that
the jurisdiction of the Court, to cancel bail has to be exercised with care and great
circumspection. Learned counsel relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court
reported as Gurcharan Singh & Ors. -v-Delhi Administration 1978 Crl.L.J. 129.
CRLMC-6255/05

5 OF 11

He submitted that the learned Judge who proceed and issued the impugned order
acted improperly. In this case, he relied upon Vikramjit Singh -v- State of
Madhya Pradesh 1992 Crl.L.J. 516. It was contended that the learned Judge who
earlier had the occasion to deal with the application under Section 439 (2) was
available when a similar request was made and propriety demanded that the
second application ought to have been referred to the previous Judge. This
course not having been taken, the impugned ordered suffered from an error of
law.

Learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court

reported as Harjeet Singh -v- State of Punjab 2002 Crl.L.J 571 in support of the
proposition that the application to cancel the bail granted earlier by recourse to
power under Section 439 (2) should be in extremely rare circumstances.
11.

Counsel next contended that the approach of the trial Court was untenable

and illegal. It was contended that the Court cannot use its power under Section
439 (2) to give effect to a prior compromise, particularly, where one party by his
conduct denies it or is unable to comply with its terms. In this case, he relied
upon the judgment reported as Avinash Arora & Ors. -v- U.T. of Chandigarh &
Anr. 2000 Crl.L.J. 4674. Reliance was also placed upon the judgment reported as
Biman Chatterjee -v- Sanchita Chatterjee & Anr. AIR 2004 SC 1699 to the effect
that the grant of bail in the Criminal Procedure Code is governed by appropriate
provisions which do not contemplate either grant or refusal on the basis of
assurance of a compromise. Therefore, the course adopted by the Court to cancel
the bail for violation of the condition of the compromise is impermissible and
cannot be upheld.
CRLMC-6255/05

6 OF 11

12.

Learned counsel for the respondent resisted the petition and contended

that a close reading of the various orders of the Court, namely, the final order
granting bail on 21.07.04, the subsequent order dated 17.01.05 and the impugned
order dated 25.11.05 bring about the reprehensible conduct of the petitioner. It
was contended by learned APP for State, Shri Pawan Sharma that though the
petitioner was not a party to the compromise which was executed on 22.07.04,
the fact that it was given effect to was never denied. In furtherance of that
compromise, the sum of Rs. 5 lakh was paid to the complainant and so recorded
by the parties and noticed by the Court.

Additionally in furtherance to the

compromise/agreement, the petitioner enjoyed the benefit of the bail order and
was set at liberty. Later when it was felt that he was seeking to resile from the
compromise, the complainant/ respondent approached the Court for cancellation
of bail. If there was no doubt as to the binding nature of the agreement, that was
clarified in the course of the second proceeding, that is application under Section
439 (2) when the petitioner unequivocally held out that he would comply with the
compromise and cooperate, once the mandatory one year period elapsed. Even
this did not happen, which compelled the complainant to approach the Court yet
again with Section 439 (2) application.
13.

Counsel submitted that the facts of this case show that the petitioner used

the judicial process to secure liberty, and when at the first instance was put to
notice, as to whether he wanted to comply with the terms, on which bail was
granted, he held out that the terms would be complied with. However, later he
resiled from it. In these circumstances, it was contended that the Court, through
CRLMC-6255/05

7 OF 11

the impugned order, exercised its discretion in a judicious and proper manner.
14.

The above narrative shows that there is not much dispute about the facts.

The petitioner and his father were detained on 10th April, 2004. The father was
released on bail on 13th April, 2004 .The petitioner continued to remain in
custody in the meanwhile. His father, being armed with a power of attorney on
his behalf, entered into a compromise on his behalf with the complainant/ wife
on 21.07.04 with the end of securing his release. Pursuant to the compromise
(which was noted in the order of 21st July, 2004) a sum of Rs. 5 lakhs was handed
over to the complainant. The petitioner was released from judicial custody.
15.

The order of 21st July, 2004 shows no discussion on the merits. This, to a

great extent, leads credence to the arguments by the respondent that the bail
application went unopposed on the ground of the compromise. The petitioner
got bail and continued to be at liberty. When the time came to effectuate the
settlement, he took the position that one year period had not elapsed. This
position was reiterated in the first cancellation of bail proceeding. Indeed that
formed the basis for the Court to reject that application by holding that the
application was pre-mature and that the Court was not deciding the matter on the
merits since the one year period had not elapsed.
16.

It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that if the complainant had

any grievance about dismissal of her application on 17.01.05, she should have
carried the matter to its logical conclusion and approached this Court in revision.
I do not agree with that logic. A litigant is expected to fall in line with the Court's
order.

The approach of the Court while declining the cancellation of bail

CRLMC-6255/05

8 OF 11

application through its order dated 17.01.05 was in consonance with reason and
logic. The Court felt, and perhaps justly, that since the decision taken by the
present petitioner that the one year period should expire in accord with law, it
was pre-mature to judge whether he would or would not comply with the terms
embodied in the bail order. Therefore, it declined to go into the merits of the
cancellation of bail application.
17.

The complainant has to be viewed from the point of view of a beleaguered

litigant who is expected to take reasonable positions. The view taken by the trial
Court on 17.01.05 cannot be held to be unjustified. Therefore, her adherence to
the view as it were of the trial Court can neither be called unreasonable nor held
to be dis-entitling her to move the second application under Section 439 (2).
18.

The main argument as far as the legality of the impugned order is

concerned, was on the ground that learned Judge did not exercise his discretion
judiciously. That apart, the other serious objection has been that the Court
should not try and give effect to compromise embodied as terms of bail order.
However, the judgments have to be viewed in the context of the facts presented
before the Court.

There can be no quarrel with the proposition that the

consideration which weigh with the Court in deciding applications under Section
439 (2) are slightly different from those that have to be viewed in the context of a
regular bail application. Yet, what is of importance is that representations held
out, by and on behalf of the petitioner, particularly, in the course of regular bail
application inhibited the parties that is respondent as well as the prosecution
from opposing the bail. Therefore, projecting a compromise as a ground of bail,
CRLMC-6255/05

9 OF 11

has to necessarily be seen from a different perspective. The two judgments cited,
in my considered opinion, were rendered in the context of entirely different
circumstances. In Avinash Arora's case, the Supreme Court was confronted with
the circumstance where the facts spoke for themselves. The accused was directed
to deposit a sum of Rs. 10 lakhs which was considered far too onerous. In the
subsequent judgment, namely, Biman Chatterjee's case, there was some dispute
as to whether there was any compromise at all. In this case, such a doubt does
not exist; if there did exist any doubt, two circumstances virtually obliterated it.
One, the petitioner himself agreed to abide by the terms when he resisted the first
cancellation application, which is recorded in the order dated 17.01.05; two, the
sum of Rs. 5 lakh was indeed paid and consequently he was released from judicial
custody.
19.

The power under Section 482 has an inherent power. It can undoubtedly

be invoked in a wide variety of circumstances. Its ambit is wide, and the reach of
the Court, in exercise of jurisdiction, limited only to the extent of express
provisions, or implied limitations. Yet, one overwhelming consideration has to
inform exercise of the power, wherever, the Court chooses to do so, i.e. to secure
the ends of justice. The facts of this case have pointed to the petitioner using the
judicial process, to secure bail, on the strength of representation about a
compromise.

The complainant and the prosecution did not contest the

application for bail, on that basis. The petitioner enjoyed the order, and was
released.

Further as per the compromise, Rs. 5 lakhs were paid to the

complainant. When the first application under Section 439 (2) was moved, the
CRLMC-6255/05

10 OF 11

petitioner expressed his willingness to adhere to the terms of the agreement, but
according to the provision of Section 13B, Hindu Marriage Act. When the period,
according to that provision expired, he resiled, and refused to honour his word.
He now seeks intervention under Section 482 Cr.P.C. after the the Court
cancelled his bail. These facts shown that the petitioner has no regard to the orders
of Court, and commitments made to it. He used the judicial process, secured bail, on

pretences, made a show of compliance with conditions, and when faced with
consequences of his conscious and deliberate actions, seeks intervention of this
Court. Exercise of inherent power, in the facts of this case, can never aid the
interests of justice - it would thwart and subvert ends of justice.
20.

For these reasons, the petition must fail. It is accordingly dismissed.

S.RAVINDRA BHAT, J
MAY 31, 2007
as

CRLMC-6255/05

11 OF 11

