*
+

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Reserved on July 23, 2007
Delivered on July 30, 2007
CRL.REV.P. 482/2003
SUNIL PANDEY

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Puneet Mittal, Advocate

versus
CUSTOMS

..... Respondent
Through Mr. Satish Aggarwal, Advocate

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.

In this revision an order of the learned Additional Metropolitan Magistrate dated

21.03.03 charging the present petitioner for committing the offence punishable under
Section 135 (1) (a) of the Customs Act, has been assailed.
2.

According to the complainant/Customs Department, on 18.07.97, a

passenger disembarking from a Singapore flight was carrying a black zipper bag. His
name was Satpal Singh. He was a Malaysian passport holder. He allegedly entered the
customs area and proceeded to the green channel. Upon being questioned about whether
he had any dutiable items like gold etc. he responded in the negative. The X-ray
Crl. Rev. P. 482/2003

1 of 8

screening of his hand bag did not indicate anything but the metal detector indicated
presence of some objects on his person. After giving notice, he was searched in the
presence of two witnesses. He was found wearing a specially designed bag of velvet
cloth underneath his clothes. These contained seven gold bars of foreign origin of one kg.
each. The contraband was valued at Rs.31.5 lakhs and Rs.41.67 lakhs. In addition, a
visiting card bearing the name of “Monica Sarees” was recovered.
3.

.

During the course of investigations, the said accused Satpal Singh recorded a

statement under Section 108 of the Customs Act. The material portion of that statement
reads as follows:
“On enquiry, I state that the gold belongs to one
Malaysian, Abdul Mohammad having business in both
Malaysia and Singapore. This gold was to be given to one
person Sunil in Delhi. This is the same person whose
name appears on the reverse of the visiting card of Monika
Sarees. This card was given to me when I came to India a
couple of years ago and had gone to Chandni Chowk to
buy some sarees for my wife and the shopkeeper must have
given me its card and when I started carrying gold for
Abdul Mohammad. He told me that the person named
Sunil will meet me at the Airport and by telling his name
take delivery of the gold from me whenever I carried gold,
Sunil used to meet me outside the Airport and take the gold
from me in the taxi and used to drop me at Sis Ganj
Gurudwara, where I used to stay. I do not know the
address or telephone number of Sunil. Sunil is about 30
years, fair, slim of average height with a moustach and he
has brown eyes.
I am just a carrier for Abdul Mohammad. I used to
get fully paid ticket and expenses paid and about five
hundred Ringett per kilo of Gold. This time also received
the free ticket and expenses given by Abdul Mohammad
once I reached Malaysia for carrying nine kilo of gold.
This time also Sunil was to meet me outside the Airport
Crl. Rev. P. 482/2003

2 of 8

and take away the gold. I have stayed in Sis Ganj
Gurudwara and was to go back on 23.07.99 by SQ 407.”
I knew Abdul Mohammad since last 7 years
because he has business. The masjor India Kuala Lumpur.
I first came to know him when he hired my van. I used to
drive the van myself at that time he used to come acess....
and knew that I was not making enough money. About two
years back, he suggested that if I carry gold for him, he
would given me good money and I agreed. Whenever he
wanted to send the gold to India, he used to call me at his
office in Kuala Lumpur in the name of S.M. Mohammad
and gave the gold to me along with enough money to buy
air ticket and to carry my expenses. I used to buy the ticket
of my own and informed Abdul Mohammad about the date
and time of the flight. This time also, Abdul Mohammad
give me gold on 16.07.97 and gave me money to buy air
ticket.... on 17.07.97 by SQ 45/SQ 408 and back by SQ 407
on 23.07.97. I expected Sunil to meet me outside Airport...
The custom officer took me outside the Airport as I
told them that Sunil may be waiting outside, I strolled
about for sometime with the custom officer watching me
from a distance. But Sunil did not come. After waiting for
sometime, the officer escorted me back to the custom
room.”
4. The employer of the present petitioner, (who was arrayed as second accused) was
summoned for his statement. He recorded that the petitioner was about 29-30 years
and he worked as a Salesman in his shop. According to him the petitioner was married
and had children; and all his brothers were also residing with them.
5.Mr. Puneet Mittal, learned counsel urged that the materials on record were so scanty
that the Court was not justified in framing the charge, as it did. Counsel submitted that
the entire justification for the impugned order appeared to be statement of the coaccused Satpal Singh. That was inadmissible so far as the petitioner was concerned
and in any event if the matter went to trial, it could never be the sole foundation for a
Crl. Rev. P. 482/2003

3 of 8

conviction.

Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of Supreme Court as

Haricharan Kurmi -v- State of Bihar AIR 1964 SC 1184. That was a judgment by
Constitution Bench; it held that the confession of a co-accused person cannot be
treated as substantive evidence and can be pressed into service only when the Court is
inclined to accept other evidence; if it feels the necessity of seeking assurance in
support of its conclusion deducible from it. He also relied upon the judgment of this
Court in Om Prakash Baksh -v- State 1989 Crl.L.J. 1207.
6.Learned counsel urged that the only material to establish a link between the present
petitioner and a co-accused was the allegedly recovered visiting card. That objective
material apart from the inadmissible statement if taken together could establish
nothing. In these circumstances, requiring the petitioner to stand trial would not only
be a futile exercise but may put him to the rigours of an avoidable proceeding.
7.Mr. Satish Aggarwal, learned counsel contended that the Court while framing the
charges was alive to all the materials. It carefully weighed the arguments led on behalf
of the petitioner and yet proceeded to frame charges. In these circumstances, this
Court should be slow in interfering with its order.
8.Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of this Court reported as Paramjit Singh -vCommissioner of Customs 2002 (2) JCC 916 and contended that in identical
circumstances the charges framed by the trial Court on the basis of confessional
statements of co-accused in a case of recovery of 27.17 kgs. of gold, were upheld.
Learned counsel relied upon the judgment reported as Naresh Sukhwani -v- Union of
India 1996 SCC (Crl.) 76. According to his submission, the statements of co-accused
Crl. Rev. P. 482/2003

4 of 8

under Section 108 constitutes relevant and admissible evidence. Therefore, the Court
would be justified in framing a charge. It was also contended that the Court should not
interfere with the impugned order, on the basis of relative merits of the evidence. If
there is some material - as indeed there is in the present case, justifying the charge, its
worth, should not be looked into under Section 227 and 228 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.

It was lastly contended that the Court was also influenced by the

petitioners conduct; he did not cooperate and join the investigations at any stage. This
was taken into consideration by the trial Court which noticed that the petitioner though
served with notices under Section 108 did not respond and report to the concerned
officer. He further submitted that the co-accused was absconding and not appearing in
the trial.
9.

It is no doubt true that in Haricharan Kurmi 's case the Supreme Court held that a

confession should be taken into consideration if it is for the purpose of reassuring that the
other materials indicate guilt of the accuse. Yet, in a later decision, of a Constitution
Bench, i.e Illias v. Collector of Customs AIR 1970 SC 1065 the Supreme Court held that
Customs authorities have been invested under the Act with many powers of a police
officer in matters relating to arrest, investigation and search, which the Customs Officers
did not have under the Sea Customs Act. Even though the Customs Officers have been
invested with many of the powers which an officer in charge of a police station exercises
while investigating a cognizable offence, they do not, thereby, become police officers
within the meaning of Section 25 of the Evidence Act. So, confessional statements made
by accused persons to Customs Officials would be admissible in evidence against them.
Crl. Rev. P. 482/2003

5 of 8

10.

In a more recent decision of a three judge decision, K.I. Pavunny -vs- Asst

Collector (HQ) Central Excise, 1997 (3) SCC 721, the Supreme Court noted the law as
follows:
"In Haroon Haji Abdulla v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1968
SC 832 : (1968) 2 SCR 641], for the offence of conspiracy
punishable under Section 120-B of IPC and Section 171-A of
the Sea Customs Act, the question arose whether the
confession of the co-accused who died pending trial before
delivery of the judgment, could be used against a co-accused ?
This Court considered the evidence of an accomplice together
with the statements of two accused recorded under the Act,
viz., one Bengali and another Noor Mohammad. How and
what evidence could be relied upon against the other accused
was the question. One of the accused who gave the evidence
was an accomplice. In that case, it was held in para 9 of the
judgment that the "argument here is that the cautionary rule
applies, whether there be one accomplice or more and that the
confessing co-accused cannot be placed higher than an
accomplice". On consideration of the evidence, this Court had
held in para 13 that the
"Customs Authorities served notices upon various suspects
and recorded their statements in answer to these notices. The
statements of Kashinath (Ex. A) and Bengali (Ex. Z-27) were
recorded on the 15th, the former by Karnik (PW 24) and the
latter by Rane (PW 26). These statements were recorded
simultaneously or almost simultaneously. The statement of
Noor Mohammad (Ex. Z-17) was recorded by Randive (PW
22) on August 19. As there was no gap of time between the
statements of Kashinath and Bengali and the incident was
only a few hours' old, it is impossible that the officers could
have tutored them to make statements which agree in so many
details".
On consideration of the evidence it was held that
"although Noor Mohammad's statement was not used by the
High Court and we have reluctantly left it out of consideration
also, nothing was shown to us to destroy the conclusion about
the truth of accomplice evidence. If it was, we would have
Crl. Rev. P. 482/2003

6 of 8

considered seriously whether we should not take it into
consideration. Further Haroon himself was also served with a
notice like others. He was unwilling to make a statement till he
had seen what the others had said. This may well be regarded
as peculiar conduct in a man who now claims that he was not
concerned with the smuggling".
The normal rule that accomplice's evidence requires
corroboration on material particulars from independent
evidence was not applied. Thus this Court had accepted the
accomplice's evidence and the statements of others were used
to confirm the conviction. Normally mens rea is an essential
ingredient of the crime but this Court in the case of offences
punishable under Section 14 of the Food Adulteration Act or
Section 7 of the Essential Commodities Act, had held that
mens rea is not an essential ingredient in proof of statutory
offences.
28. In State of Gujarat v. Acharya D. Pandey [(1970) 3 SCC
183 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 1] while holding that even in statutory
offences in certain circumstances, unless the statute excludes
expressly or by necessary implication, mens rea is an essential
ingredient. It was held that the offences under the Bombay
Public Trust Act, 1950 were not of serious nature. It was held
that mens rea was not an essential ingredient for proving the
commission of offences. In Director of Enforcement v.
M.C.T.M. Corpn. (P) Ltd. [(1996) 2 SCC 471 : 1996 SCC
(Cri) 344] a two-Judge Bench was to consider whether means
rea is an essential ingredient in the proceedings taken under
Section 23(1) (a) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act. It
was held that mens rea is not an essential ingredient to
establish contravention under Sections 10(1) and 23(1) (a) of
that Act. It is not necessary in this case to broach further
whether mens rea is an essential ingredient for proving the
commission of the offence under Sections 135 of the Act or
Sections 85 and 86 of the Gold (Control) Act since none has
raised such contention. What is required to be considered is
whether voluntary statement, Ex. P-4 given by the appellant
constitutes the sole basis to prove the commission of the
offence under Section 135(1) (i) of the Act. "
11.

Though the above decisions were not adverted to in Paramjit Singh by this Court,

Crl. Rev. P. 482/2003

7 of 8

the law appears to be that there is no absolute bar about the use of confessions of a coaccused in proceedings relating to offences under the Customs Act. Although the
petitioner's grievance of having to face a trial may to some extent be justified, yet the
circumstance that he did not respond to the notices- a factor noticed by the trial court, and
the nature of the recoveries, constrain me to conclude that it would be unsafe for the court
to surmise that he is blameless, at this stage. The added factor is that the co-accused has
not appeared in the proceedings.
12.

In view of the above discussion, I am satisfied that the impugned order does not

suffer from any illegality or unreasonableness in approach; the charges framed against the
petitioner do not require interference. However, having regard to the peculiar features of
the case, i.e. the incident having occurred almost a decade ago, it would be in the interests
of justice that the trial is concluded as early as possible; in any case within 10 months
from today. The trial court is so directed.
13.

The petition is therefore dismissed, but subject to the directions in the foregoing

para.

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE
JULY 30th, 2007

Crl. Rev. P. 482/2003

8 of 8

