51
*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of decision : August 31st, 2007

•

W.P.(C) 6425/2007
SAHU REFRIGERATION INDUSTRIES LTD.
..... Petitioner
Through Mr.Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. P.S.Bindra, Advocate
versus
DELHI POLLUTION CONTROL COMMITTEE & ANR
...Respondent
Through Ms. Aruna Tikku, Advocate for R-2

CORAM:

Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment.?

yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

% Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat: (Open Court)
1.

Issue notice. Mr. B.B. Gupta accepts notice for the Delhi Pollution Control

Committee; Mr. B.B. Gautam, Advocate accepts notice on behalf of Ms. Aruna
Tiku, for the Government of NCT of Delhi. Counsel for the respondents state that
they have the original files. With consent of counsel for all the parties in this
petition, this case was heard finally.
2.

In these proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the writ

petitioner's common grievance is that the Delhi Pollution Control Committee, the
1 of 6

WP(C) 6425/2007

first respondent, withdrew authorization and permission to engage in industrial
activity, in terms of The Environment Protection Act, 1986, the Air (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and the Hazardous Waste (Management and
Handling) Rules, 1989.
3.

The petitioners are engaged in various industrial activities, such as re-

rolling, pickling and/or annealing of Stainless steel sheets. They had earlier been
granted licenses and permissions, as applicable under various laws and regulations,
such as the the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; the Environment Protection Act,
1986 and the Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989. The
Delhi Pollution Control Committee, by impugned orders in identical terms, in
almost all cases, dated 7-8-2007, intimated that such licenses, permissions and
authorizations were withdrawn.
4.

Mr. Sandeep Sethi, learned senior counsel submitted that the impugned

orders are unsustainable, because they were not preceded with show cause notice
or reasonable opportunity. If there were any deficiencies, the respondents should
have notified them and given opportunities to rectify them. Instead, they
unceremoniously proceeded to withdraw the licenses and permissions, under the
various Acts and regulations. Such action is violative of principles of natural
justice, and the court therefore, has to interfere, in exercise of judicial review

2 of 6

WP(C) 6425/2007

powers.
5.

Mr. B.B. Gupta, learned counsel for the Delhi Pollution Control Committee,

justified the impugned orders. He submitted that the units of all the petitioners
were inspected. Though the petitioners were not separately notified the
deficiencies existing, which amounted to violation of environmental standards
prescribed by various enactments and regulations, they knew of it all times.
Counsel submitted that being aware that the units were inspected, the petitioners
had a duty to inform themselves about the shortcomings.
6.

Learned counsel for the respondents further submitted that the question of

enforcement of environmental standards is an important one and has acquired
public importance. The Supreme Court had by various directions required setting
of Local Area Committees, which could visit the sites and make recommendations.
On the basis of information collected, the Delhi Pollution Control Committee, a
statutory body created under the Environment Protection Act, determined that the
cases of the petitioners, few among the 100 plus inspected by it, required to be
treated immediately, calling for invocation of emergency powers. In these
circumstances, prior notice or hearing was not necessary.
7.

The above facts reveal that the petitioners are engaged in manufacturing

activities which require environmental clearance under the Air (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,

3 of 6

WP(C) 6425/2007

1974; the Environment Protection Act, 1986 and the Hazardous Waste
(Management and Handling) Rules, 1989. Those clearances were forthcoming.
The Delhi Pollution Control Committee, pursuant to inspections, said to have
taken place in May, 2007, issued the impugned orders, resulting in closure or
direction to close these industrial units. Indisputably, the action was not preceded
by show cause or hearing to the petitioners.
8.

It is well settled that every administrative or executive order, which affects

or adversely impacts on the rights of an individual, should be preceded by a fair
procedure, thereby implying notice, a right to represent against the proposed action
and some opportunity of hearing. The content of such right would vary from
situation to situation; every case may not warrant a personal hearing. (Ref Charan
Lal Sahu vs. Union of India etc. AIR 1990 SC 1480; Gadde Venkateswara Rao vs.
Govt. of A.P. & Ors AIR 1966 SC 828; Canara Bank and others vs. Debasis Das
& Ors 2003 (4) SCC 557). Natural justice can be dispensed with if the injury to
public interest is imminent or irreversible, if it is followed. It has been held in
Liberty Oil Mills -vs- Union of India 1984 (3) SCC 465 that the executive or public
agency can seek recourse to emergency powers to prevent harm or injury to public
interest wherever power exists, by making ex-parte or interim orders, interdicting
the rights of individuals, pending final administrative or statutory determination.
9.

4 of 6

In these cases, as noticed earlier, the impugned action was not preceded by

WP(C) 6425/2007

any, much less rudimentary or essential hearing. The orders are admittedly final;
they are not expressed to be interim measures. It may be that the petitioners were
aware of inspection carried out by the respondents; that cannot lead to a
presumption that they were aware of the latter's intention to issue directions for
closure. Moreover, there is admittedly a considerable time lag between the
inspection, carried out in May, 2007 and the impugned orders. This too, shows
prima facie that there was no such urgency or emergency, which could be termed
as “imminent” injury to public interest if rules of natural justice were followed.
10.

For the above reasons, the petition is entitled to succeed. However, instead

of quashing the impugned orders, I am of the opinion, having regard to the nature
of the concerns expressed by the respondents, that the orders, instead of being
treated as directions or orders of closure, and/or withdrawal of authorizations/
cancellations of license, they should be treated as show cause notices. The
petitioners shall file their reply to such show cause notices within 3 days. The
respondent Delhi Pollution Control Committee shall grant minimum opportunity of
hearing to the petitioners and thereafter issue speaking orders. The entire process
shall be completed within three weeks. Till then, the status quo as existing in
respect of the petitioners' industrial units shall continue; they shall not be treated as
closed units.
11.

5 of 6

Subject to the above directions, all rights and contentions of the parties are

WP(C) 6425/2007

hereby reserved. The petition is disposed off in the above terms without any order
as to costs.

August 31st,2007

(S.RAVINDRA BHAT)
JUDGE

mm

6 of 6

WP(C) 6425/2007

