*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.1804/2008

%

Date of Decision : March 05, 2008

Raj Pal Singh (Deceased)
Through his LRs

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Rama Shankar,
Advocate
Versus

M/s. Ayodhya Textile Mills & Anr.

.…Respondents

Through : Nemo
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioner is aggrieved of an award dated 4.5.2006

passed

in

ID No.5/06/1989

by

the Labour

Court

No.XII,

Karkardooma Courts, Delhi. It is the petitioner's case that the
decision of the Labour Court to the effect that the workman had
failed to prove the fact that he had worked continuously for a
period of 240 days in 12 calender months is perverse and has
occasioned

a

failure

of

justice

of

a

nature

warranting

interference in the exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution of India by this Court.
WP(C) No.1804/2008

Page 1 of 7

2.

A reference was made by the Secretary (Labour), Govt. of

National Capital Territory for adjudication of a Labour dispute in
exercise of power conferred by Section 10(1)(c), 10(1)(d) and
12(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 read with the relevant
notifications on the subject in the following terms;
“Whether the services of Sh. Rajpal Singh
have been terminated illegally and/or
unjustifiably by the management and if
so, to what relief is he entitled and what
directions are necessary in this respect?”.
Consequent upon notice being issued by the Labour Court, the
management contested the claim by the workman and filed its
written statement.

There, inter alia, the management took a

preliminary objection to the effect that the petitioner/ workman
was engaged from time to time for short durations whenever
required, and that the workman was engaged for a period of
three months in the last instance upto 31st July, 1988, after
which

the

services

automatically.

In

of

the

other

workman

words,

the

came

to

an

end

management

has

categorically denied that the workman had completed 240 days
of service in a year as required under Section 25-F of the
Industrial Disputes Act. Counsel for the petitioner has stressed
on the fact that in disputes raised by another group of workmen
concerning the same management; by another award; which
was rendered in ID No.277/1993, the Labour Court had
concluded that the management had terminated the services of
two other employees, namely Bali Ram and Bhagwan, illegally
and unjustifiably and they have been held entitled to the relief
WP(C) No.1804/2008

Page 2 of 7

of full back wages and other benefits. He states that the case of
the petitioner in the instant matter is identical, and that the
Labour Court ought to have treated the petitioner on the same
footing. He states that the written statement filed in both the
cases are similar. There also, the management had alleged that
it used to engage those workmen for short periods whenever
required. Consequently, if, in one case, the Labour Court had
returned a finding that those workmen who happened to be coworkers of the petitioners, were entitled to full back wages, the
petitioner should also have been granted the same relief. To my
mind, the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
too simplistic and cannot stand scrutiny. It is up to a party to
raise whatever defence it thinks is appropriate in a given
circumstances of a case. It might also raise a similar or identical
defence in two different cases. What really matters is whether
that party is then able to prove its defence in any of the cases.
The facts and circumstances of each case; including the terms
and nature of appointment, being unique, it is entirely possible
that in one case, the defence taken by the management may be
borne out by the evidence that comes on the record whereas in
another case, it may fail to prove its defence. If that happens, it
is but natural that the outcome of the two cases would be
different.
3.

Here also, a perusal of the other award in ID No.277/1993

which was rendered by the Labour Court No.III, Karkardooma
Courts, Delhi, shows that specific evidence has come before the
WP(C) No.1804/2008

Page 3 of 7

Court by way of cross examination of the management witness
to establish that the workmen in that case had actually worked
for 237½ days and 230 days respectively. It was also found that
in addition to these days, the number of days that ought to have
been added to this figure in terms of Section 25-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act for deciding as to whether the period of
240 days mentioned in Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes
Act

has been satisfied, were not included.

circumstances,

it

was

held

that

the

statements

In those
of

the

management witness which show that the two workmen, Mr.
Bali Ram and Sh. Bhagwan had worked for 2½ days and 10 days
less, respectively, than the figure of 240 days, were not factually
correct. In that case, the Labour Court obviously felt that once
the requirement of Section 25-B of the Industrial Disputes Act
was complied with and leave on account of sickness, weekly
holidays, festival leave, leave with wages, national holidays and
days of lock out and lay off, if any, are added to these figures,
the figure of 240 days as required under Section 25-F would be
satisfied. It was for this reason that the learned Labour Court
had concluded that, “the evidence on record is established that
both these workmen had worked for a period of more than 240
days in a year with the management.”
4.

Averments of the management to the contrary were

therefore rejected. Coming to the case at hand, I find that after
the reference was received by the Labour Court, the specific
issue to the effect, “whether the workman had worked for a
WP(C) No.1804/2008

Page 4 of 7

continuous period of 240 days in 12 calender months?” was
framed by the Labour Court. A perusal of the treatment of this
issue by the award of the Labour Court shows that here also, the
Labour Court has applied itself to all the facts and circumstances
that have emerged at the trial. However, the Labour Court has
found that the burden to prove that he had worked for 240 days
of service in one calender year is on the workman and it was for
the workman to initially discharge this burden.

The learned

Labour Court also took note of all the decision cited on behalf of
the management and in particular the decision in the case of
Sports Authority of India Vs. Sports Authority of India
Kamgar Union & Ors. 2005 LLR 541, Delhi as well as Jairaj
N. Shetty Vs. Union of India 2005 LLR 1095, Bombay.
There, the learned Court has noted that it is primarily for the
reason that the onus shifts at different stages upon different
parties and that to begin with, the party who claims the
existence of a certain set of facts must first discharge the onus
placed upon him. This must be done by that party by leading
evidence to that effect. Once that is done, the right to rebuttal
is open to the party contesting the existence of those facts. This
is a normal rule of evidence, general principles of which are
applicable to proceedings before the Labour Court also.
5.

An examination of the facts pleaded in this case, and in

particular, paragraph 22 of the impugned judgment, shows that
the workman had placed on record copies of his attendance
cards.

However, a perusal of these cards for the period

WP(C) No.1804/2008

Page 5 of 7

spanning more than 10 years, i.e. from 1978 to 1988, does not
demonstrate that the workman had completed 240 days of
service in any particular year.

This fact is not disputed by

counsel for the petitioner. I find that the learned Labour Court
has also noted that the petitioner has not been able to explain
the reasons for non-production of attendance cards for the
remaining period of service which might have shown that the
workman had worked for 240 days in each calender year.

In

other words, the facts placed on record by the workman do not
reach the magic figure of 240 days even if Sundays and other
holidays are included in it as per the mandate of Section 25B, as
also of various decisions on the subject.

In addition, the

workman had also specifically stated in his cross examination
that he does not remember how many days he had worked in
each year with the management. It was for these reasons that
the Labour Court concluded that the workman had failed to
discharge the onus placed upon him and consequently, the ratio
of the decisions relied upon by counsel for the workman were of
no assistance.

It was in these circumstances that the Labour

Court concluded that the workman was not entitled to any relief.
In my view, rightly so, as stated by Maxim ‘Ei incumbit
probatio, qui dicit, non qui negat’ – The proof lies upon him
who

affirms,

not

upon

him

who

denies.

Under

the

circumstances, I do not find any perversity or infirmity in the
impugned award of a nature that would have occasioned failure
of justice warranting of interference under Article 226 of the
WP(C) No.1804/2008

Page 6 of 7

Constitution of India.
6.

Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.

March 05, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.1804/2008

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J

Page 7 of 7

