*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.2676/2008

%

Date of Decision : April 01, 2008

Sukh Ram Sharma

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Sanjoy Ghosh,
Advocate
Versus

State Bank of India

.…Respondent
Through : Mr. Anurag Mathur,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioner, Sukh Ram Sharma, has assailed the award

passed in ID No.39/2002 by the Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal
cum Labour Court No.1 on 13.03.2007, whereby the punishment
of discharge from service imposed upon him was upheld.
2.

On

01.09.1967,

the

petitioner

Messenger with the respondent.

was

employed

as

a

He was thereafter upgraded

and assigned the duties of a Cashier.

On 06.05.1992, the

Disciplinary Authority placed the petitioner under suspension

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 1 of 9

after it was noticed that cash under his charge was short by
Rs.24,870/-.

Criminal proceedings were also initiated against

the petitioner. He was convicted under Section 405/409 IPC by
Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkardooma Court, Shahdara, Delhi
vide judgment dated 27.2.1997 and was sentenced to undergo
simple imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/and in default to undergo a further simple imprisonment for
three months. In appeal, the Additional Sessions Judge modified
the sentence by an order dated 27.9.1999 and the petitioner
was directed to be released on probation of good conduct on
furnishing a personal bond of Rs.5,000/-. However, the petitioner
was discharged from the service of the bank, on 26.11.1999, by
the respondent, on the grounds of moral turpitude.
3.

The petitioner preferred an appeal against the above order

issued by the Disciplinary Authority imposing upon him the
penalty of discharge from the service of the bank in terms of
para 521(2) (b) of the Shastri Award dated 29.3.2000.

The

action of the Disciplinary Authority was confirmed by the
Appellate

Authority

and

the

appeal

was

dismissed

on

03.05.2000.
4.

Thereafter, an industrial dispute was raised by the

petitioner and a reference was made by the Government of
India, Ministry of Labour on 28.5.2002 in the following terms :
“Whether the action of Assistant General
Manager, State Bank of India, Region-IV,
Delhi Zonal Office in imposing punishment
of discharge from bank's service w.e.f.

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 2 of 9

26.11.1999 to Sh. Sukh Ram Sharma, ExAssistant, Nand Nagari Branch on the
basis of order of Additional Sessions Judge
in Crl. A.No.50/98 given on 29.9.1999 is
justified? If not, what relief and benefit
the workman is entitled?”
After considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the
Labour

Court

held

that

mere

release

on

probation,

i.e.

suspension of conviction during the period of probation, does
not

exonerate

the

claimant

of

a

proved

misappropriation or from departmental action.

charge

of

It was further

held that no detailed and further enquiry is required to be
conducted when the charge sheeted officer has admitted that
he was convicted of the offence of misappropriation. It held the
order of discharge of the petitioner as legal and valid.
5.

One of the contentions raised by the petitioner in the

present petition is that although he was held responsible for
shortage in the cash to the tune of Rs.24,870/-, the same
amount was deposited by his wife on the very next day with the
respondent bank; and that therefore, no loss has been caused to
the bank. According to him, the learned Industrial Adjudicator
failed to appreciate this aspect. To my mind, the fact that the
petitioner's wife reimbursed the amount in question the next
day, is wholly irrelevant to the fact in issue, which was, whether
the

said

amount

entrusted

misappropriated by him or not.

to

the

petitioner,

was

Once this is demonstrated to

have happened, the offence is complete. At the very least, it is
gross misconduct. It is a settled fact that the highest standards

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 3 of 9

of honesty are expected from the employees of a bank who deal
with public money. In the case of Damoh Panna Sagar Rural
Regional Bank and Anr. Vs. Munna Lal Jain JT 2005 (1) SC
70,

the

employee

withdrew

some

money

unauthorizedly

because of an emergency, but deposited the same with 24%
interest with the bank. The Disciplinary Authority agreed with
the findings of the Enquiry Officer and passed the order of his
removal. In appeal, the said order of removal was maintained.
While a Single Judge of the High Court upheld that decision;
however, on the grounds, inter alia, that there was no allegation
that the employee had committed any kind of delinquency
earlier and there was no loss caused to the bank, the Division
Bench concluded that the Board should be compassionate and
gracious enough to reconsider the employee's case, and to pass
any punishment other than dismissal, removal or termination.
While setting aside this judgment of the High Court, the
Supreme Court observed as follows;
“a bank officer is required to exercise
higher standards of honesty and integrity.
He deals with money of the depositors and
the customers. Every officer/employee of
the bank is required to take all possible
steps to protect the interests of the Bank
and to discharge his duties with utmost
integrity, honesty, devotion and diligence
and to do nothing which is unbecoming of a
bank officer. Good conduct and discipline
are inseparable from the functioning of
every officer/employee of the bank. As was
observed by this Court in Disciplinary
Authority-Cum-Regional Manager Vs.
Nikunja Bihari Patnaik 1996 (9) SCC
69, there is no defence available to say that

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 4 of 9

there was no loss or profit resulted in case,
when the officer/employee acted without
authority.”
The observation made in Nikunja Bihari Patnaik's case
(supra), was reiterated by the Supreme Court in State Bank of
India Vs. Ramesh Dinkar Punde (2006) 7 SCC 212 and
Chairman and MD, United Commercial Bank Vs. P.C.
Kakkar (2003) 4 SCC 364. Similarly in State Bank of India
Vs. Bela Bagchi (2005)7 SCC 435, the delinquent employee
was dismissed for not depositing the amount received from an
account holder, even though the account holder subsequently
withdrew his grievance and no loss was caused to the bank.
Even in Suresh Pathrella Vs. Oriental Bank of Commerce
(2006) 10 SCC 572, it was held that misappropriation of
customer's money, even though no loss was caused to the bank,
will nonetheless be a misconduct which does not warrant a
lenient view.
Although a much higher standard of probity and honesty is
required by bank officials entrusted with their depositors'
money, even by the standard of ordinary criminal law, the fact
that the accused made good the loss either by refunding the
amount or replacing the goods in question, whether before or
after the loss was discovered, has never been accepted either
as an adequate defence or even a mitigating factor.
6.

As regards the contention of the petitioner that he had no

intention of defrauding the bank; by misappropriating the

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 5 of 9

money, the petitioner has undeniably breached the trust and
confidence reposed in him by his employer. The fact that the
delinquent officer refunded or replaced the money, or intended
to do so, is wholly irrelevant to the issue. Once the conclusion
that the amount was misappropriated is reached, as was done
by the Criminal Court in this case, nothing remains.

In Ram

Narain Popli Vs. CBI (2003) 3 SCC 641, the Supreme Court
was of the view that even if there is an intention to restore the
property misappropriated at some future point of time, such a
misappropriation is nonetheless dishonest. In any event, there
is no gainsaying the fact that the act of the petitioner clearly
amounted to misconduct. As pronounced by this Court in R.P.
Chhabra Vs. Punjab National Bank 2004 (IV) AD (Delhi)
629, an act or omission, which runs counter to the expected
code of conduct, or which is contrary to the written norms,
guidelines

or

practice

followed,

amounts

to

Furthermore, the Supreme Court in Regional

misconduct.
Manager,

UPSRTC Vs. Hoti Lal (2003) 3 SCC 605 observed that if the
charged employee holds a position of trust where honesty and
integrity are inbuilt requirements of functioning, it would not be
proper to deal with the matter leniently.

Misconduct in such

cases has to be dealt with iron hands. Where the person deals
with public money or is engaged in financial transactions or acts
in a fiduciary capacity, the highest degree of integrity and
trustworthiness is a must and unexceptionable. Thus, the plea

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 6 of 9

of the petitioner that he had no intention to defraud the bank
cannot, under the circumstances, be countenanced by this
Court.
7.

Mr. Ghosh, counsel for the petitioner also states that 32

years of unblemished service of the petitioner have been
washed away because of his one alleged indiscretion, and that
there also his wife deposited the amount in question by way of
reimbursement the very next day. I think learned counsel for
the petitioner rather mistakes the matter. To say that it is his
first indiscretion, is to put it too simplistically. Far from being a
mere indiscretion, what the petitioner did was a criminal act.
What has happened is that this is the first time that the
petitioner was caught.
8.

Mr. Ghosh has also tried to rely on paragraph 521(2) (b) of

the Shastri Award which provides as follows :
“Any offence involving moral turpitude for
which an employee is liable to conviction
and sentence under any provision of law,
if he be convicted he may be dismissed
with effect from the date of his conviction
or be given any lesser punishment.”
He states that inasmuch as the petitioner has been released on
probation, it cannot be said that he has been sentenced for the
offence in question and therefore also a lenient view ought to be
taken in the matter. I am afraid, I am not in agreement with this
contention for the reason that the expression used is, “is liable
to conviction and sentence under any provision of law..........”.
In other words, it is not necessary that there should be actual

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 7 of 9

conviction or sentencing of the individual concerned.

It is

sufficient if, on the facts alleged, the individual concerned was
liable to

conviction and sentence.

In this case, there is no

doubt that not only was the petitioner liable to conviction and
sentence, he was, in fact, convicted.

The only question that

remains is as to whether he has also been duly sentenced.
Without going into the question as to whether release on
probation also amounts to a sentence or not and I think, to my
mind, it does, it is undeniable that consequent upon his
conviction, the petitioner was certainly liable to sentencing.
Merely because the Criminal Court has taken a lenient view in
the matter and has decided to release him on probation cannot
mean that he was not liable to be sentenced. Furthermore, in
this case, the Additional Session Judge had concluded that; “the
conviction of the appellant for the offence punishable under
Section 409 IPC, do not suffer from any illegality or call for any
interference.” This observation cannot be ignored. In that view
of the matter, I do not think the paragraph 521(2) (b) of the
Shastri Award can be of much assistance to the petitioner.
Learned counsel very fairly does not challenge the procedure
whereby the impugned decision was taken. It was also found by
the Labour Court that the order of the disciplinary authority and
the Appellate Authority is reasoned one. In the case of
Chairman and MD, United Commercial Bank & Ors. Vs.
P.C. Kakkar (supra), the Supreme Court pronounced as follows;

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 8 of 9

“the Court should not interfere with the
administrator's decision unless it was
illogical
or
suffers
from
procedural
impropriety or was shocking to the
conscience of the court in the sense that it
was in defiance of logical or moral
standards.”
It was further observed that;
“in view of what has been stated in
Wednesbury principle, the court could not
go into the correctness of the choice made
by the administrator open to him and the
court should not substitute its decision to
that of the administrator. The scope of
judicial review is limited to the deficiency in
decision making process and not the
decision.”
9.

Under the circumstances, I do not consider it a fit case for

interference in exercise of writ jurisdiction.
10.

Writ petition is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
April 01, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.2676/2008

Page 9 of 9

