*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.950/2008

%

Date of Decision : February 06, 2008

Prem Chand

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Puneet Verma ,
Advocate
Versus

The Management of M/s The Joint Director,
Information & Public Relations

.…Respondent

Through : Mr. Sat Narain,
Joint Director
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioner is a workman. He has come to this Court

under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying that the
award of the Labour Court announced on 14th August, 2007
whereby he has been awarded compensation of Rs.20,000/- for
illegal termination of his services by the respondent be set
aside, and that the relief of reinstatement sought by him before
the Labour Court be granted instead.
2.

Counsel for the

WP(C) No.950/2008

petitioner bases his challenge on two

Page 1 of 14

grounds.

His first contention is that since the petitioner had

only sought reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of
service, and had not prayed for any compensation in lieu
thereof; therefore, once the Labour Court concluded that his
termination was illegal, the only option for the Labour Court was
to reinstate the petitioner. He states that in view of the fact that
he had only sought reinstatement, the same ought to have been
granted to him for another reason, which is that his right to
livelihood as conceived in ground (a) of the grounds mentioned
in the petition would otherwise stand violated. For his second
challenge, he relies on ground (c) mentioned in the writ petition.
Ground (c) is as follows :
“(c)
Because the Hon'ble Tribunal also
failed to appreciate that, without prejudice
to the contention of the petitioner that he
was in fact a full time employee of the
respondent, the petitioner could be very
well adjusted on any of the forth class post
of the respondent management as if he was
only a part time employee, there is no need
of a regular or a sanctioned post and the
petitioner by way of this writ petition only
demanding the reinstatement that can be
given even without back wages.”
3.

A perusal of the impugned award would show that, as

analysed by the learned Labour Court, the petitioner had himself
relied on Exhibit WW1/1 where he was shown as a Sweeper
working for two hours everyday @ of Rs.500/- per month.
Similarly, the management had also placed a number of
documents on the record showing the petitioner as a part time
employee working for two hours daily at a monthly salary of

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 2 of 14

Rs.500/- per month ever since 1998. It is on this basis that the
learned Labour Court has concluded that the petitioner was in
fact a part time employee who was working for two hours a day
at a monthly salary of Rs.500/- per month. Before the Labour
Court, the petitioner had also tried to urge that in fact he was a
full time employee.

In view of the fact that the document

Exhibit WW1/1 placed on the record by the petitioner himself
clearly showed that he was a Sweeper working for two hours in
a day @ of

Rs.500/- per month, and also taking into

consideration documents placed by the management on the
record which showed that the petitioner had been a part time
employee since 1998, the claim that the petitioner was in fact a
full time employee did not find favour with the learned Labour
Court.

Before this Court also, petitioner's counsel has not

attempted to urge anything to the contrary.
4.

Next question that was considered by the learned Labour

Court is whether the petitioner had himself left the employment
or was not interested in his job, in other words, whether he had
abandoned his employment. In this regard, the learned Tribunal
has concluded that in fact the claim of abandonment has not
been proved by the management. Since the learned Labour
Court had concluded that despite being a part time employee,
the petitioner was in fact a “workman” under the Industrial
Disputes Act, and that the management had failed to prove
abandonment; therefore, the termination of his service was

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 3 of 14

illegal and unjustified and deserved to be set aside.
5.

The

learned

Labour

Court

thereafter

examined

the

question as to the nature of the relief to be granted to the
workman. The power & jurisdiction of the Labour Court to grant
appropriate relief in the event termination being set aside, for
not following the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial
Disputes Act, is well recognized through a catena of judgments
on this issue. It has been repeatedly stated that reinstatement
is not the rule. It may be useful at this juncture to set down a
brief background of the trend of judicial pronouncements on this
aspect. Till the years 1980-85, the general trend was of
reinstatement in the event termination is found illegal. The
power of Industrial Tribunal to direct reinstatement was
recognised in Western India Automobiles Association Vs.
Industrial Tribunal AIR 1949 FC 111. Exceptions to this rule
are also recognised in various judgments and reinstatement can
be validly denied for many reasons including, inter alia, the
nature of job, the workman not being a regular worker or not
recruited through employment exchange or other regularly
prescribed mode of selection. Such exceptions were also noted
by the Supreme Court in the case of Haryana Tourism
Corporation Ltd. Vs. Fakir Chand & Ors. AIR 2003 SC
4465. To decide this matter, the Labour Court has examined a
number of authorities, and in particular, the decision of this
Court in Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan Vs. Union of India,

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 4 of 14

2000 IV ad (Delhi) 709 wherein this Court had dealt with the
question of reinstatement and back wages.

It is noticed in

paragraphs 27 and 28 thereof that although in the 1970s and
1980s, reinstatement with back wages was the norm in all cases
where termination was found to be illegal, the trend of later
decisions of the Supreme Court seems to suggest that now the
award of compensation in lieu of reinstatement and back wages
is the norm. This Court therefore held that;
“reinstatement is not the inevitable
consequence of quashing an order of
termination; compensation can be awarded
in lieu of reinstatement and back wages.”
The learned Labour Court also adverted to the decision of the
Supreme Court in M.L. Binjolkar Vs. State of Madhya
Pradesh 2005 VI (SCC) 224, to the same effect where, in
paragraph 7, the Supreme Court has referred to a number of
earlier decisions of that Court and concluded that “
“The earlier view was that whenever there
is interference with the order of termination
or retirement, full back wages were the
natural corollary. It has been laid down in
the cases noted above that it would depend
upon several factors and the court has to
weigh the pros and cons of each case and
to take a pragmatic view..........”
6.

The same position has been reiterated by the Supreme

Court in paragraph 56 of its decision in U.P. State Brasware
Corporation Ltd. Vs. Uday Narain Pandey 2006 1(SCC)
479). Reference may also be made to a decision of a Division
Bench of this Court in Pramod Kumar and Anr. Vs. The

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 5 of 14

Presiding Officer and Anr. 123 (2005) DLT 509 where also
a plea taken by the petitioner that the learned Single Judge
ought to have directed reinstatement instead of merely
awarding compensation to the workman, was considered only to
be rejected. It is in the light of these pronouncements that the
learned Labour Court has looked at the circumstances of the
petitioner's case.

A reading of paragraphs 26 and 27 of the

impugned award shows that in deciding to award compensation
instead of reinstatement, while the learned Labour Court was
conscious of the fact that compensation in lieu of reinstatement
and back wages is now the norm, at the same time, it has also
considered the fact that the petitioner had worked with the
management on a part time basis for two hours on monthly
wages of Rs.500/- per month for about six years. The Labour
Court has felt that since the petitioner was only a part time
employee, working for only two hours in a day with the
management, therefore instead of reinstatement, compensation
would be a better alternative. It has therefore decided to award
compensation of Rs.20,000/- to be paid to the petitioner within
one month of publication of the award failing which interest @ of
10% would be payable to the workman. According to the Labour
Court, this amount would be sufficient to meet the ends of
justice. A rough calculation will show that the Labour Court has
in fact directed payment of compensation equivalent to 40
months of earnings.

WP(C) No.950/2008

To put it differently, it has given him

Page 6 of 14

compensation amounting to the salary drawn over a period of
three years, which is also more than half of his tenure with his
employer. It is noteworthy that Supreme Court in the case of
O.P.

Bhandari

Vs.

Indian

Tourism

Development

Corporation Ltd. (1986) 4 SCC 337 held that compensation
equivalent to 3.33 years' salary (including allowances) as
admissible on the basis of last pay and allowances would be a
reasonable amount to award in lieu of reinstatement.

In that

case, the Court has taken into consideration the fact that the
corpus, if invested at prevailing rate of interest, will yield 50% of
the annual salary and allowances and the workman would get
50% of what he would have earned by way of salary and
allowances with four additional advantages:
(i)

He will be getting this amount without working

(ii)

He can work somewhere else and can earn annually
whatever he is worth over and above, getting 50% of
the salary he would have earned.

(iii)

If he had been reinstated, he would have earned the
salary upto the date of superannuation (upto 55, 58
or 60 as the case may be) unless he died earlier. As
against this, he would be getting the aforesaid 50%
annually

till

he

dies,

regardless

of

his

superannuation, after his demise, his heirs would
keep getting it in perpetuity.
(iv)

The corpus of lump sum compensation would remain

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 7 of 14

intact, in any event.
This was also reiterated in the case of Workmen Vs. Bharat
Fritz Werner (P) Ltd. & Anr. (1990) 3 SCC 565. Thus, I do
not find that the decision taken by the Labour Court in this
regard is in any way perverse or arbitrary nor do I feel that it
has occasioned any failure of justice.

A Writ Court is not

exercising appellate jurisdiction and the scope for interference is
very limited. Reference in this regard may also be had to the
cases of Syed Yakoob Vs. K.S.Radhakrishnan AIR 1964 SC
477 where it was observed that;
“There is, however, no doubt that the
jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari is a
supervisory jurisdiction and the court
exercising it is not entitled to act as an
appellate court. This limitation necessarily
means that findings of fact reached by the
inferior Court or Tribunal as a result of
appreciation of evidence cannot be
reopened
or
questioned
in
writ
proceedings.”
In the case of State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur Vs. Om
Prakash Sharma (2006) 5 SCC 123, the Supreme Court held
that the High Court cannot sit in appeal over the award of the
Labour Court, but jurisdictional errors can be corrected while
exercising power of judicial review. Similarly, in Apparel
Export Promotion Council Vs. A.K.Chopra (1999) 1 SCC
759 it was observed that
“since the High Court does not sit as an
appellate authority over the factual findings
recorded during departmental proceedings,
while exercising the power of judicial
review, the High Court cannot, normally

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 8 of 14

speaking, substitute its own conclusion,
with regard to the guilt of the delinquent for
that of the departmental authorities.”
Furthermore, in the case of Govt. of A.P. And Others Vs.
Mohd. Nasrullah Khan (2006) 2 SCC373 paragraph 11
states as follows:
“11. By now it is well established principle
of law that the High Court exercising power
of judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution does not act as an appellate
authority. Its jurisdiction is circumscribed
and confined to errors of law or procedural
error, if any, resulting in manifest
miscarriage of justice or violation of
principles of Natural Justice. Judicial review
is not akin to adjudication on merit by reappreciating the evidence as an appellate
authority.”
7.

Lastly Learned counsel for the petitioner has also sought to

urge that his client is hopeful of getting some regular
employment with the respondent. He has suggested that this
Court keep this matter on board on the plea that pendency of
this writ petition will assist his client in securing favourable
consideration from the respondent in this regard. In conjunction
with this suggestion, the petitioner has sought to link ground (c)
of his writ petition, which has been reproduced above, to state
that it was entirely within the powers of the respondent to
recruit the petitioner in any 4th class post as part time employee
without even the necessity for a regular or sanctioned post. I do
not think such a plea can be of any avail to the petitioner. In my
opinion the statute does not vest the Labour Court with any
power to direct the employer to “adjust” the petitioner in any

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 9 of 14

other Class IV employment, “as if he was only a part-time
employee,” as sought to be contended by petitioner's counsel,
reinstatement can only be granted in the same employment and
not in any other employment with the employer. The tactic of
filing such a petition in this Court, and then using the very fact
of its pendency to create some sort of pressure on the
respondent to give the petitioner further employment, has only
to be deprecated. To my mind, it would be wholly unethical for
this Court to lend itself to such tactics on the part of a litigant.
8.

The contention of the petitioner to the effect that since his

client had only claimed reinstatement without any claim for
back wages or compensation, therefore its decision to award
compensation in lieu of reinstatement, demonstrates that the
impugned award is perverse and occasioned a failure of justice,
since it did not have any jurisdiction to do so, is also devoid of
merit.

An examination of Section 10(4) of the Industrial

Disputes Act shows clearly that the Labour Court is required to
confine its adjudication to the points of dispute referred &
“matters incidental thereto”. In this case the workman had
applied directly to the Labour Court under Section 10(4A) as
amended vide Delhi Act 9 of 2003 which came into effect from
22.8.2003. This states as follows:
“(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained
in Section 9C & this section, in the case of
dispute falling within the scope of Section
2A, the individual workman concerned may,
within twelve months from the date of
communication to him of the order of

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 10 of 14

discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or
termination or the date of commencement
of the Industrial Dispute (Delhi Amendment)
Act, 2003, whichever, is later, apply in the
prescribed manner, to the Labour Court or
the Tribunal, as the case may be, for
adjudication of the dispute & the Labour
Court or Tribunal, as the case may be, shall
dispose of such application in the same
manner as a dispute referred under subsection (1).”
What is noteworthy is that in the case of any application moved
to the Labour Court under this provision, the Labour Court is
enjoined to, “dispose off such application in the same manner as
a dispute referred to in sub-section (1).” It follows therefore,
that the Learned

Labour Court was bound to dispose off this

application in the same manner as any other dispute that might
have been referred to it. From this, it can be concluded that the
provisions of Section 10(4) which apply to all other references
and spells out the nature of the Labour Court's jurisdiction, as
well as the scope of its adjudicatory powers whilst disposing off
such references, would be equally applicable while deciding an
application made directly to the

Labour Court under Section

10(4A). To my mind, the expression “shall dispose of such
application in the same manner”, can only mean that while
deciding this application, it will apply the same principles and
shall have same powers as are available to the Labour Court
and be subjected to the same restrictions by which Labour Court
is bound in case of references made to it in the ordinary course
under Section 10.

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 11 of 14

9.

It is settled law that if the Labour Court is of the opinion

that the award of said compensation would meet the ends of
justice in a particular case, then keeping in mind the relevant
facts and circumstances of that case, the Labour Court has the
power to award compensation even though there may be no
claim for back wages or reinstatement made by the workman.
This power is derived from Section 11-A of Industrial Disputes
Act which deals with power of Labour Courts, Tribunals and
National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of Discharge
or Dismissal of workmen.

In Anglo-American Direct Tea

Trading Company Ltd. Vs. Workmen of Nahortoli Tea
Estate (1961) 2 LLJ 625 (SC), the Supreme Court through
Justice Wanchoo held that Section 11-A vests the industrial
adjudicators with the discretionary jurisdiction to give 'such
other relief to the workmen..... in lieu of discharge or dismissal
as the circumstances of the case may require,' where for some
valid reason it considers that reinstatement with or without
conditions will not be fair or proper.

Compensation in such a

case is the solatium for unjustified and premature termination of
employment. In this case also, the same has been done. The
relief of compensation is clearly incidental to any adjudication
that goes into the question of unlawful termination of service of
an employee. Even going by the general principles of Industrial
Adjudication,

it

would

be

incorrect

to

conclude

that

compensation in lieu of reinstatement is not incidental to a

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 12 of 14

dispute relating to dismissal or discharge of

a workman. As

already stated above, it is unquestionable that even after
finding that termination is illegal, the

Labour Court has the

power to decline reinstatement if it is of the view that
compensation will suffice.
10.

The counsel for the petitioner has repeatedly tried to say

that he was entitled to reinstatement because of his right to
livelihood, which is recognized by the courts as an extension of
the right to life guaranteed by the State under Part III of the
Constitution of India, relating to Fundamental Rights. Such an
argument needs to be noticed only to be rejected peremptorily.
Right to livelihood, or any other Fundamental Right, is subject to
reasonable restrictions that may be imposed by the State or by
any

other

Constitutionally

valid

Statute

enacted

by

the

Parliament. The Industrial Disputes Act is one such legislation
that indeed provides for the investigation & settlement of
industrial

disputes

and

provides,

inter-alia,

a

degree

of

protection against exploitation and oppression of labour. It must
however be kept in mind that even this protection is subject to
the rule of law, which is equally applicable to all, whether
management or labour. It is within the province of the Labour
Court to decide whether on an overall conspectus of the
surrounding circumstances an award of compensation will
suffice and if it does arrive at that conclusion on a rational and
sustainable basis, the workman cannot insist that if he is not put

WP(C) No.950/2008

Page 13 of 14

back in his part time job in which he rendered 2 hours service
everyday, his right to livelihood enshrined in the Constitution is
unjustly taken away.
11.

I might add that Mr. Sat Narain, Joint Director, Information

and Public Relations, Punjab Govt., Punjab Bhawan, New Delhi
who has appeared in response to the advance notice served
upon the respondent by the petitioner, has denied any further
offers being made to the petitioner as has been claimed by the
counsel for the petitioner at the bar for giving the petitioner any
further employment.

In addition, he has also stated that the

petitioner is refusing to accept the tender of compensation from
the respondent as awarded by the Labour Court. Be that as it
may, I am satisfied that there is no infirmity with the impugned
award. It suffers from no error of jurisdiction or perversity, nor
had it occasioned any failure of justice.

For all the aforesaid

reasons, the matter does not call for interference in the exercise
of writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
12.

The petition is dismissed.

February 06, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.950/2008

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J

Page 14 of 14

