*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.2103/2008

%

Date of Decision : March 17, 2008

Mohd. Suleman

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. R.P. Sharma,
Advocate
Versus

M/s. Northern Steel and
General Mills (P) Ltd.

.…Respondent
Through : Nemo

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

By this petition, Mohd. Suleman has invoked the writ jurisdiction

of this Court to impugn an award that was passed on 16.3.2005 in ID
No.83/1993. At the bar, counsel for the petitioner restricted his claim
to the effect that the compensation of Rs.30,000/- that has been
awarded to the petitioner towards illegal retrenchment by the
respondent, is too meagre. It appears that the petitioner was
employed sometimes in January, 1985 and carried on working till
October, 1991 with the respondent mill. He worked as a Furnace Man
for a period of five years and ten months. At that time, his last drawn
salary was admittedly Rs.993/- per month. Due to the installation of a
WP(C) No.2103/2008

Page 1 of 4

mechanical ejector in the mill, the petitioner is stated to have become
surplus and his services were dispensed with. Although a number of
defences have been taken by the respondent before the Labour
Court, they were all disbelieved. The petitioner was removed from
service w.e.f. 12.10.1991. On that date, the respondent also gave the
petitioner a sum of Rs.4156/- towards final payment of his dues in full,
including one month's pay in lieu of notice of retrenchment; all of
which the petitioner says he never received. After examining the
matter, the Labour Court concluded that the management had failed
to prove its case, and for that reason, the removal of the workman
from service was illegal. The workman was admittedly a daily wager.
It was also established in the proceedings that the respondent mill
had closed down w.e.f. 21.12.1995. It is in these circumstances that
the Labour Court decided to award compensation to the tune of
Rs.30,000/- for his wrongful removal.
2.

Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has sought to urge

that this amount does not represent a fair and adequate measure of
compensation due to the petitioner. I do not agree. It is quite obvious
that when considering the last drawn salary, which was about
Rs.1,000/- per month, what the Labour Court has awarded is really
approximately 30 months' salary. It is well established that there is no
thumb rule or precise formula for grant of back wages as was held in
U.P. State Brassware Corporation Ltd. Vs. Uday Narain
Pandey (2006) 1 SCC 479. Similar is the situation while granting of
back wages and other allowances as compensation. There is no hard
and fast rule or yardstick for computing such compensation. It depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.

WP(C) No.2103/2008

Page 2 of 4

3.

In the case at hand, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner

had worked for approximately five years, the compensation awarded
amounts to 50% of the salary for the tenure he worked. At the same
time the approximate return on investment on this amount, taken at
10% would yield the workman approximately Rs.3,000/- per annum.
In other words, he could get three months salary every year, in perpetuity. Looked at in another way, the petitioner could get Rs.250/- per
month which is about 25% of the last drawn salary in perpetuity. At
the same time, the petitioner, who was about 30 years old at the time
of his removal, was free to obtain any other employment. Also, looking to the fact that the mill had closed down four years after his termination, he would have had to look for alternate employment at that
juncture.
4.

In the case of Prem Chand Vs. The Management of

M/s The Joint Director, Information & Public Relations
[WP(C) No.950/2008 decided on 6.2.2008], whilst observing the
shift in the judicial trend whereby reinstatement is no longer an
inevitable consequence in all cases of illegal termination of
service, this Court upheld the award of the Labour Court
granting compensation of Rs.20,000/- in lieu of reinstatement.
There, the workman had worked with the management on part
time basis for two hours on a monthly salary of Rs.500/- per
month for about six years. This Court held that, “…… a rough
calculation will show that the Labour Court has in fact directed
payment of compensation equivalent to 40 months of earnings.
To put it differently, it has given him compensation amounting

WP(C) No.2103/2008

Page 3 of 4

to the salary over a period of three years, which is also more
than half of his tenure with his employer.”
3.

Here also, the quantum of compensation is equal to rough-

ly half the salary earned throughout his tenure. Furthermore, as
pointed out earlier that there is no hard and fast rule for computing compensation; the decision of the Labour Court to award
this amount cannot, under the circumstances, be termed as perverse or irrational, nor can it be said that it has caused a failure
of justice warranting interference by a writ court.
4.

Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
March 17, 2008
mw

WP(C) No.2103/2008

Page 4 of 4

