*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.706/2008

%

Date of Decision : February 11, 2008

Bhupender Singh

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Kuldeep Sherawat,
Advocate
Versus

Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board & Anr. .…Respondents
Through : Ms.Zubeda Begum, Advocate
for respondent No.1
Ms. Mansi Gupta, Advocate
for respondent No.2
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioner seeks a direction to the respondents to select

the petitioner for the post of Teacher (Primary) with respondent No.2
in the reserved category of OBC with full seniority and service
benefits.
2.

Pursuant to an advertisement issued by the Delhi Subordinate

Services Selection Board (D.S.S.S.B) on 15.5.2006, the petitioner
applied for the post of Teacher (Primary) in Municipal Corporation of
Delhi (MCD). It is the petitioner's case that although he applied for the
said post as an OBC candidate along with all the requisite certificates,
WP(C) No.706/2008

Page No.1 of 7

including OBC Certificate issued by office of the Deputy Commissioner
North West District, Delhi, the admit card was issued to the petitioner
the basis of “General” category.
3.

Thereafter the petitioner made a written representation to the

Secretary, DSSSB for consideration of his candidature in the OBC
category.

In it, he informed the Secretary that he has already

submitted

the

requisite

OBC

certificate

and

the

same

was

acknowledged by the DSSSB vide acknowledgment slip No.001102.
On 29.6.2006, the petitioner personally visited the office of the DSSB
for correction in the category under which he has applied from
“General” to “OBC”. According to the petitioner he was assured orally
by officials of DSSSB that the petitioner should appear in the
examination & the said correction will be carried out and that he shall
be considered as an OBC candidate.
4.

The petitioner appeared in the written examination. He claims

that although he has failed to qualify in the General Category,
however, if treated as an OBC candidate, he makes the grade. He is
aggrieved of the fact that despite persistent requests, respondent
No.1, i.e., the

DSSSB, has not changed his candidature from

“General” to “OBC” category, and has persisted in processing his
case as a General candidate, thus depriving him of selection to the
post of Teacher (Primary) in the OBC category.
5.

The question for consideration is whether the respondents

should be directed to consider the petitioner for the post of Teacher
(Primary). In this regard, the counsel for respondent No.1 has pointed
out that the petitioner had moved two applications for the same post.
One application bears No.000744 and is dated 20th May, 2006, stating
that the petitioner is applying in the unreserved category. The second
WP(C) No.706/2008

Page No.2 of 7

application which is No.001102 and is dated 21st May, 2006, states
that the petitioner is applying under the OBC category. She has also
drawn my attention to the declaration in both forms to the effect that
the applicant has submitted only one application for one post code.
According to her, by filing two applications, the petitioner has also
violated paragraph 7 of the general instructions and procedure for
submission of the application, issued by respondent No.1, which
states, inter alia, that, “A candidate should submit only one
application for one post code.”
6.

The counsel for the petitioner states that all these infractions

are innocuous mistakes and that the petitioner's candidature should
not be cancelled on mere technical grounds. He further states that in
fact it is the respondents themselves who are guilty of having issued
acknowledgments to the petitioner against the OBC category and roll
number against the general category and, for that reason also, the
petitioner’s candidature should not be cancelled. Petitioner’s counsel
has also placed reliance on Krishnan Vs. Krishnaveni 1997 (4)
SCC 241. However, he has handed over a print out of the SCC Online
law reports, giving the head note only. A reading of this head note
shows no relevance whatsoever to the point in issue. He has also
placed reliance on Dolly Chhanda Vs. Chairman, JEE and others
AIR 2004 SC 5043. I do not think that even this case is of much
assistance to the petitioner. In that case the petitioner, Dolly
Chhanda, had applied for the admission in MBBS, against the seats
reserved for children/ widows of personnel of armed forces, killed or
disabled in action. She also filed a reserved category certificate
issued by the designated authority. She was first rejected on the
ground that the certificate which she had produced did not meet with
WP(C) No.706/2008

Page No.3 of 7

the requirements prescribed for such certificates. She then produced
a fresh certificate in which the mistake in the earlier certificate had
been rectified. Despite this, her candidature was rejected and
somebody lower in rank was given admission. In these circumstances,
the Court had held that, “depending on the facts of a case, there can
be some relaxation in the matter of submission of proof and it will not
be proper to apply any rigid principle as it pertains in the domain of
procedure. Every infraction of the rule relating to submission of proof
need not necessarily result in rejection of candidature.” In this case, it
is not a question of a valid certificate issued by the designated
authority being rejected on the ground of some technical infirmity for
which the petitioner could not be held responsible. The petitioner’s
candidature has been rejected on the ground that while he did not
qualify for the General category and there was no proper application
for consideration under the OBC category.

In addition, he has

admittedly filed two separate applications in direct violation of the
rules.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner states that this is a

procedural and curable defect. In my opinion this is not so. The
petitioner was not rejected because of any mistake in the certificate
issued by a third party. His rejection has come about because of his
own deliberate actions. He has taken two separate forms, filled them
up separately, and filed two separate complete applications. There is
no question of any procedural defect here. The petitioner filled up
these applications within a gap of one day from each other. Counsel's
contention that his client belongs to a weak background and could not
distinguish between, “post” and the, “post code” does not impress
me. Besides the fact that no such ground has been averred in the
WP(C) No.706/2008

Page No.4 of 7

petition, the petitioner was aspiring to be a teacher. He cannot be
heard to say that he is unable to even decipher the application form.
I find that there is a specific declaration made by the petitioner
while filling up the application in question. Since the petitioner has
filed each of the two forms on a different premise, the declarations
appended to each are rendered false since they contradict each
other. In one application, he has described himself to be an OBC
candidate whereas in the other, he has specifically described himself
as a general candidate. The declaration states as follows:“I hereby declare that all statements made in
this application are true, complete and correct
to the best of my knowledge and belief. I also
declare that I have submitted only one
application for one post code in response to
this advertisement. I declare that I have read
over and understood all the provisions
mentioned in the advertisement carefully and I
hereby undertake to abide by them. I further
declare that I fulfill all the conditions of
eligibility regarding age limit, educational
qualification and experience etc. prescribed in
the advertisement for the post applied for. I
have also duly enclosed, attested copies of all
the
relevant
documents/certificates.
I
understand that in the event of any
information being found suppressed, false or
incorrect or any ineligibility detected before or
after the examination, my candidature/
selection/appointment is liable to be cancelled.
The information submitted herein shall be
treated as final respect of my candidature for
the post applied for through this application
form. I also declare that I have informed my
H.O.D/Department in writing that I am applying
for this post. (for Govt. employees only).
It is noteworthy that in each declaration he has stated that all
the statements made are true, complete and correct to the best of his
knowledge and belief. He has also declared that he has submitted
only one application for one post code and that in the event of any
information being found suppressed, false or incorrect or any

WP(C) No.706/2008

Page No.5 of 7

ineligibility being detected before or after the examination, his
candidature/selection is liable to be cancelled.
8.

Furthermore, column 11 of the application form, which has to

be marked if a candidate seeks the benefit of reservation/ age
relaxation as applicable, has been left blank by the petitioner in both
the application forms filled by him. This makes it clear that the
petitioner never intended to apply as an OBC candidate. Although
petitioner's counsel conceeds that the relevant OBC certificates are to
be annexed only by those candidates who have claimed such benefit
in the first place; he seeks to explain the petitioner's failure to stake
his claim for the benefit of reservations for OBC candidates as
required under column 11 as yet another innocuous mistake on his
part. I do not agree. If a claim, as specified in paragraph 11, to the
effect that he seeks the benefit of reservation, is not made, the
application is bound to be considered under the General category. A
certificate describing a candidate to be from a reserved category is
necessary only from those candidates who have claimed the benefit
of that category. It follows, therefore, that if there is no such claim to
begin with, simply attaching a certificate showing that he belongs to a
reserved category is immaterial.

Such an application can only be

considered to be one for general category posts.
9.

On merits, it is also submitted by the respondent that the

petitioner did not secure the requisite marks under the general
category and for that reason his candidature was rightly rejected.
Counsel for the respondents also submits that in so far as his
candidature under the OBC category is concerned, firstly, the
petitioner has incurred disqualification for having submitted two
forms as discussed above; secondly, in view of the fact that he has
WP(C) No.706/2008

Page No.6 of 7

not given any indication in column 11, neither of the forms can be
construed as an application of OBC category.
10.

The very fact that the petitioner has submitted two application

forms on successive days, is itself sufficient for rejection of
petitioner’s candidature, being a clear infraction of para 7 of the
general instructions and the procedure for submission of application,
issued by DSSSB. This fact, specially when examined in the light of
the other facts examined above, shows that there is no ground for
interference in writ jurisdiction by this Court. It is a well known
principle of equitable jurisdiction that, “he who seeks equity, must do
equity,” the petitioner cannot be allowed take advantage of his own
actions, which are contrary to the stipulations laid down by the
respondents for the posts in question.
11.

In that view of the matter, I find no merit in this petition and the

same is dismissed.
CM No. 1349/2008
Since the writ petition is disposed of, the stay is vacated. This
application is also disposed of.
The date 19.3.2008 is cancelled.

February 11, 2008
mw

WP(C) No.706/2008

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J

Page No.7 of 7

