*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.8465/2007

%

Date of Decision : March 10, 2008

Anupriya Chauhan & Ors.

…..Petitioners
Through : Ms. P.L. Gautam,
Advocate
Versus

Municipal Corporation of Delhi

.…Respondent
Through : Nemo

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioners are aggrieved by an advertisement issued

by the respondent/ Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) on
30.10.2007, inviting applications for appointment to the post of
Teacher (Primary) on contract basis. The said advertisement
under one of its heads subtitled as, “Note”, makes it clear that;
the candidates so engaged on contract basis shall not claim for
regular appointment in the MCD, and the appointments being
offered are a stop gap arrangement and that for these
vacancies,

requisition

WP(C) No.8465/2007

has

already

been

sent

to

Delhi

Page 1 of 4

Subordinate Services Selection Board (DSSSB). In terms of this
advertisement, the essential qualifications, inter alia, required
candidates to hold a diploma/ certificate in Nursery Teaching
Training Education Programme of the duration of not less than
two years. The age limit which is prescribed for the candidates
is between 20 to 27 years. The petitioners being about 30 years
of age are ineligible and, therefore, unable to apply. They have,
therefore, challenged the prescription of age limit in the
advertisement on the grounds that the same is irrational,
arbitrary, discriminatory, mindless, unlawful and against the
existing recruitment regulations and natural justice.
2.

It would appear that the facts and circumstances narrated

by the petitioner in this case are similar to those in WP(C)
No.8461/2007 titled Anju Goel Vs. MCD which has been
decided by me on 21st February, 2008 and WP(C) No.8576/2007
titled Bhupinder Kaur & Ors. Vs. MCD decided by me on 27th
February, 2008. There also, since the petitioners were more
than

30

years

old;

they

were

aggrieved

of

a

similar

advertisement inviting applications for appointment to the post
of Nursery Teachers on contract issued by the MCD where age
limit prescribed for candidates was between 20-27 years. They
prayed that the respondents be directed to modify the age limit.
Those matters came to be dismissed by me on the basis of a
decision of the Division Bench of this Court dated 11th January,
2008 in the case of Rajbala & Ors. Vs. MCD (WP(C)

WP(C) No.8465/2007

Page 2 of 4

No.8417/2007) wherein this Court had noticed the difference
between the offer of regular employment under the rules and
the offer of contractual employment made by the advertisement
dated 19th October, 2007, whereby it was proposed to engage
Primary Teachers on a contractual basis as a stop gap
arrangement till such time a regular employment based on the
amended rules could be made. The Division Bench held that:
“since it is only a stop gap arrangement
and the persons appointed are not going to
get right over the post, more so when it is
done keeping in view the provisions of the
NCTE Act, we are of the view that no
interference with such a move is called for”.
Here also, as already noted, the advertisement clearly mentions
that, “the candidates so engaged on contract basis shall not
claim for regular appointment in the MCD.” and that, “this is
stop gap arrangement.” Thus, this matter will be squarely
covered by the aforesaid decisions.
3.

It is pertinent to note that according to the petitioner by

lowering the age limit, the impugned advertisement in question
has the effect of depriving the petitioners of their vested rights
of being considered for appointment.

In Bhupinder Kaur &

Ors. Vs. MCD (supra), this Court held that;
“...... in a purely contractual employment,
the terms and conditions are governed by
the offer, and if the offer fructifies into a
contract, then by that contract. An
applicant cannot demand terms which do
not form part of the offer. In the absence
of any statute compelling the same, he
cannot approach the Courts to issue a
mandamus to the employer to amend its

WP(C) No.8465/2007

Page 3 of 4

offer, so as to include the applicant also in
what is purely stop gap contractual
arrangement. It is a trite law that Courts
cannot issue a writ of mandamus unless the
claimants can demonstrate the existence of
a subsisting legal right. Since the
recruitments envisaged under the offer in
question are not in the nature of statutory
recruitments, the terms and conditions in
such a stop gap contractual employment
are governed by the conditions offered, and
the rights, if any, of the applicant would
arise only from terms of the offer itself. This
is also the ratio of the decision in Raj Bala's
case (supra).”
This observation also applies to the case at hand. I might add
that the petitioners have not brought any precedent to the
contrary to my notice.
4.

Under the circumstances, this writ petition is dismissed.

CM No.15982/2007

5.

In view of the fact that writ petition itself has been

disposed of, the interim orders passed on 16th November, 2007
are vacated and the application is also disposed of.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
March 10, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.8465/2007

Page 4 of 4

