*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.2067/2008

%

Date of Decision : March 14, 2008

Vinod Kumar Kanvaria

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Tarun, Advocate
Versus

Delhi University

.…Respondent
Through : Mr. Anurag Mathur,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioner seeks a writ of mandamus directing the

Delhi University to “immediately put into effect the appointment
in terms of the selection of the petitioner as Lecturer in the
Department of Education in the Scheduled Caste category”.
2.

In

response

to

an

advertisement

dated

27.6.2006,

published in the National Dailies on 4.7.2006, for the post of
Lecturer in Education with the respondent University the
petitioner applied for the faculty position in the Scheduled Caste
category on 18.7.2006. Apart from requisite qualifications, the
WP(C) No.2067/2008

Page 1 of 6

advertisement inter alia, indicated for seven vacancies for the
post of Lecturers out of which three were reserved for Scheduled
Caste candidates. At the time of applying for the said post, the
petitioner was working as a T.G.T. Mathematics Teacher with the
Government Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya, Naraina, New Delhi.
3.

The petitioner was interviewed on 7.6.2007 by the

Selection

Committee

of

the

respondent

University.

The

recommendation made by the Selection Committee for the posts
in Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe categories was
approved by the Executive Council of the respondent University
on

8.6.2007.

The

petitioner

was

also

amongst

those

recommended. However, the petitioner has not been appointed
till date.
4.

Before me, counsel for the petitioner has taken the stand

that his client has in fact been appointed by the respondent/
Delhi University in that post. To substantiate his stand, counsel
has drawn my attention to the recommendation of the Selection
Committee that recommended the petitioner and others for
appointment to the post of Lecturer in the Department of
Education.

In

this

recommendation,

four

persons

were

recommended for appointment in the order of merit as indicated
therein. The petitioner's name is the third from the top. This
recommendation was considered by the Executive Council of the
respondent in its meeting held on 8th June, 2007. On that date,
the

Executive

Council

resolved

to

accept

recommendation of the Selection Committee.
WP(C) No.2067/2008

the

aforesaid

The Selection
Page 2 of 6

Committee is appointed by the Executive Council and functions
on its behalf. The recommendations of the Selection Committee,
are forwarded to the Executive Council for consideration. The
Executive Council may accept or reject such recommendations.
However, the acceptance of the recommendations by the
Executive Council does not by itself automatically, amount to an
appointment. At best, this decision can be said to have placed
him on a select list.

Nothing more. The petitioner's counsel

urges to the contrary. He states that this acceptance by the
Selection Committee constitutes a valid appointment to the
post, and that nothing further is required to be done in this
behalf. However, despite my repeated queries, he is unable to
show any precedent where any such selection is deemed to be
an appointment. I have also drawn attention of counsel for the
petitioner to the decision of Supreme Court in the case of State
of U.P. Vs. Rajkumar Sharma reported as (2006) 3 SCC
330 wherein it has been held that mere inclusion in a select list
does not confer any right to appointment upon the individual
placed in that select list, even if the post in question remains
unfilled.
5.

It would appear that counsel for the petitioner is unable to

appreciate

the

distinction

between

due

selection

for

appointment to a post and the actual appointment to that post.
No appointment letter or any other factor that would go to
demonstrate the actual appointment of the petitioner to the
post in question has been brought to my attention and I am
WP(C) No.2067/2008

Page 3 of 6

unable to persuade myself that the minutes of the meeting of
the Executive Council dated 8th June, 2007, which contain a
resolution

by

the

Executive

Council

accepting

the

recommendation of the Selection Committee for appointment of
the petitioner, is sufficient to constitute valid appointment of the
petitioner to the post in question.

Counsel appearing for the

respondent in response to advance notice has also stated that in
fact there is another Writ Petition bearing WP(C) No.16258/2006
pending before a Division Bench of this Court where the issue of
appointment of handicapped persons against the quota reserved
for such persons is being examined. He states that there are
some interim orders passed by the Division bench in that case,
because of which no other appointments are being made in
reserved categories except for those that fall under reservations
for handicapped persons.

He states that it is possible that

further action was not taken with regard to the petitioner's
candidature for this reason. He states that the aforesaid interim
orders in that case were issued on 4th April, 2007 and it is
possible that the decision of the Executive Council accepting the
recommendation of the Selection Committee for appointment of
the petitioner, which came about on 8th June, 2007, has not been
acted upon for that reason.
6.

Be that as it may, whilst the Executive Council is vested

with the powers to appoint lecturers on the recommendations of
the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose, mere
acceptance of the recommendations per se would not amount to
WP(C) No.2067/2008

Page 4 of 6

an

appointment.

It

is

merely

an

acceptance

of

the

recommendation of the Selection Committee to the effect that
those recommended are fit for appointment.

No decision or

resolution of the Executive Council to appoint the petitioner or
directing the issuance of an appointment letter to him has been
brought to my notice. The petitioner has cited no precedent or
even any rules or regulations that would persuade me to hold
that the aforesaid resolution of the Executive Council on
8.6.2007 itself constitutes an appointment or that he has
acquired any right to be appointed. Under the circumstances, in
my view, the acceptance of the aforesaid recommendations by
the Executive Council at best amounts to due selection because
of which the petitioner can be said to be placed in a Select List.
In that view of the matter, the petitioner cannot, as a matter of
law, be granted the reliefs prayed for. In this regard, in Union
of India Vs. Kali Das Batish (2006) 1 SCC 779, the Supreme
Court observed that, “mere inclusion of a candidate's name in
the select list gave him no right and if there is no right, there
could be no occasion to maintain a writ petition for the
enforcement of a non-existing right.” In that case, the Supreme
Court relied on its earlier decisions in Punjab SEB Vs. Malkait
Singh (2005) 9 SCC 22 and Sankarsan Dash Vs. Union of
India (1991) 3 SCC 47 for the above proposition. Similarly, in
the case of State of UP Vs. Om Prakash (2006) 6 SCC 474,
the Court held that inclusion of a candidate's name in the merit
list does not confer any indefeasible right to be appointed.
WP(C) No.2067/2008

Page 5 of 6

Since I feel that the aforesaid resolution of the Executive Council
does not constitute any appointment of the petitioner to any
post, the question of issuing a mandamus directing the
respondent to give effect to any such appointment does not
arise.
However, it is clarified that this decision would not come in the
way of any further steps/action that the Executive Council may
be inclined to take in the matter of the petitioner's appointment
consequent upon its aforesaid resolution of 8.6.2007.
7.

The writ petition is dismissed.

March 14, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.2067/2008

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.

Page 6 of 6

