*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.14226/2005

%

Date of Decision : March 10, 2008

Union of India & Ors.

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. M.K. Bhardwaj &
Ms. Priyanka Bhardwaj,
Advocates
Versus

Baljit Singh

.…Respondent
Through : Mr. Varun Prasad,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J :
CM No.9456/2006
1.

This

application

has

been preferred by

the respondent/

workman, under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, seeking
direction to the petitioner to pay the last drawn wages or the
minimum wages whichever is higher, to him during the pendency of
the petitioner's writ in this Court on the ground that he has not been
employed in any establishment during that period.
2.

The facts in a nutshell are that the service of the respondent/

workman was terminated by the petitioner on 2.08.92. The ensuing
industrial dispute raised by him was decided by the Industrial Tribunal

CM No.9456/2006 in WP(C) No.14226/2005

Page 1 of 7

in his favour by an award dated 18.9.2003. It directed reinstatement
of the respondent/ workman along with 50% back wages. The
petitioner/ management has assailed the Award before this Court.
During the pendency of this petition, the respondent/ workman has
preferred the present application under Section 17-B of the Industrial
Disputes Act.

Alongwith his application, the respondent/ workmen

has categorically stated on affidavit that ever since the date of his
termination, he has never been employed in any establishment for
any period of time. In reply, the petitioner has denied the averments
made by the respondent/ workman by stating that the workman was
gainfully employed as a mason/ carpenter on construction sites and
that he is presently working at Peeragarhi. In an affidavit filed by Mr.
Sanjeev Rastogi, Executive Engineer on behalf of the petitioner, it is
averred that this information, regarding the working status of the
respondent,

was conveyed to them by the daughter

of the

respondent, when the officials of the petitioner visited the respondent
at his new address. In rejoinder, the workman has denied this. He
has also filed an affidavit of his school going daughter, who has also
denied having told Mr. Rastogi and the officials accompanying him,
that her father was gainfully employed.
3.

This Court in the case of Headstart Advertising and

Marketing Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Government of N.C.T of Delhi and
Another LPA 1264/ 2007, decided on 9.10.2007 (DB) observed
that, “ratio of the decisions of the Supreme Court in Dena Bank Vs.
Kirti Kumar T Patel reported in JT 1997 (9) SC 167 and Regional
Authority, Dena Bank Vs. Ghanshyam reported in JT 2001
(Suppl.1) SC 229 is that once the labour court accepts the position

CM No.9456/2006 in WP(C) No.14226/2005

Page 2 of 7

that the respondent is a workman and he is entitled to an order of
reinstatement, he should be paid the last drawn wages during the
pendency of the writ petition filed by the management against the
award subject to the condition that the workman was unemployed.”
In Putti lal Vs. Archaeological Survey of India LPA 2399/2006
decided on 3.12.2007 (DB) this court laid down that, “There must
be some concrete, cogent and sound reasoning for coming to the
conclusion as to whether or not the workmen were gainfully
employed…… what is required to be looked into is the evidence and
material on record to hold and decide whether the workmen were
gainfully employed….”
4.

In this case, the averment made by the petitioner in its reply to

the application, to the effect that the respondent has been gainfully
employed has neither been proved by it, nor has any evidence been
placed on the record in this regard. In the case of Taj Service
Limited Vs. Industrial Tribunal-I and Others (2000) 1 LLJ 1012
held as under:- “…… Under the proviso of Section 17-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act what is required to be proved by the employer
is that the workman has been employed in an establishment and had
been receiving adequate remuneration from such employment. It is
different from running one’s own business or trade in order to remain
alive to see the end of litigation…” The said case was also reiterated
in Airport Authority of India Vs. Puran Chand (2006) 8
AD(Delhi) 57 (DB) wherein the appeal of the management was
dismissed on the ground that the management failed to show that
any of the workman was gainfully employed in any establishment
disentitling them to the relief under Section 17-B.

CM No.9456/2006 in WP(C) No.14226/2005

Page 3 of 7

5.

In this case, the Management's opposition to the application

under Section 17-B filed by the workman is based solely on a
disclosure allegedly made by the school going daughter of the
workman to three officers of the Management. In this respect, the
affidavit of Mr. Sanjeev Rastogi, Executive Engineer states as follows,
“the daughter of the respondent, Ms. Rani, student of 12th Class of
G.S.K.V School, Nangloi has told that her father is employed.”
Besides this, in the same affidavit, it is said that when the officials of
the petitioner i.e. Sh. Sanjeev Rastogi, Executive Engineer, Sh. S.K.
Verma, Asstt. Engineer and Sh. Kanti Prasad, Junior Engineer visited
the respondent at his premises on 11.1.2008, “it could be found that
the respondent has gone to workplace.” Nothing more is disclosed.
No further particulars with regard to either the nature of the
applicant's alleged work or his workplace, the salary he draws or even
his working hours or whether he is self-employed or working for
another employer have been disclosed.
6.

It is noteworthy that in his rejoinder, the workman has refuted

the allegation that he was employed.

While he admits that these

three officials met his daughter, he says that she only told them her
name, name of her father and the class she was studying in; and she
never gave any other information. It is further stated that on the date
when these officials visited his premises, he had taken his other
daughter, Neelam, for treatment to GB Pant Hospital. He has also
annexed particulars of his visit to the hospital on that date. Learned
counsel for the petitioner/management has repeatedly stressed that
apart from verifying the facts from the daughter of the respondent,
there was no other way to find out as to whether the applicant has

CM No.9456/2006 in WP(C) No.14226/2005

Page 4 of 7

been in any employment during the relevant period. I do not agree.
Firstly, the facts as regards the workman's employment as stated in
affidavit of Mr. Sanjeev Rastogi, are meager and wholly insufficient for
this court to draw a conclusion to the effect that the workman has
been gainfully employed, with any degree of certainty. No particulars
whatsoever are forthcoming. Nothing is stated about where the
workman was allegedly working, the nature of the work, or his income
from that work, if any.

Consequently, the employer has failed to

satisfy the test laid down by Putti Lal's case (supra). Secondly, I do
not agree with the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner
that the only way of determining whether the workman was employed
is to question his daughter. Such an averment is simply too ludicrous
to be countenanced and I do not consider it necessary to enumerate
the myriad ways in which an employer, particularly if it happens to be
a State agency, can find out the relevant details about a person's
employment. The approach adopted by the management/petitioner,
of three officials of the petitioner questioning the workman's school
going daughter in her father's absence, and that too on the plea that
there is no other method to verify the facts must be deprecated. Such
an approach is callous and cannot be countenanced. Although it is
clear that no material particulars that could have enabled the
employer to resist this application were elicited by the officials of the
petitioner from the workman's daughter, the approach adopted by the
petitioner in this case has disturbed me and therefore, I felt it
necessary to record my disapproval of such tactics on the part of the
management/employer.

CM No.9456/2006 in WP(C) No.14226/2005

Page 5 of 7

7.

I might add that the learned counsel for the petitioner has also

tried to take the position that in cases where a question is raised with
regard to the jurisdiction of the industrial tribunal on the ground that
the employer is a Government department and therefore cannot be a
classified as an industry, then, in those cases also, no order ought to
be granted under Section 17-B. However, this argument, to my mind,
needs to be noticed only to be rejected peremptorily. Suffice to
mention that as held by the Court in Anil Jain Vs. Jagdish Chander
86 (2000) DLT 510, an application under Section 17-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act is to be considered without going into the
merits of the petition. Also, as concluded in Dena Bank Vs. Kirti
Kumar Patel 1999 2 SCC 106 and Regional Authority, Dena
Bank Vs. Ghanshyam AIR 2001 Supreme Court 2270, the object
of Section 17-B is to relieve to a certain extent, the hardship caused
to the workman due to the delay in implementation of the award
during the pendency of proceedings challenging the said award.
Furthermore, despite my asking, counsel for the petitioner was not
able to show any authority in support of his proposition, nor was any
cogent legal reasoning advanced before me by him in this behalf.
8.

Under the circumstances, the application is allowed & the

petitioner is directed to pay the last drawn wages or minimum wages,
whichever is higher, to the respondent/ workman. The arrears of
wages shall be paid to the respondent/ workman from the date of
passing of the award till date within six weeks from today.
9.

Petitioner shall continue to pay the respondent/workman the

last drawn wages or the minimum wages, whichever is higher, on a
month to month basis, on or before 10th of each month.
CM No.9456/2006 in WP(C) No.14226/2005

Page 6 of 7

10.

In the case of Dena Bank Vs. Kirti Kumar Patel (supra), the

Supreme Court has also held that payment under Section 17-B is in
nature of a subsistence allowance which would not be refundable or
recoverable from the workman even if the award is set aside by the
High Court or the Supreme Court. However, the Court may also give
directions regarding refund or recovery of excess amount in the event
of the award being set aside. A similar view has also been taken by
the Supreme Court in Regional Authority, Dena Bank Vs.
Ghanshyam (supra) which has been reiterated by a Division Bench
of this High Court in the case of Ashok Hotel Vs. Govt. of NCT &
Ors. 123 (2005) DLT 384 (DB).

Thus, to balance equities, the

payment, as ordered aforesaid, shall be subject to the applicant filing
an affidavit within a period of two weeks undertaking that in the
event of this Court deciding the writ petition in favour of the
petitioner, he shall be liable to refund to the petitioner, any amount
paid to him in terms of the present order over and above the amount
he was drawing at the time of his termination.
11.

The petitioner/ management shall be at liberty to call upon the

respondent/ workman to report for duty at its premises without
prejudice to its rights & contentions in the present proceedings.
12.

The application stands disposed of.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
March 10, 2008
skw

CM No.9456/2006 in WP(C) No.14226/2005

Page 7 of 7

