IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.2492/2006

%

Date of Decision : March 18, 2008

M/s. Kerala Automobiles Ltd.

.... Petitioner
Through : Mr. H.S. Dahiya,
Advocate

VERSUS
Mrs. Naveetha P.

.... Respondent
Through : Mr. Syed Sajad Ali,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J: (Oral)
1.

The respondent had filed applications u/s 20 (2) of the

Minimum Wages Act before the designated authority under the
Minimum Wages Act.

Pursuant to the said applications, the

Authority under the Minimum Wages Act passed the impugned
order dated 15th December 2005. By this order, five applications
moved by the respondent under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948,
were disposed of. In those applications, the respondent had
claimed the difference in the payment actually made to her and

WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 1 of 11

the amount that ought to have been paid to her under the
Minimum Wages Act. The respondent had moved separate
applications because varying amounts were being paid to the
respondent for each month. In this way, keeping in mind the
minimum wages payable to her, she claimed a sum of Rs.
12,480/- for the period, 1st February 2001 to 31st March 2002.
For the period, 1st March 2002 to 31st August 2002, she claimed
a sum of Rs. 4,860/-. For the period, 19th December 2002 to 19th
May 2003, she claimed a sum of Rs. 3,383/-. For the period, 1 st
August 2003 to 31st August 2004, the respondent claimed Rs.
7,391.40 and for the period 1st Feb 2004 to 31st July 2004 also,
she claimed a sum of Rs. 7,391.40/-.

The respondent alleged

that all these amounts claimed by her denoted the difference
between the minimum wages payable to her in those periods
and the wages actually given to her. Along with this amount,
the respondent also claimed penalty at the rate of 10 times the
amount which, according to her, was short paid to her.
2.

A perusal of the impugned judgment shows that the

learned authority has considered it appropriate to award the
maximum compensation prescribed under the Minimum Wages
Act in terms of Section 20 (3) (i) thereof merely on the ground
that the petitioner is a public sector undertaking. The learned
authority has concluded that, “I do not find any reason why
maximum compensation prescribed in the law should not be
awarded to the claimant. The management has also not

WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 2 of 11

advanced

any

arguments

on

the

quantum

of

penalty/

compensation to be imposed.” The authority has also stated
that it feels, “compelled to direct management to pay the
claimant compensation equivalent to 10 times on the balance
amount of the minimum wages due to the workman.” A perusal
of the impugned judgment demonstrates that this compulsion
was felt by the authority on two grounds alone. Firstly, that the
employer was a public sector organization, and it must be
deterred from paying less than the minimum wages; and
secondly, that no arguments were advanced on the quantum of
penalty/ compensation to be imposed.
3.

Counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a decision of the

Supreme Court of India in the case of Perena Sahygo v/s
Authority under Minimum Wages and Others (2001) 9
SCC 247. In that case, the authority had found ulterior motives
in the employer's conduct and directed it to pay 8 times the
wages awarded as compensation to the workmen. Although the
High Court had dismissed the writ petition, in a petition seeking
special leave to appeal, the Supreme Court considered it a fit
case for interference. It was of the view that the award of
compensation in that case was exorbitant; and that in the
circumstances, it should be equivalent to the amount of the
balance, unpaid wages awarded by the Authority. It was,
therefore, ordered that each of the workers shall get as
compensation, an amount equal to the balance, unpaid wages

WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 3 of 11

awarded to him, and the impugned order of the Authority in that
case was modified to that extent.

4.

In the case at hand, I find that the total difference in the

wages payable to the respondent comes to Rs. 35,505.80 only.
While there is no gainsaying the fact that Section 20 (3) (i)
permits the authority to direct compensation of such amount as
it deems fit, not exceeding 10 times the amount by which the
minimum wages payable to the workman exceed the amount
actually paid, it is obvious that a wide discretion has been left
with the authority for quantifying any such amount. Although
the Minimum Wages Act does not specify how the discretion is
to be exercised, such discretion is not unlimited. According to
Black's Law Dictionary, the term, “discretion” or to put it
more aptly, “judicial and legal discretion”, is applied to the
discretionary action of a judge or court, and mean discretion
bounded by rules and principles of law, and not arbitrary,
capricious or unrestrained action. It is not the indulgence of a
judicial whim, but the exercise of judicial judgment, based on
facts and guided by law, or the equitable decision of what is just
and proper under the circumstances. It is a legal discretion to be
exercised in discerning the course prescribed by law and is not
to give effect to the will of the judge, but to that of the law. In a
case under the Minimum Wages Act, a Division Bench of Gujarat
High Court in Chief Officer, Bhavnagar Nagarpalika Vs.

WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 4 of 11

Meghjibhai Ugadbhai & Others (1995) III LLJ 527 Guj held
as follows:“Once it is found that the nature of powers
to be exercised under Section 20 of the Act
is judicial, there is no escape from the
conclusion that the discretion conferred
upon the Authority invested with such
judicial powers is not unbridled or
unguided. By the very nature of its powers,
such Authority is required carefully to look
into the matter and to decide it in
accordance with sound judicious principles.
Even if such Authority has to exercise
discretionary powers, the very nature of
powers
carries
with
them
implicit
guidelines to exercise such discretion in a
judicial and judicious manner. Conferment
of discretionary powers on the authorities
performing judicial functions can never be
considered arbitrary.”
And that:“...a judicial decision is usually supported
by reasons. Recording of reasons in
support of a finding or conclusion is
ordinarily a part of judicial process. What
weighed with the authority invested with
judicial powers in deciding a case or in
giving a direction or directions is normally
found reflected in its reasoned order what
is popularly known in the legal parlance,
speaking order. The requirement of
recording reasons in support of its decision
or direction based on exercise of
discretionary powers is in itself a guideline
for exercise of such discretionary powers.
It rules, out conferment of unbridled and
unguided
arbitrary
powers
on
the
authority........ Furthermore, the award of
compensation under Section 20(3) of the
Act is not compulsory or mandatory. Such
award would depend upon various factors
like the nature of employment, the status
of the employer, the nature of defaults, the
number of defaults, the frequency thereof,
the amount involved, the delay in making
WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 5 of 11

payment of less than the minimum wages
fixed and like matters. All these factors
are bound to weigh with the Authority in its
decision to award compensation, if any,
and its quantum to the concerned
workman with respect to the application
under Section 20 of the Act.”
5.

Similarly, on the same issue, a Division Bench of Bombay

High Court in C.S. Parameswaram Vs. The Authority Under
The Minimum

Wages Act, 1948 for Nandgoan And

Manmad (1969) 71 BOMLR 292 held that:“Section 20 (3)(i) of the Act enables the
Authority in the case of payment of wages
less than the minimum rates of wages to
direct compensation to be paid as the
Authority may think fit not exceeding ten
times the amount of such excess, and in
any other case, a sum not exceeding ten
rupees. A reading of this clause shows that
there is a discretion in the Authority to
award the compensation or not and if it
decides to award compensation it is within
its discretion to decide what amount it
should award. This discretion has to be
judicially
exercised
and
all
the
circumstances connected with the matter
i.e., non-payment or delayed payment,
must be taken into account. It must be
realised that it is not bound to grant
compensation. Each case must depend
upon the equities of the case. The purpose
of making this provision was to see that an
employer did not contumaciously refuse to
implement the provisions of the Act. There
may be, however, cases where the
employer may not be at fault, there may be
some difficulties in his way or there may be
some cause which prevented him from
implementing the provisions of the Act. All
these matters are to be taken into account
before any order is made granting
compensation in a particular amount.”
6.

In Priya Darsan Agarbatti Vs. State of M.P. And

WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 6 of 11

Others (1995) II LLJ 1084 MP a Division Bench of Madhya
Pradesh High Court also held that the discretion under Section
20(3)(i) of the Minimum Wages Act has to be exercised on
consideration of the entirety of the facts and circumstances.
Even as early as 1960's a Division Bench of Patna High Court in
G.S. Dugal And Company Vs. Labour Inspector AIR 1968
Pat 90 had held that:“Although no criteria are indicated in
Clause (i) of Sub-section (3) of Section 20
of the Act for fixing the amount of
compensation which has to be directed to
be paid along with the amount of the
excess wages within the meaning of the
said clause, i.e, the excess amount by
which the minimum wages payable to the
employees concerned exceeds the amount
actually paid, the outer limit of the amount
of compensation is ten times such excess
amount. That can never mean that without
any rhyme or reason and in all cases it
must be ten times the said amount. The
quantum of compensation has got to be
fixed with reference to the facts of each
case.”
7.

As regards the discretion under Section 20(3)(i), it is to be

exercised by the Authority with regard to the amount of
'compensation' that may be awarded to the workman. The word
compensation has not been defined under the said provision. In
Houghton Main Colliery Co. Ltd, In re (1956) 3 All ER 300
it was observed that the word 'compensation' signifies that
which is given to recompense an equivalent rendered-damages,
on the other hand, constitute the sum of money claimed, or
adjudged to be paid as compensation for loss or injury

WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 7 of 11

sustained, the value estimated in money of something lost or
withheld. The term 'compensation' etymologically suggests the
image of balancing one thing against another. Even in the case
of Chief Officer, Bhavnagar Nagarpalika (supra) a Division
Bench of Gujarat High Court has stated that:“It may be noted that what is to be awarded
is compensation under the relevant
provisions contained in Section 20 of the
Act. The word compensation is not defined
therein. Its meaning will have therefore to
be gathered by means of its usage in the
common parlance. Its dictionary meaning,
inter alia, connotes the act of compensating
and something, especially money, given as
a recompense. In the same dictionary the
word 'compensate', is defined, inter alia, to
mean 'recompense' 'make amends' and
'counter balance'. The dictionary meaning
of the term 'recompense', inter alia, is
'make amends to a person for a loss or
requite, reward or punish a person in an
action. The word 'requite' is referred to in
the dictionary, inter alia, to connote
'reward' or avenge (a favour or injury)'. It
thus become clear from the above referred
meaning of various terms connected with
the word 'compensation' that compensation
is offered to a person to make amends for
some injury or loss caused to him. The
person responsible for causing such injury
or loss is made liable to pay compensation.”
And that:“the compensation awarded under Section
20 (3) (i) of the Act has some penal
element therein.
It is however not a
penalty stricto sensu. The legislature has
advisedly used term 'compensation' in
contra-distinction with the term penalty in
Sub-section (4) of Section 20 of the Act.”
8.

Therefore, what is to be kept in mind while awarding such

WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 8 of 11

compensation is the intention behind the provision, which is to
compensate the workman, and not to penalize the employer. In
the impugned award, the reasoning adopted by it while granting
the maximum quantum of compensation, awardable to the
respondent shows that the Authority appears to be more
inclined to punish the employer, i.e., the petitioner herein,
rather than compensating the workman. Though it says that it is
a case for awarding the maximum compensation envisaged
under the Act, its reasoning reveals that what is termed as
“compensation” has, in fact, been imposed as a penalty aimed
at deterring public sector employers from paying less than the
minimum wages. Furthermore, the payment made to the
respondent varied every month, which is obvious from the fact
that different amounts were claimed by the respondent for
different periods. It is even possible that in some months it went
over, or was at least at par with, the minimum wages. The
authority should also have considered this peculiar facet of the
case while exercising its discretion.
9.

The High Court of Gujarat in Project Technologist Pvt.

Ltd. Vs. P.C. Bhargava and Others (1998) 1 GLR 700
relying on an earlier decision of Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Andhra Pradesh State Handloom Weavers Society Vs.
Authority under Minimum Wages Act, Warangal 1986 I
LLJ 355 held that :
“.... It cannot be denied that Section 20(3)
of the Act vests a discretion in the authority
WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 9 of 11

to direct payment of compensation, and in
deserving cases, it can be equal to ten
times of the wages. The exercise of the
discretion is not left to the caprice of the
Authority. It must be exercised judicially
and reasonably. If the facts of a given case
show that the authority did not exercise the
discretion judiciously, this Court is entitled
to
interfere
with
the
exercise
of
discretion...”.
10.

There is, therefore, no gainsaying the fact that the

authority under the Minimum Wages Act exercises quasi judicial
powers. It follows therefore that the ratio of all the aforesaid
authorities applies with full force in this case also. It appears in
the case at hand, the only factor that appears to have weighed
with the authority is that the employer was a public sector
undertaking. If this is considered sufficient for awarding the
maximum compensation that could have been awarded under
the statute, it would mean that in every case of a public
employer failing to pay the minimum wages to a workman, the
maximum amount of compensation payable would have to be
imposed automatically.

Such an interpretation to my mind is

wholly uncalled for. It would amount to creating a special
category of employers in whose cases no flexibility whatsoever
is available and the maximum awardable compensation must
always be granted. Even in the case of Prerna Sahygo (supra)
where the authority had arrived at a finding that the employer,
“has also tried to falsify the Inspector who is also the applicant.”
And that the employer, “is adamant to pay less wages against
the provisions of the Act” and, therefore, concluded that the
WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 10 of 11

employers conduct was vitiated by ulterior motives, still, a
direction to pay 8 times the wages awarded as compensation to
the workman, was held to be excessive and not sustainable. In
the case at hand, the motives of the employer are not
questioned.
11.

I feel that under the circumstances, the amount of

compensation directed by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid
case of Prerna Sahygo (supra) constitutes a good guide to the
amount of compensation payable. Accordingly, it is directed that
the respondent shall get as compensation, an amount equal to
the amount of wages awarded to her, i.e., Rs.35,505.80. She is
also entitled to a further amount equal to the difference
between the wages actually paid and those payable to her
under the Minimum Wages Act, which amount is stated to have
already been paid to her by the petitioner. The impugned order
of the Authority dated 15th December, 2005 shall stand modified
to this extent. The writ petition disposed of accordingly.
C.M. No. 2259/06
12.

Since the Writ Petition has been disposed of today, this

application is rendered infructuous and the same is disposed of
accordingly.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
March 18, 2008
smp

WP (C) No.2492/2006

Page 11 of 11

