*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.11849/2005

%

Date of Decision : March 18, 2008

Delhi Transport Corporation

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Abhay N. Das,
Advocate
Versus

Balwant Rai Ex. Cond.

.…Respondent
Through : Ms. Rashmi B. Singh,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes.

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes.

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
CM No.50/2006
1.

This is an application Under Section 17-B of the Industrial

Dispute Act. The background of the matter is as that on 3.08.2004,
the impugned award came to be passed by Labour Court-VII,
Karkardooma Courts, Delhi in ID No.166/98. In terms of this award, it
was directed that the removal of the respondent/workman was illegal.
The Labour Court also directed the DTC to reinstate the workman
within one month from the date of the award along with 50% of back
wages. The Delhi Transport Corporation preferred a writ petition
against the said award and the operation of the award was
WP(C) No.11849/2005

Page 1 of 6

stayed by this court on 25.7.2005 with a direction to the petitioner to
deposit a sum of Rs.7500/- as litigation expenses in this court. The
respondent had preferred this application under Section 17-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act. Notice in this application came to be issued by
this court on 4.01.2006 and the same has been pending disposal ever
since. In his application, the workman had stated that he has
remained unemployed ever since the date of his termination by the
petitioner.

This specific averment has been made in the affidavit

accompanying this application to the effect “that deponent has not
been employed in any establishment since the date of his illegal
termination from the service”. After repeated opportunities being
granted in that behalf, reply to this application came to be filed by the
petitioner on 27.9.2007. In its reply no substantial particulars have
been put forward by the petitioner to controvert the claim of the
workman. All that has been stated is that the workman's averments
regarding unemployment ever since removal from the service of the
corporation are denied “being beyond the knowledge of the
petitioner”. Along with this, there is an omnibus denial of the
workman’s claim that he has remained unemployed since the date of
his termination despite his best efforts to find suitable employment.
The only other ground on which this application is contested is that “it
is common knowledge that it is difficult to survive without a job for so
long”. It is, therefore, obvious that although he had more than a year
and a half to do so, the petitioner has been unable to bring forward
any facts that would go to rebut the claim of the respondent/workman
to the effect that he has remained unemployed. It is a also settled law
that merely because an individual may have resorted to some
marginal employment with a view to keeping his body and soul

WP(C) No.11849/2005

Page 2 of 6

together, he cannot be denied the benefits under Section 17-B of the
Act.
2.

In Airport Authority of India Vs Puran Chand 2007 (1) LLJ

850, a Division Bench of this Court, while dealing with Section 17-B of
the Industrial Disputes Act, relied on a decision of the Supreme Court
in Rajendra Kumar Kindra Vs. Delhi Administration (1984) 4
SCC 635 where the workman had admitted that ever since the
termination of his service, he was maintaining his family by helping
his father-in-law Tara Chand who owns a coal depot, and that he and
the members of his family lived with his father-in-law and that he had
no alternative source of maintenance. There, the Supreme Court held
that if this is gainful employment, the employer can contend that the
dismissed employee in order to keep his body and soul together had
taken to begging and that would as well be gainful employment.
Relying upon the aforesaid decision of Supreme Court, this court held
that

intermittent

employment

would

not

amount

to

gainful

employment.
3.

Similarly, in Management of Delhi Gymkhana Club Limited

Vs Government of N.C.T of Delhi and others 2005 (81) DRJ 63,
this Court observed that self employment does not per se disentitle a
person to the benefits under Section 17-B and an endeavour to eke
out a living by employment will also not bar the grant of such relief. In
Management Ashok Hotel Vs Government of NCT of Delhi and
others CM No.8312/2004 in W.P.(C) No.2076/2003 decided on
30.11.2005

this

court

observed

that

sporadic

or

intermittent

engagement of a workman cannot be termed as gainful employment
within the meaning of this expression under Section 17-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act. Even recently, a Division Bench of this court in
Management of Hotel Connaught Vs. Om Prakash 2007 (96)
WP(C) No.11849/2005

Page 3 of 6

DRJ 461 observed that intermittent employment/engagement cannot
be said to be gainful employment and thus granted relief to the
workman under Section 17-B rejecting the plea of the employer to the
contrary. A similar approach was adopted by this court in a number of
other cases viz. DTC Vs. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court-I,
Delhi and others (2002) 96 DLT 103; Food Craft Institute and
others Vs. Rameshwar Sharma and another 2000 (VI) AD
(Delhi) 189; DTC Vs. Pawan Kumar CM No.11344/2006 in
W.P.(C) No. 18882/2005 decided on 10.8.2007.
4.

In view of all the case law discussed above, the plea of the

petitioner that it is common knowledge that it is difficult to survive
without a job for so long, is of no use to it. It cannot raise a
presumption of alternative gainful employment of the workman either
in fact or in law. In view of several judicial pronouncements, it is
settled that sporadic intermittent employment resorted to by the
workman to keep body and soul together, cannot be said to satisfy
the test of gainful employment under Section 17-B of the Industrial
Disputes Act. In fact, a Division Bench of this Court has held in Taj
Services Ltd. Vs. Industrial Tribunal-I & Ors. 82 (1999) DLT
378 that even self-employment in a business, even if it generates
profits, cannot be termed as alternative employment of the type
contemplated under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act. The
decision of this Court on this aspect is as follows :“...........Under the proviso of Section 17-B of
the Industrial Disputes Act what is required to
be proved by the employer is that the workman
had been employed in an establishment and
had been receiving adequate remuneration
from such employment. Being employed for
remuneration in an establishment means
employment under another employer. It is
different from running one's own business or
trade in order to remain alive to see the end of
the litigation. Hence I accept the contention of
WP(C) No.11849/2005

Page 4 of 6

the learned counsel for workmen that
respondents 2, 4 and 10 cannot be denied the
benefit under Section 17-B of the Industrial
Disputes Act on the ground that they are
running their own business and are receiving
profit from such business.”
A reading of this shows that even if it is demonstrated that the
workmen in question are running their own business and are
receiving profits from such business, benefit of Section 17-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act cannot be denied to them. What is required to
be seen is whether the workman was employed for remuneration
under another employer; and so long as that test is not satisfied,
relief under Section 17-B is available. This proposition has also been
reaffirmed in Iklash Hussain Vs. Delhi Transport Corporation
2006 (9) AD (Delhi) 187 where in paragraph 12 thereof, a Division
Bench of this Court has specifically affirmed the view of the leaned
Single Judge taken in the aforesaid case of Taj Services Ltd. Vs.
Industrial Tribunal-I and Ors. (supra). In addition, as decided by
the

Supreme

Court

in

Rajinder

Kumar

Kundra

Vs.

Delhi

Administration AIR (supra), any marginal occupation resorted to
merely to keep body and soul together cannot be construed to
amount to gainful employment denying the benefit of Section 17-B of
the Industrial Disputes Act; and to do so, would be perverse.
5.

Under the circumstances, it is directed that the petitioner, Delhi

Transport Corporation shall pay the respondent/ workman last drawn
wages or minimum wages whichever is higher w.e.f 3.9.2004 and
shall continue to do so during the pendency of proceedings in this
court. The payment shall be subject to the undertaking of the
workman to the effect that in case, the payment made to the
workman is more than the amount of wages last drawn by him, he
would undertake to refund the difference between the wages last
WP(C) No.11849/2005

Page 5 of 6

drawn and the minimum wages, if any, in the event that the
petitioner succeeds in the Writ Petition. This proposition flows from
the ratio in Dena Bank Vs. Kirtikumar T. Patel (1999) 2 SCC 106
wherein it was observed that although Section 17-B does not in any
way preclude the High Court or the Supreme Court to pass an order
directing payment of higher amount than contemplated under Section
17-B, the court may also give directions regarding refund or recovery
of the excess amount in the view of the award being set aside. This
view was also affirmed by a Division Bench of this Court in Ashok
Hotel Vs. Government of NCT of Delhi and others (2005) 83
DRJ 706. Counsel for the respondent workman states that her client
is ready and willing to report for work and to work for the petitioner's
corporation in the meanwhile. It will be open to the corporation to
take him back at work in any capacity it deems suitable, without
prejudice to its rights and contentions in the writ petition.
6.

Application is disposed of.

W.P.C No.11849/2005
7.

Counsel for the petitioner seeks some time to file rejoinder to

the counter affidavit filed by the respondent. Let rejoinder be filed
within four weeks with an advance copy to counsel for the
respondent.
8.

Renotify on 20th November, 2008.

March 18, 2008
ib

WP(C) No.11849/2005

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J

Page 6 of 6

