*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.9608/2007

%

Date of Decision : April 28 , 2008

Shri N.S. Bhatnagar

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr.. Kumar Saurabh,
Advocate
Versus

M/s. India Tourism Development
Corporation

.…Respondent

Through : Mr.. Ajay Kapur &
Mr.. Rajeev Kumar Singh,
Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J :
1.

The workman, Mr. N.S. Bhatnagar, was initially employed

by the India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) in the
year 1972 as a Store Helper at a consolidated salary of Rs.200/per month. In the same year, he came to be promoted as an
Assistant Storekeeper.
2.

In August 1976, he was suspended on charges of fraud and

WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 1 of 17

dishonesty. He was charged with misappropriating Rs.12,146.85.
A chargesheet was issued to him in 1977 by his employer. At
the same time, a criminal complaint was also lodged against him
at the local police station.
3.

A

domestic

inquiry

was

also

commenced

by

the

respondent. There, the Enquiry Officer submitted his report in
1981. Consequent upon this, Mr. Bhatnagar was issued a show
cause notice. He duly replied to the same. Ultimately, on
1/6/1981, Mr. Bhatnagar was dismissed from service.
4.

Mr. Bhatnagar claims that he approached the Labour

Authority against his dismissal, but was advised to wait for the
conclusion of the criminal trial that was pending as a result of
the aforesaid criminal complaint lodged by his employers on the
same allegations.
5.

On 4/12/2002, Mr. Bhatnagar was acquitted by the Criminal

Court on the ground that there was no evidence against him.
Armed with this acquittal, he sent a demand notice to his
employer on 3/2/2003. Having received no reply to this notice,
he

initiated

conciliation

proceedings.

However,

these

proceedings came to naught and the matter was referred by the
Government to the Labour Court.
6.

This case is unique. The dispute came to be referred by the

Government to the Labour Court nearly 27 years after Mr.
Bhatnagar was initially suspended by his employer, ITDC, i.e.,
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 2 of 17

the respondent herein. The Labour Court has thrown out the
reference because, according to it, the reference is stale and, in
view of the facts and circumstances surrounding the matter, no
dispute can be said to have existed on the date of the reference.
It has also examined some authorities on this point.
7.

At the relevant time, Mr. Bhatnagar was employed at the

Akbar Hotel by the respondent. That hotel was shut down long
ago. Before the Labour Court, while the respondent pleaded that
the enquiry conducted by it in the year 1981 was legally sound,
it failed to produce any evidence in support of that plea since,
according

to

it,

the

enquiry

report

was

not

traceable.

Furthermore, at the trial conducted by the Labour Court, the
respondent

led

no

evidence

to

prove

Mr.

Bhatnagar's

misconduct. The Labour Court therefore concluded that it had no
option but to hold that the workman has proved illegal
termination of his service by the management. However, despite
this conclusion, the Labour Court declined any relief to Mr.
Bhatnagar. This was because it felt that even if Mr. Bhatnagar's
case is taken at its highest, and he is taken to have sent a legal
notice to his employer on 1.5.1981, demanding reinstatement;
he admittedly slept over the matter for the next 22 years since
the next notice was admittedly sent by Mr. Bhatnagar only on
3/2/2003. Furthermore, the Labour Court found that even this
notice fails to raise any dispute with regard to his termination
from service, nor does it demand reinstatement. It merely asks

WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 3 of 17

for the supply of some documents. It was under these
circumstances

that

the

Labour

Court

concluded

that

no

industrial dispute subsisted when the reference was made.
8.

Before me, counsel for Mr. Bhatnagar, the petitioner

herein, has urged two main grounds. First, that soon after his
dismissal in June 1981, his client had approached the concerned
Labour Authority, but was advised to wait for the outcome of the
criminal trial that he was facing on the same charge, and to
come back after the conclusion of the said trial. He states that it
was for this reason that he had waited all these years for the
conclusion of his trial before raising the industrial dispute by
approaching the Government in the year 2003 after nearly 22
years.
9.

His second ground of challenge is that one Mr. Bhagwan

Das, who was his co-accused in the criminal trial, was also
similarly acquitted and, in view of the fact that the other
Presiding Officer at the Labour Court who heard that matter has
thereafter granted him compensation; his client, who happened
to be in the same boat, was equally deserving of compensation.
He states that even if the presiding officers happen to be
different in the two cases, in view of the fact that the two cases
are identical in all material aspects, different outcomes in the
two cases cannot be countenanced for the reason that the law
should be uniformly applied in every case.

Therefore, if Mr.

Bhagwan Das was granted compensation by one tribunal, his
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 4 of 17

client too should have been granted similar compensation by the
other tribunal who happened to sit on his case.
10.

He has also urged one more point to the effect that looking

to his age when his case was referred to the Labour Court by the
Government, Mr. Bhatnagar still had five years of service left
before reaching the age of retirement; and therefore it would
have been appropriate for the Labour Court to have granted
either reinstatement or compensation equal to his salary for that
period.
11.

The petitioner has also relied upon a decision of the

Supreme Court in the case of Sapan Kumar Pandit Vs. U. P.
State Electricity Board & Ors. reported as AIR 2001 SC
2562. This was a case where the services of Mr. Pandit were
terminated by the U. P. State Electricity Board in the year 1975.
He raised an industrial dispute claiming that this termination
was illegal and, ultimately the dispute came to be referred to
the Labour Court for adjudication on 29.3.1993. This reference
was impeached by the respondent-Board before the Allahabad
High Court on the ground that the delay by the State
Government in referring the matter was so inordinate that the
dispute has ceased to exist by afflux of time, and, therefore, no
reference should have been made. The High Court quashed the
reference because in its view, there was an undue, inordinate as
well as unexplained delay leading to the presumption that on
the facts and circumstances of that case, no dispute existed at
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 5 of 17

the time when the matter came to be referred by the State
Government for adjudication. It concluded that the workman, Mr.
Sapan Kumar Pandit, had kept silent for more than 15 years and
he woke up only after the petition of other workmen was
allowed. He had made no efforts to get his dispute referred to
the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court, and hence, he could
not be allowed to raise such a dispute after the lapse of such a
long time. However, the Supreme Court overturned this decision
of the High Court. That Court found that as a matter of fact, the
dispute regarding Mr. Pandit, as also of his co-workmen, had
been duly raised in the year 1976 itself after the termination of
their service in the year 1975. The State Government had
thereupon referred the matter to the Industrial Tribunal, Kanpur.
Consequent upon this, the respondent-Board gave an assurance
to Mr. Pandit that in the event any of the claims of his coworkmen, who were 10 in number, succeed, the same benefit
would be extended to the appellant. That litigation ultimately
came to be concluded in favour of the workmen before the
Supreme Court only in the year 1989. The workman then took
up the matter with the respondent Board, and after he realised
that the Board had no intention of honouring its commitments,
he moved the Labour Authorities. The Supreme Court held that
in the circumstances, it could not be said that the reference was
stale or that no dispute existed at the time when the reference
was made.

WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 6 of 17

12.

In essence, the grievance of Mr. Pandit in that case was

that the Electricity Board had failed to treat him at par with the
workmen whose dispute was espoused by the union, and in
whose favour the industrial award was pronounced, in violation
of the assurances given by the Board to him. It was in these
circumstances that the Supreme Court went into the scope and
meaning of the expression “at any time” used in Section 4-K of
the U. P. Industrial Disputes Act. As regards the points in issue in
that case as well as in the case at hand, Section 4-K of the U. P.
Industrial Disputes Act and Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 are in pari materia. The view of the Supreme Court
was as follows :“The words 'at any time' as used in the section are
prima facie indicator to a period without boundary. But
such an interpretation making the power unending
would be pedantic. There is inherent evidence in this
section itself to indicate that the time has some
circumscription. The words 'where the Government is
of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is
apprehended, have to be read in conjunction with the
words 'at any time'. They are, in a way, complimentary
to each other. The Government's power to refer an
industrial dispute for adjudication has thus one
limitation of time and that is, it can be done only so
long as the dispute exists. In other words, the period
envisaged by the enduring expression 'at any time'
terminates with the eclipse of the industrial dispute. It
therefore, means that if the dispute existed on the day
when the reference was made by the Government it is
idle to ascertain the number of years which elapsed
since the commencement of the dispute to determine
whether the delay would have extinguished the power
of the Government to make the reference.
9.
Hence the real test is , was the industrial dispute
in existence on the date of reference for adjudication.
If the answer is in the negative then the Government's
power to make a reference would have extinguished.
On the other hand, if the answer is in positive terms
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 7 of 17

the Government could have exercised the power
whatever be the range of the period which lapsed
since the inception of the dispute. That apart, a
decision of the Government in this regard cannot be
listed on the possibility of what another party would
think whether any dispute existed or not. The section
indicates that if in the opinion of the Government the
dispute existed then the Government could make the
reference. The only authority which can form such an
opinion is the Government. If the Government decides
to make the reference there is a presumption that in
the opinion of the Government there existed a
dispute.”
13.

Although, while considering the factual position in that

case, the Supreme Court concluded that so long as on the date
of reference, the conciliation proceedings were not concluded, it
cannot be said that the dispute does not exist on that date;
however, at the same time, it also noticed its earlier decision in
Nedungadi Bank Ltd. Vs. K. P. Madhavankutty reported as
AIR 2000 SC 839 and quoted the following observation from
that case :“A dispute which is stale could not be the subjectmatter of reference under S. 10 of the I.D. Act. As to
when a dispute can be said to be stale would depend
on the facts and circumstances of each case.”
14.

The Supreme Court then referred to its own Full Bench

decision in M/s. Western India Watch Co. Ltd. Vs. Western
India Watch Co. Workers Union reported as AIR 1970 SC
1205 on the same subject and quoted, inter alia, the following
observations from the said judgment :“As already stated, the expression 'at any time' in the
context in which it is used postulates that a reference
can only be made if an industrial dispute exists or is
apprehended. No reference is contemplated by the
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 8 of 17

section when the dispute is not an industrial dispute,
or even if it is so, it no longer exists or is not
apprehended, for instance, where it is already
adjourned or in respect of which there is an
agreement or a settlement between the parties or
where the industry in question is no longer in
existence.”
Thereafter, the Supreme Court in paragraph 15 of its
decision in Sapan Kumar Pandit (supra) concluded as follows:“There are cases in which lapse of time had caused
fading or even eclipse of the dispute. If nobody had
kept the dispute alive during the long interval it is
reasonably possible to conclude in a particular case
that the dispute cased to exist after some time. But
when the dispute remained alive though not
galvanised by the workmen or the Union on account of
other justified reasons it does not cause the dispute to
wane into total eclipse.”
And that :“the High Court should not have quashed the
reference merely on the ground of delay. Of course,
the long delay for making the adjudication could be
considered by the adjudicating authorities while
moulding its reliefs. That is a different matter
altogether.”
15.

To my mind, Sapan Kumar Pandit's case (supra) is

different from the case at hand on a number of vital points. In
that case, the Supreme Court had concluded on the facts that it
was not as if the appellant woke up at the end of 15 years like
rip van winkle and raised an industrial dispute. In fact, the Board
had given an assurance to the appellant that in the event of any
of the claims of the 10 other workmen being upheld by the
Labour Court, the appellant would get the same benefit,
regardless of the fact that he did not press his claim in any legal
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 9 of 17

forum. It was on the basis of this assurance, and under the
expectation that the Board will extend the same benefits to him
which might be found due to the other workmen at the
culmination of the legal process initiated by those workmen,
that Mr. Sapan Kumar Pandit did not move the Conciliation
Officer soon after the termination of his services on 17.7.1975.
The legal process in respect of the other workmen ultimately
culminated in the year 1989. He, thereafter, called upon the
Electricity Board to honour its promises by carrying out the
assurance held out to him in the year 1975-76 as aforesaid. It
was only when he found that the Board had no intention of doing
so that he approached the conciliation officer. It is, therefore,
obvious that, in that case, the dispute regarding his termination
in the year 1975 remained alive, but was not galvanized by the
workman for good reason. The reason being, the assurances
held out by the U. P. State Electricity Board to the workman at
the time of the termination of his service that it would give him
the same reliefs which the other workmen were found entitled at
the culmination of the legal process initiated by those workmen.
The Supreme Court found this to be a justified reason for the
workman not having initiated proceedings soon after the
termination of his services. It, therefore, could not be said that
the dispute with regard to the workman's termination in the year
1975 had vaned and been eclipsed by the time he approached
the Conciliation Officer appointed by the State Government after
the culmination of the legal proceedings of those other workmen
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 10 of 17

in the year 1989.
16.

The facts in that case can be looked at in another way also.

Mr. Pandit claimed that he had forborne from instituting
proceedings in the year 1975, because the management
promised him the same relief that might be obtained by other
workmen who had taken out proceedings. This promise was
obviously contingent upon proceedings culminating in favour of
those

workmen.

He

claims

that

after

those

proceedings

ultimately concluded in the year 1989, and the workmen
succeeded there, the management reneged on its promise. To
my mind, under the circumstances, the dispute with the
management must necessarily include the issue whether or not
any such promise was made and if so, whether the management
was bound by the same. The other equally important issue that
would arise would be, whether the management had reneged on
the said promise after the year 1989 when the said promise had
fructified and became enforceable. Looking to the latter issue, it
cannot be said that the cause of action to enforce the promise,
that the workman claims was made to him, could have arisen at
any time before 1989. The further question, whether the
workman was entitled to press his original claim of 1975 against
illegal termination in case the management is found to have
reneged on its promise after it fructified, would necessarily have
to be examined while determining the relief to be granted to
him. Consequently, for this reason also, the reference made by

WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 11 of 17

the State Government soon after the date when the promise is
said to have became enforceable, cannot be said to be stale.
17.

The other authority relied upon by the learned counsel for

the petitioner is a decision of the Supreme Court in Dharappa
Sangappa

Nandyal

Vs.

Bijapur

Cooperative

Milk

Producers Societies Union Ltd. [Civil Appeal No.2175 of
2007,

arising out of SLP (C) No.3796/2006,

decided on

26.4.1007]. I do not think this case is of much assistance to the
petitioner.

In

that

case,

the

question

was

whether

the

amendment to Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
introduced by sub-section (4A) with effect from 7.4.1988 in
Karnataka by the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment)
Act, 1987 would have the effect of reviving stale or non-existing
claims because the said amendment enabled the concerned
workmen to apply to the Labour Court for adjudication of the
dispute within six months, inter alia, from the date of
commencement of the said amendment which had come into
effect from 7.4.1988. It was in that context that the Supreme
Court concluded as follows :“28. The object of Section 10(4A) is to enable
workmen to apply directly to the Labour Court for
adjudication of disputes relating to termination,
without going through the laborious process of seeking
a reference under section 10(1) of ID Act. The
Legislative intent was not to revive stale or nonexisting claims.”
18.

Interestingly, even in Dharappa's case (supra), in the

context of stale or dead claims, the Supreme Court noted with
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 12 of 17

approval some of its earlier decisions which, to my mind, can
only support the claim of the respondent before me. In this
context, the Supreme Court held as follows:“27. This Court while dealing with Section 10(1)(c)
and (d) of the ID Act, has repeatedly held that though
the Act does not provide a period of limitation for
raising a dispute under Section 10(1)(c) or (d), if on
account of delay, a dispute has become stale or
ceases to exist, the reference should be rejected. It
has also held that lapse of time results in losing the
remedy and the right as well. The delay would be fatal
if it has resulted in material evidence relevant to
adjudication being lost or rendered unavailable [vide Nedungadi Bank Ltd vs. K. P. Madhavan kutty [2000(2)
SCC 455]; Balbir Singh vs. Punjab Roadways [2001 (1)
SCC 133]; Asst. Executive Engineer vs Shivalinga
[2002 (1) LLJ 457]; and S.M. Nilajkar vs. Telecom DT.
Manager [2003 (4) SCC 27] ]. When belated claims are
considered as stale and non-existing for the purpose
of refusing or rejecting a reference under Section
10(1)(c) or (d), in spite of no period of limitation being
prescribed, it will be illogical to hold that the
amendment to the Act inserting section 10(4A)
prescribing a time limit of six months, should be
interpreted as reviving all stale and dead claims.”
19.

It is noteworthy that in the instant case also, the Labour

Court has noted that over this period of time, the very hotel
where the petitioner was employed has been shut down long
ago and also that the enquiry report of 1981 was not traceable
when the matter came to be decided by the Tribunal in the year
2007.
20.

On the other hand, counsel for the respondent has relied

upon The Nedungadi Bank Ltd. Vs. KP Madhavankuty &
Ors. AIR 2000 SC 839. There, the Supreme Court went into
the question of relief to be granted to a workman in a dispute
that is raised after an inordinately long time. It held that
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 13 of 17

although the law does not prescribe any time limit for the
exercise of power under Section 10 of the Act; however a stale
dispute cannot be said to be the subject matter of a reference
under Section 10. As to when the dispute can be said to be stale
would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. In
that case, the workman had raised a dispute seven years after
his dismissal on the ground that two other employees who were
dismissed in similar situation were reinstated. In this context,
the Supreme Court held as follows :“Law does not prescribe any time limit for the
appropriate Government to exercise its powers under
Section 10 of the Act. It is not that this power can be
exercised at any point of time and to revive matters
which had since been settled. Power is to be exercised
reasonably and in a rational manner. There appears to
us to be no rational basis on which the Central
Government has exercised powers in this case after
lapse of about seven years of order dismissing the
respondent from service. At the time reference was
made no industrial dispute existed or could be even
said to have been apprehended. A dispute which is
stale could not be the subject-matter of reference
under Section 10 of the Act. As to when a dispute can
be said to be stale would depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case. When the matter has
become final, it appears to us to be rather incongruous
that the reference be made under Section 10 of the
Act in the circumstances like the present one. In fact it
could be said that there was no dispute pending at the
time when the reference In question was made. The
only ground advanced by the respondent was that two
other employees who were dismissed from service
were reinstated. Under what circumstances they were
dismissed and subsequently reinstated Is nowhere
mentioned. Demand raised by the respondent for
raising industrial dispute was ex facie bad and
Incompetent.”
This was again restated by that Court in Assistant
Engineer, CAD Kota Vs. Dhan Kunwar reported as 2006

WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 14 of 17

LLR 1220.
21.

Turning to the first ground raised by the petitioner whereby

he has tried to explain the delay of nearly 22 years in
approaching the conciliation officer on the fact that he was
advised to await the outcome of the criminal trial. There appears
to be no factual basis for this assertion and the record does not
bear this out. Even in the letter admittedly sent by him on
3.2.2003 to his employer i.e., the respondent, the petitioner
makes no reference to his having approached the Labour
Authority in 1981. Even more significantly, in his crossexamination, Mr. Bhatnagar has categorically stated that, "it is
correct that between 1981 to 2003, I never approached any
Labour Court or conciliation officer for my reinstatement with
the management". Even before this Court, material particulars
to substantiate this allegation are missing. It is only a bald
statement made by the petitioner in a statement of claim before
the Labour Court in the year 2003. This leaves me in no doubt
that the plea of having approached the Labour authorities
contemporaneously soon after his dismissal, when he was
allegedly advised to come back after the conclusion of the
criminal trial, is a false plea that has been raised to suit the
convenience of the petitioner.

It has no merit and deserves

rejection.
22.

In view of the aforesaid conclusion that Mr. Bhatnagar's

claim to the effect that he did not move the Conciliation Officer
WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 15 of 17

soon after the termination of his service in 1981, because he
was advised to await the outcome of the criminal trial, has no
basis; there is nothing that could sufficiently explain why the
petitioner

forbore

initiation

of

proceedings

against

the

management for more than 22 years. In that view of the matter,
in this case at least, it cannot be said that Mr. Bhatnagar has
demonstrated any valid reasons for not approaching the
Conciliation

Officer

with

reasonable

dispatch

after

the

termination of his services in the year 1981.
23.

As regards the second ground whereby, the petitioner has

claimed parity with the treatment accorded to the case of Mr.
Bhagwan Das because, according to him, both cases were
identical in all material particulars; I am afraid, here also, the
petitioner's case is not well founded. To my mind, there is, in
fact, a very material difference in the two cases inasmuch as,
after his dismissal in the year 1981, Bhagwan Das had filed a
case before the conciliation officer on 18/5/1983 itself whereas
the petitioner did no such thing. This puts the instant case on a
different footing altogether. A decision of a court is rendered on
the facts and circumstances that are pleaded by either party
and and which are established at trial. To that extent, each case
is unique. Here, in one case, the workman clearly established
the fact that he had approached the Labour Authority soon after
his dismissal whereas in the instant case, the workman failed to
do so. In addition, he also failed to give any convincing reason

WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 16 of 17

for not approaching the Labour Authority with sufficient dispatch
in order to convince the Court that the dispute was still alive.
Consequently it is not surprising that the outcome in both cases
was different. Here, since the explanation preferred by the
petitioner has been disbelieved, the delay of around 22 years is
inordinate and unexplained.
24.

In addition, once the Tribunal concluded, and in my view

rightly, that no dispute existed any more and that the reference
was stale, there could be no question of granting either
reinstatement or compensation in lieu thereof. In this view of the
matter, the fact that the petitioner still had some more years to
go before he attained the age of superannuation, is immaterial.
25.

Consequently, looking to the circumstances of the instant

case, and in view of the above discussion, the decision of the
Labour Court to the effect that the dispute was stale, and that it
could not be said that any dispute existed as on the date of the
reference, cannot be interfered with. The petition is devoid of
merit and is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
April 28 , 2008
mw/OPN

WP(C) No.9608/2007

Page 17 of 17

