*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.15637/2006

%

Date of Decision : February 22, 2008

Deepika Sabharwal

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. M.N.
Krishnamani, Mr. Anoop
Bagai and Mr. Soumyajit
Pani,
Advocates
Versus

Sanatan Dharm Senior
Secondary School

.…Respondent
Through : Mr. Vasudev
Lalwani, Mr. S.K. Kapoor
and Mr. Jaibir Sharma,
Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J. :
CM No.12538/2006
1.

This application has been filed by the petitioner praying that

the order passed by the Inquiry Officer on 27th September, 2006
be stayed. By that order, the Inquiry Officer, who is arrayed as
respondent No.2 in the petition, has rejected the petitioner’s
reply to his notice dated 18th September, 2006 directing the
petitioner to appear with her defence statement along with
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 1 of 10

documents. In the said notice, it was also stated that in the
absence of written statement, the Inquiry Officer shall submit his
findings to the Disciplinary Authority who may take stern action
her.

By the impugned communication dated 27th September,

2006, the Inquiry Officer has stated that the reply submitted by
the petitioner, is vague and not acceptable to the undersigned…
…” And that, “the other issues raised by her…….. is not related
to the inquiry.” It also states, “the language used by her in reply
to the notice shows her intention and shows that testimonials
submitted by her are fake, which has been established by the
Crime Branch of the Delhi Police.” It then goes on to state that,
“the matter is closed finally and it is for her information.” In her
petition, the petitioner has also impugned the aforesaid notice
dated

18th

September,

2006

placing

the

petitioner

under

suspension and directing her to appear before the Inquiry Officer
on 27th September, 2006.
2.

On 9th October, 2006, this Court had also heard some

preliminary arguments with regard to stay and passed the
following order :“Till then the disciplinary inquiry is hereby
stayed because it is stated that the criminal
case and the allegations made in the
inquiry are identical” and that, “action be
not taken till further orders”.
After completion of pleadings, this application seeking interim
relief was taken up for disposal.
3.

The following relevant facts have emerged. The petitioner

was appointed on 9th December, 1997 as a Teacher in the
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 2 of 10

Sanatan Dharm Senior Secondary School, Dayanand Colony,
Lajpat Nagar-IV, New Delhi. She was selected by the Selection
Committee as PGT (Hindi) w.e.f. 01.07.1999. Admittedly, there is
serious conflict between the current Managing Committee of the
respondents and the petitioner’s father who the respondents
allege had grabbed the powers of Manager of the Managing
Committee of the School, and that a number of complaints came
to be instituted against the petitioner’s father in this regard.
Whilst they state that the petitioner came to be selected as a
Teacher, “due to coercion exerted by the father of the petitioner
who was managing the affairs of the school at the relevant time.”
; it is also admitted that even now there is litigation between the
School Managing Committee and the petitioner’s father. There,
her father has alleged that the present Managing Committee of
the respondent school has no locus standi, that it is illegally
constituted, and has taken over the school without authority of
law.

While the respondents have taken the position that the

petitioner came to be appointed without submitting the original
certificates due to her father’s influence’, the petitioner states
that the current Managing Committee is determined to dismiss
her with a view to settling scores with her father.

It has also

emerged that on 3rd October, 2002, after her father was ousted,
and the current Managing Committee assumed control of the
affairs of the school, an FIR came to be lodged against the
petitioner under Sections 120(b), 420, 467, 468 and 471 IPC on a
report, said to have been made by an informer, that forged
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 3 of 10

certificates have been submitted by the petitioner with a view to
obtaining her employment with the school. As a result of this, the
petitioner was arrested on 26th November, 2002 and remained in
jail till 4th December, 2002, when she was enlarged on bail.
Significantly, the petitioner was permitted to rejoin her duties on
5th December, 2002 and continued in her job till 10th April, 2003,
when she was placed under suspension.

It appears that the

precursor to her suspension was a legal notice sent by the
petitioner on 5th February, 2003 demanding her salary and
allowances which were not being paid from October, 2002.
4.

After the School Management passed an order dated 10th

April, 2003 placing the petitioner under suspension, the petitioner
resorted to WP(C) No.5223/2003 wherein the petitioner limited
her grievance to her dues and the quantum of subsistence
allowance admissible to her in terms of the Delhi Schools Act and
Rules.
5.

On 3rd April, 2003, a challan was filed in court by the police

in the aforesaid criminal case against the petitioner. In the said
challan, it was stated that the certificates and marksheets
produced by the petitioner before the Investigating Officer were
found to be authentic on investigation. At the same time, it was
stated that the petitioner’s father has prepared a forged Class-IX
school leaving certificate.

In addition, the Investigating Officer

also claims to have found some discrepancy in the date of birth of
the petitioner as entered in different school leaving certificates.
After this challan came to be filed in the Criminal Court on 3rd
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 4 of 10

April,

2003,

the

School

Management

respondent No.2 as an Inquiry Officer.

decided

to

appoint

This was done on 27th

January, 2004 and a chargesheet dated 26th April, 2005 was
served upon the petitioner. On 8th May, 2005 itself, the petitioner
sent a reply stating that, “the fact that the matter involves the
issue which is subject matter of the proceedings in the criminal
case as well and if I am required to divulge all my defence in the
DE. The same shall cause prejudice to my defence in the criminal
case and this is not permissible in the eye of law.”

She also

stated that, :all the certificates are with the Hon’ble Court and
the same has not been returned to the undersigned till date. The
undersigned

feels

that

by

raising

such

issues

in

this

memorandum is just to harass me and also to settle score with
my father.” She prayed that, under the circumstances, this
memorandum be withdrawn. However, on 23rd July, 2005,
respondent No.2 came to be appointed as the Inquiry Officer.
The Inquiry Officer then issued a notice on 18th September, 2006
i.e. after more than one year, to the petitioner calling upon her to
present her defence statement along with documents, and that
this notice may be treated as the last notice.

It was further

stated that in the absence of any written statement, the Inquiry
Officer shall submit his findings to the Disciplinary Authority
Committee who may take stern action against her. In reply, the
petitioner sent a letter dated 23rd September, 2006 where she
relied upon her earlier reply of 8th May, 2005 and also stated that,
“As far as the documents in question are concerned, a trial in
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 5 of 10

respect of the same issue is pending before the Hon’ble MM,
Patiala House Courts, New Delhi and the evidences are pending
yet to be recorded.

The enquiry may therefore, be kept in

abeyance till the finalisation of the trial in the criminal court, as it
would adversely affect the outcome of the trial, in case I am
compelled to disclose my defence in this enquiry proceedings.”
She also pointed out that the School Management is biased
against her because of on-going tussle with her father, and the
question of the School Management is also pending before the
Delhi High Court. Finally, she stated that, “However, at this stage
I reserve my right to participate in the D.E. after the final
outcome of the criminal trial pending before Hon’ble Court of
M.M. Patiala House.” It is in these circumstances that respondent
No.2 issued the impugned Memorandum dated 27th September,
2006.

There

September,

the

2006

petitioner’s
has

been

aforesaid

termed

as,

reply

dated

“vague

and

23rd
not

acceptable……”. Furthermore, the impugned memorandum also
goes on to state that, “the language used by her in reply to the
notice shows her intention and shows that testimonials submitted
by her are fake which has been established by the Crime Branch
of the Delhi Police.” Prima facie, this shows that respondent No.2
is proceeding as if the allegations brought against the petitioner
by the Investigating Officer in the challan filed before the
Criminal Court in themselves constitute proof of the allegations
made therein against her. By this, it also obvious that the scope
of the inquiry and the allegations made against the petitioner in
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 6 of 10

the chargesheet issued to her by the respondents, is identical to
the accusation for which the petitioner is facing a criminal trial.
As a matter of fact, counsel for the respondent fairly conceded
before me that the scope of the disciplinary proceedings pending
against her is identical to the criminal proceedings which the
petitioner is facing, and that the evidence and witnesses in both
would be the same. At the same time, in the impugned order,
respondent No.2 has also concluded that the petitioner’s reply
dated 23rd September, 2006 while showing, “her intention”, also
shows that testimonials submitted by her are fake, and that the
fact that the testimonials are fake has also, “been established”
by the Crime Branch of the Delhi Police. It is quite obvious that
respondent No.2 is acting under the impression that the challan
filed by the Delhi Police which, as is well known, constitutes only
an accusation which is required to be established, in the trial
before it can be said to be proved, have been misunderstood by
the Inquiry Officer/respondent No.2 who has obviously concluded
that nothing further is required in the matter.
6.

Counsel for the petitioner has relied on the case of Capt.

M. Paul Anthony Vs. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. & Anr. (1999)
3 SCC 679 whereby while holding that normally proceedings in a
criminal

case

and

departmental

proceedings

can

proceed

simultaneously, the exception, “may be where the departmental
proceedings and the criminal case are based on the same set of
facts and the evidence in both the proceedings is common

CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 7 of 10

without there being a variance”. In that case, in paragraph 22
thereof, the Supreme Court has concluded, inter alia ;
“…….. (ii) If the departmental proceedings
and the criminal case are based on
identical and similar set of facts and the
charge in the criminal case against the
delinquent employee is of a grave nature
which involves complicated questions of
law and fact, it would be desirable to stay
the departmental proceedings till the
conclusion of the criminal case.”
The Supreme Court had also concluded that ;
“35. Since the facts and the evidence in
both
the
proceedings,
namely,
the
departmental proceedings and the criminal
case were the same without there being
any iota of difference, the distinction, which
is
usually
drawn
as
between
the
departmental proceedings and the criminal
case on the basis of approach and burden
of proof, would not be applicable to the
instant case.”
7.

On the other hand, counsel for the respondent has relied

upon a case of NOIDA Entrepreneurs Association Vs. NOIDA
& Ors. JT 2007 [2] SC 620 and in particular paragraph 16(v)
thereof which states that “if the criminal case does not proceed
or its disposal is being unduly delayed, the departmental
proceedings, even if they were stayed on account of the
pendency of the criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded
with…… .” He relies upon this observation of the Supreme Court
that in this case also enquiry proceedings are unduly delayed and
therefore as an exception, the departmental proceedings ought
to be allowed to be continued. In this context, some facts are
relevant. To begin with, after the FIR was registered against the
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 8 of 10

petitioner on 3rd October, 2002, she was arrested on 26th
November, 2002 and remained in jail for seven days. After her
release on bail, she rejoined her duties on 5th December, 2002.
These facts could not have been gone unnoticed. Despite this,
she continued in her job upto 10th April, 2003 till she decided to
agitate the question of her salary and allowances which were not
being paid to her.

Her suspension on 10th April, 2003 by the

respondents appears to have been motivated by this demand
Before this, the respondents were obviously content with
withholding her salary and allowances.

It was only after writ

petition was filed by her demanding her dues and also seeking
revocation of her suspension order that the School Authorities
decided to appoint an Inquiry Officer on 23rd July, 2005 i.e. more
than 2½ years after the facts, upon which the disciplinary inquiry
is based, came to light. Then again, the Inquiry Officer appears
to have done nothing for over a year. On the other hand, in the
case of NOIDA Entrepreneurs Association (supra), the
matter involved serious allegations of violation of public duty and
misuse of official power by a senior official of the State Govt. in
an arbitrary, colorable or malicious manner. In that case, it was
also found that the State Govt. which had control of the
disciplinary proceedings, was out to help the delinquent officer at
all cost. It was in those circumstances that the Supreme Court
was compelled to appoint a Commission to go into the decisions
taken by the State Govt. to first keep the enquiry in abeyance
pending the outcome of the CBI enquiry investigating the matter
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 9 of 10

and thereafter to dispense with the enquiry altogether. Here
there is no such allegation. The factual matrix is quite different.
The matter revolves around the allegation of the petitioner
having submitted fake and forged certificates with a view to
obtaining employment in the Govt. aided school.

There is no

allegation of any violation of public duty or misuse of official
power; or that the authorities are out to subvert the whole
process with a view to helping her at all costs. Furthermore, the
conclusions reached by the Enquiry Officer in impugned memo of
27th September, 2006 are ex facie quite startling.

When the

allegations are identical, for the Enquiry Officer to conclude that
her guilt stands established by the Crime Branch of the Delhi
Police without any further trial in the matter, is to undermine the
entire process by which relevant facts that go to make up the
guilt of the accused person are required to be proved. To my
mind, the observations of the Supreme Court in para 35 of Capt.
M. Paul Authority’s case (supra) apply to this case also.
8.

Under the circumstances, the interim order dated 9th

October, 2006 directing that further action be not taken pursuant
to the impugned order dated 27th September, 2006 is made
absolute.
9.

The application is disposed of.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
February 22, 2008
skw
CM No.12538/2006 in WP(C) No.15637/2006

Page 10 of 10

