*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Civil Writ Petition No.222/2008

%

Date of Decision : January 24, 2008

Bhagwan Dass

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Sanjay Ghosh,
Advocate
Versus

Lala Ram Sarup T.B. Hospital

.…Respondent
Through : Nemo

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be

Yes

allowed to see the judgment?
2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J (Oral)
1.

By this petition, the petitioner seeks to challenge the award

passed by the Labour Court, FAST TRACK-XXI in ID No.762/06/89
(hereinafter referred as the impugned award).
2.

The petitioner was working as Safai Karamchari with the Lala

Ram Sarup TB Hospital at Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi ever since
1970. On 31st May, 1987, a staff nurse on duty complained that the
petitioner was drunk and had misbehaved with her along with two
other workers, namely Bansi Lal and Ramesh.

After the said

complaint was made, the petitioner along with the other two
individuals who also happened to be employees of the same hospital,
were suspended. He claims that he had in fact not misbehaved at all.

WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 1 of 11

Ultimately, after going into the matter, the respondent hospital
punished Bansi Lal by withholding two increments and Ramesh was
awarded a penalty of censure. However, the petitioner was dismissed
from service.

The matter of the petitioner’s dismissal came to be

referred to the Labour Court for adjudication by an order dated 16th
June, 1989. The said Court granted an opportunity to the respondent
management to prove the petitioner’s misconduct in Court. Before
that Court, the petitioner took the stand that he suffered hostile
discrimination inasmuch as whilst his co-workers, Bansi Lal and
Ramesh, who were also involved in the incident, were punished by
the withholding of two increments in the case of Bansi Lal and
Censure in the case of Ramesh whereas the petitioner himself was
dismissed from service. He also took the plea that the punishment of
dismissal imposed upon him was highly disproportionate to the
misconduct proved against him and therefore prayed that the Labour
Court exercise its power under Section 11A of the Industrial Disputes
Act and substitute the same for a lesser punishment commensurate
to the misconduct found. After recording evidence of the parties and
going into the matter, the learned Labour Court concluded that the
termination of the petitioner’s service is neither illegal nor unjustified
and therefore he was not entitled to any relief. After hearing counsel
for the petitioner, I am satisfied that no case is made out for issuance
of notice in this matter and the petition deserves dismissal at this
stage itself.
3.

By its order dated 27th August, 2003, for a number of reasons,

the Labour Court concluded that the petitioner was not offered
legitimate opportunity of leading evidence in defence and that
therefore the enquiry report is vitiated on the ground that the
WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 2 of 11

domestic enquiry was not held in accordance with the principles of
natural justice. Consequently, the learned Labour Court granted the
respondent management the opportunity to prove the misconduct of
the workman by leading evidence before the Court. In the evidence
of the complainant staff nurse, it has been proved that

whilst she

was on evening duty at about 4.30 p.m., the petitioner came inside
the room where she was sitting and started harassing her along with
Ramesh to compel her to dress a wound on a co-worker.

They

gheraoed her and thereafter abused her stating that “HARAMJADI
SALI, RANDI TERI JAISI TO MERE PARON KE NEECHE SE NIKAL GAI”.
The petitioner and his associates were also smelling of alcohol and
the petitioner in particular kept moving close to her and on being told
by the staff nurse to keep his distance, he reportedly said, “TU KYA
SAMAJHTI

HAI TERE SE JYADA KHOOBSOORAT MERI BIBI

HAI, TU

USKE PERON KI DHOOL BE NAHIN HAI VO CHH BACHCHON KI MAN HO
GAI HAI PAR TERE SE JYADA KHOOBSOORAT HAI. AGAR MAIN TERI
IJJAT KHARAB KAROON TO DOCTOR JAIN MERA KUCH NAHIN BIGAR
SAKTA. TUJHE MAIN BAGAL MAIN DABA KAR LE JA SAKTA HUN.” No
question was put to the complainant in cross examination that the
petitioner was not under the influence of liquor at that time. Before
me, the petitioner’s counsel sought to rely upon the petitioner’s cross
examination where he has denied the suggestion that he had
misbehaved or that he was drunk.

However, there is no cross

examination of the complainant nurse or any other witness or other
individuals present on this aspect. Under the circumstances, I do not
think any benefit can be gained by the petitioner from the
exculpatory

statements

made

by

him

during

his

own

cross

examination whereby he has denied everything, and the conclusion of
WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 3 of 11

the learned Labour Court in this respect cannot be faulted. Similarly,
in response to the petitioner’s attempt to blame the staff nurse for
refusing to do what he alleges was her duty and apply the requisite
dressing on his co-worker, the same cannot give any right to the
claimant to resort to such misbehaviour and intimidation or to subject
the staff nurse to such indignity, humiliation and harassment.

It

appears that about 10 days after the complaint was lodged by the
staff nurse against him, the petitioner, in his reply thereto, also made
serious allegations against the staff nurse by claiming that the staff
nurse called him, “you people are SHARABI, BADMASH AND GUNDAs”
and that she also referred to them in Hindi as, “CHURAs” and,
“CHAMARs”. Since there was no attempt to bring any corroborative
evidence of other members of the staff or patients, etc. who would
have been in a position to bear out these allegations of the petitioner,
it is obvious that these were completely baseless allegations. I have
enquired from the petitioner’s counsel whether the petitioner pursued
the matter of these allegations any further in any independent
proceedings. I am informed that no other proceedings were taken up.
In any case, those allegations, at best, could have constituted
grounds for a separate proceeding against the staff nurse and they
cannot, to my mind, justify the petitioner’s conduct and behaviour.
4.

It is next urged by the petitioner that he has been subjected to

unfair discrimination inasmuch as the other co-workers, namely Bansi
Lal and Ramesh were let off comparatively lightly.

He states that

whilst Bansi Lal was punished with the penalty of withholding of two
increments and Ramesh was merely punished by censure, in contrast
to this, the petitioner has been dismissed from service. The petitioner
states that the learned Labour Court ought not to have accepted the
WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 4 of 11

respondent’s case that a more lenient approach was taken in the
cases of the other two because they had tendered an apology and
undertook not to indulge in any such activities in future.

The

petitioner states that the fact that there was actually no such written
apology is demonstrated by the cross examination of Shri V.K. Jain,
Administrative Officer of the respondent where he has stated, “I do
not possess the letter of apology tendered by the other co-worker.”
He submits that in view of this admission elicited by his counsel in
cross examination, the learned Labour Court ought not to have given
any weightage to the tendering of an apology as being a reason for a
lesser punishment and consequently, the finding of the Labour Court
must be set aside in these proceedings.
submission.

I do not agree with this

The fact of the apology has been stated by the staff

nurse in her examination-in-chief filed by way of affidavit. There, she
has stated that both the co-workers, Ramesh and Bansi Lal, were
taken back on duty on tendering their written apology and
undertaking not to indulge in any such activities in future. I find that
the staff nurse has not been cross examined on this point at all.
Furthermore, there is no evidence or cross examination that might
indicate the person to whom these apologies would have been
tendered or whether they were tendered to the staff nurse or to the
hospital or to both. This is relevant because it has also come in the
evidence of the Administrative Officer, Mr. V.K. Jain, who stated in his
affidavit by way of evidence that the other two persons were allowed
to join the duty with minor punishment, “on their tendering apology
and undertaking that they will not indulge in such activities in future”.
In Mr. Jain’s cross examination what is elicited is only the following,

WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 5 of 11

“I do not possess the letter of apology
tendered by the other co-worker”.
Nothing else is brought out. If the petitioner was trying to prove that
no apologies whatsoever were tendered by his co-workers, then it
was for him to establish the person or authority to whom the said
apologies

were

claimed

to

have

been

given

and

to

further

demonstrate that that person or authority has never in fact received
any such apologies.

In this case, while the complainant who says

that the petitioner's co-workers apologised, is not cross examined at
all; all that is put to the Administrative Officer, who also said that
such apologies were tendered, is merely the question whether he has
brought the letter of apology.

The question that no such letter or

letters exist on the record has not been put to him nor has the record
been summoned. Nor has the witness been asked whether he could
produce it if given an opportunity. In the circumstances, the bland
suggestion that no apology was tendered, has simply been denied.
Although Bansi Lal had since died, the petitioner has also not
bothered to examine the other co-worker, Ramesh, who is said to
have also given the said apology, in support of his stand that no
apology was tendered by his co-workers who were also supposed to
have been involved in the incident. To my mind, it was necessary for
the petitioner to have at least asked the Administrative Officer
whether he was in a position to produce the letter of apology from
the records if he was given an opportunity to do so. For all these
lapses, the petitioner has only himself to blame and under the
circumstances, the finding of the Labour Court that the apologies in
question were actually tendered as claimed, does not require any
interference. Furthermore, on this aspect, the Labour Court was also

WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 6 of 11

conscious of the clear distinction that emerged to the effect that
whilst the complainant was clearly and specifically able to identify the
leading role played in the matter by the petitioner, as also his
attitude and the words he used against her at the relevant time, no
such specific allegations were made against the co-workers and that
the complainant was not able to give the exact words used by the
other two.

Under the circumstances, the conclusion of the Labour

Court that the gravity of the misconduct indulged in by the petitioner
is quite different from that of the misconduct of the other two, is
unexceptionable.
5.

Lastly, the petitioner has also sought to gain some advantage

from the provisions of Section 11A of the Industrial Disputes Act by
taking the position that there was sufficient ground for the Labour
Court to grant relief to the petitioner by reducing the punishment and
imposing some other punishment in lieu of the dismissal, especially in
view of the fact that the other two workmen were treated more
leniently. Here also, a perusal of the decision of the learned Labour
Court cannot be faulted with.

Section 11A confers a specific

jurisdiction on the Labour Court to be exercised whilst adjudicating
matters that come before it. This power is to be exercised by that
Court keeping in mind the evidence and all other circumstances
surrounding the case. Here, an examination of paragraph 8-10 of the
impugned award shows that the Labour Court has applied its mind to
this question to see whether under all the circumstances taken
together including, inter alia, the fact of the other two workmen
having been given lesser punishment, the impugned punishment
meted out of the petitioner was either disproportionate or shocking to
the conscience of the Court. I feel that the learned Labour Court has
WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 7 of 11

rightly concluded that the punishment imposed was clearly warranted
by the claimant’s behaviour.

Amongst other things, it has also

emerged that the petitioner has remained obdurate and intransigent
throughout.

After the incident, whilst the other two workmen

apologized, the petitioner went to the other extreme; he raised
counter allegations of a very serious nature against the staff nurse
besides insisting that he committed no misbehavior at all.
6.

The scope of interference by the High Court in exercise of its

writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of Constitution of India, has been
defined in a number of judgments by the Supreme Court and also by
different High Courts.
In J.H.Jadhav vs. Forbes Gokak Ltd. (2005) 3 SCC 202, the
Supreme Court held that the conclusion reached by the High Court
was unsustainable. In that case the Division Bench had held that
there was nothing on record to show that the appellant was a
member of the Union or that the dispute had been espoused by the
Union by passing any resolution in that regard. The Supreme Court
held that the Tribunal had addressed its mind to that question,
appreciated evidence both oral and documentary and found that the
Union had espoused the appellant’s cause. It held that under the
circumstances, the High Court had misapplied the principles of
judicial review under Article 226 in interfering with the decision. It
was not a question of there being no evidence of espousal before the
Industrial Tribunal. There was evidence which was considered by the
Tribunal in coming to the conclusion that the appellant’s cause had
been espoused by the Union. The High Court should not have upset
the finding without holding that the conclusion was irrational or
perverse. Therefore, the conclusion reached by the High Court was
WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 8 of 11

held to be unsustainable by the Supreme Court. It held that so long
as the High Court did not conclude that the decision of the Tribunal
was irrational or perverse, the conclusion reached by the Industrial
Tribunal could not be overturned.
Similarly in the case of Indian Overseas Bank vs. I.O.B.
Staff Canteen Workers Union and Anr. AIR 2000 SC 1508, the
Supreme Court has concluded that any liberal re-appreciation of
evidence and redrawing of conclusions on pure questions of fact is
impermissible in exercise of writ jurisdiction, inter alia, for the reason
that, the High Court is not to exercise any appellate jurisdiction over
the awards passed by the Tribunal and that,

“the findings of fact

recorded by a fact finding authority duly constituted for the purpose
and which ordinarily should be considered to have become final,
cannot be disturbed for the mere reason of having been based on
materials or evidence not sufficient or credible in the opinion of the
writ court to warrant those findings at any rate, as long as they are
based upon some material which are relevant for the purpose or even
on the ground that there is yet another view which can be reasonably
and possibly be taken.”
Similarly, in Harbans Lal vs. Jag Mohan AIR 1986 SC 302,
the Supreme Court has stated as follows:“……The limitations on the jurisdiction of the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution
are well settled. The Writ Petition before the
High Court prayed for a Writ in the nature of
certiorari, and it is well known that a Writ in the
nature of certiorari may be issued only if the
order of the inferior tribunal or subordinate
court suffers from an error of jurisdiction, or
from a breach of the principles of natural
justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent
error of law. There is no sanction enable the
High Court to reappraise the evidence without
sufficient reason in law and reach finding of
WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 9 of 11

fact contrary to those rendered by an inferior
court or subordinate court. When a High Court
proceeds to do so, it acts plainly in excess of its
power.”
Even a Division Bench of Bombay High Court in the case of C.
C. Palkar Vs. K. M. Mills Ltd. (1992) 4 SLR 82 (Bom) observed
that If the adjudicator’s award is challenged before the High Court in
writ jurisdiction, it can be quashed, “if it is vitiated by the
fundamental flaws of gross miscarriage of justice, absence of legal
evidence, perverse misreading if facts, serious errors of law on the
face of the order, jurisdictional failure and the like.” The High Court
has, “to be cautious both in not overstepping as if Article 226 were as
large as an appeal and not failing to intervene where a grave error of
law has crept in.”
Even as long ago as in 1964, the Supreme Court in the case of
Syed Yakoob Vs. K. S. Radhakrishnan & Ors. AIR 1964 SC 477
observed as under :“7……..There is, however, no doubt that the
jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari is
supervisory
jurisdiction
and
the
Court
exercising it is not entitled to act as an
appellate Court. This limitation necessarily
means that findings of fact reached by the
inferior Court or Tribunal as a result of
appreciation of evidence cannot be reopened
or questioned in writ proceedings…..”
7.

As I have already concluded, the impugned award does not

suffer from error of jurisdiction or from any breach of the principles of
natural justice nor can it be said to be vitiated by any manifest or an
apparent error of law. Nothing has been shown which could suggest
any flaws leading to a gross miscarriage of justice or any other
perversity apparent on the face of the impugned award. This Court is

WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 10 of 11

not an appellate court.

Even otherwise the findings of the Labour

Court are unexceptionable. Under the circumstances, the decision of
the Labour Court does not warrant any interference in the exercise of
writ jurisdiction by this Court.
The petition is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
January 24, 2008
mw

WP(C) No.222/2008

Page 11 of 11

