*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.1478/2008

%

Date of Decision : February 25, 2008

M/s Ranutrol Industries Limited

…..Petitioner
Through :

Mr. Gulshan Chawla,
Advocate

Versus
Mr. Navched Singh & Anr.

.…Respondents
Through : NEMO

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J (Oral)
1.

The present Writ Petition has been preferred by the petitioner

for quashing the impugned award dated 27.10.2005, passed by the
Presiding Officer, Labour Court-IX Delhi in ID No.850/2004 whereby,
after closing the evidence of the petitioner vide order dated
12.01.2004, the Labour Court granted reinstatement to respondent
No.1 with full back wages @ Rs.1078/- per month. The said order
dated 12.01.2004, as well as the terms of reference dated 5.05.1994
passed by the appropriate Government, and the notice dated
15.11.2006 issued by the Labour court for implementation of the
award dated 27.10.2005, have also been challenged by the petitioner.
2.

A reference was sent by Secretary (Labour) Government of NCT,

Delhi on 5.05.1994, vide reference No.F.24(4845)/93-Lab./19301-06
WP(C) No.1478/2008

Page 1 of 8

pertaining

to

an

Industrial

Dispute

between

the

petitioner/management and respondent No.1, Sh. Navched Singh and
Sh. Vijay Ram in the following terms:“Whether the services of S/Sh. Vijay Ram
and Navched Singh have been terminated
illegally and / or unjustifiably by the
Management, and if so, to what relief are
they entitled and what directions are
necessary in this respect?”.
3.

In their statement of claim, the workmen submitted that they

were working with the management as helpers at Rs.1,078/- per
month respectively, and that their services were terminated w.e.f.
22.03.1993,

without

any

reason

or

notice.

The

management

contested the claim. According to it, Vijay Ram was a temporary
worker, whose service was terminated after the expiry of the period
of his employment under the terms of his contract; while Shri
Navched Singh's employment was terminated because management
had lost confidence in him after a departmental enquiry conducted by
an independent person, in accordance with the Principles of natural
justice found that he had participated in an illegal and unjustified
strike. A Rejoinder was filed by the workmen denying all allegations
made in the written statement.

On the pleadings, following issues

were framed:1.

Whether the workman was appointed for a fixed
period?

2.
3.

As per the terms of reference.

4.
4.

Whether the proper inquiry has not been held?

Relief.

On 12.01.2004, the Labour Court closed the evidence of the

management because it failed to produce any evidence even though

WP(C) No.1478/2008

Page 2 of 8

many adjournments were granted for this purpose. After that, the
management stopped appearing altogether. Since Vijay Ram did not
produce any evidence to support his case, no relief was granted to
him. On the other hand, vide order dated 27.10.2005, termination of
Navched Singh, respondent No.1 herein, was declared illegal; the
Labour Court directed his reinstatement along with continuity in
service and full back wages on the ground that while he had
discharged the onus of proof placed upon him by proving his affidavit
filed by way of evidence, the management failed to rebut the same
and produced no evidence to the contrary.
5.

Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner states that the

Labour Court has not addressed issue no.2 framed by it, to the effect
that proper enquiry has not been held. According to him, in the light
of this issue, the onus of proving the lack of proper enquiry lay upon
the workman and that there is nothing in the impugned award to
show that this aspect of the matter has been considered by the
labour Court. For this proposition, he has relied upon the decision of
Supreme Court in Indian Oil Corporation Vs. Ashok Kumar Arora
(1997) 3 SCC 72. In that case, the respondent was dismissed by the
Disciplinary Authority for cheating the Corporation. The High Court
however, setting aside the order of dismissal, directed reinstatement
with back wages. The Supreme Court observed that the High Court
was wrong in interfering with the punishment awarded by the
Disciplinary Authority. As to the contention of the respondent that he
was denied a reasonable opportunity by the Enquiry Officer the Court
held it to be devoid of merits as the respondent was unable to
illustrate in what manner he was denied a reasonable opportunity.
This authority does not in any way substantiate the claim of the
WP(C) No.1478/2008

Page 3 of 8

petitioner. A reading of the impugned award clearly shows that the
workman had made a categoric statement that his service had been
terminated without any enquiry and in violation of the provisions of
the Industrial Disputes Act and that no notice or notice pay or
retrenchment compensation had been given to him. As stated in the
Latin maxim “Ei Incumbit probatio qui dicit, non qui negat”, the
onus of proof lies upon him who affirms, and not upon him who denies
the existence of any fact. It is the management who averred that the
requisite enquiry had, in fact, been held. Therefore, it was for the
management to prove that fact. In this context, the examination of
paragraphs 5 and 7 of the impugned award shows that the labour
court has duly noted the fact that despite a number of opportunities
being granted to the management, it has failed to produce any
evidence of a fair and valid enquiry and / or that any enquiry at all
has been held against the workman. At the same time, it has also
been noted that the workman denied in his cross examination that
any enquiry has been held against him. It is, therefore, obvious that
this issue has been decided correctly.
7.

As regards the other objection of the petitioner with regard to

the ground that the date of appearance before the Labour Court was
never intimated to them by their previous advocate and a party
cannot be made to suffer for non appearance of the advocate,
learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention to the
decision of Supreme Court in Rafiq Vs.Munshilal reported as AIR
1981 SC 1400 and in particular paragraph 7 thereof. That was a
case where an appeal was dismissed for default of the appellant's
counsel. It was also ordered that the costs should be recovered from
the advocate who absented himself. I do not agree with the
WP(C) No.1478/2008

Page 4 of 8

contentions of the petitioner.

Here, admittedly, the same counsel

was also entrusted with several other matters by the petitioner, but
while he attended only 4-5 of them, the others remained unattended
along with the instant case, and the petitioner woke up only after the
impugned award came to be passed. The management ought to have
been vigilant enough to verify the progress of its cases. There is no
explanation forthcoming as to what steps if any, were taken by the
management once it realised that certain matters were going
repeatedly unattended. If anything, it shows complete carelessness of
the management towards the fate of this case. It is noteworthy that
the petitioner has not bothered to demonstrate the method of
interaction between itself and its counsel to appraise itself about the
status of all its cases being handled by that counsel. It has also not
placed any proof of its interaction with its counsel with regard to this
case in particular. If the petitioner was seriously aggrieved of the way
in which its counsel was conducting this case, it would have
immediately proceeded to rectify matters either in writing or
personally. The only information in this behalf is given in paragraph 2
of the writ petition wherein it is contended that after the award came
to be passed, some enquiry was made from the previous advocate
who was authorised to conduct the proceedings and that “the
petitioner management did not get any satisfactory reply.” There is
nothing to show that the petitioner was alive to its responsibility with
regard to the proceedings pending before the Labour Court. Nothing
has been shown by the petitioner by way of contemporaneous
interaction with their counsel demonstrating its anxiety to find out as
to how the matter was proceeding before the Labour Court from one
date to the next.
WP(C) No.1478/2008

It appears that the statement of claim was filed
Page 5 of 8

before the Labour Court in the year 1994 and thereafter petitioner
retained the counsel through whom a written statement was filed in
November 1998. The impugned award came to be passed in
27.10.2005. It is thus obvious that these proceedings continued for a
number of years. It is incomprehensible that a responsible petitioner
would not systematically follow up the proceedings in such a case,
more so, when the same counsel is admittedly pursuing a number of
other cases also for the petitioner.
8.

If the counsel was squarely to blame, what steps did the

petitioner take in this behalf? Was any letter written to the counsel
remonstrating his behavior? Did it even bother to withdraw the other
matters entrusted with the same counsel? None of this is known.
Consequently, the bald averment in this behalf carries no conviction.
It is entirely possible that while he continued to do so in other cases
where he was being properly instructed by the petitioner; counsel
failed to appear before the Labour Court due to lack of necessary and
material instructions in this case.
9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner also urges that in fact the

respondent arrayed before the Labour Court was M/s Ranu Troll
Limited whereas the petitioner's correct nomenclature is Ranutrol
Industries Limited and therefore, the reference is incomprehensible.
The fact of the matter is that admittedly, the petitioner duly entered
appearance and in response to the notice. It filed its written
statement of defence also. It also admitted the fact that the workman
in question was actually employed by the petitioner. Furthermore, no
such defence has been taken in the written statement. Learned
counsel for the petitioner relies on the decision of Madan Pal Singh
Vs. State of UP and others 2000 LLR 225 (SC) in support of this
WP(C) No.1478/2008

Page 6 of 8

proposition. I do not think that this decision is of much assistance to
the petitioner for the reason that the pertinent fact in that case was
that the name of the workman was wrongly described in the
reference order, and that during the evidence, the employer had
taken a stand before the Labour Court that no such person named in
the reference was ever employed by him; and that Labour Court
proceeded to pass the award without waiting for correction by
government as sought by the workman himself. According to the
Supreme Court, in view of the fact that the name of the workman was
not correctly mentioned in the reference, although there was no
doubt about his identity, the Labour court itself could have sought
correction of the reference from the State Government. In contrast, in
the case at hand, this discrepancy in the name of description of the
petitioner was never brought to the notice of the Labour court. The
petitioner management took no objection to the manner it was
described and has proceeded to defend itself on merits. The
relationship of employer and employee was also not denied. In that
view of the matter, this objection has no force and the decision of the
Labour Court cannot be quashed on that ground.
10.

Lastly, counsel for the petitioner has also sought to urge that

since a specific plea was taken in its written statement that the
management had lost confidence in the workman, learned Labour
Court ought not to have ordered his reinstatement

in such

circumstances and the award of compensation was more appropriate.
Although this plea was taken by the petitioner; no effort was made to
prove it by way of evidence to enable the Labour Court to seriously
countenance the same. Hence the fact that the Labour Court did not

WP(C) No.1478/2008

Page 7 of 8

notice this plea cannot be interfered with by this court in writ
proceedings.
11.

In this view of the matter, this is not a fit case for exercise of

jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
12.

The petition is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
February 25, 2008
ib

WP(C) No.1478/2008

Page 8 of 8

