*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.3225/2008

%

Date of Decision : April 25, 2008

Shri Satyendra Singh

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Ratnesh Kumar Thakur,
Advocate
Versus

University of Delhi & Anr.

.…Respondents

Through : Mr. Mohinder Rupal,
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : Oral
1.

This writ petition has been posted for urgent hearing at

3.45 p.m. today by a special order. The petitioner is a student of LL.B
First Year at the Law Centre-II, Faculty of Law.

He is also a

handicapped person. He prays that a direction be issued to the
respondents, “to issue examination admit card to the petitioner so as
to enable him to appear in the examination of LL.B First Year, Second
Semester, starting from 28th April, 2008.”
2.

The petitioner rests his case on the fact that he met with

WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 1 of 9

an accident on 16th January, 2008 and was thereafter hospitalised
upto 19th January, 2008. While at hospital, the petitioner underwent
an operation.
discharged.

On 19th January, 2008, he is stated to have been
He thereafter revisited the hospital on 30th January,

2008, when the sutures that had been applied pursuant to his
operation, were removed. On that date, according to the petitioner,
he was advised rest for four weeks.

The petitioner states that he

ultimately recovered from his ordeal on 26th February, 2008 and
started attending classes thereafter. In this way, the petitioner was
admittedly absent from 16th January, 2008 to 26th February, 2008.
3.

He states that the attendance list was put up at the Law

Centre on 21st April, 2008. As per this list, the petitioner was shown to
have attended 103 lectures out of 173 lectures and consequently, his
attendance worked out to 59.54%. He states that on the very next
day, i.e. 22nd April, 2008, he had applied for the requisite attendance
certificate. He also claims to have submitted relevant papers seeking
waiver/ condonation of delay in terms of the rules on the ground that
his is an exceptional case that deserves relaxation. In support of his
claim for relaxation, petitioner has also annexed the attendance rules
applicable to his case at page 18-A of the petition titled “Attendance,
Examination and Promotion Rules for First Year LL.B Programme”.
The relevant portion of this rules reads as follows :
“1. Students pursuing LL.B programme are
required to attend 66% of the lectures in each
subject including moot courts and practical
training.
2. In exceptional cases for reasons to be
recorded and communicated to the Bar
Council of India, the Dean of the Faculty of
Law/ Professional-in-Charge of the Law Centre
may condone attendance short of those
required by this Rule, if the student had
attended 66% of the lectures in the aggregate
WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 2 of 9

per semester examinations.”
A perusal of these rules shows unequivocally that students pursuing
the LL.B course are required to attend 66% of the lectures in each
subject.

However, in case the student has attended 66% of the

lectures in the aggregate per semester, but falls short of the
aforesaid requirement of having attended 66% of the lectures in each
subject, then, in, “exceptional cases”, and for reasons to be recorded
and communicated to the Bar Council of India, the Professor Incharge
of the Law Centre is empowered to condone the shortfall between the
requirement of attending 66% of the lectures in each subject and the
aggregate of 66%. Looking to this requirement, it is obvious that for
a shortage in attendance to be condoned, two requirements must be
fulfilled – first, that the case must be an exceptional one, and second,
that the student concerned must have attended at least 66% of the
lectures in the aggregate, per semester. In the instant case, even if it
is assumed that the first requirement is satisfied, and that the
petitioner's case is indeed exceptional, there is no gainsaying the fact
that the petitioner unfortunately does not satisfy the second
requirement. His aggregate attendance is admittedly 59.54% which
is woefully short of the required 66%.

To put it differently, for a

student to be eligible for consideration for condonation of the shortfall
in his attendance, it is imperative that he attends at least 66% of the
lectures in the aggregate. In that view of the matter, it is obvious
that the petitioner does not fall within the type of cases that are
entitled to consideration for condonation.

Mr. Rupal, who has

appeared in response to an advance notice, has brought to my
attention a decision of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of
S.N. Singh Vs. Union of India & Ors. reported as 2003 IV AD

WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 3 of 9

(Delhi) 378 where also, the question of relaxation in attendance
granted to LL.B students studying at the Faculty of Law, University of
Delhi was examined. In that case, this Court had held that, “a law
course cannot be equated with the normal academic course.
Attendance of lectures, tutorials and seminars is very essential to
train the law students. Under the Advocates Act, 1961, the Bar
Council of India has been empowered amongst others, 'to permit
legal education and to lay down standards of such education'.”
Thereafter, this Court had held that although under the ordinances
and rules framed by the Academic Council of the Delhi University,
relaxation of shortage of attendance upto 10% was permissible to
college students and the Academic Council, in exceptional cases, is
empowered to grant further relaxation, however, the examination
rule framed by the Bar Council of India makes a different provision for
relaxation. It held that, “the Bar Council of India Rule requires 66%
attendance in each paper and empowers relaxation in a particular
paper, provided however total attendance in all papers is 66%.” It
further held that;
“23. Since the Bar Council of India recognises
the LL.B. Degree Course of the University of
Delhi and the Bar Council of India is a
statutory
body
constituted
under
the
Advocates Act, 1961 and is empowered to lay
down standards of legal education, University
of Delhi would be required to bring its rules in
conformity with the rules of the Bar Council of
India.”
It was in these circumstances that a direction came to be issued to
the University of Delhi to amend its Examination and Promotion Rules
in the matter pertaining to attendance and bring them in conformity
with the corresponding rules framed by the Bar Council of India. In
that case, another argument raised by the petitioner that was

WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 4 of 9

examined by the Court was that since in the past, the University had
been waiving attendance rules without any outer limit to relaxation in
the interest of equity and justice, this also should not be disturbed by
the Court.

This argument was emphatically turned down by this

Court with the finding that, “no one can have a legitimate expectation
that an academic body will go about relaxing norms without
application of mind.”

In that case, although a number of students

had been allowed to sit for the examinations subject to the outcome
of that writ petition, ultimately,their petitions were dismissed, and the
admissions to the next semester granted on the basis of interim
orders permitting them to sit for the examination, of all those
students, were quashed.

In this case also, learned counsel for the

petitioner has sought to urge that simply because the petitioner is
faced with exceptional circumstances inasmuch as he is physically
handicapped and on top of that, he met with an accident which
prevented him from attending classes for nearly 40 days, therefore,
the attendance requirements must be relaxed in his case.

I am

afraid, such a relief cannot be granted to the petitioner for the same
reason as was recorded in the aforesaid case of S.N. Singh (supra).
There also, the request of a number of students claiming relaxation
on a number of grounds, including, inter alia, viral fever or other
medical complications, was unequivocally turned down.
4.

My attention has also been drawn to two more decisions

of this Court in this respect by the learned counsel appearing for the
respondent. In another case filed by the same petitioner, i.e., S.N.
Singh Vs. Delhi University decided by a Division Bench of this
Court on 5th December, 2006 in WP(C) No.7701/2005, it was
unequivocally stated as follows :

WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 5 of 9

“In view of the aforesaid stand now taken by
all the parties hereto, we are of the
considered opinion that to be able to appear
in the examination for obtaining the degree of
LL.B, a student has to have a minimum
attendance 66% of the lectures on each of the
subjects. However, there is a proviso added
thereto that in exceptional cases for reasons
to be recorded and communicated to the Bar
Council of India the Dean of the Faculty of Law
and the Principals of the Law Colleges shall
have the power and the jurisdiction to
condone attendance short of what is required
by the rule, if the student have attended 66%
of the Lectures in the aggregate for the
semester of examination as the case may be.
The aforesaid provision mandates that a
candidate must have minimum attendance of
66% of the lectures on each of the subject to
enable him to appear in the LL.B examination,
subject to the condition mentioned in the
proviso.
Considering the aforesaid position, we are
also of the opinion that the aforesaid provision
being mandatory in nature should be strictly
adhered to and be complied with by the
respective colleges. If there is any violation of
the said rules, it would be open to the
petitioner................. Authorities and also to
the notice of the Bar Councils and when such
violation is noticed, appropriate remedial
measures shall be taken by the University
Authorities, Bar Council of Delhi and the Bar
Council of India. It is also made clear that the
University Authorities shall not allow any
deviation from the requirements of Rule 4 of
section A of Part IV of the Bar Council of India.
Rules unless they receive specific permission
from the Bar Council of India.”
This Court also agreed with the rationale of the earlier decision of the
Division Bench in S.N. Singh Vs. Union of India & Ors. (supra). It
may be noted that the aforesaid earlier decision came about on a writ
petition seeking directions that all three Law Centres in Delhi must
necessarily take the attendance rules seriously and adhere to them
strictly. In the later decision, this Court also reproduced with approval
the following portion of the earlier decision in S.N. Singh Vs. Union

WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 6 of 9

of India & Ors. (supra) which, to my mind, is relevant in this case
also :
“Para 21. We find force in the submission of
the Ld. Counsel for the petitioner in respect of
the first four submissions noted as above. A
Law Course cannot be acquitted with a
normal academic course.
Attendance of
lectures, tutorials and seminars is very
essential to train the law students. Under the
Advocates Act 1961, the Bar Council of India
has been empowered,. Amongst others, “to
promote legal education and to lay down
standards of such education”.
The Bar
Council of India has framed statutory rules
which bind all institutions conferring LL.B
Degree Course which are recognized by the
Bar Council of India. Section 4 of the Delhi
University Act 1922, empowers the University
to confer degrees of students who have
pursued as course of study in the University
or in any college attached or affiliated to the
University. No student can be deemed to
have pursued a course of study who does not
comply with the various requirements
prescribed under the Act, Statute, Ordinances
or Rules framed by the Academic Council.
Needless to state that the Academic Council is
the Supreme Academic Body of the
University. Clause 8 of Ordinance 7 clearly
provides that no student shall be deemed to
have pursued a regular course of study unless
he has attended at least two-thirds proviso
permits relaxation of shortage of attendance
upto 10%. Thus, as per the attendance norms
prescribed under the Ordinance, pertaining to
LL.B Degree Course, shortage of attendance
beyond 10% is not permissible. However, the
Academic Council in exceptional cases is
empowered to grant a further relaxation. The
examination rules framed by the Bar Council
of India also provides for relaxation, but
makes a different provision for relaxation.
The Bar Council of India requires 66%
attendance in each paper and empowers
relaxation in a particular paper, provided
however total attendance in all the papers is
66%. The Academic Council decision to
accept the Justice V.S.Deshpande Committee
recommendation is thus a resolution limiting
the exercise of power of relaxation
unanimously adopted by the Academic
Council. The Academic Council would thus be
bound by its own resolution. The decision not
to grant relaxation was a conscious decision
WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 7 of 9

not to grant relaxation was a conscious
decision taken for which a high powered
Committee was considered and was taken in
the interest of legal education.”
Para 22.
Since the Bar Council of India
recognizes the LL.B Degree Course of the
University of Delhi and the Bar Council of
India is a statutory body constituted under the
Advocates Act 1961, and is empowered to lay
down standards of legal education, University
of Delhi would be required to bring its rules in
conformity with the rules of the Bar Council of
India.
Para 23.
The Respondent No.1 is thus
issued a direction to amend its examination
and promotion Rules in the matter pertaining
to attendance to bring them in conformity
with the corresponding rules framed by the
Bar Council of India.
Para 31.
In matters pertaining to education
no Court can permit total violation of the
norms. LL.B Degree Course is expected to
produce trained legal minds, ready to take on
the challenges of the 21st Century. Decline in
education norms in professional law courses
was noted by the Supreme Court as far back
as 1989. In the judgment reported as AIR
1989 1541 titled Baldev Raj Sharma vs Bar
Council of India, it was observed that there is
a substantial difference between a course of
study pursued as a regular student and a
course of study pursued as a private
candidate.
It was observed that regular
attendance for the requisite number of
lectures, tutorials etc. has a purpose. Rules
framed by the Bar Council of India were
upheld.”
Relying on the above judgments, a Single Judge of this Court in the
case of Smt. Deepti Vs. Vice Chancellor and Ors. WP(C)
No.18051/2006 decided on 20th April, 2007, held as follows :
“Those who do not fall within the criteria of
relaxation would obviously not have been
eligible to sit for the semester examinations
held on December, 2006 and there would be
no question of the declaration of the result of
the papers in which they have appeared
pursuant to interim orders passed by this
Court.”
5.

In view of these judgments mentioned above, I have no

doubt that regrettably, despite exceptional circumstances, the
WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 8 of 9

petitioner cannot claim relaxation of the attendance criteria.
6.

Consequently, the writ petition is without merit and is

dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
April 25, 2008
skw

WP (C) 3225/2008

Page 9 of 9

