*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.8576/2007

%

Date of Decision : February 27, 2008

Bhupinder Kaur & Ors.

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. M.R. Farooqui
Mr. S.K. Srivastava,
Advocates
Versus

Municipal Corporation of Delhi

.…Respondent

Through : Ms. Smita Shankar
Ms. Gurupyani Dwivedi
Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioners are aggrieved by an advertisement issued

by the respondent the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) on
30th October, 2007, inviting applications for appointment to the
post of Nursery Teachers on contract. That advertisement also
makes it clear that the appointment for which applications are
invited are not regular appointments in the MCD and that these
appointments being offered are a 'stop-gap' arrangement till

WP(C) No.8576/2007

Page 1 of 4

these vacancies are filled through the Delhi Subordinate
Services Selection Board in the normal course for which the
necessary requisitions has already been sent. In terms of this
advertisement, the essential qualifications, inter alia, required
candidates to hold a diploma/ certificate in Nursery Teaching
Training Education Programme of the duration of not less than
two years. The age limit which is prescribed for the candidates
is between 20 to 27 years.

The petitioners being above 30

years of age are ineligible and, therefore, unable to apply. They
have, therefore, challenged the prescription of age limit in the
advertisement on the ground that the same is against existing
recruitment regulations and natural justice.
2.

It would appear that the facts and circumstances

narrated by the petitioner in this case are similar to those in
WP(C) No.8461/2007 titled Anju Goel Vs. MCD which has been
decided by me on 21st February, 2008. There also, since the
petitioner was more than 30 years old; he was aggrieved of a
similar advertisement inviting applications for appointment to
the post of Nursery Teachers on contract issued by the MCD
where age limit prescribed for candidates was between 20-27
years. He prayed that the respondents be directed to modify the
age limit. That matter came to be dismissed by me on the basis
of a decision of the Division Bench of this Court dated 11th
January, 2008 in the case of Rajbala & Ors. Vs. MCD (WP(C)
No.8417/2007) wherein a Division Bench of this Court had

WP(C) No.8576/2007

Page 2 of 4

noticed the difference between the regular employment under
the rules and the offer of contractual employment made by the
advertisement dated 19th October, 2007, whereby it was
proposed to engage Primary Teachers on a contractual basis as
a stop gap arrangement till such time a regular employment
based on the amended rules could be made. The Division Bench
held that:
“since it is only a stop gap arrangement and
the persons appointed are not going to get
right over the post, more so when it is done
keeping in view the provisions of the NCTE
Act, we are of the view that no interference
with such a move is called for”.
Here also, as already noted, the advertisement clearly mentions
that, “the candidates so engaged on contract basis shall not
claim for regular appointment in the MCD.” and that, “this is
stop gap arrangement.”

Counsel for the petitioner fairly

concedes that this is a matter which is now squarely covered by
the aforesaid decisions.
3.

It is worth noting that apart from the above grounds of

challenge in para 2 of the petition, although the petitioners have
also stated that they belong to the reserved OBC and SC
categories and are therefore entitled to get the age limit
prescribed relaxed; this is not mentioned in any of the grounds
appended to the petition nor is there any prayer to this effect.
Even otherwise, in a purely contractual employment, the terms
and conditions are governed by the offer, and if the offer

WP(C) No.8576/2007

Page 3 of 4

fructifies into a contract, then by that contract. An applicant
cannot demand terms which do not form part of the offer. In
the absence of any statute compelling the same, he cannot
approach the Courts to issue a mandamus to the employer to
amend its offer, so as to include the applicant also in what is
purely stop gap contractual arrangement. It is a trite law that
Courts cannot issue a writ of mandamus unless the claimants
can demonstrate the existence of a subsisting legal right. Since
the recruitments envisaged under the offer in question are not
in the nature of statutory recruitments, the terms and conditions
in such a stop gap contractual employment are governed by the
conditions offered, and the rights, if any, of the applicant would
arise only from terms of the offer itself. This is also the ratio of
the decision in Raj Bala's case (supra). The petitioners have not
cited any precedent to the contrary.
Under the circumstances, the petition is dismissed.
CM No.16174/2007
In view of the fact that the main writ petition has
been disposed of today, interim orders granted earlier stand
vacated and this application is also dismissed.
Application is disposed of.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
February 27, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.8576/2007

Page 4 of 4

