*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.2285/2008

%

Date of Decision : March 24, 2008

Usha Sahai

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. H.K. Shekhar,
Advocate
Versus

Delhi School Tribunal & Ors.

.…Respondents
Through : NEMO

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

Petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated 22.11.2007 of

the Delhi School Tribunal, whereby, the application of the
petitioner for condonation of delay in filing the appeal against
the termination of her service on 14.5.2004 has been dismissed.
It would appear that the petitioner's service was terminated on
14.5.2004. The termination order was admittedly received by
the petitioner on 18.5.2004 in the United States of America
where she was staying at that time. After receiving this order on
18.5.2004, the petitioner returned to India on 11.8.2004. The
period of limitation available to the petitioner for filing the
WP(C) No.2285/2008

Page 1 of 8

appeal in question against the termination of her service was 90
days.

For computing the period of limitation, time started

running from 18.5.2004. On her return to India on 11.8.2004, at
least 6 days were still available to the petitioner to file her
appeal. However, the appeal came to be filed only on
25.11.2004. In her application for condonation of delay, the
petitioner has merely stated that;
“she returned to India on 11.8.2004 and
with the intention to file an appeal against
the
respondents
and
collected
all
documents and datas about the statement
of the school for filing the case/ appeal at
appropriate forum”.
She further stated as follows:
“That the appellant is able to collect all the
datas on 17.11.2004 and contacted his
lawyer thereby, so, she was not able to file
the appeal within time.”
2.

No further particulars are disclosed in the application.

Learned Tribunal has gone into the question of condonation of
delay.

It has found that the appellant has failed to show which

documents were collected by the appellant after admittedly
having arrived in India on 11.8.2004.

It is also noted that no

copy of any application seeking these documents has been
placed on the record; and that the non filing of such an
application makes it impossible to ascertain the exact date on
which these documents were applied for; or even whether these
documents were sought from the school, or from any other
authority. In other words, the learned Tribunal has concluded
that the plea of the petitioner seeking condonation of delay is

WP(C) No.2285/2008

Page 2 of 8

bereft of material particulars. The Tribunal has dealt with this
aspect in the following terms:
“merely, an averment that the
Appellant took three months to collect
the documents, without there being
any other substantial proof, will not
entitle
the
Appellant
to
claim
condonation of delay even without
giving the sufficient cause to claim the
same”.
3.

Learned counsel has also urged that since a substantial

question of law is involved in the case that by itself was
sufficient ground for the Tribunal to condone the delay. He
states that this Court ought to have interfered in the exercise of
writ jurisdiction for this ground alone. According to him, once, “a
substantial question of law”, is shown to exist, that in itself
constitutes sufficient ground for the condonation of delay and, in
such a case, no further duty is cast upon the petitioner to
explain the delay. To accept this proposition amounts to
exempting all appeals before the Education Tribunal in which, “a
substantial question of law”, is claimed to arise, from the rigour
of the limitation prescribed under Section-8(3) of the Delhi
School Education Act. I am afraid I do not see any such
exemption to Section-8(3) prescribing limitation of 90 days for
preferring an appeal before the Tribunal. A perusal of Section8(3) also shows that while an employee is given a right to prefer
an appeal; there is nothing to indicate therein that appeals
involving, “a substantial question of law”, stand on a different
footing than appeals not involving any such question. The
expression, “substantial question of law”, is to be found in
WP(C) No.2285/2008

Page 3 of 8

Section 100 of Civil Procedure Code. In addition, Article 133 of
the Constitution of India, that confers appellate jurisdiction on
Supreme Court of India in appeals from High Courts in regard to
civil matters, also states – an appeal shall lie to the Supreme
Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High
Court certifies under Article 134-A that the case involves, “a
substantial question”, of law of general importance. To my mind,
the scope and purport of these provisions can, by no stretch of
imagination, be read into the jurisdiction being exercised by the
Delhi School Tribunals constituted under the Delhi School
Education Act.
4.

Even otherwise, the argument advanced by the counsel for

the petitioner to the effect that the jurisdiction to condone delay
ought to have been exercised on the sole ground that a
'substantial question of law' is involved in the case or, in other
words, the mere existence of a substantial question of law can
be termed as a cause sufficient to condone the delay, is too
broad a proposition and cannot be countenanced at law. From
the impugned order, I find that the petitioner relied on the case
of Collector, Land Acquisition v. Katiji, (1987) 2 SCC 107,
but the Delhi School Tribunal held it to be not applicable to the
facts of the case. In that case, the Supreme Court

observed

that a liberal approach is adopted to determine whether
sufficient cause exists or not as it is realized that:
1) Ordinarily a litigant does not stand to benefit by lodging

WP(C) No.2285/2008

Page 4 of 8

an appeal late.
2) Refusing to condone delay can result in a meritorious
matter being thrown out at the very threshold and cause of
justice being defeated. As against this when delay is
condoned, the highest that can happen is that a cause
would be decided on merits after hearing the parties.
3) That every day's delay must be explained, does not
mean that a pedantic approach should be made. Why not
every hour's delay, every second's delay? The doctrine
must be applied in a rational common sense pragmatic
manner.
4) When substantial justice and technical considerations
are

pitted against each other, cause of substantial justice

deserves to be preferred for the other side cannot claim to
have vested right in injustice being done because of a nondeliberate delay.
5) There is no presumption that delay is occasioned
deliberately, or on account of culpable negligence, or on
account of malafides. A litigant does not stand to benefit
by resorting to delay. In fact he runs a serious risk.
6) It must be grasped that judiciary is respected not on
account of its power to legalize injustice on technical
grounds but because it is capable of removing injustice
and is expected to do so.
This decision spells out the approach to be adopted and

WP(C) No.2285/2008

Page 5 of 8

suggests that a liberal approach should be adopted in deciding
whether there exists sufficient cause for condoning delay,
specially when substantial justice & technical considerations are
pitted against each other. In such a case, substantial justice is
to be preferred & the term “sufficient cause” is to be interpreted
liberally. However, nowhere does it suggest that the mere
existence of a substantial question of law can be taken, ipso
facto, as a sufficient cause to condone any delay whatsoever,
regardless of the circumstances surrounding the delay.
The aforesaid decision in Katiji's case (supra) was also
analyzed by a Full Bench of Gujarat High Court in Municipal
Corporation

of

Ahmedabad

Through

Municipal

Commissioner Vs. Voltas Limited and Others AIR 1995
Guj 29, wherein the Court observed that the only principle laid
down in the said decision is that, on account of these factors, a
liberal approach is required to be adopted by a Court in deciding
an application for condonation of delay. It was further observed
that, “we are unable to locate therefrom any principle laid down
to the effect that these six factors (whether considered
individually, collectively or in combination of other facts) when
factually established in a given case for condonation of delay,
would itself constitute sufficient cause for condonation.” It was
also observed that, “the phrase sufficient cause involves only
questions of fact to be considered by the Court dealing with the
application for condonation of delay, and in considering
sufficiency of the cause, no question of principle is involved.”

WP(C) No.2285/2008

Page 6 of 8

The Gujarat High Court also examined the question whether
merits

of

the

substantive

matter,

in

respect

of

which

condonation of delay is sought, is the only criterion to decide
the sufficiency of the cause, and/or whether it is a predominant
factor, or merely a relevant factor, even if the delay is not
satisfactorily explained. It held as follows;
“To our mind, this submission puts the cart
before the horse. The substantive matter in
respect of which delay is sought to be
condoned has no existence in law, so far as
the the Court is concerned, until the delay
is condoned. In fact, until the delay is
condoned the Court cannot take cognizance
of the merits or otherwise of the
substantive matter. In this limited context,
the application for condonation of delay
created a jurisdictional barrier against the
consideration of the substantive matter on
merits.”
6.

The above observations clearly contemplate that if there is

a substantial question of law involved in a case then the term
“sufficient cause” for condonation of delay has to be interpreted
liberally & not that the mere existence of a substantial question
of law in itself will be a sufficient cause to condone the delay. In
other words, even if it is assumed for a moment that there
exists a substantial question of law; some material and relevant
particulars spelling out the unavoidable circumstances that
prevented the petitioner from availing his remedy within the
time prescribed must be reliably demonstrated.

This, I am

afraid, has not been done. I might add that the right to file an
appeal has been conferred by the Delhi Schools Education Act.

WP(C) No.2285/2008

Page 7 of 8

It is a statutory right; therefore follows that the scope and
amplitude of this right can be validly spelt out by the said
statute.

If the right to file appeal is made available by that

statute for 90 days; then, it follows that after the expiry of that
period the right to file the appeal stands extinguished.
7.

In this view of the matter, and since I do not find any

perversity or illegality in the impugned order, therefore without
going further into the question whether the Tribunal is even
empowered to condone the delay; I do not consider it a fit case
for interference in exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution of India, the writ petition is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
March 24, 2008
ib

WP(C) No.2285/2008

Page 8 of 8

