*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.7796/2005

%

Date of Decision : March 26, 2008

Delhi Transport Corporation

…..Petitioner

Through : Ms. Saroj Bidawat,
Advocate
Versus
Pratap Singh

.…Respondent
Through : Mr. Som Dutt Sharma,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
CM No.15006/2007
1.

This is an application filed by the respondent/workman

Mr. Pratap Singh under Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act. The
instant writ petition came to be filed by the Delhi Transport
Corporation impugning the award dated 12.9.2003 in ID No. 391/1996
passed by the Labour Court-VII which held that the services of Mr.
Pratap Singh had been terminated illegally by the petitioner. It was
also directed that he shall be reinstated with full back wages and
continuity of service. On an application moved by the petitioner an
interim stay of the effect and operation of the impugned award was

WP(C) No.7796/2005

Page 1 of 8

also granted by this Court on 28.11.2005.
2.

By this application, Mr. Pratap Singh has stated that he is

unemployed and could not find gainful employment and that he has
been maintaining himself from out of the payment made to him by
the petitioner in part implementation of the impugned award. He
states that he has been paid salary for the period from 1.6.1990 to
29.2.2004. He has also annexed an affidavit to that effect.

This

application came to be filed by the workman on 27.10.2007. Counsel
for the petitioner had sought time to file reply to this application on
30.10.2007 and she was granted four weeks to do so. Thereafter on
11.1.2008, at the request of counsel for the petitioner, last
opportunity was granted to file the reply within two weeks. It was also
directed that in case the reply is not filed within the time granted the
right to file reply shall stand closed. The time granted to the
petitioner for filing a reply in terms of this Court's aforesaid order of
11.1.2008 expired on 25.1.2008.
3.

From the record, I find that the reply of the petitioner was

filed only on 13.3.2008 i.e. well beyond the time granted. Counsel for
the petitioner earnestly pleads that this reply be considered. She
states that she was under the impression that the reply had in fact
been filed within time. Although the right to file the reply stands
closed in terms of the Court's order dated 11.1.2008; however, in the
interest of justice, and in view of the fact that there is no objection by
counsel for the workman also, the petitioner is permitted to file this
reply and the same is taken on record. I find that the stand taken by
the petitioner in the reply is that the respondent/workman has not
disclosed the efforts, if any, that were made by him to secure a job
during the period in question, and that therefore the application
WP(C) No.7796/2005

Page 2 of 8

deserves dismissal.

Counsel for the petitioner has, however, not

been able to place any authority or address any argument in support
of the proposition that it was incumbent upon the workman to
demonstrate these facts before an order under Section 17B can be
made.
4.

Counsel for the petitioner also urges that although the

writ petition was filed in the year 2005, however, the instant
application has only come to be filed in the year 2007 i.e. nearly two
years after the filing of the writ petition challenging the award that
was passed in favour of the workman. She contends that in view of
the fact that the application has been filed after two years, at best
the workman can be entitled to relief under Section 17B with effect
from the date on which the application was filed, and not earlier. I do
not agree.

Section 17B of the Act does not admit to any such

distinction. The liability of the employer to pay the workman, which is
created by that Section, is not limited to the period after the date of
his application.

On the contrary, Section 17B states that, “the

employer shall be liable to pay such workman, during the pendency
of such proceedings in the High Court........ if the workman had not
been employed in any establishment during such period.......”. To my
mind, what Section 17B does, is to create a liability on the employer,
and that liability is unequivocal. It is related to the period of pendency
of the proceedings in the High Court. Consequently, the only
requirement is that the workman should not have been employed in
any establishment during such period and his affidavit to that effect
should be filed. The expression “such period” has to be read in the
light of the expression, “the period of pendency of such proceedings
in the High Court......” referred to in the earlier portion of Section 17B.
WP(C) No.7796/2005

Page 3 of 8

It cannot be said that on the one hand, the workman is required to
state on affidavit that he has remained unemployed during the entire
period of pendency of the proceedings in the High Court, i.e. to say,
from the date the proceedings came to be instituted in the year 2005,
and yet, simply because he moved the application under Section 17B
in 2007, he will get relief only from 2007 onwards.

If it was the

intention of the legislature to grant relief under Section 17B only from
the date on which he applied, in that case, it would not have required
the workman to state on affidavit that he has remained unemployed
during the entire period and the requirement could well have been
restricted to a statement by the workman that as on the date of his
application, he is unemployed.

This is an ameliorative piece of

Legislation. As held by this Court in Dena Bank Vs. Kirtikumar T.
Patel (1999) 2 SCC 106; Regional Authority, Dena Bank Vs.
Ghanshyam AIR 2001 SC 2270; Bharat Singh Vs. Management
of New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre (1986) 2 SCC 614 the object
of Section 17B is to relieve, to a certain extent, the hardship that is
caused to the workman due to delay in the implementation of the
award during pendency of the proceedings impugning the said award
before the High Court or the Supreme Court. This amount is in the
nature of a subsistence allowance and is not refundable or
recoverable even if the award is set aside by the superior Courts.
This was also reiterated by a Division Bench of this Court in
Hindustan Cabinet Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi 95
(2002) DLT 689. Looking to the object of this provision, as also to
the clear and unambiguous language thereof, the interpretation
canvassed for by the learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be
countenanced. The Section cannot be interpreted in a manner that
WP(C) No.7796/2005

Page 4 of 8

requires the workman to show that he has remained unemployed for
a longer period, but will be given relief only for the period after he has
moved the application under Section 17B.
5.
me

The interpretation canvassed for is also unacceptable to
for

another

reason.

The

Labour

Court's

award

directing

reinstatement is also in keeping with the object of Labour Legislation;
which is to prevent exploitation of labour in recognition of the weaker
economic status of workmen. Under the circumstances, to now hold
that although the Labour Court has concluded that the workman is
entitled to reinstatement, however, if the decision of the Labour Court
remains unimplemented due to a challenge mounted by the employer
in the High Court, thereby causing hardship to the workman, he
deserves ameliorative relief envisaged under Section 17B only for the
period after the date on which he moved the application and not from
the date of the Award in his favour, is unacceptable. Furthermore,
since he is required to state on affidavit that he has not been
employed in any establishment during the entire period that the
challenge to the award was pending; there cannot also be any
presumption that till he moved the application under Section 17B, he
was gainfully employed and therefore did not require the support of
Section 17B for that reason.

Other reasons, such as poverty or

illness, can also prevent the workman from applying. To my mind,
the workman's entitlement to payment under Section 17B arises the
moment the ingredients mentioned in that Section are satisfied. That
the workman shall be entitled to compensation only from the date of
application onwards, is not an ingredient of Section 17B. Therefore,
the entitlement having once arisen under Section 17B, a portion of
the same, corresponding to the period from the date of the award
WP(C) No.7796/2005

Page 5 of 8

upto the date the application under Section 17B came to be filed,
cannot be lost or extinguished merely because the workman, in
whose favour this entitlement has arisen, has not applied to the Court
to realise it earlier.

To interpret it thus would amount to whittling

down the scope and amplitude of an ameliorative provision designed
at relieving the hardship caused to the workman due to delay in the
implementation of the award.
6.

Counsel for the petitioner has stated that there is a

decision of Justice Gita Mittal of this Court where in similar
circumstances, an application under Section 17B which was filed 2½
years after the filing of the writ petition challenging the award in
favour of the workman, and in that case, relief under Section 17B has
been granted only for the period after the date of filing of the
application. This authority has not been placed before me.

In fact

counsel for the petitioner has not cited a single authority in support
of any of her propositions. In that view of the matter, and also for the
reasons stated above, I find myself unable to agree with any of the
submissions made by her.

On the other hand, counsel for the

workman has cited the decision of this Court in Food Craft Institute
vs. Rameshwar Sharma which is also a decision by Justice Gita
Mittal reported as 134 (2006) DLT 49 for the proposition that
interim relief can be granted w.e.f the date of the award. He refers to
para 64 of this judgment wherein all the principles laid down in
various judicial pronouncements for the grant of interim relief to a
workman have been culled out. This is a comprehensive and well
reasoned judgment and I do not see any reason to differ from this.
Even a Division Bench of Rajasthan High Court in Rajasthan State
Road Transport Corporation Vs. Labour Court & Anr. (1998) 1
WP(C) No.7796/2005

Page 6 of 8

LLJ 831, Raj, where the application under Section 17B was made by
the workman two years after filing of the writ petition, observed that
if all the three ingredients for making an application under Section
17B are fully satisfied, the relief under the Section will be awarded.
The delay in making the application will not affect the powers of the
Court.
7.

Under the circumstances and for the aforesaid reasons, I

am satisfied that ingredients of Section 17B have been made out and
the workman is entitled to relief under the said Section.
8.

Counsel for the workman also states on instructions that

his client is ready and willing to report for work with the petitioner.
Counsel for the petitioner states that she would like to seek
instructions as to whether the petitioner corporation would like to
take work from the workman without prejudice to

its rights and

contentions in the petition. In the event that the petitioner
corporation wishes to take work from the workman, it would be open
to the corporation to give the petitioner one week's time to report for
work. In the event such notice is given to the workman, the workman
will be bound to report for work. As the workman has already
received salary upto 29.2.2004, he shall be paid his wages during the
pendency of these proceedings in terms of the last salary drawn
w.e.f. 01.03.2004. Let the arrears be paid within six weeks.
9.

The application is disposed of.

CM No. 5543/2005

10.

The interim orders granted on 28.11.2005 are made

absolute till the disposal of the writ petition.
11.

The application is disposed of.

WP(C) No.7796/2005

Page 7 of 8

WP(C) No.7796/2005
12.

Renotify this matter on 10th April, 2008.

March 26, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.7796/2005

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J

Page 8 of 8

