*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.734/2008

%

Date of Decision : April 28 , 2008

M/s. Priya Enterprises

…..Petitioner
Through :

Mr. A. K. Mishra,
Advocate

Versus
Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Anr.

.…Respondents
Through :

Mr. Prem Mishra,
Advocate for respondent
No.1

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J :
1.

A claim was filed by Mr. Het Narain Jha, a workman, employed

by the petitioner. His last drawn salary was Rs.1,600/- per month.
According to the workman, he was admitted to hospital for treatment
after he had met with an accident during the course of his
employment on 28.10.1998. However, after recovering, he was not
permitted to re-join his duties on 10.1.1999. The workman claims to
have sent a demand notice dated 21.4.1999. In defence, the
petitioner-management pleaded that in fact the workman had not
completed 240 days of service in the preceding year, and, as such, he
could not be deemed to be in continuous service in terms of Section

WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 1 of 9

25B of the Industrial Disputes Act, and, therefore, he was not entitled
to the protection under Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
According to the petitioner, Mr. Jha had worked for only five months
from May 1998 to September 1998; and that too only as a Helper, for
which he had been paid the requisite salary under the Minimum
Wages Act. The petitioner also took the stand that even during the
span of the five months that he worked with the petitioner, he was
highly irregular, erratic, careless and dishonest, as well as insincere in
his duties, because of which he was repeatedly warned and
reprimanded, but to no avail. According to the petitioner, the
workman was incorrigible and eventually abandoned his job.
2.

In the written statement filed before the Labour Court, the

petitioner also took the stand that it was unable to prove any of the
facts pleaded therein because the entire record pertaining to
attendance, salary, appointments, vouchers and ledgers for the
period 1996 to 1998 had been lost. The petitioner stated that a
complaint with regard to the loss of the record had been lodged, and
a publication was also effected in that behalf. As noticed by the
Labour Court, this record was allegedly lost when the same was being
taken on a scooter to the conciliation proceedings in this very matter.
All other facts pleaded by the respondent, Mr. Jha, were also denied in
the written statement by the petitioner.
3.

According to the management, Mr. Jha had left its services in

the month of September 1998, which was much before the date of
the alleged accident which he claimed had occurred during his
employment on 28.10.1998. The petitioner took the stand that the
entire story of the workman was concocted and baseless. In addition,
the petitioner denied having received the demand notice dated
WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 2 of 9

21.4.1999 allegedly sent by the respondent. In addition, it was also
pleaded

that

the

respondent,

Mr.

Jha,

is

gainfully

employed

elsewhere.
4.

In its judgment, the Labour Court has noted that neither party

addressed any arguments despite repeated opportunities.

The

matter had come up for final arguments initially on 7.1.2006.
Thereafter, the matter was fixed repeatedly for final arguments on as
many as 11 dates of hearing. Except for one or two days, on which
the Presiding Officer was on leave, the matter was adjourned
repeatedly. Ultimately, the Labour Court was constrained to close the
opportunity to address arguments and proceeded to deliver judgment
on the basis of the material on record.
5.

With regard to the demand notice dated 21.4.1999, said to

have been sent by the workman; an examination of the returned AD
envelope shows that it was dispatched to the correct address.

As

many as seven efforts were made by the postman to deliver the
same.

Ultimately, it was returned with the report that the the

addressee was not found available. It is in these circumstances that
the Labour Court has presumed due service on the petitionermanagement, and since no reply was given to the said notice, the
contents are deemed to be admitted by the petitioner-management.
In the writ petition also, neither this reasoning nor this finding of the
Labour Court has been assailed.
6.

As for the stand of the petitioner that Mr. Jha abandoned his job;

the Labour Court concluded that as the management failed to bring
any attendance record to that effect, and its witness had admitted
that the management did not write any letter calling Mr. Jha to
resume duty; consequently, the management had failed to prove
WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 3 of 9

abandonment. It also concluded that on the contrary, the workman,
Mr. Jha, had done all he could to prove his claim that he was working
with the management since 1994.

In the case of G.T.Lad And

Others Vs. Chemical And Fibers of India Ltd (1979) 1 SCC 590
the Supreme Court dealing with the question of the true meaning of
the expression ‘abandonment of service’ observed as follows:
“In the Act, we do not find any definition of the
expression ‘abandonment of service’. In the
absence of any clue as to the meaning of the said
expression, we have to depend on meaning
assigned to it in the dictionary of English language.
In the unabridged edition of the Random House
Dictionary, the word ‘abandon’ has been explained
as meaning ‘to leave completely and finally; forsake
utterly; to relinquish, renounce; to give up
something. According to the Dictionary of English
Law by Earl Jowitt (1959 Edition), 'abandonment'
means
'relinquishment of an interest or claim'.
According to Black's Law Dictionary, 'abandonment'
when used in relation to an office means 'voluntary
relinquishment'. It must be total and under such
circumstances as clearly to indicate an absolute
relinquishment.......”
The Apex Court relying on its decision in Buckingham & Carnatic
Co. Vs. VenkatiahAIR 1964 SC 1272 also held that “Abandonment
or relinquishment of service is always a question of intention, and
normally, such an intention cannot be attributed to an employee
without adequate evidence in that behalf.”
Similarly a Division Bench of this Court in Shiv Dayal Soin and Sons
Vs. The Presiding Officer Labour Court IV and Others LPA
No.801/2002

decided

on

20.12.2007

observed

that

a

mere

accusation that the workers had abandoned their jobs is not enough
to accept the said imputation, and that the degree of proof required
to establish abandonment of service, is rather strict. It was further
WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 4 of 9

observed that it is for the management to establish abandonment to
discharge the burden of proof. In the case of Nicks (India) Tools
Vs. Ram Surat And Another (2004) 8 SCC 222, the Supreme
Court held that the burden of proving that the workman has
voluntarily left the service is on the management. In the case at
hand, the Labour Court has rightly come to the conclusion that in the
absence of any evidence adduced, the management failed to
substantiate their stand of abandonment.
7.

The onus to prove the claim of the workman that he had worked

continuously for more than 240 days in the year preceding the
termination lay on the workman. Although in support of his claim, the
workman

did

not

produce

any

document

which

would

have

demonstrated this fact; it was however open to the workman to have
summoned the record of the management to prove this fact. This,
unfortunately, was not possible because, in its written statement
itself, the petitioner-management had taken the stand that the entire
record pertaining to attendance, salary, payment vouchers and
ledgers for the period 1996 to 1998 had been lost. In this manner, the
workman was clearly deprived of any opportunity to summon the
relevant record from the management to prove his case. It would
appear that this was a crucial piece of evidence and the petitioner
management was well aware of this fact. However, as noted by the
Labour Court in the impugned award, the petitioner has remained
content by baldly stating that the documents had been “lost”.
According to the Labour Court, no further details of the alleged loss
have been furnished in the written statement. This has not been
controverted before me. Copy of the written statement filed by the

WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 5 of 9

petitioner before the Labour Court has also not been placed before
this Court.
8.

From the impugned judgment, I find that the Labour Court has

examined the question with regard to the loss of the records in some
detail. It has found that although the report was lodged with the
Police Station, Tri Nagar, Delhi, copy of which was exhibited as MW1/3, however, the veracity and authenticity of this document was
challenged in cross-examination and it was also suggested that all the
relevant

documents

are

actually

in

the

possession

of

the

management. Despite this challenge, the management did not bother
to summon the concerned police official to prove this fact along with
the relevant record of the police station. It has also emerged that
although this complaint is dated 19.6.1999, the loss of this record
apparently took place at 10.00 A.M. on 18.6.1999, and there is no
explanation forthcoming as to what was being done for one full day
before lodging this complaint. The Labour Court has found this delay
in lodging this report undermined the credibility of the petitioner's
case. Furthermore, it has also been found that the petitioner's witness
was unable to name the place where the documents were lost. It
appears that the story of the management was that this entire record,
which was obviously a very voluminous one, fell from a scooter but it
was unable to state when it fell, or even when the loss was noticed,
lacks credibility. Another fact which has weighed with the learned
Labour Court is that this incident of loss of the relevant record
appears to have occurred in June 1999, i.e., after the conciliation
proceedings had already started between the workman and the
management and the management would have known very well that
this record holds the key to the claim of the petitioner. The fact of the
WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 6 of 9

very record, only pertaining to that limited period during which the
petitioner claims employment, to have been lost at that crucial
juncture, is by itself not free from suspicion. According to the Labour
Court, the entire version of the management regarding the loss of the
record

is

clearly

an

after-thought

and

cannot

be

believed.

Interestingly enough, in the face of its stand that the entire record for
the relevant period is lost, the management also failed to prove its
own claim that the workman had joined only in the year 1998. In the
case of Laik Ali Vs. M/s Ravissant Pvt. Ltd WP(C) No.
5733/2007 decided on 06.08.2007, this court observed that taking
adverse inference depends on the facts and circumstances of each
case. It relied upon Municipal Corporation, Faridabad Vs. Siri
Niwas (2004) 8 SCC 195 wherein it was observed that presumption
as to adverse inference for non-production of evidence is always
optional and one of the factors which is required to be taken into
consideration is the background of the facts involved in the lis. It is
within the powers of the Labour Court not to draw an adverse
inference on the basis of the evidence adduced before it. It is
pertinent to note that these observations in Municipal Corporation,
Faridabad (supra) have also been reiterated in the cases of R.M.
Yellati Vs. Assistant Executive Engineer (2006) 1 SCC 106;
Krishna Bhagya Jal Nigam Ltd. v. Mohd. Rafi,(2006) 9 SCC
697; Chief Engineer, Ranjit Sagar Dam v. Sham Lal,(2006) 9
SCC

124;

Surendranagar

Distt.

Panchayat

v.

Gangaben

Laljibhai,(2006) 9 SCC 132; ONGC Ltd. v. Shyamal Chandra
Bhowmik,(2006) 1 SCC 337. It is therefore up to the Labour Court
to draw the necessary inference depending on the facts and
circumstances of each case.
WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 7 of 9

9.

Another factor that appears to have weighed with the learned

Trial Court is the fact that although the record was available when the
conciliation proceedings had commenced before the Conciliation
Officer, the petitioner-management did not bother to file any written
statement before the said Officer. It was stated that the records were
lost when the officer of the management was going to attend the
conciliation proceedings in this very matter. The management was
ferrying this record back and forth, but did not bother to file a written
statement putting up its case based on this record. Admittedly, at
that stage, the petitioner-management had all the relevant records in
its possession and would have known its claim also, yet it chose not
to do so. Furthermore, conscious as I am, of the fact that the written
statement of the management, which mentions the records that were
apparently lost, does not talk of the Provident Fund Register, I find
myself in agreement with the Labour Court.

A Provident Fund

Register of any management is a legitimate and reliable record of its
employees. It is a permanent record for all times to come. It contains
the names and other pertinent information of all the regular
employees.

The said record was never placed before the Labour

Court by the petitioner to support their case and to rebut the claims
of the respondent. This in itself is sufficient to suspect the stand of
the petitioner. The fact remains that the Labour Court which tried the
matter has exercised the discretion vested with that Court and
concluded that the management’s story about the loss of all its
records at such a crucial juncture cannot be believed and that the
same is merely a ploy. For this reason, Labour Court has drawn an
adverse inference against the management. The inference drawn is
plausible and based on cogent facts. Under the circumstances, I see
WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 8 of 9

no reason to interfere.
10.
order

On the basis of the above findings, the Labour Court, vide its
dated

6.10.2007,

held

that

the

termination

of

the

respondent/workman, Mr. Het Narain Jha, was absolutely illegal as
well as unjustified, being in violation of Section 25 F and N of the
Industrial Disputes Act. On the premises that a long time has elapsed
since termination, the Labour Court thought compensation to be more
appropriate

than

reinstatement

and

awarded

Rs.2,00,000/-

as

compensation to the respondent/workman. I am in concurrence with
the findings of the learned Labour Court which are properly reasoned
and well considered. The petitioner has failed to show anything to
the contrary. The present petition does not warrant any interference
of this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
11.

Under the circumstances, the petition is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
April 28 , 2008
OPN.

WP(C) No.734/2008

Page 9 of 9

