*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.19695/2005

%

Date of Decision : April 28 , 2008

Director General (Works), CPWD

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Sewa Ram, Advocate

Versus
Sant Lal & Ors.

.…Respondents
Through : Mr. Varun Prasad,
Advocate for respondent
No.1

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J
CM No.2251/2006
1.

This is an application filed on behalf of the respondent/

workman under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. On
30th April, 2004, the impugned award bearing ID No.15/91 came to be
passed by the Industrial Tribunal whereby it was directed that the
workman who is respondent No.1 herein be reinstated with 25% back
wages. The management has chosen to challenge this award by way
of a writ petition filed in this Court. On an application filed by the
management, the impugned award also came to be stayed. On 20th
February, 2006, the workman moved the instant application under
Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act praying that the
management be directed to pay the workman last drawn wages from
WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 1 of 11

the date of the award i.e. 30th April, 2004. In that application, the
workman had also averred as follows :
“3. That the Applicant/ Workman/ Respondent
No.1 has not been in employment any where
since his illegal termination nor has he been
engaged
in
any
other
employers/firms
/companies /establishment /gainful avocation,
as he could not secure the same despite best
of his best efforts till now.”
In reply, the management took the position that in fact during cross
examination on 14.9.1993 the workman had stated as follows :
“I am working privately in Azad Market since
1984 and getting Rs.800/-.”
The management has relied upon this statement to demonstrate that
the workman's claim of having remained unemployed during all this
time, is false. It has tried to take the position that since the workman
has stated in his aforesaid cross examination that he was working
privately since 1984, and since it was the workman's own case that
he had been illegally removed from service by the management also
in December, 1984, therefore, he had admitted to having joined some
private service within a few days of his alleged termination of service
by the petitioner, and that therefore, there was no question of there
being any entitlement under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes
Act in his favour. In addition, the management has contended that
despite admitting to having been employed ever since December,
1984, the workman had suppressed the particulars of his employer,
as well as the nature of his job being done by him ever since, with a
view to mislead this Court and secure orders under Section 17-B. In
the same context, the management further alleges that in the face of
his own admission in the aforesaid cross- examination, the workman's
claim in the application, as also his statement in the supporting
affidavits that he could not get any employment after termination of
WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 2 of 11

his service on 27th December, 1984, are also false. The management
has relied on the decision of a Single Judge of this Court in the case of
IRCON International Vs. Union of India (2003) (108) DLT 656 in
support of its averment that such a deliberate and false averment
falls under Section 191, 192 and 193 of the Indian Penal Code and
cannot be countenanced in support of a plea under Section 17-B of
the Industrial Disputes Act. Counsel also sought to rely upon the order
dated 19.1.2006 passed by this Court in WP(C) No.13157/2005
titled Sant Lal Vs. District Collection Officer in support of his
contention that in fact the workman had never expressed a desire,
nor did he report for reinstatement and therefore for that reason also,
his application deserved dismissal.
2.

On 20th July, 2006, after hearing some arguments on this

application, this Court directed the workman to file a detailed affidavit
furnishing information where he was working, what was his salary,
period of working, when he left the service and the reasons of leaving
employment. Consequently, an additional affidavit dated 25th July,
2006 was filed by the workman. On 20th September, 2007, the
petitioner was given the opportunity to file a parawise reply to this
affidavit within four weeks.

At the same time, the workman was

directed to file his fresh and correct address on affidavit within one
week. The workman thereafter filed his correct address on 27th
September, 2007 in this Court. However, the management did not
bother to file any reply to this additional affidavit of the workman
giving the particulars as directed by this Court on 20th July, 2006. A
perusal of the additional affidavit of the workman shows that whilst
giving particulars of his employments ever since his termination on
27.12.1984; he has also tried to explain his earlier statement made in

WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 3 of 11

his supporting affidavit annexed to his application under Section 17-B
wherein he has said that he was not employed anywhere; in the
following manner :
“4. That it is respectively submitted that while
drafting the application under Section 17 B, the
counsel of the respondent accidentally omitted
to notice the cross examination of the workman
and he was under the belief that the answering
respondent has been doing agriculture work
ever since the date of his termination. This
mistake was bonafide and without any
intention to mislead this Hon'ble Court.”
3.

In addition, he has also disclosed details of having worked for

the period between February, 1985 to December, 1986 in the
establishment of one Pradeep Arora of 1508, Aziz Ganj, Azad Market,
Delhi-06. It is his case that what is relevant for the purpose of Section
17-B

is

whether

the

workman

has

been

employed

in

any

establishment during the period of pendency of proceedings in the
High Court or the Supreme Court. To disentitle the workman to any
relief under Section 17-B, it must be proved that the workman had
been employed and had been receiving adequate remuneration
during such period or part thereof. He states that, as stated in his
additional affidavit, he was assisting his father in agricultural work
ever since December, 1986, and in view of the fact that the instant
writ petition came to be filed only on 27th September, 2005 after the
impugned award dated 30th April, 2004, therefore, for the purpose of
directing payment of last drawn wages, the relevant period is really
the period after 30th April, 2004 when the impugned award came to
be passed. Counsel for the workman has referred to the case of
Airport Authority of India Vs. Puran Chand & Ors. reported
2007 1 LLJ Delhi 850 where a Division Bench of this Court has
quoted a decision by a Single Judge of this Court in Taj Services Ltd.
WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 4 of 11

Vs. Industrial Tribunal-I and Ors. 82 (1999) DLT 378 which held
as follows :
“...........Under the proviso of Section 17-B of
the Industrial Disputes Act what is required to
be proved by the employer is that the workman
had been employed in an establishment and
had been receiving adequate remuneration
from such employment. Being employed for
remuneration in an establishment means
employment under another employer. It is
different from running one's own business or
trade in order to remain alive to see the end of
the litigation. Hence I accept the contention of
the learned counsel for workmen that
respondents 2, 4 and 10 cannot be denied the
benefit under Section 17-B of the Industrial
Disputes Act on the ground that they are
running their own business and are receiving
profit from such business.”
A reading of this shows that even if it is demonstrated that the
workmen in question are running their own business, and are
receiving profits from such business, benefit of Section 17-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act cannot be denied to them; what is required to
be seen is whether the workman was employed for remuneration
under another employer; and so long as that test is not satisfied,
relief under Section 17-B is available. This proposition has also been
reaffirmed in Iklash Hussain Vs. Delhi Transport Corporation
2006 (9) AD (Delhi) 187 where in paragraph 12 thereof, a Division
Bench of this Court has specifically affirmed the view of the leaned
Single Judge taken in the aforesaid case of Taj Services Ltd. Vs.
Industrial Tribunal-I and Ors. (supra).

Learned counsel for the

workman has also drawn my attention to the decision of the Supreme
Court in Rajinder Kumar Kindra Vs. Delhi Administration AIR
1984 Supreme Court 1805 wherein a finding that the workman was
maintaining his family by helping his father-in-law who owns a coal
depot; and that he lived with his father-in-law along with his family

WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 5 of 11

without any alternative source of maintenance, cannot be termed
gainful employment. In that case, it was held that any marginal
occupation resorted to merely to keep body and soul together cannot
be construed to amount to gainful employment denying the benefit of
Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act. There, the Supreme Court
held that to do so, would be perverse. On the facts that have
emerged in this case also, it is quite clear that for the relevant period,
which is from the date of the award i.e. 30th April, 2004, the workman
has not been employed in any establishment in the sense that he has
not been working under any other employer.

He has only been

assisting his father in agriculture with a view to sustain himself
without any substantial employment.

In this context, I might also

advert to the decision of this Court in Food Craft Institute & Ors.
Vs. Rameshwar Sharma & Anr. Reported 2006 (VI) AD (Delhi)
189 wherein the principles laid down in the various judicial
pronouncements for grant of any relief to a workman have been
culled out in paragraph 64 thereof; and in particular to the following :
“64 (v)
The court can enforce the spirit,
intendment and purpose of legislation that the
workman who is to get the wages from the
date of the award till the challenge to the
award is finally decided as per the statement of
the objections and reasons of the Industrial
Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982 by which
Section 17B was inserted in the act. Re : JT
2001 (Suppl.1) SC 229 Dena Bank Vs.
Ghanshyam (para 12).”
“64(ix)
The court while considering an
application under Section 17B of the ID Act
cannot go into the merits of the case, the court
can only consider whether the requirements
mentioned in Section 17B have been satisfied
or not and, if it is so, then the court has no
option but to direct the employer to pass an
order in terms of the statute. It would be
immaterial as to whether the petitioner has a
very good case on merits (Re : 2000(5) AD
WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 6 of 11

Delhi 413 entitled Anil Jain Vs. Jagdish
Chander.”
This decision was also reaffirmed by a Division Bench of this Court in
the case of Iklash Hussain Vs. Delhi Transport Corporation
(supra).
4.

Another ground urged by Mr. Sewa Ram is that since the

workman never approached the management for reinstatement,
therefore he is not entitled to any relief under Section 17-B.

To

support this contention, he relies on an order dated 19th January,
2006 passed in WP(C) No.13157/2005 in Sant Lal Vs. District
Collection Officer (supra). I do not see how this order can be of any
help to the management for the proposition that the workman had
never offered to rejoin the service of the management. In fact, the
said petition was filed by the workman to direct implementation of
the award. In other words, he was clearly seeking reinstatement by
the management and was basing his petition on the ground that the
management was refusing to implement the award. The case before
this Court is altogether different. Furthermore, a perusal of Section
17-B does not in any way indicate that for the workman to be entitled
to the relief under that Section, he must, as a condition precedent,
first

demonstrate

management.

his

willingness

to

rejoin

service

with

the

Nor has any authority been cited before me by the

counsel for the management in support of this proposition. This
contention therefore deserves to be rejected without anything more.
5.

Clearly the workman knows no English. His affidavit, which is

signed in Hindi, bear no endorsement to the effect that the same has
been read out and explained to him in the vernacular. Taking all the
circumstances into account, I am inclined to accept the explanation

WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 7 of 11

given by the workman in his additional affidavit to the effect that the
averment made in the first affidavit in support of his Section 17-B
application was made erroneously by his counsel.
6.

Coming to the so-called falsehood in the workman's affidavit;

the petitioner management has also sought to rely upon the apparent
false statement that appears to have been made by the workman in
his application under Section 17-B as well as in the supporting
affidavit where he has stated that he has never been employed ever
since December, 1984. To impeach the credibility of the workman,
counsel for the petitioner states that although the workman has now
given some details in his additional affidavit about his occupation
ever since February, 1985 onwards, however the fact remains that in
his cross examination on 14th September, 1993, the workman has
stated that he was working in Azad Market, “since”, 1984. He states
that such a workman is not entitled to any discretionary relief as
contemplated under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act. In
support of his contention,

learned counsel

for the petitioner

management relies on the decision of this Court in IRCON
International Ltd. Vs. Union of India & Ors. (2004) I AD (Delhi)
479. In that case, in order to support his claim under Section 17-B of
the Act, the workman had averred that he was out of employment
since 1983 and that he had secured a passport only in 1998 and that
he had been present in India without any interruption ever since 1983
to September, 2000. It was however demonstrated before the Court
that the workman had been in possession of a passport much prior to
1998 and that in fact he had stayed abroad for more than two years
during that period.

In that case, the impugned award had been

passed on 15th May, 2000. Although it is true that, in that case, the

WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 8 of 11

plea of the respondent that the relief period under Section 17-B was
from 20th July, 2000 onwards, i.e., from the date when the impugned
award was given, and that since the workman was in employment in
Bangkok only from 1993 to 1997, his statement to the contrary in
support of his application under Section 17-B of the Industrial
Disputes Act should not be taken to amount to perjury, was rejected
by this Court; This came about because that statement was made in
response to a specific direction by the Court to disclose the
particulars of his stay abroad, if any. In this case, what is before this
Court is merely a statement made in cross examination in Hindi by
the workman to the effect that he has been in private employment
since 1984. In fact, during the same cross examination, he has also
simultaneously

denied

the

suggestion

that

he

was

gainfully

employed. This record of the cross examination does not inspire much
confidence. It is also likely that the statements were being made by
the workman in Hindi and some error may have crept in while
recording their substance in English for the record. Otherwise,
somebody who admits to earning Rs.800/- per month as compared to
the salary of Rs.300/- per month, i.e., nearly three times the salary
received from his previous employer, is not likely to deny the
suggestion that he is in fact gainfully employed. The fact that the
statements made in cross examination by the workman are rather
loosely recorded is also borne out by the statement attributed to him
to the effect that, “it is incorrect that I am gainfully employed so I
have not gone myself for employment.”

The latter part of the

statement i.e., “so I have not gone myself for employment” makes no
sense.

It is not even proper English.

There is also no attempt at

clarification. Therefore, it is not inconceivable that what the workman

WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 9 of 11

had stated was that he had worked in 1984 and received 800/- rupees
per month. This cross examination was carried out nearly nine years
later. Under the circumstances, to my mind, this is not a case which
warrants the same approach that was taken by this Court in the case
of IRCON International Ltd. (supra). In that case, there was a
positive averment made by the management that the workman had
gone abroad on gainful employment. Thereafter, in response to an
application filed by the management asking the workman to produce
his passport, and as directed by the Court; the workman stated that
he had only applied for a new passport in March, 1998 and that he
had never gone abroad for employment during 1997-1998 because
the passport was only issued on 3rd September, 1998. He had also
made a positive averment that “his presence in India has been
without any interruption ever since 1983 till date”. This was a direct
and blatant falsehood, which was resorted to in a brazen manner, to
befool the Court and had clearly warranted a prosecution for perjury.
The instant case stands on different footing.

Here, there is no

positive averment by the management claiming that the workman
had been in gainful employment. What is relied upon is merely two
words in his cross examination carried out 9 years after the
termination of his service.

From the date of the said cross

examination also, 11 years elapsed before the date of the impugned
award came to be passed in his favour; the recording of which leaves
much to be desired. In addition, no further information or allegation to
counter the detailed statement of facts given by the workman in his
additional affidavit is forthcoming. In the circumstances narrated
above, I am satisfied that the petitioner has remained entitled to an
order under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act.

WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 10 of 11

7.

It is, therefore, directed that the petitioner shall be paid full

wages last drawn by him inclusive of any maintenance allowance
admissible to him under any rule. For calculating wages last drawn,
the revision of pay, if any, will also be taken into consideration by the
petitioner management. It is further directed that the management
shall pay to the workman an amount equal to the minimum wages
payable or the last wages drawn by him whichever is higher. Further,
keeping in view the decisions of the Supreme Court vis-a-vis Dena
Bank Vs. Kirti Kumar Patel (1999) 2 SCC 106 and Regional
Authority, Dena Bank Vs. Ghanshyam AIR 2001 Supreme
Court 2270 and decisions of this Court in Ashok Hotel Vs. Govt. of
NCT & Ors. 123 (2005) DLT 384 (DB) and Hindustan Carbide
Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi 2002 (61) DRJ 521 (DB), in
the interest of justice, and to balance equities, such payment shall be
subject to the workman filing an affidavit within a period of two weeks
giving an undertaking that in the event of this Court deciding the writ
petition in favour of the petitioner, he shall be liable to refund to the
petitioner, any amount paid to him in terms of the present order over
and above the amount he was drawing at the time of his termination.
8.

The petitioner/ management shall be at liberty to call upon the

respondent/ workman to report for duty at its premises without
prejudice to its rights & contentions in the present proceedings.
9.

The application stands disposed of.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J.
April 28 , 2008
skw

WP(C) No.19695/2005

Page 11 of 11

