*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.2313/2004

%

Date of Decision : March 26, 2008

Smt. K. Pattamma

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. B.K. Dash, Mr. Pabitra
Biswal & Mr. Saurabh Gaur,
Advocates
Versus

Union of India & Anr.

.…Respondents
Through : Mr. A.S. Singh,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

This case arises out of the cancellation of freedom fighter's

pension that had been awarded to the late husband of the
petitioner under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension
Scheme, 1980. It would appear that the pension was cancelled
on the ground that the requisite conditions, and in particular,
the requirement that the late husband of the petitioner ought to
have suffered imprisonment as a member of the Indian National
Army, was not satisfied.

WP(C) No.2313/2004

Page 1 of 6

2.

The petitioner's late husband had applied for pension

under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980
(formerly known as Freedom Fighters Pension Scheme, 1972).
The claim of the petitioner is that a certificate issued by the All
India INA Committee to her husband to the effect that he was a
member of the Indian National Army, has not been believed. It is
the case of the respondent that the All India INA Committee is
not an official body and, therefore, the records maintained by
the Committee are not official records and cannot be relied
upon for granting benefits under the scheme. In addition, the
stand of the Government is that even if it were to be assumed
that the petitioner's husband was a member of the Indian
National Army, he was still required to fulfill the other conditions
of the scheme, before any benefits can be granted to him.
3.

It is also averred that before the pension granted to the

petitioner's husband was cancelled, a show cause notice was
given calling upon her to produce documentary proof in support
of her contention that her husband was a member of the Indian
National Army and had suffered imprisonment on that account.
It is averred that the impugned order dated 19.12.2000 came to
be passed because the petitioner failed to produce such
documentary proof.

In addition, it is the stand of the

Government that as per the records prepared and maintained
by the Army Authorities, the petitioner's late husband was never
inducted as a member of the Indian National Army.
4.

On the other hand, the petitioner relies on a captivity

WP(C) No.2313/2004

Page 2 of 6

certificate dated 29.9.1983 which is stated to have been issued
by respondent No.2. This document contains two certificates; a
captivity certificate, and an INA certificate. It bears the official
seal of the EME records, Sikandrabad. Counter affidavit filed by
respondent No.1/Union of India is silent on this aspect.
Respondent No.2 has not filed any separate counter affidavit.
Although the respondent No.1 has filed a reply to the show
cause notice and had also sought an opportunity in that reply to
file a detailed

affidavit at a later stage, this assertion of fact

which is supported by annexure 'B' has not been traversed, save
for a bald denial in para 3 to the effect that as per the records
maintained by Army Authorities, the petitioner's husband was
never inducted as a member of the Indian National Army.
5.

The eligibility criteria for the grant of pension under the

Scheme, as disclosed in the counter affidavit filed by respondent
No.1, is as follows :
“(a)
A person who had suffered a
minimum imprisonment of six months in
the mainland jails before Independence.
However, ex-INA personnel will be eligible
for pension if the imprisonment/ detention
suffered by them was outside India.
(b)
The minimum period of actual
imprisonment for eligibility of pension has
been reduced to three months, in case of
women and SC/ST freedom fighters from
1-8-1980.”
From the records produced by respondent No.1, it appears that
the petitioner's husband was originally enrolled in the Royal
Indian Army Supply Corps on 15.4.1940.

Thereafter he was

believed to have become a Prisoner of War in Malaya from

WP(C) No.2313/2004

Page 3 of 6

15.2.1942 to 17.3.1945.

On 18.3.1945, he reported to the

Infantry Brigade of the Royal Indian Army and he left Burma on
7.6.1945. He was ultimately discharged from service of the
Royal Indian Army Supply Corps from 6.12.1945. The certificate
dated 29.9.1983 annexed by the petitioner as annexure 'B'
merely states that:
“Certified that Ex-ME-123263 :L/Nk K.
Narasima was enrolled in the Army Supply
Corps on 15th April, 1940. He was a
prisoner of War (POW), while serving in
Malaya and remained POW from 15th
February, 1942 to 18th March, 1945. He
was originally discharged from service
w.e.f. 6th December, 1945 for having joined
Indian National Army and categorized as
“GREY”.
6.

The first sentence that the Petitioner's husband was

enrolled in the Royal Indian Army Supply Corps on 15.4.1940, is
obviously intended to indicate the enrollment of the petitioner in
the Royal Indian Army Supply Corps, at Bangalore on that date.
The next sentence further certifies that the petitioner's husband
was a Prisoner of War while serving in Malaya from 15.2.1942 to
18.3.1945. This period also corresponds to the period which is
considered by respondent No.2 as the time spent by the
petitioner's husband as a prisoner of war of the Japanese
obviously as a part of the Royal Indian Army. The reading of
communication dated 31.1.2002 sent by the EME records,
Sikandrabad bears this out.
7.

The only other endorsement which is on the certificate is

the

last

sentence

WP(C) No.2313/2004

which

states

that

“he

was

originally

Page 4 of 6

discharged from service w.e.f. 6.12.1945 for having joined
Indian National Army and categorised as grey”. This is the only
reliable source of information which might demonstrate the fact
that the petitioner's late husband had in fact joined the Indian
National Army. However, the details of the petitioner's late
husband as to when he actually joined the Indian National Army,
are not forthcoming. In any case, it is quite clear that the
captivity/imprisonment suffered by the petitioner's husband was
not on account of his having joined the Indian National Army. It
is a historical fact that the Prisoners of War, who were captured
by the Japnese Army as members of the Royal Indian Army,
were thereafter released from captivity with the option of joining
the Indian National Army and serving there.

Counsel for the

petitioner also does not dispute this position. Unfortunately, in
this view of the matter, the highest case of the petitioner can be
that her husband did serve in the Indian National Army.
8.

Be that as it may, to enable the petitioner to claim the

pension in question, her late husband should have also
undergone a minimum imprisonment of six months, either
within or outside India, as a member of the Indian National
Army. Regrettably, there is no official record to demonstrate the
captivity/imprisonment/detention

of

the

husband

of

the

petitioner as a member of the Indian National Army.
9.

Admittedly, the petitioner's claim for pension emanates

from Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980
(formerly known as Freedom Fighters Pension Scheme, 1972).

WP(C) No.2313/2004

Page 5 of 6

The petitioner's counsel also does not dispute the eligibility
criteria reproduced by respondent No.1 in its counter affidavit
and the said scheme.

Whether the petitioner's husband was

entitled to any other pension or grants of any kind is not
material to this petition. I do not propose to go into that
question. The question before me admittedly is the right of the
petitioner's husband, if any, to the pension under the Scheme of
1980. The reading of the scheme leaves no doubt that for the
ex-INA personnel to be eligible to the pension under the
scheme, they must have suffered a minimum imprisonment of
six months as a member of the Indian National Army. There is
nothing to show that the petitioner's late husband suffered any
imprisonment on account of his being a member of the Indian
National Army. Consequently, I do not think the petitioner can
be granted any relief under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman
Pension Scheme, 1980.
10.

In that view of the matter, the writ petition is dismissed.

CM No.2126/2004
11.

Since the writ petition is dismissed, this application is

rendered infructuous and is disposed of as such.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
March 26, 2008
mw

WP(C) No.2313/2004

Page 6 of 6

