*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.8891/2007

%

Date of Decision : March 28, 2008

R.K. Singh

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. S.K. Pandey &
Mr. A.P.S. Rawat,
Advocates
Versus

Union of India & Anr.

.…Respondents
Through : Mr. Rajesh Banati,
Ms. Babli Kala, Mr. Arun Mehta
& Mr. D.K. Sharma,
Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioner was working as a Director in the Ministry of

Rural Development. He retired on 31st January, 1992. His wife
is suffering from Cancer.

It is the petitioner's case that he is

entitled for reimbursement of all medical expenses incurred by
him on the treatment of his wife in terms of the Central
Government Health Scheme (“CGHS”) for treatment in approved
hospitals which, according to him, has been turned down on

WP(C) No.8891/2007

Page 1 of 8

flimsy grounds. The petitioner opted for the benefit of CGHS on
27th June, 1996 through the CGHS Dispensary No.79, Vivek
Vihar, Delhi. An Identity Card, bearing Token No.P050093, was
duly issued to him. This card is valid both for himself and his
wife. It is stated that on 24th April, 2006, the petitioner's wife
was diagnosed with Breast Cancer. Consequent upon this, she
was admitted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(“AIIMS”) on 28th April, 2006 where she underwent surgical
intervention. She was also advised to undergo chemotherapy,
to be followed up by radiotherapy. Petitioner states that he was
also advised that any delay in chemotherapy or in the
radiotherapy procedure, as advised, could be dangerous for his
wife. He states that during that period, intermittent strikes were
going on in the AIIMS and therefore, since the same was
urgently required, he thought it fit to take his wife to the Rajiv
Gandhi Cancer Institute & Research Centre for chemotherapy.
The petitioner's wife underwent treatment consisting of seven
cycles of chemotherapy at the Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute &
Research Centre from 20th May, 2006 to 18th December, 2006.
On completion of the same, the petitioner applied to the
Competent Authority for reimbursement of medical expenses
incurred in terms of the Central Government Health Scheme.
He had raised a claim for a total sum of Rs.1,20,894.17 in this
behalf.
2.

On

14th

WP(C) No.8891/2007

February

2007,

the

petitioner’s

claim

for

Page 2 of 8

reimbursement of the aforesaid expenses was returned by
respondent No.2 with the request that the requisite information/
documents mentioned in the said letter be furnished for further
processing of the case. According to the petitioner, after he
furnished this requisite information, the respondents have
issued another letter dated 30th July 2007 containing a fresh set
of objections. He states that the only common objection
forthcoming in the aforesaid letters dated 14th February, 2007
and 30th July, 2007 issued by the respondents is with regard to
the time within which the claim has been made. Whilst in the
letter dated 14th February, 2007, it is stated that, “claim is to be
preferred within 3 months of discharge from the hospital”; in the
other letter dated 30th July, 2007, it is stated that, “the time bar
of 90 days to be followed for submission and resubmission”. The
claim was returned with the request to furnish the particulars
sought to enable the respondents to proceed further in the
matter.

Counsel for the petitioner states that apart from the

items listed at sub-para (f) and sub-para (2) and (3) in the letter
dated 30th July, 2007, all the other particulars had already been
furnished to the respondents.

He states that as regards the

emergency certificate required in terms of sub-para (f) also, a
certificate dated 3rd February, 2007 issued by the Senior
Consultant, Medical Oncology, at the Rajiv Gandhi Cancer
Institute & Research Centre certifying that the petitioner's wife
underwent treatment at that institute and that, “in view of poor

WP(C) No.8891/2007

Page 3 of 8

prognostic features, chemotherapy was required on urgent
basis” has already been submitted by him. He states that this
certificate satisfies the requirements. As regards the objection
in sub-para (2), learned counsel for the petitioner points out that
in the Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute & Research Centre, where
his client's wife underwent the necessary chemotherapy, is on
the list of the hospitals approved by the CGHS and therefore,
keeping in mind the difficulties faced by the petitioner in going
from Rohini, where the petitioner's wife was being given the
treatment, all the way to Vivek Vihar Dispensary where the
petitioner was registered, simply to obtain the requisite
medication, made no sense.

As regards the objection in sub-

para (3), counsel for the petitioner states that his claim was
preferred within the time prescribed. He states that the
chemotherapy, which the petitioner's wife had undergone, had
seven cycles and treatment was only completed after she
underwent all the cycles. He states that the treatment started
on 20th May, 2006 and it ended on 18th December, 2006, when
the last cycle of chemotherapy was undergone. He states that
he has preferred his claim on 2nd February, 2008 and, therefore,
computed from the date of the last cycle, the claim is well within
the time and for these reasons, the rejection of his claim is
unjustified.
3.

On 30th November, 2007, counsel for the petitioner had

sought time to file an affidavit giving particulars of various

WP(C) No.8891/2007

Page 4 of 8

documents filed by him before the respondents.

The said

affidavit has been filed.
4.

To counter the contentions of the petitioner, the counsel

appearing for respondent has raised three objections. Firstly, he
states that before seeking reimbursement, the petitioner
underwent full seven cycles of chemotherapy. He states that the
gap between one cycle and the next is about one month.
Consequently, the petitioner had sufficient time to approach the
respondent authorities around the time of the first cycle itself or
immediately thereafter. However, admittedly, according to the
rules,

the

petitioner

was

required

to

apply

for

the

reimbursement within 90 days of the completion of treatment. It
is also an admitted fact that the course of treatment in this case
consisted of seven cycles of chemotherapy and it cannot be said
that one individual cycle constituted complete treatment.
5.

In

my

view,

such

claims

are

to

be

treated

in

a

humanitarian manner and keeping in mind the totality of
circumstances. In such cases, where a retired officer is trying to
have his wife treated for cancer, it would be inappropriate to
construe such provisions strictly. No doubt he had enough time
to approach the authorities, but I do not see any impediment in
the petitioner approaching the authorities after the treatment
was over, i.e., after the seventh cycle. It is also admitted that
the petitioner did approach the authorities within the prescribed
90 days after the treatment was over, i.e., after the seventh

WP(C) No.8891/2007

Page 5 of 8

cycle.

Looking to the fact that he was required to prefer his

claim within 90 days of the completion of the treatment, it was
always open to the petitioner to approach the authorities for
reimbursement at any time from the very first day of the
treatment till the 90th day after the day on which the treatment
was over.

The period of 90 days, which is prescribed for

approaching

the

authorities

for

reimbursement

after

the

treatment is over, is the outer limit. The fact that he chose to
approach it not on the first day or even at any time before the
last day of the treatment, but only thereafter, cannot disentitle
the claimant to reimbursement because there is no gainsaying
the fact that he did approach the authorities within the period
prescribed. Admittedly, the petitioner was obliged to file his
claim within 90 days after the completion of treatment. There is
no mandate under the provisions which oblige a claimant to
approach the authorities at the earliest possible date. Under the
circumstances, I am not prepared to countenance this objection.
6.

Next objection is that the petitioner never approached the

CGHS authorities for the medicines required for his wife's
treatment. According to the respondent, they would have been
available to him through the CGHS Dispensary No.79, Vivek
Vihar, Delhi in respect of which the requisite Identity Card is also
available with the petitioner. It appears that admittedly the
petitioner's wife was diagnosed to be suffering from Breast
Cancer on 24.4.2006. Immediate medical intervention was

WP(C) No.8891/2007

Page 6 of 8

advised,

as

a

result

of

which

she

underwent

surgical

intervention within four days, i.e., on 28.4.2006.
7.

In view of the fact that the petitioner was advised not to

delay any of the procedures, including chemotherapy, and that
any such delay could be dangerous for his wife, he thought it fit
to have her treated at the Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute &
Research Centre for chemotherapy immediately. Admittedly this
institution is also on the list of hospitals approved by the CGHS.
The petitioner is stated to have obtained regular medication for
the treatment of his wife from the said institute and paid for the
same. There is no objection taken by the respondent to the bills
of medicines submitted by the petitioner along with his claim.
The only objection is of a procedural nature with regard to the
time within which the claim could be preferred or that the
medicines ought to have been purchased from the CGHS
approved dispensary at Vivek Vihar instead a similarly approved
hospital where the surgery was performed and the post
operative treatment in question was undergone. As I have
already stated, in my opinion, the claim is within the time
prescribed

by

the

relevant

regulations

and

deserves

consideration. It cannot also be rejected solely on the ground
that the medicines in question were not obtained through the
Vivek Vihar dispensary. In view of the fact that the hospital from
where the petitioner purchased the medicines in question, also
happens to be an approved hospital, coupled with the fact that

WP(C) No.8891/2007

Page 7 of 8

no objection has been raised to the bills submitted by him in this
regard, this objection is a mere technicality and cannot be
sustained.
8.

It appears that the petitioner has broken up his claim, and

a separate claim for each of the seven cycles has been
preferred. They have all been returned with the common
objection. They all bear the same date i.e. 30.7.2007. Looking to
the circumstances of the case, in my opinion, objections No.2 &
3 to the effect that chemotherapy drugs are to be procured from
the

dispensary;

and

that

the

claim

is

time

barred,

are set aside, and the respondent is directed to reconsider the
claim of the petitioner with regard to requirements (a) to (k) of
the letter dated 30.7.2007. The petitioner may clarify all these
factors within a period of four weeks from today. The
respondents may call for any further information on this aspect
that may be required before taking a final decision in the
matter.
9.

The matter be disposed of within four weeks thereafter.

10.

The writ petition is disposed of.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
March 28, 2008
mw

WP(C) No.8891/2007

Page 8 of 8

