*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.17179/2005

%

Date of Decision : March 24, 2008

M/s Kapur Son (India)

…..Petitioner

Through : Nemo
Versus
N.C.T., Delhi & Anr.

.…Respondents

Through : Mr. Prem Mishra for respondent No.1
Mr. Suryakant Singla & Mr. Shanto
Mukerjee for respondent No.2,
Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
CM No.12970/2007
1.

This is an application under Section 17-B of the Industrial

Disputes Act which has been filed by respondent No.2/
workman, Sh. Bansu Ram.
2.

This application, which is stated to have been filed on 4 th

April, 2006, came to be filed under the following circumstances :
The workman, Bansu Ram filed a claim before the Labour Court
alleging that he has been working with the management ever since
23rd August, 1968, and that his last drawn wages were Rs.2800/- per

WP(C) No.17179/2005

Page 1 of 7

month. He stated that his services were terminated on 19th March,
2002 in violation of the Principles of Natural Justice and of the Labour
Laws. The Labour Court found that although the management had
been duly served in the matter, it had chosen to stay away from the
proceedings. Consequently, on 17th January, 2004, the management
was directed to be proceeded ex parte. After examining the case of
the workman as also the evidence produced by him, the Labour Court
concluded that his services were terminated in violation of the
provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act. This decision
came to be given on the unrebutted testimony and evidence of the
workman.

Consequently, the Labour Court directed that the

workman, Bansu Ram be reinstated at his post along with back wages
in terms of the last drawn wages @ of Rs.2800/- per month or the
minimum wages fixed for that post by the appropriate Government
from time to time, whichever is higher w.e.f. 19th March, 2002 which
was the date of termination of his service. It was also directed that
the workman will be deemed to be in continuous service and be
entitled to all consequential benefits in that respect.
3.

This award which was passed on 1st July, 2004 by the Labour

Court in ID No.124/2003 is challenged on the sole ground that the
requisite summons had never been served on the petitioner
management and consequently the same deserves to be set aside.
According to the petitioner, the ex parte award was received by it on
4th April, 2005 and it was on this date that the petitioner came to
know of the pendency of the dispute before the Labour Court for the
first time. It has also been alleged by the petitioner that in fact the
signatures appended to the summons issued by the Labour Court in
proof

of

delivery

WP(C) No.17179/2005

of

the

said

summons

upon

the

petitioner
Page 2 of 7

management which are stated to be appended by one of the partners
of the petitioner management, have been forged.

The petitioner's

application for setting aside the ex parte award on the ground that
the signatures of Sh. Ravinder Kapoor, partner of the petitioner
management have been forged, also came up to be dismissed by the
Labour Court. It is the petitioner's case that in this manner, a fraud
has been perpetrated on the petitioner management, and therefore,
the impugned award is in fact a nullity. The respondent/ workman
contests this and says, inter alia, that in fact due service was effected
on

the

petitioner

management

by

way

of

registered

post

acknowledgment due, as also under postal certificate, and that the
same is duly reflected from the records of the Labour Court.

4.

Be that as it may, it is settled law that while disposing of an

application under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, the
Court is not required to go into the merits of the matter. In the case
of Anil Jain Vs. Jagdish Chander 86 (2000) DLT 510, this Court
observed that while considering an application under Section 17-B of
the Industrial Disputes Act, the Court cannot go into the merits of the
case in the writ petition. The application has to be considered strictly
in terms of Section 17-B irrespective of the merits of the writ petition.
Similarly, a Division Bench of this Court in Headstart Advertising &
Marketing

Pvt.

Ltd.

Vs.

Govt.

of

NCT

of

Delhi in

LPA

No.1264/2007 decided on 09.10.2007, has held that while deciding an
application under Section 17-B the Court is not required to delve into
the merits and demerits of the writ petition. The object and purpose
being to alleviate the hardship being faced by the workman, who is
unemployed and without work, in spite of an award/ order in his

WP(C) No.17179/2005

Page 3 of 7

favour. Looking at the above judgments, it is clear that a relief under
Section 17-B is really an ameliorative relief by way of compensation.
Similarly in the case at hand, the workman has got an award in his
favour but is unable to have the fruits of the said award because of
the proceedings instituted by the management in this High Court, as
a result of which, the operation of the award passed in favour of the
workman came to be stayed on 25th January, 2006 by the Court.
5.

In his application, under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes

Act, the respondent/ workman has averred that he has not been
employed in any establishment or elsewhere and continues to be
unemployed since the date of the award. Along with the application,
the workman has also filed an affidavit verifying this fact and stating
that the facts narrated in the application under Section 17-B are true
to his knowledge and that, “since the date of award 01.07.2004 I
have not been employed in any establishment or elsewhere and
continue to be unemployed till date.”

In reply, the petitioner has

taken the position that an application under Section 17-B is
maintainable only if the applicant is a workman and the respondent is
an employer. It is averred that since the applicant is not a workman
and nor was he employed with the petitioner, therefore the question
of any such application being entertained by the Court does not arise.
The petitioner has also taken the plea that the applicant/ workman
has not given his correct address and therefore the petitioner is not in
a position to correctly verify the relevant facts with regard to the
employment of the applicant, if any.

In support of this allegation,

petitioner has also annexed a certificate by a Notary Public to the
effect that the workman, Bansu Ram is not living in Delhi. In addition,
another ground that is taken is that the applicant has reached the
WP(C) No.17179/2005

Page 4 of 7

age of 60 years.

By this, the petitioner probably means that the

applicant has passed the retirement age and therefore the question
of giving him regular wages does not arise.
6.

As regards the first objection which is raised with regard to the

maintainability of the application under Section 17-B on the ground
that relief under that Section is only available to a person who
satisfies the definition of workman and is in the employment of the
petitioner, I am afraid the same holds no water.

There is no such

limitation to the availability of relief under Section 17-B to a workman
who has an award in his favour. The question as to whether or not
the applicant is a workman or whether any relationship of employer,
employee exists between the applicant and the petitioner is one that
could at best be said to relate to the merits of the case.

However,

the fact remains that the applicant has an award in his favour and, in
my view, he can certainly maintain the instant application so long as
the ingredients of Section 17-B are satisfied. In this case, the Labour
Court has clearly directed reinstatement of the applicant with the
petitioner and the petitioner has preferred the instant proceedings
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India against the said award.
Looking to the ratio of the decisions of this court in Anil Jain Vs.
Jagdish

Chander

(supra)

and

Headstart

Advertising

and

Marketing Pvt. Ltd. (supra) also, I find no force in this plea.
7.

As regards the non-disclosure of the correct address as alleged

by the petitioner is concerned; a perusal of the certificate issued by
the Notary Public on 27th May, 2006 in fact confirms the fact that the
workman, Bansu Ram had been living at the given address, and that
on the date when the Notary Public went there, she met the sons of
the applicant who informed her that Bansu Ram was living at his
WP(C) No.17179/2005

Page 5 of 7

village. She has also noted the fact that whenever Bansu Ram had to
come to Delhi in connection with some case, he stayed at this
address and then went back to his native village the same day.
Simply because the sons of Bansu Ram did not disclose the name of
Bansu Ram's native village would not be sufficient for the petitioner
to resist an application under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes
Act. It does not mean that the workman's employment as required
under Section 17-B stands proved by the management. At the same
time, the objection about the age of Bansu Ram which is stated to be
now more than 60 years is also not substantiated by the petitioner in
any way. Whilst the applicant himself has stated his age to be about
55 years in 2006 when the application was filed, the petitioner has
not produced any material for the claim that Bansu Ram is more than
60 years old. It is strange that the petitioner who states that he is not
in any way connected to the workman and does not even know the
workman, can claim definite knowledge with regard to the age of that
workman, without putting any cogent proof before the Court to
support, even prima facie such an averment. I might add that in the
management's response to this application, there is not even a
whisper of an averment with regard to the employment of the
applicant in any establishment after the instant proceedings were
instituted before this Court.
8.

In that view of the matter, I have no hesitation in holding that

the requirement of Section 17-B are duly satisfied and the applicant
has complied with all the necessary ingredients to entitle him to relief
under the said Section. In that view of the matter, the petitioner, who
has not bothered to enter appearance in these proceedings, is
directed to pay to the workman wages equivalent to the last drawn
WP(C) No.17179/2005

Page 6 of 7

wages or minimum wages, whichever is higher from the date of the
award i.e. 1st July, 2004 and to continue to pay wages at the same
rate during the pendency of these proceedings on or before 10th of
each month. In the light of the ratio in Dena Bank Vs. Kirtikumar
T. Patel (1999) 2 SCC 106 and a decision of a Division Bench of
this Court in Ashok Hotel Vs. Govt. of NCT 2005 (83) DRJ 706,
the workman is directed to file an undertaking by way of an affidavit
that in the event of this Court deciding the writ petition in favour of
the petitioner, he shall be liable to refund to the petitioner any
amount paid to him in terms of the present order over and above the
amount he was drawing at the time of his termination, within four
weeks.
9.

Counsel appearing for the applicant workman states that his

client is willing to render services to the petitioner. In that view of the
matter, let the applicant/ workman report for work to the petitioner
after one week and it will be open to the petitioner to assign work to
the applicant without prejudice to its contentions raised in the writ
petition pending before this Court.
10.

Arrears are to be paid to the workman within three months from

today.
11.

Application is disposed of.

WP(C) No.17179/2005
Renotify this matter on 24th November, 2008.

Copy of the order be given dasti.

March 24, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.17179/2005

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J

Page 7 of 7

