*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.949/2008

%

Date of Decision : February 21, 2008

Chandra Prabhu International Ltd.
…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. S. N. Mehrotra, Advocate
Versus
Shri Ram Avtar

.…Respondent
Through : NEMO

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J :
1.

The petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this

Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to challenge the
award of the Labour Court, which was pronounced on 4.5.2007
whereby the petitioner was held entitled to reinstatement with
continuity of service along with 50% back wages and all other
benefits.
2.

The sole ground of challenge urged by learned counsel for

the petitioner is that the impugned award is perverse for the reason
that the termination claimed by the workman has in fact not been
proved by him by placing either any dismissal or termination order
before the Labour Court. He states that since this was not done by the
respondent/workman, he failed to discharge the onus placed upon
him in this regard and, therefore, the learned Labour Court ought not

WP(C) No.949-2008

Page No.1 of 9

to have directed his reinstatement with continuity of service along
with 50% back wages and all other benefits.
3.

The

petitioner

claims

that

it

employed

the

respondent/workman as a clerk in September, 1995 in terms of his
letter of appointment, his services were transferable from one place
to another. On 21.10.1999, the respondent/workman was transferred
by the petitioner to its Guwahati establishment but he refused to
receive the transfer letter and also failed to join duties at Guwahati.
Nor did he come to the Delhi office thereafter. After about two
months of this refusal, the respondent sent a demand notice alleging
that his services were arbitrarily and illegally terminated from
22.10.1999. This allegation is stated to be totally baseless.
4.

The dispute that was referred for adjudication between

the parties to the Labour court was in the following terms:“Whether the services of Shri Ram Avtar
has abandoned the job by not reporting at
place of his transfer or his services have
been
terminated
illegally
and/or
unjustifiably by the Management and if so
to what relief are he entitled and what
directions are necessary in this respect?”
5.

It appears that to begin with, because of its non-

appearance, the management was proceeded ex parte and an ex
parte award came to be passed against the petitioner. Thereafter, on
27.7.2002, on the petitioner's application, the ex parte award was set
aside and the petitioner filed its written statement. There, the
petitioner/management has taken the defence that the workman
started absenting himself from duty w.e.f. 22.10.1999 without any
leave or intimation. It was also stated that the petitioner has written
several letters to the workman to report for duty, but to no avail. The

WP(C) No.949-2008

Page No.2 of 9

petitioner

claimed

that

therefore

it

was

obvious

that

the

respondent/workman had abandoned the employment by absenting
himself from duty without leave or proper intimation or even
bothering to submit any explanation whatsoever with regard to such
absence.

In addition, while denying that the services of the

respondent/workman were terminated on 22.10.1999, the petitioner
claimed that in fact the workman had refused to receive letter dated
22.10.1999, which was tendered by the Company Secretary, Mr.
Rajesh Aggarwal in the presence of the personnel officer of the
company.

Consequently, the petitioner was compelled to post the

said letter on 21.10.1999 to the respondent at his residential address.
Petitioner states that in fact the management never refused work to
the respondent/workman at any point of time and that the main
reason for the respondent/workman in abandoning his employment
was the fact of his aforesaid transfer to Guwahati.

Petitioner also

claimed that the transfer order, which the petitioner was compelled to
send through post, was also received back with the remarks that
despite repeated visits, the workman's residence was always found
locked.

While admitting that the respondent/workman had been in

the employment of the petitioner ever since 5.6.1983, the petitioner
also took position that in terms of the appointment letter given to the
workman, his job was a transferable one. The respondent/workman
also filed a rejoinder denying all the allegations of the petitioner.
6.

The following issues were framed by the Labour Court :
“1.
Whether
the
workman/claimant
abandoned the job at his own accord by
remaining absent from duties without any
intimation with effect from 22.10.1999, as
alleged in P.O. No.1 of WS, if so, to what
effect?

WP(C) No.949-2008

Page No.3 of 9

2. To what relief, if any, is the Workman
entitled against the Management in terms of
this reference?”
7.

It

appears

that

thereafter,

although

the

workman

appeared in the witness box in support of his allegations, the
petitioner failed to lead any evidence. The learned Labour Court
initially listed the case for the petitioner's evidence on 3.5.2005.
Thereafter as many seven opportunities were granted to the
petitioner to lead its evidence but the petitioner failed to do so and
ultimately, the petitioner's evidence was closed by the Labour Court
on 28.7.2005. Faced with this situation, the learned Labour Court has
proceeded to conclude that in view of the fact that the petitioner has
not bothered to even reply to the demand notice dated 15.12.1999
sent by the respondent/workman, and since no evidence has been led
by the petitioner to show that the transfer order was issued to the
workman and that the respondent/workman had refused to accept
the same; it had no option but to decide the matter against the
petitioner. The contents of the envelope in which the transfer order
was allegedly sent to the respondent/workman were also not proved.
Similarly, the petitioner/management failed to discharge its onus of
proving

continuous

absence

from

duty

on

the

part

of

the

respondent/workman as claimed by it since it had failed to prove any
of the letters allegedly written to the respondent calling upon him to
report for duty. I find that the learned Labour Court has also noted the
fact that no attendance register has been produced by the
management nor has any officer of the petitioner company been
examined

in

support

WP(C) No.949-2008

of

its

case.

At

the

same

time,

the

Page No.4 of 9

respondent/workman has proved on the record that he had in fact
sent the demand notice dated 15.12.1999 to which no reply was
given. The evidence of the workman also proved that his services
were terminated by the petitioner w.e.f. 22.10.1999 without any
notice, charge sheet, compensation etc. It was further proved on the
record by the respondent/workman that he had already rendered
continuous service for the period of 240 days with the petitioner and
that after termination of his service he could not get any alternative
job in spite of his best efforts and he had not been gainfully
employed. All these facts proved by the workman in his evidence are
unrebutted.
8.

In the case of Shiv Dayal Soin & Sons vs,. The

Presiding Officer, Labour Court in LPA 801/2002 decided on
20.12.2007, the Division Bench of this Court has held in para 11
thereof which is as follows:“However, it is pertinent to note that a mere
accusation that the Workers had abandoned their
jobs is not enough to accept the said imputation,
degree
of
proof
required
to
establish
abandonment of service, is rather strict and the
management in this case has failed miserably to
discharge the said burden of proof. Observation of
the Supreme Court in the Case of G.T.Lad v.
Chemical and Fibres of India Ltd., reported in
(1979) 1 SCC 590 throws great deal of light on
this aspect, The Court noted as under: “5a. Re
Question 1: In the Act, we do not find any
definition of the expression 'abandonment of
service.' In the absence of any clue as to the
meaning of the said expression, we have to
depend on meaning assigned to it in the
dictionary of English language. In the unabridged
edition of the Random House Dictionary, the word
'abandon' has been explained as meaning 'to
leave completely and finally; forsake utterly; to
relinquish, renounce; to give up all concern in
something'. According to the Dictionary of English
Law by Earl Jowitt (1959 Edn.) 'abandonment'
means 'relinquishment of an interest of claim'.

WP(C) No.949-2008

Page No.5 of 9

According
to
Black's
Law
Dictionary
'abandonment' when used in relation to an office
means 'voluntary relinquishment.' It must be total
and under such circumstances as clearly to
indicate an absolute relinquishment. The failure to
perform the duties pertaining to the office must
be with actual imputed intention, on the part of
the officer to abandon and relinquish the office.
The intention may be inferred from the acts and
conduct of the party, and is a question of fact.
Temporary absence is not ordinarily sufficient to
constitute an 'abandonment of office'.”
9.

In the same judgment while deciding that question this

Court in Shiv Dayal Soin & Sons (supra) also relied upon in
Buckingham and Carnatic Co. vs. Venkatiah AIR 1964 SC 1272
for the proposition that, “abandoning or relinquishment of service is
always a question of intention, and normally, such an intention cannot
be attributed to an employee without adequate evidence in that
behalf and thus whether there has been a voluntary abandonment of
service or not is a question of fact which has to be determined in the
light of the surrounding circumstances of each case”.
10.

Similarly, in the case of Nicks (India) Tools vs. Ram

Surat & Anr.

(2004) 8 SCC 222 decided by the Supreme Court it

has been held that since the respondent was in the service of
management, the burden of proving that he voluntarily left the
service then falls on the management, in that case also it was duly
noted that although the management did take this stand that the
workman had left the services of the management voluntarily,
however the workman was not confronted with the document on
which the management was relying.

Consequently, it was not

considered by the Court. The appeal preferred by the management
was dismissed.

During the course of hearing, counsel for the

petitioner also tried to say that the evidence could not be led by his

WP(C) No.949-2008

Page No.6 of 9

clients because of some administrative difficulties and change of
personnel during that period. I am afraid this is merely an argument
of despair. The petitioner can get no sustenance from the same at
this stage.
11.

It is noteworthy that in para 1 of the preliminary objection

taken by the petitioner in its written statement filed before the Labour
Court;

the

petitioner

has

stated

thus,

“hence,

the

applicant

abandoned the employment by way of absenting from duty.”
plea is categoric and unambiguous.

The

It, therefore, follows that the

petitioner’s contention raised in ground (I) of the writ petition to the
effect that the petitioner has not treated the respondent as having
abandoned its service, as well as the stand taken by the petitioner in
ground (K) to the effect that, “the petitioner had earlier only
presumed but not finally concluded that the respondent has
abandoned its service……”. What is now sought to be urged before
this Court in writ jurisdiction is therefore merely an attempt to resile
from the plea of abandonment to enable it to avoid the onus of
proving the same at trial in terms of maxim “El incumbit probatio
qui dicit, non qui negat” - the onus of proof lies upon him who
affirms, not upon him who denies. This cannot be permitted. I might
add that it is elementary that any plea of abandonment of service by
the management contains within it an implicit admission that the
concerned workman is no longer in its service. This admission coupled
with the workman’s unrebutted testimony that his services were
illegally terminated; is sufficient to warrant a conclusion to that effect.
12.

A perusal of the impugned award shows that the learned

Labour Court has proceeded in a rational and logical manner and has

WP(C) No.949-2008

Page No.7 of 9

arrived at a reasonable conclusion. In view of the fact that the
petitioner has completely neglected to prove any of the facts alleged
by it in its written statement, there was no option available before the
Labour Court.
13.

Finally, counsel for the petitioner has sought to urge

before me that the award of 50% back wages by the Labour Court,
under the circumstances, is too harsh.

An examination of the

impugned award shows that the workman's plea that he was
employed with the petitioner ever since 5.6.1983 has not been
believed by the Labour Court because the appointment letter proved
by the workman is dated 26.9.1995. In this regard, it only remains to
be noticed that as decided by the Supreme Court in the case of UP,
SRTC vs. S.P.Misra (2006) 4 SCC 733

as also the UP State

Brassware Corporation Ltd. vs. Udyan Narayan Pandey (2006)
1 SCC 479 & G.M.Haryana Roadways vs. Rudhan Singh (2005)
5 SCC 591. There is no precise formula applicable in cases where
back wages are claimed and that this is a discretionary power where
a flexible and realistic approach is required to be adopted by the
Tribunal and the Court. In this case, after finding that the workman’s
services were illegally terminated in addition to reinstatement, the
further relief that the Labour Court could have granted ranged from
full back wages, to no back wages at all. Since nothing whatever was
proved by the management against the workman, I don’t see how the
management can say that a direction to pay only 50% of the back
wages for the period during which the workman was kept out of
service

by

the

management

itself,

is

grossly

unfair

or

disproportionate. It certainly cannot be termed as something shocking

WP(C) No.949-2008

Page No.8 of 9

to the conscience of this Court or a manifest error resulting in a
failure of justice warranting interference in writ jurisdiction.
14.

Consequently, no ground is made out for interference with

the impugned award in the exercise of writ jurisdiction by this Court.
15.

The writ petition is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
February 21, 2008
mw

WP(C) No.949-2008

Page No.9 of 9

