*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.1533/2008

%

Date of Decision : February 26, 2008

Bisundhari Singh & Ors.

…..Petitioners
Through : Mr. K.N. Jha,
Advocate
Versus

M/s. Dhillon Transport Agency

.…Respondent
Through : Nemo

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

The petitioners have assailed the impugned award dated

15.01.2008

passed

by

the

learned

Labour

Court

No.XII,

Karkardooma Courts, Delhi in ID No.221/2006/2005 whereby it
was held that the workmen are not entitled to any relief in terms
of reference order at Delhi for want of jurisdiction; and that they
are however entitled to raise the Industrial Dispute against the
management after joining duty at their place of transfer, if they
so desire. The petitioners have categorically prayed for the relief
of reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages

WP(C) No.1533/2008

Page 1 of 8

and other legal benefits.
2.

The petitioners/workmen allege that they started working

with the respondent on various dates between 1971-1998, but
the management did not issue any appointment letters to them
and had also given wrong dates of appointment in their ESI
Cards.

Since 2003, disputes arose between the petitioners and

the respondent regarding non-payment of bonus, earned leave
etc. Ultimately on 02.04.2005, petitioners/workmen were not
allowed

to

carry

out

their

jobs

and

were

told

by

the

management that they have been transferred, on which a
complaint was sent to SHO, Sadar Bazaar on 04.04.2005.

A

demand notice dated 4.04.2005 was also issued by the
petitioners/workmen to the management, but no reply was
given by the management.

On 07.04.2005, a complaint was

sent to the Labour Commissioner, Rajpur Road, but no
settlement

could

be

arrived

at

between

the

parties.

Consequently, the Secretary (Labour) Government of NCT, Delhi
sent

a

reference

on

28.11.2005

vide

reference

No.F.24

(1715)/2005-Lab/11596-600 with following terms :“Whether the services of workmen
shown in Annexure A, have been
terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably
by the management under the garb of
transfer and if so, to what sum of
money as monetary relief alongwith
other consequential benefits in terms
of
existing
Govt.
consequential
benefits in terms of existing Govt.
Laws/ Notification and what other relief
are they entitled and what directions
are necessary in this respect?”

WP(C) No.1533/2008

Page 2 of 8

3.

Before

the

Labour

Court

it

was

contented

by

the

petitioners/workmen that as they were residing in Delhi, the
management business is in Delhi, jobs were also granted in
Delhi and the complaints were also made to the Labour
Commissioner, Rajpur Road, Delhi, therefore the Labour Court
has territorial jurisdiction to entertain their claim. On merits it
was submitted that they never refused to join the duties and
that it was the management who did not allow them to join. In
its written statement before the Labour Court, the management
averred that the petitioners were on a transferable jobs and no
discharge/ dismissed/ terminal/ retrenchment had been made
and the petitioners/workmen were transferred to different
branch offices of the management firm, situated in different
States for administrative reasons but the petitioners did not join
at their new postings. The management also averred that the
transfers were made in view of the provisions contained in the
Employment Rules and Regulations of their firm.

It is also

submitted that as the new place of postings of petitioners was
not at New Delhi, territorial jurisdiction of the authorities
constituted by the State Government of Delhi under the
provisions of the Act does not arise at all. In their rejoinder the
workmen denied the allegations made by the management. The
Labour Court framed the following issues :
1. Whether the State Government had no territorial
jurisdiction to refer the present industrial dispute as
alleged in preliminary objections No.2 in the written

WP(C) No.1533/2008

Page 3 of 8

statement?
2. As per the terms of reference.
Since these were decided in favour of the management and
against the workmen, the present Writ Petition has been
preferred by the workmen.
4.

On perusal of the impugned award, it has come to my

notice that the Labour Court observed that the workmen in their
statement of claim have alleged that they were transferred by
the management, therefore the fact that their services were
transferred stands established.

Further, it was observed that

the management proved the transfer of the workmen by
transfer orders and in view of the plea of the workmen in their
joint statement of claim, the workmen had knowledge of their
transfers. Thus, the transfer orders were deemed to have been
served upon the workmen despite their refusal to receive the
same. The learned Labour Court then relied upon a number of
authorities for the proposition that once an employee is
transferred, the Labour Court having jurisdiction at the place
where he is transferred is the competent Court to entertain any
reference even if the workman refused to accept transfer orders
and continued to stay at such place illegally; and that this
amounts to absenting himself from attending duties at the new
station. A workman cannot create an artificial cause of action to
raise a dispute at a place wherefrom he has been transferred in
violation of transfer orders by incidentally questioning the

WP(C) No.1533/2008

Page 4 of 8

orders of transfer. In General Manager, N.E. Railway,
Gorakhpur & Others Vs. Jamait Ram Khatnani & Others
1975 FLR 246 All, the following observations were made by
Allahabad High Court :
“...............Once an employee is transferred
and posted to a particular place acceptance
of the transfer order by that employee is
immaterial. Even though he may not join
his duties or physically may not go to the
new place of posting he will continue to be
posted there in the eye of law. His place of
posting cannot be deemed to have changed
merely because he disobeys the transfer
order...................”.
Similarly,

in

Additional

Siemens
Industrial

Limited

Vs.

Presiding

Officer,

Tribunal-Cum-Additional

Labour

Court, Hyderabad & Another 2003 (96) FLR 819 AP the
following observations were made by the Andhra Pradesh High
Court:
“40. ..........the situs of employment would
become paramount in raising the industrial
dispute. Since the situs of the employment
of the workman was at Manipal with effect
from 3.10.1994 as indicated in the order of
transfer dated 19.9.1994 and notice dated
6.10.1994 and the same was treated as
misconduct, by the office at Bangalore.
41. In other words he ceases to be an
employee of Hyderabad Office with effect
from 3.10.1994 and supposed to have
born at the new station at Manipal, within
the jurisdiction of Bangalore Office....... At
the most his stay at Hyderabad is only
illegal and as right pointed, the same
amounts to absenting himself from
attending the duties at the new station.”
In Lohla Starlinger Ltd. and Anr. Vs. Government of NCT
of Delhi and Ors. 2006 LLR 905, Delhi, a Single Bench of our

WP(C) No.1533/2008

Page 5 of 8

High Court has observed as follows :
“36. .......... Mere continuation of stay at the
place where the employee has been
transferred does not create any legal right
to adjudicate his grievance by his
termination after the cessation of his
employment at the office wherefrom he is
transferred; his continuous stay at such
place is illegal and amounts to absenting
himself from attending duties at the new
station. Stay at the place wherefrom an
employee is transferred must be for valid
reasons.
37. A workman cannot create an artificial
cause of action to raise a dispute at a place
wherefrom he/ she has been transferred by
incidentally questioning the order of
transfer ......”
Similar observations have been made in Indian Express
Newspaper (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. and State of West Bengal
and

Others

with

Sampat

B.G.

Vs.

Indian

Express

Newspaper (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd., 2005 (106) FLR 467 Cal.,
New Delhi General Mazdoor Union Vs. Government of
Delhi and Others 2000 LLR 770.
5.

I have repeatedly tried to explain to learned counsel for

the petitioner that if his case is that the petitioner's service has
been terminated under the garb of a transfer; it can only mean
that the management has stopped the petitioners from working
and had no intention of taking their services even at the place to
which they were transferred. If that were so, it would have been
quite

easy

for

the

petitioners

to

put

the

ball

in

the

management's court by reporting for work at that place, or at
least expressing their willingness to do so.

WP(C) No.1533/2008

In this context, I

Page 6 of 8

have repeatedly put it to counsel for the petitioners as to why
his clients did not ever express their willingness to join the place
of transfer for all these years that this dispute has been pending
either before the Conciliation Office or before the Labour Court.
At one stage, learned counsel said that they did say so, but my
repeated requests to demonstrate this from the record have
failed to elicit a straightforward reply. No document, letter or
communication has been placed on the record to demonstrate
the petitioner's willingness to join service at their place of
posting. In that view of the matter, I do not find any infirmity in
the order and finding of the Labour Court to the effect that it
does not have the jurisdiction to examine this dispute.

No

authorities to support the case of petitioners with regard to the
question of jurisdiction in the event of transfer of a workman,
have been brought to my notice. In the face of the number of
authorities that have been examined by the Labour Court for
this proposition, I do not find any such infirmity in the decision
of the learned Labour Court that would persuade me to interfere
in the exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
The writ petition is dismissed.
CM No.3008/2008
This is an application moved under Section 17-B of the
Industrial Disputes Act for grant of subsistence allowance to the
petitioner/workman.

WP(C) No.1533/2008

In view of the fact that the writ petition

Page 7 of 8

itself has been dismissed, this application does not survive.
Even otherwise on merits, this application is not well founded for
the reason that these proceedings have been initiated by the
workmen themselves against the impugned award which had
dismissed their case.

Consequently, it cannot be said that

instant writ petition had been filed against any award that
directing reinstatement of the workman, which is a sine qua non
for maintaining such an application.
The application is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
February 26, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.1533/2008

Page 8 of 8

