*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.4814/2002

%

Date of Decision : February 22, 2008

Sh. Ram Goel

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Ankit jain,
Advocate
Versus

Presiding Officer, Labour Court VI
.…Respondents
Through : Ms.Manpreet Kaur
Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported

Yes

in the Digest ?
SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
C.M. No.13261/2002
1. This is an application under Section 17-B of the Industrial
Disputes Act filed by the respondent/workman.
2. The respondent/ workman was terminated from his service by
the petitioner on 8.07.1998. The workman raised an industrial
dispute which was decided by the Labour Court in his favour, by
an award dated 6.02.2002, directing one time compensation to
the tune of two years wages at the rate of Rs.6,150/- per month.
The petitioner assailed the Award before this Court. During the
pendency of the petition, the respondent/workman preferred the
WP(C) No.4814/2002

Page No.1 of 5

present application under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes
Act.
3. The case of the respondent/ workman is that he is entitled to
the wages stipulated under Section 17-B of the Industrial
Disputes Act in as much as he has in his favour an award passed
by the Ld. Labour Court, directing the petitioner to pay salary
equivalent to 2 years wages and that if he had not attained the
age of superannuation, he would have continued in service. The
respondent/ workman has stated in his affidavit, accompanying
the present application, that he is unemployed and is ready to
work but is not getting any employment despite his best efforts
and thus is dependent on his son for his livelihood. The
petitioner has filed reply to the application, denying the
averments made by the respondent/ workman by stating that
the relief of reinstatement has not been awarded by the Labour
Court and what is awarded is only compensation.
4. The counsel for the petitioner submits that since the
impugned award has not directed any reinstatement, Section
17-B could not be available to the workman. According to him, a
sine qua non for the application under Section 17-B is that the
Labour Court ought to have directed reinstatement in his award.
Counsel for the petitioner has also drawn my attention to a
judgment of this Court in the case of this Court of Delhi
Transport Corporation Vs. Jagdish Chander 120 (2005)
DLT 664 (FB).
5. In the above case the full bench of this Court, while analysing
WP(C) No.4814/2002

Page No.2 of 5

Section 17-B observed that the essential ingredients of Section
17-B appear to be:
a) By its award direct reinstatement of any workman;
b) The employer prefers any proceedings against such
award in the High Court or Supreme Court;
c) The employer shall be liable to pay such workman
during the pendency of such proceedings full wages drawn
by the workman. The liability to pay arises if the workman
had not been employed in any establishment during such
period and an affidavit to that effect is filed in the Court;
d) Even if the above conditions exist but it is shown to the
satisfaction of the Court that the workman had been
employed and receiving adequate remuneration during
any such period or part thereof then no back wages would
be payable for that period.
The Court held that the emphasis of legislature is on the
expression 'reinstatement' rather than on an 'award'. Thus, “the
determination of any matter which is an 'award' within the
meaning

of

the

Act,

but

does

not

specifically

direct

reinstatement would not per se attract the provisions of Section
17-B of the Act. In other words, the relief of reinstatement is the
very foundation of seeking relief under that provision.”
6. Similarly this Court in the case of Anil Jain Vs. Jagdish
Chander 86 (2000) DLT 510 held that, “It is clear from the
above provision that a workman will be entitled to the benefit
WP(C) No.4814/2002

Page No.3 of 5

under Section 17-B of the I.D. Act only if the following
requirements are satisfied:
a) There is an award of the labour Court/ Tribunal/ National
Tribunal directing reinstatement of the workman;
b) The employer has preferred proceedings against such
award in a High Court or Supreme Court.
c) The workman had not been employed in any
establishment during the period of pendency of such
proceedings.
d) The workman has filed an affidavit to the effect that he
had not been employed in any establishment during the
period of pendency of such proceedings.
If all the above the requirements are satisfied, the
employer will be liable to pay the workman full wages last
drawn by him.......”
7. The inference highlighted in the above cited cases is that
there must be an award directing reinstatement of the workman
for taking recourse to the benefits under Section 17-B, because
it specifically uses the word 'reinstatement'. In the present case
from the records it appears that reinstatement was not granted
by the Ld. Labour Court.

It appears that reinstatement was

declined because the respondent/ workman had attained the
age of superannuation and also because the establishment has
been lying closed w.e.f. April 1998. Be that as it may, the fact
remains that reinstatement is not ordered.
Under the circumstances and for all the aforesaid reasons,
WP(C) No.4814/2002

Page No.4 of 5

the application is dismissed.
WP(C) No.4814/2002
Counsel for the petitioner seeks a short adjournment on
personal grounds not opposed by counsel for the respondent.
Post this matter again on 9th April, 2008.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
February 22, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.4814/2002

Page No.5 of 5

