*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No. 5544/2007

%

Date of Decision : 22nd February, 2008

Ex. ASI Shadi Ram

.... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Shyam Babu, Advocate
VERSUS

Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors.
.... Respondents
Through : Mr. Rohit Madan and
Mr.J.K.Chaudhry, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SARIN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

Yes
Yes

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J:
1.

The main question that arises for determination in this

petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is whether
the officer, to whom the power was delegated in this behalf by the
Commissioner of Police, has applied himself properly while
deciding the petitioner’s application for grant of Compassionate
Allowance on 24th of February 2006. It has arisen in the following
circumstances.

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.1 of 38

2.

The petitioner, Shadi Ram, was employed with the Delhi

Police. On 17/9/1987, one Kundan Singh complained that while
investigating a suicide bid by his brother, Davinder Singh, the
petitioner, along with Constable Main Pal Singh, tried to extort
three thousand rupees from him by threatening to falsely
implicate him, and then arrest him, in the matter. It was alleged
that in this way, the petitioner ultimately managed to extort a
thousand rupees from the complainant. After an inquiry, the
petitioner was dismissed from service on 19th of August 1988.
Consequently, in terms of Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules,
1972, his pension and gratuity were also forfeited. At that time,
he was working as an Assistant Sub Inspector of Police.
3.

Nearly 17 years later, on the 16th of February 2005, the

petitioner

applied

to

the

second

respondent,

i.e.,

the

Commissioner of Police, Delhi, for grant of Compassionate
Allowance in terms of the proviso to Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension)
Rules, 1972. He prayed that this allowance be given to him with
effect from the date of his dismissal, along with arrears. Rule 41
is as follows;
“(1) a government servant who is dismissed or
removed from service shall forfeit his pension and
gratuity:
provided that the authority competent to dismiss or
remove him from service may, if the case is deserving
of special consideration, sanction a compassionate
allowance not exceeding two thirds of pension or
gratuity or both which would have been admissible to
him if he had retired on compensation pension.

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.2 of 38

(2) ……………………..”
4.

This request was first refused by the Deputy Commissioner

of Police on 25th of April, 2005. The petitioner challenged this
refusal before the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter
referred to as “the Tribunal”) by OA 1353/2005, inter alia, on the
ground that the respondent had passed a non-speaking order.
Agreeing with the petitioner’s contention, the Tribunal quashed
the order of the Deputy Commissioner of Police dated 25th of
April 2005, and directed the respondents to pass a speaking order
on the petitioner’s aforesaid application. Ultimately, on 24th of
February 2006, pursuant to this direction of the Tribunal, the
Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police, who is the third
respondent before this Court, passed another order. By this order
also, the authorities have chosen to reject the petitioner’s
application for Compassionate Allowance.
5.

Consequent upon this rejection, the petitioner filed a second

OA bearing No.1005/2006 before the Tribunal. This time, after
hearing the petitioner, the learned Tribunal has dismissed the
same. Aggrieved by this dismissal, the petitioner has approached
this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. He prays
that the order dated 24th of May 2007, passed by the learned
Tribunal, by which his second petition has been dismissed, be
quashed, and that the reliefs sought by him before the Tribunal,
be granted by this court. He also prays that such other or further
orders, as may be deemed proper on the facts and circumstances
W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.3 of 38

of his case, be also granted.
6.

The petitioner’s case in his representation seeking grant of

Compassionate Allowance is that till he came to be dismissed
from service on 19th August, 1988, he had put in more than 26
years of unblemished service, and that he had been awarded
Commendation Certificates in the years 1970 and 1979, as well as
Commendation Cards in 1981 and 1982. In addition, he was also
given cash awards a number of times, and it was due to his hard
work and devotion to his duty that after being enlisted in the
Delhi Police as a Constable on 15th December, 1962, he ultimately
attained the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector on 17th July, 1984. He
states that he came to be implicated in a false case due to “illluck”, which led to his dismissal from service. He claims that his
run of bad luck continued, and his OA No.2438/1988, impugning
his dismissal, also came to be dismissed by the Tribunal on 18 th
August, 1993, because his case could not be pleaded properly,
since his counsel did not appear before the Tribunal. He says that
his representation to the President of India on 26th March 2003,
for reinstatement in service, was also of no avail. The petitioner
claims that before this incident, not even a warning was ever
issued to him. He states that, having been deprived of his pension
and gratuity due to his dismissal in 1988 as aforesaid, he has now
reached the stage of starvation and that he is struggling hard to
meet day-to-day expenses. He further states that from 1993
onwards, he has begun to suffer from neurosis, loss of memory,

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.4 of 38

anxiety and depression. He says that since he does not have any
source of income, he has become totally dependent on the mercy
of his children, relatives and friends for the treatment of all these
ailments. He prayed that considering his physical and mental
condition, he be granted Compassionate Allowance as envisaged
under the proviso to Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972. In
support of his plea, he has also stated that his wife and son are
wholly dependent on him, and that since he is now more than 60
years old, and without any source of income or livelihood, he has
thrown himself at the mercy of the authorities to grant him some
money to fulfill at least his basic daily needs so as to enable him
to spend his remaining days peacefully. At this juncture, I need
only add one fact which was omitted by the petitioner in his
representation, which was, that after the Tribunal rejected his
petition challenging his dismissal from service, the petitioner also
approached this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India. This also came to be decided against him.

He does not

seem to have carried the matter any further, and his case against
his dismissal from service on 19th of August 1988, appears to
have rested there.
7.

As stated above, this representation by the petitioner first

came to be rejected on 25th April, 2005. This was set aside by the
Tribunal in OA No.1353/2005, with a direction to the respondents
to reconsider the matter, and to pass a speaking order on the
petitioner’s application for Compassionate Allowance. Pursuant

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.5 of 38

thereto, another order was passed by the Additional Deputy
Commissioner of Police on 24th February, 2006. By this order also,
the petitioner's application for Compassionate Allowance was
rejected. Since the aforesaid order of 24th February, 2006, passed
by the third respondent, rejecting the petitioner’s application for
Compassionate Allowance, is impugned before this Court, and the
reasons stated therein are relevant, I therefore consider it
appropriate to set them down verbatim. They are as follows;
“… the ex-ASI Shadi Ram has been found indulging in
malpractices, involving moral turpitude which has
been proved during the department proceedings, as a
result of which he was dismissed from service vide this
office order number 10401 -- 86/SD (P) dated 19.8.88.
He has committed serious misconduct, which is not
only reprehensible, but also tarnish the image of the
force in the eye of the public. As such the case for
grant of compassionate allowance is not a fit case for
sanction and does not fall within the ambit of pension
rules. Therefore the benefit of allowance to ex-ASI
Shadi Ram cannot be extended at this stage.”
8.

This order gave rise to the second round of litigation in the

form of OA No. 1005/2006 before the Tribunal. There, one of the
main points of the petitioner's case was that despite the matter
having been remanded to the respondents for reconsidering the
petitioner's application for Compassionate Allowance and to pass
a speaking order thereon, the respondents had once again
rejected the petitioner's claim without the required application of
mind to the facts and circumstances set down by him in his
application which, according to him, were relevant and germane
to the issue at hand and ought to have been duly considered. He

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.6 of 38

states

that

in

the

order

rejecting

his

application

for

Compassionate Allowance, respondent No. 3 has based his
decision solely on the original misconduct, for which he was
already punished by removal from service, and that all other vital
considerations that ought to have weighed with the deciding
authority,

while

deciding

whether

to

grant

Compassionate

Allowance under Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, have
been ignored. He stated that while passing the impugned order,
respondent No. 3 failed to appreciate the underlying rationale of
Rule

41,

which

was

to

consider

grant

of

Compassionate

Allowance, inter alia, in cases such as that of the petitioner, where
the penalty of dismissal and consequent forfeiture of pension and
gratuity have already been inflicted on an officer. He pointed out
that it is only in serious and grave cases that such a severe
penalty is inflicted. He urges that whenever such a severe penalty
is found to have been inflicted, that it was imposed for grave and
serious misconduct, is axiomatic. For the authorities to thereafter
refuse to grant Compassionate Allowance on the ground that his
dismissal was for grave and serious misconduct and, therefore,
for that reason alone, the same cannot be granted, is to nullify the
very purpose and object of Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules.
The petitioner urges that, under the circumstances, the impugned
order of 24.2.2006, suffers from non-application of mind to the
relevant

considerations.

He

states

that

for

deciding

his

application, respondent No.3 ought to have applied himself to the

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.7 of 38

petitioner’s past service record, his other pressing needs and the
circumstances in which he finds himself today, as narrated by him
in his application.
9.

In support of his case before the Tribunal, the petitioner also

relied upon the, “Guiding Principles for Grant of Compassionate
Allowance”, formulated by the the Govt. of India in OM dated 22 nd
April 1940 for applying the aforesaid Rule 41 CCS (Pension) Rules,
under which all applications for Compassionate Allowance are to
be considered. This OM (which is hereinafter referred to as the
“Guidelines”) is reproduced below for convenience: “Guiding principles for the grant of Compassionate
Allowance – It is practically impossible in view of the
wide variations that naturally exist in the
circumstances attending each case, to lay down
categorically precise principles that can uniformly be
applied to individual cases. Each case has, therefore,
to be considered on its merits and a conclusion has to
be reached on the question whether there were any
such extenuating features in the case as would make
the punishment awarded, though it may have been
necessary in the interests of Government, unduly hard
on the individual. In considering this question, it has
been the practice to take into account not only the
actual misconduct or course of misconduct which
occasioned the dismissal or removal of the officer, but
also the kind of service he has rendered. Where the
course of misconduct carries with it the legitimate
inference that the officer's service has been dishonest,
there can seldom be any good case for a
Compassionate Allowance. Poverty is not an essential
condition precedent to grant of a Compassionate
Allowance, but special regard is also occasionally paid
to the fact that the officer has a wife and children
dependent upon him, though this factor by itself is not,
except
perhaps
in
the
most
exceptional
circumstances, sufficient for the grant of a
Compassionate Allowance.
[G. I., F. D., Office Memo. No. 3(2)-R-II/40,
W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.8 of 38

10.

dated the 22nd April, 1940.]”
The petitioner submitted that, had the Competent Authority

applied the aforesaid guidelines according to their true scope and
intent while deciding his application under Rule 41, his prayer for
Compassionate Allowance would not have been summarily
rejected by it merely on the basis of a single incident of
misconduct for which he had already been punished by being
dismissed from service.
11.

As stated above, ultimately, the petitioner’s challenge to the

order of respondent No.3, passed on 24.2.2006, rejecting his
application for Compassionate Allowance, came to be dismissed
by the impugned judgment dated 24.5.2007 in OA No.1005/2006.
In its decision, the Tribunal has held that the Guidelines debar the
grant of Compassionate Allowance to anyone who was dismissed
from service as a result of an incident involving dishonesty. This,
along with some other, equally significant, conclusions it has
reached, has persuaded the Tribunal to decline relief to the
petitioner.

12.

Since I do not agree with the conclusions of the learned

Tribunal on many aspects of this case, and feel that its decision to
dismiss the petitioner’s OA needs to be set aside, I am proceeding
to examine these conclusions in the following paragraphs.
13.

In its judgment, particularly in paragraph 15 thereof, the

learned Tribunal has agreed with the respondents’ contention to

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.9 of 38

the effect that the main ground emphasized by the Guidelines
against grant of Compassionate Allowance under Rule 41, is
dishonesty, and the main reason for the petitioner’s dismissal was
also dishonesty, therefore, the petitioner’s case cannot be said to
be one that deserves special consideration. To put it differently,
the Tribunal has concluded that the Guidelines peremptorily
disentitle officers whose dismissal happens to be occasioned by
misconduct involving dishonesty, to Compassionate Allowance. To
my mind, this is clearly misconceived. The relevant portion of
Rule 41 provides that the Competent Authority may, “if the case
is deserving of special consideration, sanction a compassionate
allowance…” (emphasis added). Nothing more is specified under
the Rule. It is thus evident that the sole criterion is that the,
“case”, must be, “deserving of special consideration”. The word,
“case” here has clearly been used to denote, the ‘state of affairs’,
or “the circumstances involved”,

[refer to the Concise Oxford

Dictionary of current English, 8th edition], while the words,
“deserving of” are defined as, “showing qualities worthy of…help
etc”; and, “consideration,” is defined as, “a fact or circumstance
to be taken into account” (the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary,
3rd Edition). Therefore, in the context, the phrase, “if the case is
deserving of special consideration”, can only mean that if the
state of affairs or the circumstances involved bring out qualities
that are worthy of help or assistance, the applicant should be
granted Compassionate Allowance. For arriving at this conclusion,

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.10 of 38

the field is left wide open for the Competent Authority. All that is
required for the Competent Authority to entertain the matter, and
to apply its mind thereto, is that the applicant must have been
dismissed from service and his pension and gratuity forfeited. In
particular, there is nothing whatsoever in Rule 41 to suggest that
the application of any officer who has been dismissed for
misconduct involving dishonesty, is to be rejected peremptorily.

14.

In addition to Rule 41, on 22.4.1940, the Government of

India has issued the aforesaid Guidelines which have been
reproduced by me in paragraph 9 above. They are titled, “Guiding
Principles for the Grant of Compassionate Allowance”. They have
obviously been issued with a view to ensuring uniformity in
application and decision-making under Rule 41.

At their very

outset, the Guidelines make it clear that while each case has to
be considered on its own merits, the question which is to be
decided by the Competent Authority in every case is, whether the
case has any such extenuating features that would make the
punishment awarded unduly hard on the dismissed officer. They
also seek to facilitate the task of decision-making entrusted to the
Competent Authority under the said Rule by laying down certain
principles for their application. Every aspect that is referred to in
the Guidelines is aimed at determining the same question, i.e.,
whether the punishment awarded has been unduly hard on the
dismissed officer. This approach is in consonance with the

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.11 of 38

mandate of the Rule 41 that has been analysed by me above,
which

authorizes

the

Competent

Authority

to

sanction

Compassionate Allowance if the case is deserving of special
consideration. It is in this context that the Guidelines have stated
the following :
“In considering this question, it has been the practice
to take into account not only the actual misconduct or
course of misconduct which occasioned the dismissal
or removal of the officer, but also the kind of service
he has rendered.”
Immediately after this, and in the same context, that is, to
examine and to see whether the punishment awarded has been
unduly hard on the dismissed officer, a caution is added by the
Guidelines qua those cases where the officer’s dismissal was
occasioned by a, “course of misconduct”. This states as follows:
“Where the course of misconduct carries with it
legitimate inference that the officer’s service has been
dishonest, there can seldom be any good case for a
compassionate allowance.”
Unfortunately, the Tribunal appears to have taken this
caution to mean that if the dismissal was the result of an incident
that had an element of dishonesty, the Competent Authority is
obliged to refuse the application peremptorily.
To my mind, the word, “service”, has been used in both the
portions of the Guidelines extracted above, to denote, “a state or
period of employment to work for an individual or organization”,
(refer the Concise Oxford Dictionary of current English, 8th
edition). At the same time, the phrase, “kind of service”, denotes

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.12 of 38

that it is the nature of the service rendered by the officer during
his entire tenure that needs to be assessed, and is not confined to
the incident that led to his dismissal. It follows therefore that the
Guidelines enjoin the authority to look at the officer's entire
service record and then decide whether the punishment awarded
has been unduly hard on the officer, and this requirement for the
officer’s service to be looked at from the point of view whether
the punishment awarded has been unduly hard on him, cannot be
peremptorily dispensed with on the ground that his dismissal was
based on an incident of misconduct which had an element of
dishonesty. Unfortunately, both the Competent Authority, as well
as the learned Tribunal, appear to have overlooked this aspect.
15.

In this connection. it becomes necessary to note two more

expressions that have been employed in the aforesaid portions of
the Guidelines extracted in paragraph 14 above. They are the,
“misconduct”, and the “course of misconduct”, either of which
may have resulted in dismissal of the officer. Although the kind of
service rendered by the officer is required to be taken into
account in both cases, however, in the latter case, i.e., where
dismissal was occasioned by a, “course of misconduct”, the
Guidelines have inserted the aforesaid caution to the effect that,
if, on examination, the said, “course of misconduct”, that led to
his dismissal, “carries with it the legitimate inference”, that his
service has been dishonest, there can seldom be any good case
for granting Compassionate Allowance. Nothing like this is

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.13 of 38

mentioned in cases where the solitary incident that led to his
dismissal also had in it elements of dishonesty. This shows that
although the circumstances of the officer’s dismissal must always
be taken into account by the Competent Authority; and in every
case, the kind of service rendered by the officer has also to be
kept in mind; however, where the dismissal is, “for a course of
misconduct,” of such a nature, which justifiably leads one to infer
that his service has been dishonest; the chances of there being a
good case for grant of Compassionate Allowance in spite of this,
are rare. It bears repetition that even in that case, the Competent
Authority has to examine the type of service rendered, albeit only
for ascertaining that the case at hand is not one of those of a rare
kind. It follows, therefore, that rejection of a dismissed officer’s
application for Compassionate Allowance under Rule 41, which is
based solely on the fact of the said officer’s dismissal for a
solitary incident involving dishonesty, without anything more, as
is the case before this Court, is bad in law, and must therefore be
struck down.

16.

A perusal of the impugned judgment shows that the learned

Tribunal was impressed by the argument that in case the
authorities

return

an

adverse

finding

in

the

disciplinary

proceedings instituted against a delinquent officer and dismiss
him, and thereafter a challenge to his dismissal is rejected by the
Tribunal, as well as the High Court in writ proceedings, it means

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.14 of 38

that the dishonesty which formed the basis of the penalty
imposed on the petitioner, stands, “affirmed”. And that this alone
is sufficient to decline a request for Compassionate Allowance. It
appears that this conclusion that the petitioner’s dishonesty
stands, “affirmed” by the courts, has formed the basis of yet
another conclusion, which is, that since the Guidelines envisage
grant of Compassionate Allowance on the ground of, “financial
difficulties or dependant wife and child advanced by the
applicant”, only in the most exceptional circumstances, therefore,
in view of the affirmation of the applicant’s dishonesty, by the
courts, no case for granting Compassionate Allowance on the
ground of poverty and the existence of dependants as an
exception, can be said to have been made out. On an
examination of the Guidelines, I feel that the learned Tribunal has
unfortunately failed to draw the correct logical inferences from
the said Guidelines, and has proceeded to reach a number of
incorrect conclusions in this regard.
17.

The learned Tribunal was impressed by the fact that all the

courts have rejected the petitioner’s challenge to his dismissal. It
appears to have felt that in this way, the order of dismissal of the
petitioner has been confirmed, and that this somehow disqualifies
the petitioner for the grant of Compassionate Allowance. This is
apparent from its acceptance of the respondent's submissions
noted in paragraph 10 of its judgment to the effect that, “the
dismissal of the applicant has attained finality”, as well as its

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.15 of 38

observations in para 13 of its judgment where it has sought to
distinguish the decision of the High Court of Delhi in the case of
Ex. CT. Daya Nand v Union of India & Ors. [2000 (1) ATJ
136] on the ground that in that case, there was no court order
confirming the petitioner's dismissal.

Similarly, a reading of

paragraph 15 shows that the learned Tribunal has unwittingly
evolved a new ground for dismissing an application for grant of
Compassionate Allowance, which is affirmation of the applicant's
incident of misconduct by the Tribunal as well as by the High
Court. Besides the fact that it was not within the province of the
Tribunal to substitute its own conclusions on the merits of the
petitioner's application for that of the Competent Authority; I feel
that such a consideration is not even germane to the issue for the
reason that no such factor is provided under Rule 41 of the CCS
(Pension) Rules read with the aforesaid Guidelines.
18.

I might also add that it can never be said that a person who

seeks to challenge his dismissal before the courts is putting
himself at a disadvantage when it comes to the question of
granting him Compassionate Allowance under the Rules after the
failure of his challenge, as compared to someone who never
approached the courts at all, on the reasoning that the dismissal
of the former’s challenge would be taken to amount to an
affirmation of the misconduct for which he was dismissed in the
first place. Such reasoning is specious for a number of reasons. In
addition to what I have already stated on the subject, the

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.16 of 38

dismissal of the petitioner from service is a decision which is
complete in itself. There is no requirement under the law, and the
rules applicable here, for any affirmation or confirmation by the
courts, of the penalty imposed by the department upon an officer.
Even otherwise, there is nothing to warrant the conclusion that
the penalty imposed has attained any “finality” by the rejection of
the petitioner’s challenges to the penalty imposed by the courts.
“Finality” of a decision is a concept of civil law. There, a decree is
said to be, “preliminary”, when further proceedings have to be
taken before the suit can be completely disposed of, and it
becomes “final”, when the adjudication in suit completely
disposes of the suit. It may also be partly preliminary and partly
final [see Order 2 Rule 2 Code of Civil Procedure 1908]. Similarly,
the expression, “final order”, also means an order that finally
disposes of the rights of the parties in relation to the whole suit or
criminal proceeding. At the most, the application of these
expressions to service law is limited to aspects of res judicata, the
bar of limitation, and the like. By adjudicating upon the
petitioner’s earlier challenge to his dismissal from service, the
courts could not possibly be taken to have pronounced on the
merits of the petitioner’s application for grant of Compassionate
Allowance under Rule 41, which has now been moved by him
after many years. Since this application or the relief sought
therein was never there, therefore, there can be no question of
either the Tribunal, or the High Court, having pronounced upon, or

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.17 of 38

decided this question, thus enabling the Tribunal to conclude that
it is no longer open for the petitioner to raise this challenge in
these proceedings on the ground of “finality” of the type brought
about by the principles of res judicata. In service law, there is
also occasional reference to the “finality doctrine”, which is the
rule that a court will not judicially review an administrative
agency’s action until it is final [see Black’s Law Dictionary, 8th
edition]. Violation of this doctrine leads to the plea that the
exercise of the court’s jurisdiction of judicial review in such a case
is premature. No such pleas arise for consideration here and this
doctrine is not even remotely applicable to this case. It follows,
therefore, that the learned Tribunal’s conclusions to the effect
that the petitioner does not deserve Compassionate Allowance
because his dismissal has attained, “finality”, with the rejection of
his challenge to that dismissal by the courts, is not correct. I have
felt the necessity to expatiate on these aspects because
expressions such as, a decision having attained, “finality”, or
having been, “affirmed”, have definite legal connotations when
employed in judicial decisions.

19.

For all these reasons therefore, the penalty imposed on an

officer does not in any way become stronger, or more valid by the
dismissal of his challenge to the same, by the Courts. Nor does it
thereby get elevated to a status which disentitles the officer to
the grant of Compassionate Allowance, in case he were to apply

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.18 of 38

for the same, years later.
20.

It is possible that the learned Tribunal has given weight to

the fact of the rejection of the petitioner’s challenge to his
dismissal by the courts for an altogether different reason. By
saying that there may be myriad circumstances warranting the
conclusion that there were extenuating features that make the
punishment

awarded

unduly

hard

on

the

individual,

the

Guidelines, in effect, require the Competent Authority to apply its
mind to the merits, as well as the circumstances of the dismissal
order, and if it feels that the punishment was imposed on shaky
evidence, or in haste, or that it suffered from some other infirmity,
then, this might also form the basis for it to grant Compassionate
Allowance. It may be that it is in the light of this understanding,
that the learned Tribunal might have felt that, since the courts
have examined the order of dismissal passed in this case and
upheld the same, at least these types of circumstances cannot be
said to exist. Having noted this possibility, I have to say that
firstly, the Tribunal has not said anything even approximating this
reasoning. Secondly, even if it did indeed mean this, it was
encroaching upon the arena of decision making on the merits of
the petitioner’s application for grant of Compassionate Allowance,
which is the province of the Competent Authority alone under the
rules. Therefore, for that reason also, the conclusion of the
Tribunal, that the petitioner’s application deserves peremptory
rejection because his dismissal has attained, “finality”, or because

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.19 of 38

it has been, “confirmed”, by the courts, has to be set aside.
21.

Going further, I find that the Tribunal has felt that while

rejecting

the

petitioner’s

application

for

Compassionate

Allowance, the Competent Authority, i.e., respondent 3 herein,
was correct in ignoring the petitioner’s plea that he was poverty
stricken and that there was a wife and son dependant on him
because the petitioner’s dismissal had been, “affirmed” and had
attained, “finality” due to the failure of his challenge to the same
before the courts. In the preceding paragraphs, I have already
concluded that the finding of, “confirmation”, “affirmation” and,
“finality” that the learned Tribunal has relied upon, and applied,
to decide this case, are erroneous. I am, therefore, not repeating
them. However, in this context I must add that under the
Guidelines, the importance given to poverty, as a factor in
deciding an application for Compassionate Allowance, is not in
any way linked to any, “affirmation” or “confirmation” of the
applicant’s misconduct that led to his dismissal, by the courts. I
however feel that in view of the treatment accorded to this aspect
of the matter by the learned Tribunal, it has become necessary for
me to interpret this part of the Guidelines also, and I am
proceeding to do so in the following paragraphs.
22.

The portion of the Guidelines, which refers to the poverty of

the applicant, and the treatment to be accorded to such a plea, is
as follows;
“Poverty is not an essential condition precedent to

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.20 of 38

grant of a compassionate allowance, but special regard
is also occasionally paid to the fact that the officer has
a wife and children dependent upon him, though this
factor by itself is not, except perhaps in the most
exceptional circumstances, sufficient for the grant of a
compassionate allowance.”
This portion of the said Guidelines attempts to explain, and also to
clarify, some of the guiding principles that should be applied by
the authorities in deciding such cases. Unfortunately, it is not
happily worded. It seems to be saying a number of things in the
same sentence. I therefore consider it appropriate to break up
this sentence into intelligible portions for the purpose of arriving
at its true import and meaning. This I am proceeding to do in the
following manner;
(i).

The first part of the above portion states, “ poverty is not an

essential condition precedent to grant of a compassionate
allowance,..”. Here, the word,” poverty”, according to the concise
Oxford English dictionary, (8th edition) is a noun, meaning, “the
state of being poor; want of the necessities of life.” and the
expression, “condition precedent”, is best described by Black’s
law dictionary to mean, “ an act or event, other than a lapse of
time, that must exist or occur before a duty to perform something
promised arises.” It has also been described as a provision which
delays the vesting of a right until the happening of an event (refer
Osborne's concise law dictionary, 6th edition).

Therefore, by

saying that, “poverty is not an essential condition precedent..”, it
simply means that it is not necessary, or essential, that in every

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.21 of 38

case, before a decision is taken to grant Compassionate
Allowance, it must invariably be established that the applicant is
extremely poor and in want of the necessaries of life, i.e., that he
is poverty stricken.
(ii)

The same sentence then goes on to state, “… but special

regard is also occasionally paid to the fact that the officer has a
wife and children dependent upon him,..”, this expression, when
read together with the first part analysed above, can only mean
that although poverty is not a condition precedent for the grant of
Compassionate Allowance, the fact that the applicant has a wife
and children dependent upon him, is sometimes given, “special
regard”, while taking a decision. This is said to have happened,
“occasionally”, i.e., when the occasion demands. A fair reading of
this portion can only lead one to conclude that on occasion, when
it is felt necessary to do so, special regard is given to the fact that
the applicant has a wife and children dependent on him.
(iii). The concluding portion of this sentence says, “..,though this
factor by itself is not, except perhaps in the most exceptional
circumstances, sufficient for the grant of a compassionate
allowance.” this, when read together with the aforementioned
proceeding portions, to my mind, can only mean that the
applicant’s need to support a wife and children, who are
dependent on him, in the absence of any other pressing reasons,
is usually not considered sufficient by itself to justify the grant of
Compassionate Allowance.

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

In other words, Compassionate

Page No.22 of 38

Allowance is usually not granted in cases where the request is
based solely on the need to support a dependent wife and
children,

excepting

in

the

most

unusual

or

compelling

circumstances.
In the light of the above analysis, I feel that this sentence
simply means that it is not as if in every case, for the applicant to
be granted Compassionate Allowance, he must necessarily be
poverty stricken.

However, sometimes, when the occasion so

demands, the fact that the applicant also has a wife and children
dependent upon him, is given some weightage by the authorities
in arriving at their decision. At the same time, unless there are
some very exceptional circumstances warranting it, the decision
to grant Compassionate Allowance cannot be based solely on this
factor alone. There is however, nothing to warrant the conclusion
reached by the Tribunal that where the applicant’s challenge to
his dismissal from service has failed before the courts, the fact of
the applicant being poverty stricken, or having a dependant wife
and children, can never be considered as a ground for grant of
Compassionate Allowance.
As I have said, this portion of the Guidelines is not happily
worded. Perhaps that is the reason why the learned Tribunal was
misled into erroneous conclusions regarding that portion. I have
therefore endeavored to clarify it and to set down its true scope
and intent as I find it.
23.

Another aspect that has obviously escaped the attention of

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.23 of 38

the learned Tribunal is that while the Guidelines are to be utilised
in the manner of all guidelines, that is, to guide the deciding
authority in applying Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules with a
view to promoting uniformity in its application while minimizing
subjectivity and arbitrariness; they cannot be interpreted and
applied in such as way as to either override or whittle down the
scope and applicability of the rule itself. Rule 41 has statutory
force, while the aforesaid Guidelines do not. I have already
analysed the scope and meaning of both Rule 41 as well as the
Guidelines

issued

on

22.4.1940

for

its

application.

The

interpretation placed upon the Guidelines by the learned Tribunal
has the effect of restricting the application and scope of Rule 41.
It excludes all officers who were dismissed or removed from
service for misconduct which had an element of dishonesty from
the purview of the said rule peremptorily. It also tends to exclude
those officers whose challenge to their dismissal has failed before
the courts and the dismissal orders are upheld, on the ground that
their misconduct thus stands confirmed or affirmed.

For these

reasons also, I feel that the construction placed by the learned
Tribunal on the Guidelines is not sustainable.
24.

In view of the above conclusions which I have drawn, I feel

that the learned Tribunal’s opinion that, simply because the
applicant was dismissed from service for a single act of
misconduct which demonstrated an element of dishonesty, his
poverty or the existence of dependent wife and children, or even

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.24 of 38

his service record, cannot be taken into consideration, is
erroneous and cannot be sustained.
25.

Before departing from this aspect, it is necessary to point

out that it is essentially the function of the Commissioner of
Police, or his delegate, to weigh the relevant factors and then
take the appropriate decision. I however find that even though
the impugned order of respondent 3 is completely silent on these
aspects, the learned Tribunal has gone into a long and involved
assessment of some of the merits of the petitioner’s case. It has
gone on to discuss the state and extent of his family, and some,
but not all of the other relevant circumstances that ought to have
been considered by the Commissioner of Police, or his delegate,
in the first place. On the merits, it is the Competent Authority that
is required to take a decision. The role of the Tribunal is confined
to deciding whether the Commissioner of Police, or his delegate,
has applied himself properly and has taken into account all
relevant factors whilst deciding petitioners application for grant of
Compassionate Allowance in the light of Rule 41 of the CCS
(pension) Rules, 1972 and the Guidelines dated 22/4/1940. I find
that instead of confining itself in this manner, the learned Tribunal
has erroneously ventured upon the decision-making process,
thereby taking over the role of the Authority empowered to
decide the application. It has stepped into the shoes of the
Competent Authority and has tried to substitute its own decision
for that of the said Authority. This is something it cannot do, inter

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.25 of 38

alia, for the reason best elucidated by the maxim Rerun ordo
confunditur, si unicuique jurisdictio non servetur – The
order of things is confounded if everyone keeps not within his
jurisdiction. It is only in those cases where all the relevant factors
happen to be before the court, and the court feels that, regardless
of who decides the matter, the circumstances can admit of only
one possible outcome, that the court sometimes proceeds to
record its own decision thereon with a view to save time and
effort on what has clearly been rendered an unnecessary
exercise. The instant case is not such a case because the factors
that have to be examined and weighed are numerous and all the
relevant facts for taking such a decision are not before this Court.
The outcome is not inevitable here. Even the quantum of
Allowance, as well as the period from which it may be admissible,
can vary. For all this, the Competent Authority designated under
the rules must apply its mind and, in law, the thinking of the
Tribunal on the subject cannot be substituted for that of the
Authority. Furthermore, because it had concluded that the
element of dishonesty in the incident that led to his dismissal, as
well as the fact that his challenge thereto had been dismissed by
the courts, warranted peremptory dismissal of his application for
Compassionate Allowance; the Tribunal has in fact not even
examined the petitioner’s service record & other relevant
circumstances, before choosing to pronounce on the merits of his
case in place of the Competent Authority. For this reason also,

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.26 of 38

the impugned order is unsustainable.
26.

During the course of arguments before the Tribunal, the

respondents defended the impugned order rejecting the grant of
Compassionate Allowance by bringing to the notice of the Court
numerous facts and circumstances which were not noticed
anywhere in the impugned order.

This was objected to by the

petitioner on the ground that the impugned order of rejection
must either stand or fall on the reasons expressed in the order
itself, and further additional reasons should not be permitted to
be adduced to support the conclusion reached by respondent No.
3 in rejecting the petitioner's application.
27.

In support of this contention, counsel for the petitioner cited

a decision of the Supreme Court of India in Mohinder Singh Gill
& Anr. versus The Chief Election Commissioner & Anr.,
reported as AIR 1978 Supreme Court 851. He cited this authority
for the proposition that when a statutory functionary makes an
order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the
reasons mentioned there. It cannot be supplemented by fresh
reasons placed before the court either on affidavit, or in any other
way. Otherwise an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it
comes to court on account of a challenge, get validated by
additional grounds later brought out. In reaching this conclusion,
the Supreme Court referred to its own, earlier, observations in
Gordhandas Bhanji (AIR 1952 SC 16) which are as follows:“Public orders publicly made, in exercise of a statutory

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.27 of 38

authority cannot be construed in the light of
explanations subsequently given by the officer making
the order of what he meant, or of what was in his
mind, or what he intended to do. Public orders made
by public authorities are meant to have public effect
and are intended to affect the acting and conduct of
those to whom they had addressed and must be
construed objectively with reference to the language
used in the order itself.”
The above dictum applies with full force to the case at hand,
and I do not agree with the conclusion of the learned Tribunal in
paragraph 14 of its judgment that, although reference to the said
case by the petitioner, “is well taken”, “however, once the order
is before the court and there are pleadings argued on both sides
taking additional grounds as well, it may not be fair to ignore
them in adjudicating upon the matter.” No cogent legal reasoning
is offered, nor has any precedent been cited by the Tribunal for
adopting this approach in the matter. Furthermore, this approach
adopted by the learned Tribunal, which clearly entailed taking into
consideration the supplemental reasons put forward by the
Competent Authority in support of the impugned order, which
were not there in its original order, flies in the face of settled law
as laid down by the Supreme Court of India in Mohinder Singh
Gill’s case [supra].
28.

Before the Tribunal, the petitioner also relied upon the

judgment of the Tribunal’s coordinate bench at Chandigarh in the
case of Shri Ram Krishan Hooda v Union of India & others
[AISLJ 1997(1)(CAT) 562] as a precedent showing that in case
relevant factors such as, the kind of service rendered, poverty of

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.28 of 38

the dependent family, etc., have not been considered by the
concerned authority while making up his mind to disallow
Compassionate Allowance, the Authority should be directed to
reconsider the matter.

Unfortunately, the learned Tribunal has

chosen to disregard this decision on the ground that the same is
not relevant to the issue because Hooda’s case [supra] was
dealing with an applicant who had been dismissed from service
due to his conviction in a case of murder, whereas in the instant
case, the misconduct which led to the applicant's dismissal,
relates to dishonesty. By this, the Tribunal has implied that the
two stand on different footing, and that if the incident of
misconduct that prompted the authorities to dismiss an officer
now seeking Compassionate Allowance under Rule 41, was
murder, the Authority is obliged to consider his application in the
light of the kind of service rendered by him, poverty of the
dependent family, etc, but in the case of a dismissal that was the
result of an incident that had an element of dishonesty, such as
that of the petitioner, where he allegedly extorted Rs. 1000/-,
such considerations are barred, and therefore irrelevant to the
issue. If this reasoning is taken a step further, it means that if the
petitioner had murdered Kundan Singh instead of merely
extorting a thousand rupees, as he is stated to have done, and if
he were to apply for Compassionate Allowance on his dismissal
from service thereafter for that reason, the Authority would be
obliged consider all the relevant circumstances, including his

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.29 of 38

service record etc. I do not agree with this line of reasoning. The
learned Tribunal has proceeded on a completely wrong footing in
this regard and reached an astounding result. The approach of
the learned Tribunal has resulted in a decision which in effect
concludes that as an incident of misconduct disentitling the
dismissed officer to Compassionate Allowance, the act of murder
is not as grievous as an act of dishonesty, since the latter
disentitles the applicant to consideration of his past service
record, his straitened circumstances, or the fact that he has a
family dependent upon him or that there are any other
extenuating

features

which

would

persuade

the

authority

concerned to conclude that although the officers dismissal was
warranted, it has been unduly hard on the individual concerned;
but the former does not. It appears to me that this conclusion
with regard to the inapplicability of the decision in Hooda’s case
[supra] has been prompted by the conviction of the learned
Tribunal

that

the

Guidelines

debar

such

considerations

peremptorily if the incident upon which the applicant's dismissal
is based involves dishonesty. As I have already concluded, the
learned Tribunal has misconstrued the scope and application of
the said Guidelines inasmuch as, while the authority is required to
also take into account, “the kind of service he has rendered”, in
both cases; however, in the case of dismissal based on a, “course
of misconduct”, the Competent Authority is invited to decide
whether the aforesaid, “course of misconduct” is of such a nature

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.30 of 38

as to warrant a legitimate inference that the officer’s service has
been dishonest. If it is so, then, the Guidelines say, there can
seldom be any good case for Compassionate Allowance which, as
I have concluded above, merely means that the chances of the
Competent Authority finding that there is a case for granting
Compassionate Allowance nevertheless, are rare. However, in a
case where the dismissal is based on an isolated incident of
misconduct, involving dishonesty, even such a peremptory
caution is not there in the Guidelines. I daresay that since due
application of mind to all the relevant circumstances is the norm,
for the Competent Authority to find that a case for Compassionate
Allowance is made out in the case of an officer dismissed for a
murder most foul, or some equally reprehensible conduct, would
also be rare indeed.
For all these reasons, I am of the view that in deciding the
issue before it, the approach of the coordinate bench Of the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh, in Ram Krishan
Hooda’s case [supra] ought to have commended itself to the
Tribunal in deciding the matter.
29.

Going further, I find that the case of Anna Deoram Londhe

v State of Maharashtra, reported as, 1998(5) SLR 480, which
was also relied upon by the petitioner before the Tribunal has
been dealt with in a cursory fashion by the learned Tribunal. This
is a decision of a division bench of the Bombay High Court
wherein the court was considering the applicability of Rule 101 of

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.31 of 38

the Maharashtra Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1982, to an
application for Compassionate Pension moved by an officer who
was removed from service for misconduct after more than 30
years of service. This removal was prompted by his conviction for
an offence under Section 325 of the Indian Penal Code. In that
case also, the petitioner challenged the rejection of his application
on the ground that the concerned authority had not applied its
mind to his application in the manner required under the relevant
rules.

It was contended that the impugned order in that case

demonstrated a clear lack of reasoning for the rejection.

A

reading of this authority shows that the only reason assigned for
the rejection of the applicant’s representation for Compassionate
Pension was that the applicant was convicted of an offence under
Section 325 of The Indian Penal Code, which was considered to be
a serious offence. In that case also, the relevant rules required
that the, “government may, if the case is considered deserving of
special treatment, sanction the grant ……” of a Compassionate
Pension to the applicant. This is similar to the relevant provision
under Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules which provides that the
Competent Authority may, “ if the case is deserving of special
consideration, sanction a compassionate allowance…….”, to the
applicant. The two are in pari materia.

It is apparent that in

applying the two, similar considerations have to be kept in mind
by the Government, or the Competent Authority, as the case may
be. In that case, the High Court of Bombay had concluded that

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.32 of 38

the respondent ought to have considered the representation of
the petitioner to assess whether the case is deserving of a special
consideration for grant of pension independently of the fact of his
having been convicted of an offence under Section 325 IPC. Since
that was not done, the impugned order refusing Compassionate
Pension was set aside. Since I have found the relevant provisions
that arose for examination by the Bombay High Court to be in Pari
Materia with the Rule dealing with the grant of Compassionate
Allowance in this case, therefore I have no hesitation in
concluding that the ratio of the decision in Anna Deoram
Londhe’s case [supra], would be applicable to the present case
also.
30.

A reading of paragraphs 10 and 11 of the impugned

judgment shows clearly the confusion in the mind of the learned
Tribunal resulting from a failure to appreciate the meaning of the
aforesaid Government of India Guidelines issued on 22/4/1940, as
well as the nature of the jurisdiction being exercised by it, which
is limited to the examination of the order passed by the
Competent Authority on 24th of February 2006, and to decide
whether or not relevant factors had been considered by the said
Authority and, once it concluded that this had not been done, it's
only option was to remand the matter to the authority to be
decided afresh.
31.

In addition to this, the learned Tribunal has also upheld the

impugned order of the third respondent on the ground that the

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.33 of 38

petitioner has applied for grant of Compassionate Allowance
nearly 17 years after his dismissal, and that such a long lapse of
time, demonstrates that the petitioner has managed to survive all
this while without pension, and therefore he could not possibly
require this allowance henceforth. In other words, the fact of the
petitioner applying after nearly 17 years, has persuaded the
Tribunal to conclude that the penalty of dismissal, and the
consequent forfeiture of his pension and gratuity, was not unduly
hard on him. To my mind, this is a completely erroneous
approach. People manage to survive the most oppressive
circumstances in life. That does not mean that since their adverse
circumstances have not actually killed them, and they have
managed to somehow survive, therefore it must be presumed
that the circumstances through which they have passed have not
been unduly harsh. Similarly, simply because the petitioner
managed to stay alive all these years after his dismissal bereft of
pension

and

gratuity,

doesn’t

automatically

warrant

the

conclusion that the punishment was not unusually harsh on him.
It is entirely possible that the applicant has struggled all these
years to make ends meet and felt ashamed to beg for a
Compassionate Allowance, but his current circumstances have
reduced him to such a state that he had no alternative but to
throw himself at the mercy of his former employer’s compassion.
It is also conceivable that for some years after his dismissal, the
petitioner was not so badly off, and that his condition has

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.34 of 38

deteriorated only much later.
32.

In Thankappan Nair Vs. State of Kerala 2001 (3) ILR

Kerala 464 (W. A. No.2966/2000) decided on 03.10.2001, the
Division Bench of High Court of Kerala thought fit to direct
reconsideration

of

a

dismissed

officer's

request

for

Compassionate Allowance for which he had applied 28 years after
this dismissal. Similarly a Division Bench of Bombay High Court in
R.S.Sharma Vs. Union of India & Another (2004) III LLJ
191 Bom directed reconsideration of a dismissed officer's
request for Compassionate Allowance for which he had applied 11
years after his dismissal.

Only recently, in a case where the

dismissed officer happened to apply for Compassionate Allowance
30 years after his dismissal, the Andhra Pradesh High Court has
set aside the order rejecting his application and directed
reconsideration, see Md. Abdul Samad Vs. General Manager,
South Central Railways and ors. 2007 (3) ALD 722.
However, in the case of Idan Puri Vs. Union of India & Ors.
RLW (2007) 1 Raj 471, a Single Judge of the Rajasthan High
Court thought fit to reject a petition challenging refusal to grant
Compassionate Allowance to a dismissed officer on the ground
that his claim was hit by delay

and laches

because he had

applied for the same nearly 20 years after his dismissal. Be that
as it may, as I have already concluded, it was inappropriate on
the

part of the

learned Tribunal

to have

stepped into

the

shoes of the Competent Authority to decide whether the

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.35 of 38

applicant's case is deserving of special consideration warranting
the sanction of Compassionate Allowance. By the same line of
reasoning, these questions are not for this Court to decide.
Suffice to say that it is open to the Competent Authority to apply
itself to every aspect and, while taking a decision on the matter,
there is nothing to prevent the Competent Authority from fixing
not only the quantum of allowance, but also the date from which
it will be payable.
33.

I also

agree with the submission of the petitioner’s counsel

that the punishment of dismissal from service is employed only in
the most

grievous cases of misconduct by an officer, and the

provision contemplating the grant of Compassionate Allowance
can be invoked only by someone who have been dismissed from
service.

It is obvious that conduct that leads to an officer’s

dismissal is bound to be of a kind that tends to tarnish the image
of his employer. After all, that is also one of the reasons for his
dismissal. For the Competent Authority to thereafter say that he
doesn’t deserve Compassionate Allowance because he lowered
his employer’s image by the very act, or acts, that led to his
dismissal, is to render the provision otiose. Furthermore, in the
light of foregoing analysis of Rule 41 as well as the Guidelines, the
issue before the Competent Authority is only whether the
punishment imposed has been unduly hard on the officer.

That

is the point of view from which the whole thing is to be examined.
That the dismissed officer's conduct has tarnished the image of

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.36 of 38

the Force is irrelevant to the issue at hand.

Such an approach

on the part of the Competent Authority shows a lack of
understanding of the object and purpose of the rule and the
circumstances under which it is invoked.
34.

I might add that, in my view,

there is an element of

decision-making involved in disposing of an application for grant
of

Compassionate

Allowance. As the title suggests, it is an

application seeking a, “compassionate” allowance. It is a plea
whereby the authorities might be moved to show “compassion”
for a former employee in straitened circumstances. I need hardly
add that justice tempered with mercy always has a lasting effect.
Furthermore, even in decisions taken by an Administrative
Authority, there must be an element of uniformity and rationality.
The power to grant or refuse Compassionate Allowance cannot be
exercised on the mere whim of the officer who is designated as
the Competent Authority at the relevant time.
35.

For all the aforesaid reasons, the impugned Judgment of the

Tribunal dated 24/5/2007 passed in OA number 1005/06 is set
aside.

The decision of the Competent Authority dated 24th of

February 2006, is quashed. The Competent Authority is directed
to reconsider the petitioner’s application dated 16/2/2005 seeking
the grant of Compassionate Allowance in the light of the
provisions of Rule 41 CCS (Pension) Rules, the Guidelines dated
22/4/1940, the observations and the conclusions reached by this
Court, and to pass a speaking order thereon within one month

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.37 of 38

from today. It should take an independent decision in the matter,
without being influenced by any observations of the Tribunal on
the merits of the aforesaid application of the petitioner.
36.

Parties are left to bear their own costs.

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J
February 22, 2008
skw

W.P(C)No. 5544/2007

Page No.38 of 38

