*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Writ Petition (Civil) No.588/2008

%

Date of Decision : January 30, 2008

C.P. Sharma

…..Petitioner
Through : Mr. Neeraj Shekhar,
Advocate
Versus

Group 4 Securities Indian Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.

.…Respondents

Through : Nemo
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
1.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the judgment?

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not ?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest ?

SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J : (Oral)
1.

On 21st January, 2008, after some arguments, petitioner's

counsel had sought an adjournment to obtain further instructions.
Today, the petitioner has tried to demonstrate that the Tribunal's
conclusion that the petitioner was engaged in supervisory duties, and
hence was not a workman, is perverse. According to him, the status
of the petitioner has been totally misconstrued by the learned
Tribunal, and that the Tribunal failed to consider the petitioner’s
statement to the effect that he was merely a workman with no
supervisory role whatsoever. He states that, therefore, the finding of
the learned Labour Court to the effect that the claimant i.e. the
petitioner, was a Head Guard, and that he was promoted to Senior
Guard later on, and further that the nature of the job being performed
WP(C) No.588/2008

Page 1 of 6

by the petitioner was of a supervisory nature and not of the workman,
has occasioned a complete failure of justice.

He relies upon the

statement of a management witness, Sh. Ram Janak, who has stated
in cross examination that the management does not have any
document in support of the supervisory nature of duties being
performed by the petitioner except the description in Exhibit NW-1/1.
To support the plea that the Tribunal could not arrive at this
conclusion in the absence of documentary proof by the management,
the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon para 14 of the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Anand Regional
Cooperative Oilseeds Growers' Union Ltd. Vs. Shailesh Kumar
Harshadbhai Shah reported as (2006) SCC 548 paragraph 14
thereof which states as follows :
“14. For determining the question as to
whether a person employed in an industry is a
workman or not; not only the nature of work
performed by him but also the terms of the
appointment in the job performed are
relevant considerations.”
2.

I do not agree with the contentions raised by the learned

counsel for the petitioner in this behalf.

An examination of the

impugned judgment, and in particular paragraph 23 thereof, clearly
shows that there has been an extensive application of mind by the
learned Tribunal on this aspect. The Tribunal has noted the fact that
the workman himself has filed documents wherein he is designated
as Supervisor and also as the Head Guard.

Even in his written

statement, he has described himself as Head Guard, as also in his
affidavit by way of evidence. Furthermore, in his additional affidavit
also, he has stated that he was appointed as Head Guard and
promoted later on as the Senior Guard.

His statement in another

portion of his additional affidavit that he has no control or supervision
WP(C) No.588/2008

Page 2 of 6

over other Guards has also been noticed and duly considered. The
learned Tribunal has also considered the arguments put forward by
the claimant to the effect that in fact the management has
manipulated the documents which were actually filed by the claimant
himself. Petitioner's contention that the letter “H” was added in some
of the documents later on, has also been noted.

In fact, learned

Tribunal had specifically drawn the attention of the petitioner to the
portion of his affidavit where he described himself as Head Guard and
found that he was not able to give any satisfactory explanation for
the same. Not only that, it appears that in cross examination also,
the petitioner stated that he was supervising the job of six guards. A
reading of the impugned judgment shows quite clearly that the
learned Tribunal had applied its mind to this controversy.

It has

taken note of the contentions and the stand of the petitioner as well
as the fact that admittedly, he was drawing wages exceeding
Rs.1,600/- per month; and then arrived at its conclusion to the effect
that the petitioner was not a workman. I do not find any perversity in
the reasoning of the learned Tribunal or in the conclusions drawn by
it. The conclusion arrived at is plausible and it cannot be said that
the finding in this regard is one which could never have been arrived
at by any Tribunal. In the case of Indian Overseas Bank Vs. I.O.B.
Staff Canteen Workers' Union & Anr AIR 2000 SC 1508 the
Supreme Court held:
“17.... The findings of fact recorded by factfinding authority duly constituted for the
purpose and which ordinarily should be
considered to have become final, cannot be
disturbed for a mere reason of having been
based on material or evidence not sufficient or
credible in the opinion of the writ court to
warrant those findings, at any rate, as long as
they are based on some material which are
relevant for the purpose or even on the ground
WP(C) No.588/2008

Page 3 of 6

that there is yet another view which can
reasonably & possibly be taken....”
3.

Furthermore, it is settled law that scope of interference by this

Court under Article 226 is very limited.

This Court is not sitting in

appellate jurisdiction and cannot examine the matter as if it were a
first appeal. This proposition has been time & again highlighted by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in myriad cases. In Apparel Export
Promotion Council Vs. A.K.Chopra (1999) 1 SCC 759 it was
observed that “since the High Court does not sit as an appellate
authority over the factual findings recorded during departmental
proceedings, while exercising the power of judicial review, the High
Court cannot, normally speaking, substitute its own conclusion, with
regard to the guilt of the delinquent for that of the departmental
authorities.”
4.

Similarly in the case of Govt. of A.P. And Others Vs. Mohd.

Nasrullah Khan (2006) 2 SCC373 paragraph 11 states as follows:
“11. By now it is well established principle of
law that the High Court exercising power of
judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution does not act as an appellate
authority. Its jurisdiction is circumscribed and
confined to errors of law or procedural error,
if any, resulting in manifest miscarriage of
justice or violation of principles of Natural
Justice. Judicial review is not akin to
adjudication on merit by reappreciating the
evidence as an appellate authority.”
5.

In Mukand Ltd. Vs. Mukand Staff & Officers' Association

(2004) 10 SCC 460 the Supreme court relying upon its own earlier
judgments, observed that writ jurisdiction can be invoked to interfere
with the award of the Tribunal when such award is given in bad faith,
made without proper jurisdiction, in violation of principles of Natural
Justice & so on. In that case, the Court also reiterated its earlier
WP(C) No.588/2008

Page 4 of 6

decision in Syed Yakoob Vs. K.S.Radhakrishnan AIR 1964 SC
477 where it had held that, “There is, however, no doubt that the
jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari is a supervisory jurisdiction and
the court exercising it is not entitled to act as an appellate court. This
limitation

necessarily means that findings of fact reached by the

inferior Court or Tribunal as a result of appreciation of evidence
cannot be reopened or questioned in writ proceedings.”
6.

Even a Division Bench of Bombay High Court in the case of

C.C.Palkar Vs. K.M.Mills Ltd. (1992) 4 SLR 82 (Bom) in para 8
therein observed as follows:
“8......if the adjudicator's award is challenged
before the High Court in writ jurisdiction it can
be quashed if it is vitiated by the fundamental
flaws of gross miscarriage of justice, absence of
legal evidence, perverse misreading of facts,
serious errors of law on the face of the order,
jurisdictional failure & the like. The High Court
has to be cautious both in not overstepping as
if Article 226 were as large as as appeal and
not failing to intervene where a grave error of
law has crept in....”
7.

Reliance of learned counsel for the petitioner on paragraph 14

of the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court in Anand Regional
Cooperative Oilseeds Growers' Union Ltd. Vs. Shailesh Kumar
Harshadbhai Shah (supra) also does not help him very much. That
authority, while laying down the law, merely states that in addition to
the nature of the work performed by the petitioner, the terms of the
appointment and the job performed are also relevant considerations.
It is not as if the terms of appointment should be the sole
consideration. Furthermore, as has been held by Supreme Court in
Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distribution Company of India
Ltd. Vs. Burmah Shell Management Staff Association AIR 1971

WP(C) No.588/2008

Page 5 of 6

SC 922, in determining whether an employee is covered by the
definition of “workman”, the Court has to see what is the main or
substantial work that an employee is engaged in. Even in Anand
Regional

Coop.

Oil

Seedgrowers'

Union

Ltd.

Vs.

Shaileshkumar Harshadbhai Shah (2006) 6 SCC 548, the
Surpeme Court has stated that what is important is the primary
duties performed by the employee rather than his designation. In this
case, the learned Tribunal has relied upon the documents filed by the
petitioner himself, as also his own statements, his examination-inchief, as well as the cross examination. It has also kept in mind the
apparent inconsistency in his own statements and has then arrived at
a conclusion about the nature of the duties. It is therefore obvious
that the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner to the
effect that the Tribunal has failed to consider his statement that he
was merely a workman with no supervisory role, must be rejected.
No other ground is pressed by the petitioner.
8.

Under the circumstances, I do not find any ground to interfere

in the exercise of writ jurisdiction.
9.

Petition is dismissed.

Sudershan Kumar Misra, J
January 30, 2008
skw

WP(C) No.588/2008

Page 6 of 6

