•

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
•

Date of Decision: 8 February, 2008
th

+

W.P.(C) 5555/1997
R.S. BHARGAVA PHARMACY

..... Petitioner

versus
UOI
2.

..... Respondent

W.P.(C) 2407/1997
RALSON REMEDIES PVT. LTD.

..... Petitioner

versus
UOI
3.

..... Respondent

W.P.(C) 3688/1995
DR. V.K. BHANDARI

..... Petitioner

versus
UOI & ORS.
4.

..... Respondents

W.P.(C) 1791/1998
HAHNEMANN PHARMACEUTICALS

..... Petitioner

versus
UOI & ORS.
5.

..... Respondents

W.P.(C) 931/2006
M/S K.R. INDO-GERMAN
HOMEOPATHIC PHARMACEUTICALS

..... Petitioner

versus
UOI & ORS.

WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

..... Respondents

page 1 of 14

6.

W.P.(C) 19257/2006
JISHNU PHARMACEUTICALS P. LTD.

..... Petitioner

versus
UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents

Advocates who appeared in the cases :

For Petitioners :
Mr. Ashok Bhasin, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Shantnu Rastogi,
Adv. in WP(C) Nos. 5555/1997, 2407/1997, 1791/1998
Mr. Raman Kapur, Adv. in WP(C) No. 3688/1995
Mr. Kirti K. Mehta, Adv. for Mr. Tarun Dewan, in WP(C)
19257/2006
For Respondents :
Mr. Mukesh Anand, Mr. Shailesh Tiwari, Ms. Zeba
Tarannum Khan, Advs. in WP(C) 19257/2006
Mr. S.K. Dubey, Adv. in WP(C) No. 3688/1995
Mr. Vinod Kumar, Adv. in WP(C) 931/2006
Ms. Monica Garg, Adv. in WP(C) 5555/97, 1791/1998
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

Per Thakur, J
In this batch of writ petitions, the petitioners challenge the
constitutional validity of Rule 106B of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945
inserted by notification dated 22nd February, 1994. The challenge arises in
the following circumstances :2.

A tragedy resulting in loss of human lives and involving the use of

spurious alcohol based medicinal preparations led to the constitution of a
one-man Inquiry Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice Jagdish
Chandra.

Among other recommendations, the Committee suggested that

medicinal preparations containing more than 12% alcohol should be packed
in smaller packages. These recommendations in turn led to the initiation of
a process by which Rule 106B was introduced by way of an amendment to
the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. The Rule so introduced prohibits packing
WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 2 of 14

of homeopathic medicines containing more than 12% Ethyl Alcohol in
packings or bottles of more than 30 ml except in cases where the medicine
is being sold to hospitals or dispensaries in which case the packings in
bottles cannot be of a capacity more than 100 ml. The Rule reads as under:106B. Prohibition of quantity and percentage.–No
Homeopathic medicine containing more than 12% alcohol v/v
(Ethyl Alcohol) shall be packed and sold in packing or bottles of
more than 30 mililitres, except that it may be sold to
hospitals/dispensaries in packings or bottles of not more than
100 mililitres.”

3.

Learned counsel for the petitioners strenuously argued that Rule 106B

(supra) is discriminatory inasmuch as it singles out the homeopathic
medicines for a hostile treatment.

There was, according to the learned

counsel, no such provision applicable to allopathic medicines which
continue to be packed and sold in bigger containers even when the alcohol
content in them may be more than 12%. It was argued that the Rule under
challenge placed an unreasonable restriction on the right to free trade and
commerce.

Besides there was, according to the learned counsel, no

justification for the rule making authority to restrict the size of the bottles
or the packings nor was there any nexus between the measures enforced by
the Government and the mischief sought to be cured by the same. It was
also contended that Rule 106B was ultra vires of the provisions of Section
12 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 which did not empower the
Government to make a Rule regulating the packaging or the containers to
be used for the same.

On behalf of the respondents, it was per contra

argued that the Rule 106B was intra vires of the Constitution as also the
Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940.

The charge of discrimination was also

unfounded according to the learned counsel for the respondent who
submitted that the rule was introduced to deal with a mischief which could
result in grave danger to human lives if left without remedy or regulation.
Three questions, under these circumstances, arise for consideration of this
court. These are :

WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 3 of 14

(i)

Is Rule 106B of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 ultra vires of
the provisions of the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940?

(ii)

Is Rule 106B discriminatory inasmuch as it regulates containers used
only for homeopathic medicines while leaving out preparations under
other systems of medicines; and

(iii)

Is the Rule under challenge violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India?

4.

We shall deal with the questions ad seriatim :

Re Question No. 1 :
5.

Rule 106B of the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945 introduced by

Notification dated 22nd February, 1994 has been framed to regulate the
containers in which homeopathic medicines containing more than 12%
alcohol is present. The first question that would then arise while examining
the validity of the said rule would be whether the rule making authority
could exercise the rule making power even in relation to the containers in
which the medicine was packed for sale. The answer to that question would
primarily depend upon whether the rule under challenge is in any way
unrelated or falls outside the objectives which the Act purports to achieve.
A reading of the preamble to the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 would show
that the legislation was considered expedient to regulate the import,
manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs and cosmetics in India.

The

term ‘manufacture’ is defined by Section 3(f) inter alia to mean any process
or part of a process for making, altering, ornamenting, finishing, packing,
labelling, breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting any drug with a
view to its sale or distribution. Section 3(f) may at this stage be extracted:
“3. Definitions
(f) “manufacture” in relation to any drug [or cosmetic] includes
any process or part of a process for making, altering,
ornamenting, finishing, packing, labelling, breaking up or
otherwise treating or adopting any drug [or cosmetic] with a
WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 4 of 14

view to its [sale or distribution] but does not include the
compounding or dispensing [of any drug, or the packing of any
drug or cosmetic] in the ordinary course of retail business; and
“to manufacture” shall be construed accordingly;]”

6.

It is evident from a plain reading of the above that any process or part

thereof which deals with packing of drugs or cosmetics is also tantamount
to manufacture of drugs and cosmetics. It follows that the Act is intended
not only to regulate the import and distribution of sale of drugs but also
processes relating to the manufacture which inter alia includes packing. In
the case of the liquids packing of the medicinal preparations takes place
either in glass bottles or other similar containers.

Any provision which

regulates packing in bottles must necessarily imply regulation of the
containers used for such packing. Seen thus, Rule 106B is within the rule
making power conferred upon the Central Government under Section 33 of
the Act which reserves in favour of the said Government the power to make
rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of Chapter IV. If the
purpose underlying the Act is also to regulate the packing of the medicinal
preparations, any rule which regulates such packing or prescribes the
capacity of the bottles/containers in which the same can be packed would
clearly be a provision intended to give effect to the provisions of the Act.
7.

Even apart from the general power conferred upon the Government in

terms of Section 33(1), the provisions of Section 33(2)(i) specifically confer
upon the Government the power to regulate packing of the medicinal
preparations in bottles, packages and other containers. Section 33(2)(i) of
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 may, at this stage, be extracted :
“33. Power of Central Government to make rules 2(i)
prescribe the conditions to be observed in the packing in
bottles, packages, and other containers of drugs [or cosmetics],
[including the use of packing material which comes into direct
contact with the drugs] and prohibit the sale, stocking or
exhibition for sale, or distribution of drugs [or cosmetics]
packed in contravention of such conditions;”

8.

There is in the light of the above, no room for holding that Rule 106B

which regulates the packing of homeopathic medicines in bottles is outside
WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 5 of 14

the rule making authority vested in the Government under Section 33 of the
Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 and hence ultra vires of the said Act. Not
only from the stand point of the Rule in question giving effect to the
provisions of the Act but also from the stand point of the specific power
vested in the rule making authority under Section 33(2)(i), Rule 106B is
intra vires of the Act.
9.

Although the scheme of the Act and a plain reading of the provisions

contained in the same leave no manner of doubt that Rule 106B is within
the rule making authority of the Government, we may briefly refer to a few
decisions of the Supreme Court in which the Court has stated the principles
to be applied while dealing with a challenge to a piece of delegated
legislation on the ground that the same falls beyond the authority conferred
upon the delegate.
10.

In

Maharashtra

State

Board

of

Secondary

and

Higher

Secondary Education and Anr. V. Paritosh Bhupeshkumar Sheth and
Ors. AIR 1984 SC 1543, the court declared that while examining whether a
particular piece of delegated legislation, whether in the form of a rule or
regulation or any other type of statutory instrument, was in excess of the
power of subordinate legislation conferred on the delegate, has to be
determined with reference only to the specific provisions contained in the
relevant statute conferring the power to make the rule, regulation etc. and
the object and purpose of the Act as can be gathered from the various
provisions of the enactment. It was wrong, the Court observed, for their
Lordships to substitute its own opinion for that of the legislature or its
delegate as to what principle or policy would best serve the objects and
purposes of the Act and to sit in judgment over the wisdom and
effectiveness or otherwise of the policy laid down by the regulation making
body and declare a regulation to be ultra vires merely on the ground that, in
the opinion of the Court, the impugned provisions will not help to serve the

WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 6 of 14

object and purposes of the Act. The following passage from the said decision
sums up the legal position succinctly :
“So long as the body entrusted with the task of framing the
rules or regulations acts within the scope of the authority
conferred on it, in the sense that the rules or regulations made
by it have a rational nexus with the object and purpose of the
Statute, the court should not concern itself with the wisdom or
efficaciousness of such rules or regulations. It is exclusively
within the province of the legislature and its delegate to
determine, as a matter of policy, how the provisions of the
Statute can best be implemented and what measures,
substantive as well as procedural would have to be
incorporated in the rules or regulations for the efficacious
achievement of the objects and purposes of the Act. It is not for
the Court to examine the merits or demerits of such a policy
because its scrutiny has to be limited to the question as to
whether the impugned regulations fall within the scope of the
regulation-making power conferred on the delegate by the
Statute. Though this legal position is well established by a long
series of decisions of this Court, we have considered it
necessary to reiterate it in view of the manifestly erroneous
approach made by the High Court to the consideration of the
question as to whether the impugned Clause (3) of Regulation
104 is ultra vires.”

11.

Reference may also be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in

V.T. Khanzode and Ors. v. Reserve Bank of India and Anr. AIR 1982
SC 917, where the court observed thus :
“It is well-settled that
without prejudice to
conferred; the specific
restrict the width of the

12.

where a specific power is conferred
the generality of a power already
power is only illustrative and cannot
general power.”

It is, in the light of the above settled legal position futile for the

petitioners to argue that Rule 106B was beyond the rule making power
delegated to the Government under Section 33 of the Act. It is noteworthy
that the petitioners did not challenge the validity of the rule on the ground
of violation of the procedural formalities required to be followed by the
delegate in making the rule. The record, however, bears sufficient evidence
of the fact that the Government had while introducing Rule 106B, consulted
the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under Section 5 of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

It is also evident from the record that

before promulgating the rules, the rule making authority had invited
objections from the affected parties and the same were considered at the

WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 7 of 14

appropriate level. There was therefore no legal infirmity in the framing of
the rules, to call for any interference from this Court.

Our answer to

question No.1 is therefore in the negative.
Re Question No. 2 :
13.

The challenge to the rule on the touchstone of the equality clause

contained under Article 14 of the Constitution is also in our view wholly
untenable.

We say so because the legal position in regard to the

permissible classification is fairly well settled by a long line of decisions
rendered by the Supreme Court.

In Budhan Choudhry and Ors. Vs.The

State of Bihar AIR 1955 SC 191, the Supreme Court authoritatively held that

Article 14 does forbid class legislation but does not forbid reasonable
classification for purposes of legislation. The Court in that case evolved the
dual test of the classification being founded on an intelligible differentia
which distinguishes persons or things that are left out of the group and the
differentia having a rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved by
the statute in question.

The Court declared that classification can be

founded on different basis, viz; geographical according to the objects or
occupations or the like. What was necessary, observed their Lordships, was
that there must be a nexus between the basis of classification and the object
of the Act under consideration. The law was summed-up by the Court in

Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar and Ors. AIR 1958
SC 538 in the following paragraph which we may gainfully extract :
“(a) that a law may be constitutional even though it relates to a
single individual if, on account of some special circumstances
or reasons applicable to him and not applicable to others, that
single individual may be treated as a class by himself;
(b) that there is always a presumption in favour of the
constitutionality of an enactment and the burden is upon him
who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression
of the constitutional principles;
(c) that it must be presumed that the legislature understands
and correctly appreciates the need of its own people, that its
laws are directed to problems made manifest by experience and
that its discriminations are based on adequate grounds;
(d) that the legislature is free to recognise degrees of harm and
may confine its restrictions to those cases where the need is
WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 8 of 14

deemed to be the clearest;
(e) that in order to sustain the presumption of constitutionality
the court may take into consideration matters of common
knowledge, matters of common report, the history of the times
and may assume every state of facts which can be conceived
existing at the time of legislation; and
(f) that while good faith and knowledge of the existing
conditions on the part of a legislature are to be presumed, if
there is nothing on the face of the law or the surrounding
circumstances brought to the notice of the court on which the
classification may reasonably be regarded as based, the
presumption of constitutionality cannot be carried to the extent
of always holding that there must be some undisclosed and
unknown reasons for subjecting certain individuals or
corporations to hostile or discriminating legislation.” (emphasis
supplied)

14.

We may also refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Sakhawat

Ali v. State of Orissa AIR 1955 SC 166, where their lordships observed
that it was for the legislature to determine what categories it would
embrace within the scope of legislation and merely because certain
categories standing on the same footing as those which are covered by the
legislation are left out would not render the legislation discriminatory or
violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 14. The court
observed :
“The simple answer to this contention is that the legislation
enacted for a particular object or purpose need not be all
embracing. It is for the legislature to determine what
categories it would embrace within the scope of legislation and
merely because certain categories which would stand on the
same footing as those which are covered by the legislation are
left out would not render legislation which has been enacted in
any manner discriminatory and violative of the fundamental
right guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution.”

15.

In V.K. Sood v. Secretary, Civil Aviation and others AIR 1993 SC

2285, the Supreme Court declared that no motives could be imputed to the
legislature and that a rule could not be struck down as invalid on the
ground of mala fides. The Court observed :
“The rules thus having been made in exercise of the
power under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution,
being statutory, cannot be impeached on the ground that
the authorities have prescribed tailor-made qualifications
to suit the stated individuals whose names have been
mentioned in the appeal. Suffice to state that it is settled
law that no motives can be attributed to the Legislature
in making the law.”

WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 9 of 14

16.

It is not, in the light of the above legal position, open to the petitioners

to contend that Rule 106B was discriminatory in nature simply because the
rule making authority had left out preparations in other systems of
medicines from a similar restriction as to the capacity of the container in
which the same could be sold. There is no gainsaying that Homeopathic,
Ayurvedic, Allopathic, Unani and other systems of preparations are totally
different in their content and approach.

Just because another system of

medicine also makes use of alcohol for its medicinal preparations but has
been left out of the regulatory control introduced by Rule 106B would not
render the said rule discriminatory qua Homeopathic medicines with more
than 12% alcohol content. The very fact that the systems of medicines are
different would in our opinion justify a different approach to each one of
them. Inasmuch as the rule making authority chose to regulate containers
used

for

marketing

homeopathic

drugs

only,

leaving

out

drugs

manufactured in other systems of medicines making use of alcohol, would
not render the rule constitutionally invalid on the ground of discrimination,
being contrary to Article 14. Our answer to question number 2 also, thus, is
in the negative.
Re Question No.3 :17.

The right to carry on any trade, occupation or profession guaranteed

under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution is not absolute in terms.
Reasonable restrictions can be placed upon the said right in the interest of
general public. The legal position in this regard is fairly well settled by a
constitution bench decision of the Supreme Court in Khoday Distilleries

Ltd. and Ors. v. State of Karnataka and Ors. (1995) 1 SCC 574, where
the court observed :
“The rights protected by Article 19[1] are not absolute
but qualified. The qualifications are stated in Clauses [2]
to [6] of Article 19. The fundamental rights guaranteed in
Article 19[1](a) to (g) are, therefore, to be read along
with the said qualifications. Even the rights guaranteed
WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 10 of 14

under the Constitutions of the other civilized countries
are not absolute but are read subject to the implied
limitations on them. Those implied limitations are made
explicit by Clauses [2] to [6] of Article 19 of our
Constitution.”

18.

Their lordships were in that case dealing with restrictions placed on

the trade and business in industrial alcohol and in medicinal and toilet
preparations containing liquor and alcohol. The Court held that restrictions
placed on the use of alcohol in medicinal and toilet preparations could be
regulated and that restrictions placed on the use of alcohol intended to
prevent the abuse or diversion thereof were reasonable in nature.
19.

In Municipal Corporation v. Jan Mohd. Usmanbhai (1986) 3 SCC

20, the court interpreted the expression “in the interest of general public”
and held that the same were of wide import comprehending public order,
public health, public security, morals, economic welfare of the community
and the objects mentioned in part IV of the Constitution.
20.

In Cooverji B. Bharuch v. Excise Commissioner , AIR 1954 SC

220, the court was examining the test applicable for determining the
reasonableness of the restriction and observed that reasonableness of the
restriction has to be determined by reference to the nature of the business
and the conditions prevailing in the trade. Some occupations by the noise
made in their pursuit, some by the odours they engender, and some by the
dangers accompanying them, require regulations as to the locality in which
they may be conducted.
21.

In Mohd. Hanif Quareshi and Ors. v. The State of Bihar AIR 1958

SC 731, the court was examining the test to be applied for determining the
reasonableness of the restriction and observed :
“Clause (6) of Art. 19 protects a law which imposes in the
interest of the general public reasonable restrictions on
the exercise of the right conferred by sub-clause (g) of
clause (1) of Art. 19. Quite obviously it is left to the court,
in case of dispute, to determine the reasonableness of the
restrictions imposed by the law. In determining that
question the court, we conceive, cannot proceed on a
general notion of what is reasonable in the abstract or
WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 11 of 14

even on a consideration of what is reasonable from the
point of view of the person or persons on whom the
restrictions are imposed. The right conferred by subclause (g) is expressed in general language and if there
had been no qualifying provision like clause (6), the right
so conferred would have been an absolute one. To the
person who has this right any restriction will be irksome
and may well be regarded by him as unreasonable. But
the question cannot be decided on that basis. What the
court has to do is to consider whether the restrictions
imposed are reasonable in the interests of the general
public. (emphasis supplied)

22.

Similarly in Bishambhar Dayal Chandar Mohan and Ors. v. State

of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. AIR 1982 SC 33, the court reiterated the
principle underlying clauses 5 and 6 of Article 19 and observed that
reasonable restriction signifies that the limitation imposed on a person in
enjoyment of the right should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature,
beyond what is required in the interests of the public. The court also held
that the test of reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to
each individual statute impugned, and no abstract standard, or general
pattern of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable in all cases. The
following passage from the decision is in this regard apposite :
“The expression 'reasonable restriction' signifies that the
limitation imposed on a person in enjoyment of the right should
not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature, beyond what is
required in the interests of the public. The test of
reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to each
individual statute impugned, and no abstract standard, or
general pattern of reasonableness can be laid down as
applicable in all cases. The restriction which arbitrarily or
excessively invades the right cannot be said to contain the
quality of reasonableness and unless it strikes a proper balance
between the freedom guaranteed in Article 19(1)(g) and the
social control permitted by Clause (6) of Article 19, it must be
held to be wanting in that quality.
In judging the validity of these restrictions, the Court has to
strike a proper balance between the freedom guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(g) and the social control permitted by Article
19(6).”

23.

Reference may also be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in

Southern Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals, Trichur and Ors. v. State
of Kerala and Ors. AIR 1981 SC 1863 where the court reiterated the
settled legal position that no fundamental right was available to a citizen
under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution to carry on trade in any noxious
WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 12 of 14

and dangerous goods like intoxicating drugs or intoxicating liquors.

The

Court observed :
“The power to legislate with regard to intoxicating liquor
carries with it the power to regulate the manufacture, sale and
possession of medicinal and toilet preparations containing
alcohol, not for the purpose of interfering with the right of
citizens in the matter of consumption or use for bona fide
medicinal and toilet preparations, but for preventing
intoxicating liquors from being passed on under the guise of
medicinal and toilet preparations. It was within the competence
of the State Legislature to prevent the noxious use of such
preparations, i.e. their use as a substitute for alcoholic
beverages.”

24.

The court further held that it was a matter of common knowledge that

Ayurvedic preparations like asavas and arishtas containing liquor are
always likely to be misused as a substitute for alcohol bevereges and
therefore the restriction imposed by Section 12A of the Abkari Act, 1977
was a reasonable restriction within the meaning of Section 19(6) of the
Constitution. The following passage is in this regard instructive :
“The contention that Note to Rule 3(1) is an unreasonable
restriction on the freedom of trade guaranteed under Article
19(1)(g) of the Constitution has no substance. It provides that
unless otherwise declared by the Expert Committee, asavas
and aristas and other preparations containing alcohol are
deemed to be spurious if their self-generated alcoholic content
exceeds 12% by volume. It is a matter of common knowledge
that such preparations are always likely to be misused as a
substitute for alcoholic beverages and, therefore, the
restriction imposed by Section 12A is a reasonable restriction
within the meaning of Section 19(6) of the Constitution.”

25.

In the light of the above pronouncements of the Supreme Court, we

have no hesitation in holding that the restriction placed upon the use of
containers for sale of homeopathic medicines with more than 12% alcohol
content in the same is a reasonable restriction and is intended to prevent
misuse of such preparations by those who purchase the same across the
counters. The experience of such preparations having been misused in the
past leading to loss of valuable human lives was, in our view, sufficient for
the rule making authority to act in public interest and regulate the sale of
such medicines by stipulating that they would not be sold in containers
more than 30 ml capacity. The rule, it is noteworthy, does not require such
small containers to be used in case the supply is meant for hospitals and
WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 13 of 14

dispensaries in which event the packing of bottles could be of 100 ml also.
Having regard to the purpose sought to be achieved by the Act and the
Rules framed thereunder, the restriction contained in Rule 106B qua
homeopathic medicine with more than 12% alcohol content cannot be said
to be either unreasonable or otherwise violative of the right guaranteed to
the petitioners under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.

Our answer to

question No. 3 is in the negative.
26.

In the result, these petitions fail and are hereby dismissed but in the

circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

VEENA BIRBAL, J.
FEBRUARY 08, 2007
pk

WP(C) 5555/2007 & connected matters

page 14 of 14

