*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 6015/2007
Date of Decision:

7th January, 2008

KISHAN CHAND & SONS
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. S.C. Singhal, adv.
versus
GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ANR
..... Respondent
Through: Ms. Zubeda Begum,Adv. for GNCT
with Ms. Iram Majid,Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH

1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Yes

Per Thakur,J (Oral)
Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Hospital in Delhi is one of the largest
hospitals in Asia. The number of persons treated in the hospital both
as indoor and outdoor patients is, therefore, understandably very
large and the requirement of surgical equipments and other materials
like

bandages

proportionately

higher.

These

equipments,

in

particular, bandages of different types are, in the usual course,
procured by the Central Procurement Agency (CPA) and supplied to
the hospitals in Delhi. In the event of a shortfall of such supplies by
the

Central

Procurement

empowered

to

formalities

and

make

Agency,

purchases

processing

the

the

hospital

authorities

are

after

following

the

requisite

papers

through

the

Purchase

Committee appointed for the purpose.
2.

For the year 2006-2007, the hospital felt the need for

W.P.(C)6015/2007

Page 1 of 9

purchasing surgical bandages and accordingly initiated the process of
procuring the same through the Purchase Committee constituted for
the purpose. The Purchase Committee appears to have initially fixed
an annual turnover of Rs.10 crores as a condition of eligibility for any
manufacturer of such bandages to submit a tender.

It is common

ground that in response to the tenders invited on that condition of
eligibility, only two quotations were received thereby forcing the
purchase committee to reduce the turnover from Rs.10 crores to Rs.5
crores. A fresh tender notice was on that basis floated by the Medical
Superintendent of the hospital which was published in four leading
newspapers in their issue dated 27th July, 2007.

The notice invited

sealed tenders for the purchase of the equipment mentioned in the
same including surgical dressing in the prescribed format of a tender
document which, according to the tender notice, could be purchased
on a cash payment of Rs.500/- from the procurement Section of the
hospital between 27th July, 2007 and 16th August, 2007 upto 2 p.m.
The tender notice required sealed tender to be dropped in the box
prescribed for the same placed in the purchase section of the
Procurement Cell up to 2 p.m. on 17th August, 2007 which would then
be opened on 17th August, 2007 at 3 p.m. in presence of the tenderers
3.

The petitioner is a manufacturer of surgical dressings and

claims to be making some supplies to the hospital mentioned above on
the basis of a limited tender floated for that purpose. It has, in the
present writ petition, challenged the stipulation contained in the
tender notice requiring the manufacturers to have a turnover of Rs.5
crores as a condition of eligibility on the ground that the same is
totally illogical, irrational and arbitrary. A writ of certiorari quashing
the tender notice and the condition of annual turnover with a

W.P.(C)6015/2007

Page 2 of 9

mandamus to respondent No. 2 to call fresh tenders without the
mandatory condition of turnover has, therefore, been prayed for in the
present petition.
4.

In response to the show cause notice issued by this Court, the

respondents have appeared and contested the writ petition by filing a
counter affidavit.

According to the respondents, the stipulation

regarding annual turnover of the manufacturer is neither arbitrary
nor irrational as alleged by the petitioner.

It is, on the contrary,

intended to ensure that only manufacturers of good financial standing
stay as players in the ongoing process and that the person eventually
emerging successful as the lowest tenderer is in a position, on
account of his large turnover, to make uninterrupted supply of the
material required by the hospital. According to the respondents, the
need for fixing a higher turnover had been felt by the Purchase
Committee on the basis of the past experience in which sub-standard
and spurious materials had been supplied and the supplies eventually
given up by the chosen contractor on account of his inability to meet
the demands. The respondents argue that the present is not a case
where this court could interfere in exercise of its powers of judicial
review with either the conditions of the tender notice or the ongoing
process of issue of a supply order in favour of the successful tenderer.
5.

Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Singhal strenuously argued

that the conditions regarding annual turnover of Rs.5 crores was
wholly irrelevant to the question of the capacity of the tenderer to
make the supplies.

He urged that the petitioner was, even with a

limited turnover, making supplies to the hospital on the basis of
limited tenders issued by it on account of the failure of the supplies
from the Central Procurement Agency and the contractors chosen for

W.P.(C)6015/2007

Page 3 of 9

making the supply. The ability of the petitioner to make the supplies
did not depend, argued Mr. Singhal, upon his total annual turnover
fixing an irrationally and unreasonably higher benchmark as a
condition of eligibility. The condition was, according to the learned
counsel, arbitrary and violative of the Equality Clause contained in
Article 14 of the Constitution.
6.

Mr. Singhal further contended that the Central Procurement

Agency which is the main procuring agency for supplying equipment
including surgical bandages to Government Hospitals in Delhi had
itself fixed a lower turnover of Rs.2 crores which clearly showed that
the higher limit of Rs.5 crores fixed by the Purchase Committee in the
instant case was unjustified.
7.

On behalf of the respondents Ms. Zubeda Begum, on the other

hand, argued that the writ petition was liable to be dismissed on the
ground of unexplained delay and latches. She contended that the last
date for the purchase of the tender document was 16th August, 2007
upto 2 p.m.. The petitioner had not, according to the learned counsel,
purchased any tender document till 16th August, 2007 which,
according to her, meant that he had lost the right to compete for the
allotment of the supplies in question not by reason of any arbitrary or
unreasonable stipulation in the same but

by his own inaction and

indolence. She further submitted that the scope of judicial review did
not extend to finding fault with the conditions of the tender notice
unless the conditions were found by the Court to be totally arbitrary
or discriminatory in nature.

There was, however, neither any

arbitrariness nor any irrationality or perversity in the conditions of
eligibility stipulated by the respondents for the supply in question. On
the contrary, the higher turnover of

W.P.(C)6015/2007

Rs.5 crores per annum was

Page 4 of 9

intended to achieve the object of standard material being supplied
and the supplies remaining uninterrupted. There was, in that view, a
direct nexus between the turnover of the manufacturers and their
ability to make the supplies.

Reliance was placed by Ms. Zubeda

Begum upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in Directorate of

Education & Ors. V.s Educomp Datamatics Ltd. & Ors. 2004(3)
Scale 111 and Global Energy Ltd. & Anr. V.s M/s Adani Exports
Ltd. & Ors. 2005(4) Scale 551.
8.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions

made at the bar and perused the record. The Writ petition filed by
the petitioner is indeed belated.

As rightly pointed out by Mrs.

Zubeda Begum, the tender notice was issued as early as on 27th July,
2007 with a specific stipulation to the effect that intended tenderers
could purchase the tender document up to 16th August, 2007 till 2p.m.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner neither approached the
authorities for the purchase of the tender document nor did the
petitioner file any petition challenging the condition of eligibility as
stipulated in the tender notice till 17th August, 2007 by which time the
last date for purchase of the tender document had already expired.
Mr. Singhal's argument that the petitioner had, during the intervening
period, submitted a representation to the Medical Superintendent of
the hospital for reconsideration of the stipulation regarding annual
turnover of the manufacturer has not impressed us. A reading of the
said representation produced as annexure P-7 to the writ petition
would show that the representation was not filed by the petitioner but
by one of the parties intending to participate in the tender process.
That is evident even from the petitioner’s assertion made in para 13
of the writ petition which reads as under:-

W.P.(C)6015/2007

Page 5 of 9

“That in the above said circumstances the
petitioner and other similarly situated persons
brought this fact to the notice of the
respondent no. 2 and requested him to amend
the condition, but to no avail. One of the
participants has even written a letter to the
Medical Superintendent and the copy of such
letter is annexed as ANNEXURE P-7 to the
present writ petition, but the Medical
Superintendent neither replied the said letter
nor amended the said condition and is bent
upon opening the tender on 17th August, 2007
at 3:30 p.m. The Schedule of the tender is as
below:Sale of the tender from 27.07.2007 to
16.08.2007 upto to 2PM.
Tender Box sealing on 17.08.2007 at 2PM.
Tender box opening on 17.08.2007 at 3PM
Main envelope and prequalification BI
opening on 17.08.2007 at 3:30 PM.
Cost of Tender: Rs. 300 (Five hundred only)
[emphasis supplied]
9.

It is evident from the above that the representation upon which

the petitioner has sought to place reliance in order to explain his
inaction in the matter was not filed by the petitioner but by some
other party.
10.

Mr. Singhal next argued that the representation was filed by

one

of

his

distributors.

It

is

interesting

to

note

that

the

representation, Annexure P-7, does not indicate the name of the party
who has filed the same, it is signed by one Mr. Daksh Khulbe as
proprietor but the name of the concern of which Mr. Khulbe claims to
be the proprietor is not available either in the representation or
anywhere else on the record. Even Mr. Singhal was unable to give us
the name of the concern which according to him was the distributor of
the petitioner.

Suffice it to say that the explanation sought to be

advanced on behalf of the petitioner for its inaction between 27th July,
2007 till 17th August, 2007 when he filed the present petition does not
inspire confidence. The petitioner appears to have remained on the
fence, lost the opportunity to enter the competitive process by his own
W.P.(C)6015/2007

Page 6 of 9

inaction and indolence thereby dis-entitling him to make any
grievance against the condition of eligibility stipulated in the tender
document.
11.

Even otherwise the scope of judicial review in matters involving

challenge to the tender conditions is very limited.

The nature and

scope of judicial review has been the subject matter of a long line of
decisions rendered by the Supreme Court including the two decisions
referred by Ms. Zubeda Begum.

In Directorate of Education &

Ors. V.s Educomp Datamatics Ltd. & Ors. 2004(3) Scale 111 the
Apex Court has unequivocally ruled out any interference with the
terms of tender notice unless it is shown that the same are either
arbitrary or discriminatory or actuated by malice. Just because the
tender conditions may appear to the Court to be a little more
stringent than what would in its opinion be reasonable is not a ground
for the Court to interfere with the same. The following passage from
the said decision sets the entire controversy to rest as to the scope of
judicial review.
“12.
It has clearly been held in these
decisions that the terms of the invitation to
tender are not open to judicial scrutiny the
same being in the realm of contract. That the
government must have a free hand in setting
the terms of the tender.
It must have
reasonable play in its joints as a necessary
concomitant for an administrative body in an
administrative sphere.
The courts would
interefere with the administrative policy
decision only if it is arbitrary, discriminatory,
mala fide or actuated by bias. It is entitiled to
pragmatic adjustments which may be called
for by the particular circumstances.
The
courts cannot strike down the terms of the
tender prescribed by the government because
it feels that some other terms in the tender
would have been fair, wiser or logical. The
courts can interefere only if the policy decision
is
arbitrary,
discriminatory
or
mala
fide.”(emphasis supplied)

W.P.(C)6015/2007

Page 7 of 9

12.

To the same effect is the decision of the Supreme Court in

Global Energy’s Case (Supra).
13.

Coming then to the facts of the instant case, we do not think

that the stipulation that the manufacturer must have a turnover of
Rs.5 crores per annum in order to make him eligible to submit his
tender can be said to be arbitrary, irrational, perverse or malafide.
The said condition has a direct nexus with the standard of the
material to be supplied as also the ability of the supplier to maintain
supplies on a continuous uninterrupted basis. It is common ground
that the total value of the supplies which the hospital proposes to
receive over the year is around Rs.2 crores. Under the circumstances,
the requirement that the tenderer must have a turnover of Rs.5 crores
annually cannot be said to be unreasonably or unfairly high so as to
be described as discriminatory, arbitrary or malafide.
14.

So also the question whether the Purchase Committee was

justified in fixing a higher turnover as a condition of eligibility in
comparison to the one fixed by the CPA, we need only say that the two
agencies are entitled to stipulate two different standards depending
upon their own perceptions.

Just because CPA has fixed a lower

turnover as a condition of eligibility may not necessarily imply that
the hospital must follow suit and fix a similar lower turnover. As a
matter of fact, while the CPA may be justified in fixing a lower
turnover, the hospital may not be. We say so because after the CPA’s
failure to provide the required material to the hospital, the hospital
had no option but to arrange the essentials from a private source by
floating tenders on its own. If the supply from the private source also
for any reason failed, there would be utter chaos in the hospital to the
grave detriment of the patients admitted to the same. The hospital

W.P.(C)6015/2007

Page 8 of 9

was, therefore, entitled to act on the safer side by fixing a higher
turnover as a condition of eligibility to make sure that the supplier
chosen by it does not fail in making the supply and that the supplies
are of standard quality.
15.

Similarly the fact that the petitioner is making certain supplies

to the hospital on the basis of limited tenders does not lend any
support to the challenge to the validity of the conditions of eligibility.
The petitioner, if found eligible and entrusted with the supply on the
basis of limited tender, is perfectly within its rights to do so just as it
may be entitled to participate in any other tender process where it is
eligible to do so in accordance with the condition of eligibility fixed for
the same.
16.

In the result, we see no reason to interfere with the ongoing

process aimed at fixing a proper contract for supply of the required
material.

The conditions of eligibility prescribed do not, in our

opinion, suffer from any arbitrariness or perversity. There is no merit
in this petition which fails and is hereby dismissed but in the
circumstances without any order as to costs.

Interim orders shall

stand vacated.

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
JANUARY 07, 2008
mr

W.P.(C)6015/2007

Page 9 of 9

