*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 17855/2005
Date of Decision: 4th January, 2008
M/S DELHI VILLAGERS DEVELOPMET ..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Pramod Ahuja, Adv.
versus
GOVT. OF INDIA & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through : Mr. B.B. Gupta, Ms. Isha
Khanna, ADvs. For DPCC
Mr. Sanjay Katyal, Adv. for UOI

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment?
Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

T.S. THAKUR, J
In this petition for a writ of mandamus filed in public interest,
the petitioner prays for a direction against the respondents to
construct a third outer ring road near the border of NCT of Delhi on
an alignment suggested by the petitioner. It also prays for a direction
to the respondents to shift the wholesale markets (mandies) located in
Delhi to the peripheral third outer ring road proposed by the
petitioner apart from certain further incidental directions.

The

controversy arises in the following circumstances:
2.

As a part of Urban Extension Plan, 2001, the respondents

propose to construct a 100m wide road connecting NH-8 to NH-1
through NH-10 as an Urban Extension Road-II (UER-II).

The

proposed road, it appears, is a part of the road network plan prepared
by the National Capital Region Planning Board constituted under the
W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 1 of 11

National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.

The Board co-

ordinates the efforts of Union Territory of Delhi and the adjoining
states through a plan for the National Capital Region which includes
some parts of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan besides National
Capital Territory of Delhi.

The road network plan prepared by the

Board aims at widening the balanced development of the city of Delhi.
The proposed Urban Extension Road-II running over nearly 46
kilometers is a part of that development plan and would connect the
four national highways passing through the city. Once completed, it
would connect the proposed Urban Extension areas and avoid
additional traffic in the congested parts of the city.
3.

The petitioner finds fault with the alignment of the road

aforementioned as proposed by the respondents and prays for a shift
in the said alignment.

The prayer for mandamus against the

respondents to adopt an alternative alignment of the road is in the
following words:
A)

Issue a writ or order or direction in the nature
of MANDAMUS directing the respondents in
declaring the action of the 4th respondent in
proposing to lay the road of 100 meter wide
connecting the National Highway No.8
(Gurgaon – Jaipur Road) and National Highway
No. 1 (G.T. Karnal Road) crossing National
Highway No. 10 (Rohtak Road) and passing
from NH 8 (Gurgaon Road) via Dwarka Subcity-Village Bhartal-Village Dhulsaras-Village
Chhawla-Village Tajpur-Village Goyla KhurdDeenpur-Roshanpura-Najafgarh-MasoodabadVillage, Nangli Sakrawati-Village Dichaon
Kalan-Village Baderwara and village Mundka
connecting NH 10 Rohtak Road). Further the
route between National High Way No.1 (G.T.
Karnal Road) as mentioned in the sketch
marked with Pink colour from point A to B as
being violative of Article 21 and also being
opposed to Articles 47 and 48 of the
Constitution and also to the principles of
Ecology:”

W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 2 of 11

4.

Consequential to the construction of the road on the periphery

of the city is a prayer for shifting the wholesale markets (mandies)
located in Delhi to the said peripheral area to reduce the vehicular
traffic within the city and consequent pollution which is according to
the petitioner making the life of the citizens miserable.
5.

The respondents have opposed the writ petition in the counter

affidavits filed by them. The DDA has in the reply filed on its behalf

inter alia stated that measures have been taken in the restructuring of
the road networks in the NCR. The Master plan classifies the roads
into : (a) National Highways, (b) Arterial Roads which include primary
roads with access control and primary all purpose roads, (c) Sub
Arterial roads which include primary or secondary collector streets ;
and (d) local streets.

The master plan also envisages developing

modern wholesale markets to be incorporated with freight complex
where the whole sale business could be operated more efficiently and
in a proper environment.

The affidavit goes on to state that new

wholesale markets have already been developed at suitable locations
in different parts of the city and that integration of goods movement
by road and rail between these freight complexes has also been
recommended. The affidavit states that freight complexes are located
at Madanpur Khadar (NH-2), Patparganj (NH-24), G.T. Road(NH-1),
Barthal (NH-8).

These complexes have to be inter-connected by

providing road links as proposed in MPD-2001 but the construction of
these roads have been pending on account of non-finalization of the
road development plan (RDP) by the consultants appointed for that
purpose.

A comprehensive consultative process involving the

railways, Delhi TRANSCO, NDPL, DJB, NHAI has to be undertaken
before the road development plan is finalized. The DDA has further
W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 3 of 11

stated that before determining the alignment of UER-II, subcommittees were constituted for detailed feasibility of the roads and a
detailed proposal of rationalization of the proposed road put up for
consideration to the DDA Technical Committee in its meeting held on
29th January, 2004. The alignment of the road was discussed in the
said Committee of the DDA and eventually approved by the Lieutenant
Governor of Delhi.

According to the DDA the proposed alignment

between NH-8 and NH-10 is one of the major alignments connecting
the freight complexes proposed at Dwarka.

It is asserted that the

basic approach for the development of the road in question is to
connect the proposed urban extension areas and to avoid additional
traffic in the congested parts of the city.
6.

On behalf of Government of India, R-1, an affidavit has been

filed by Sh. A. Senthil Vel, Additional Director in Ministry of
Environment of Forests. The affidavit states that the road proposed
by

the

respondents

does

not fall

under

the perview

of the

Environment Impact Assessment Notification, 1994 so as to call for
prior environment clearance of the Government of India. To the same
effect is an affidavit filed by Sh. H.S. Dhillon, Joint Director (planning)
Traffic

and

Transportation

of

the

DDA

who

has

stated

that

environmental clearance in terms of Government of India notification
dated 14th September, 2006 is required only for National Highways
and State Highways. The proposed UER-I, UER-II and UER-III are,
however, neither state nor national highways. These roads are only
Arterial roads of the city passing through Narela, Rohini and Dwarka
and do not therefore, require prior environmental clearance.
7.

An affidavit has been filed even by Sh. S.S. Ghonkrokta,

W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 4 of 11

Member Secretary, Delhi Pollution Control Committee. The affidavit
inter alia states that no request for conducting any public hearing has
been received by the DPCC relating to the project in question.

It

further states that highways require environmental clearance only if
they are new national or state highways or involve an expenditure
more than the prescribed amount for expansion of an existing
highway.
8.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

record.

A three-fold argument was advanced before us by learned

counsel for the petitioner in support of the petition.

It was firstly

submitted that the alignment of the proposed new road was not
technically feasible as the same passed through areas that are heavily
built upon.

The alternative road/alignment suggested by the

petitioners was, according to the learned counsel, more feasible as the
same passed through agricultural lands and therefore, did not cause
any inconvenience or disturbance to inhabitants.

Secondly, it was

contended that construction of the road on an alignment which would
take the road through human habitation would jeopardize and
adversely affect the environment in those areas on account of heavy
vehicular traffic which is likely to pass by the same. Thirdly, it was
contended

that

the

respondents

had

not

taken

the

requisite

environmental clearance from the authorities in terms of the
Government of India notification requiring an environmental impact
study to be conducted before the project was undertaken.
9.

On behalf of the respondent, it was on the other hand argued

that the petition was misconceived and malafide inasmuch as the
purpose underlying the petition was to shift the road on the proposed

W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 5 of 11

alternative alignment only to benefit the owners of the land through
which the road would eventually pass.

It was argued that the

construction of a road results in an immediate spurt in the prices of
real estate especially when the road is going to be 6 lanes, 100 ft.
wide road. Alternatively, it was contended that the alignment of the
proposed road has been settled after comprehensive studies by
technical staff and eventually the Technical Committee of DDA, which
alignment was found to be the most ideal to connect the highways on
the periphery of the city and to decongest the traffic in the congested
areas.

The very fact that some unauthorized colonies on the

alignment suggested by the respondents have come up or that some
structures would have to be demolished would not render the
alignment technically unsound.

It was also argued that the

petitioners were raising the spectre of environmental hazards for the
inhabitants of the area only as a pretext of getting the alignment
shifted to benefit the owners of the area through which they want the
road to pass. The contention that the environmental impact study has
not been conducted in terms of the notification issued by the
Government of India is also, according to the learned counsel,
misconceived in the light of the affidavits filed by the respondents to
the effect that such a study and permission was not a condition
precedent for non-national and state highways or Urban Extension
Roads like the one proposed in the instant case.
10.

We have given our careful consideration to the submission made

at the bar and perused the record. The petition, as noticed earlier, is
not adversarial in nature.

It has been filed in public interest.

The

Supreme Court has, no doubt, adopted a liberal rule as to locus standi
in favour of public interest litigants who draw the attention of the
W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 6 of 11

Courts in matters of utmost public importance or matters where
directions are prayed for the benefit of under-privileged and less
fortunate sections of the society.

Cases involving relief to bonded

labourers, undertrial prisoners, prison inmates, cases involving
disadvantaged sections of the society like women, children and
unorganized labour, cases involving exploitation of children arising
out of inter-country adoption and education of the children of
prostitutes,

cases

where

judicial

intervention

was

considered

necessary for the protection of the sanctity of democratic institutions
and cases where administrative decision relating to development were
found to be harmful to the environment jeopardizing people’s rights to
natural resources such as air and water have been dealt with by the
Courts and appropriate directions issued. The Apex Court has, all the
same, sounded a note of caution that the newly evolved doctrine of
PIL should not be abused by a mere busy body or a meddlesome
interloper or wayfarer or officious intervener.

The Court has

emphasized the need for adopting a cautious approach to prevent any
abuse of its process by unscrupulous litigant for their personal needs
or to wreck vengeance against political or other adversaries.

The

Court has declared that public interest litigation is a weapon to be
used with great care and circumspection and that the judiciary has to
be extremely careful to see that behind the veil of public interest
there is no ugly private malice, vested interest and/or publicity
lurking. See T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad(98) Vs. Union of India
and Ors. 2006 (5) SCC 28 , Gurpal Singh Vs. State of Punjab and Ors.

AIR 2005 SC 2755, Kushum Lata vs. Union of India & Ors. AIR
2006 SC 2643, Janata Dal vs. H.S. Chowdhary and Ors. AIR 1993
SC 892.
W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 7 of 11

11.

The grievance made by the petitioner in this petition does not in

our view stand closer scrutiny.

The argument that the alignment

proposed by the respondents is going to affect the inhabitants of the
area through which the road passes, has not impressed us.

The

petitioner does not purport to represent the interests of the
inhabitants, who are likely to be affected by the demolition of the
structures in connection with the construction of the road.

Even

otherwise, there is no averment in the writ petition that the built-up
structures are authorized by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi or
that the colonies in which the structures have been raised are planned
and regular colonies.

The nature and the extent of structures that

may fall on the alignment proposed by the respondents is also not
clear.

The petitioner has, no doubt, placed certain photographs on

record but in the absence of clear assertions and particulars as to the
total extent of structures that may fall on the alignment of the road as
proposed by the respondents, it will not be possible to hold that the
alignment suggested by the respondents to be technically unsound or
imprudent.

That is, all the more so when the alignment of the

proposed road has been determined by experts in the field and has
been debated at various levels by them both from the administrative
as well as technical angles. That apart, what should be the alignment
for the construction of the road is a matter for the concerned
authorities to determine. It is an essential part of the planning of a
project which the Courts must leave to the executive. A vague and
generalized

assertion

respondents

is

not

that

the

technically

alignment
feasible

suggested

simply

by

because

the
some

unauthorized colonies have been constructed on that alignment would
not justify interference with the proposed road on the specious plea
W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 8 of 11

that the alignment proposed by the experts is not perfect.

The

executive in a responsible government is responsive to and aware of
the problems of the inhabitants and sensitive to their needs and
requirements.

We have no reason to believe that, that expectation

has failed in the instant case. If the alignment has been determined
after proper deliberations and discussions at various levels, we would
not like to sit in appeal over the same or substitute our own opinion
over that of the engineers and the technical experts, who have worked
and planned the project in question.
12.

This is true even in regard to the alternative submission made

on behalf of the petitioners that the constructions of the road on the
alignment suggested by the respondents would cause environmental
pollution and hazards for the inhabitants of the area. There are two
facets even to this part of the petitioner's case, one making grievance
against the possible pollution of the environment in the area to the
detriment of the inhabitants and the other suggesting an oblique
motive on the part of the petitioners in having the alignment shifted to
benefit the owners of land through which the proposed road may run.
It is common ground that the two alignments viz; one suggested by
the petitioner and the other by the respondents are just about a
kilometer and a half apart. If that be so one fails to understand how
the hazards of pollution, assuming that any such hazards are
inevitable, would in the post-completion scenario of the project be
reduced if the alignment is shifted by just about a kilometer and a half
as proposed by the petitioners.
localized.

Environmental pollution is not

This is especially so in case of pollution caused by the

vehicular traffic which is bound to spread to the areas in the vicinity
of the source. If a highway or urban extension road like the one we
W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 9 of 11

are dealing with in the instant case is going to be a source of
pollution, it would be so not only for those in the immediate vicinity of
the road but also to those living at some distance from the same. The
object of decongesting Delhi and the connecting highways to relieve
the ever increasing vehicular pressure on them is laudable.

As a

matter of fact, the construction of such arterial roads on the periphery
to divert heavy vehicular traffic which is passing through Delhi away
from the core area was long overdue. It is only if these peripheral
roads provide the requisite connectivity to vital business and other
establishments that the city can be decongested to make it habitable.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in rejecting the alternative
argument advanced by the petitioner that the hazards of pollution
resulting from the movement of vehicular traffic over the proposed
road should justify and call for a shift in the alignment as proposed by
the petitioners.
13.

The third and the only other submission made on behalf of the

petitioner is equally devoid of merit. The environment impact study in
terms of the notification relied upon by the petitioner has no
application and is not a condition precedent in cases of urban
extension roads like the one proposed by the respondents in the
instant case.

That position is clear from the affidavits filed by the

respondents which we have no difficulty in accepting as the correct
position.
14.

In the result, there is no merit in this petition which fails and is

hereby dismissed but in the circumstances without any order as to
costs.

W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 10 of 11

T.S. THAKUR, J

S.N. AGGARWAL, J
JANUARY 04, 2008
anb

W.P.(C)17855/2005

Page 11 of 11

