*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) 322/2007
Date of Decision: 8th February, 2008
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
.....Appellant
Through : Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Advocate

versus

ANAND AND ASSOCIATES
.....Respondents
Through : Mr. Harish Malhotra, Sr. Advocate
with Ms. Namita Choudhary,
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes
Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

Per THAKUR, J.
This appeal arises out of an order dated 18/4/07 passed by a Learned Single
Judge of this Court whereby OMP No. 144/05 under Section 34 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act 1996 filed by the appellant has been dismissed.
2.

Disputes relating to a certain work contract executed between the appellant

DDA and the respondent contractor were referred for adjudication to Mr. Avadh
Behari Rohtagi a former Judge of this Court. Before the arbitrator, the respondent
contractor made as many as ten claims inclusive of interest and cost of arbitration
while the appellant made a counter claim for payment of a sum of Rs. 40,781/which was given up in terms of a statement made on behalf of the appellant before
the arbitrator on 08/9/02. The arbitrator eventually came to the conclusion that the

FAO(OS) 322/2007

page 1 of 10

appellant DDA had committed defaults in the discharge of its obligations under the
agreement thereby rendering the termination of the contract illegal.

On that

finding, the Learned Arbitrator held the contractor entitled to the refund of a sum
of Rs. 1 lac towards security deposit and a sum of Rs. 10,42,136/- representing the
balance amount payable to the contractor for the work done by it but not paid. The
arbitrator further held the respondent contractor entitled to a sum of Rs. 3,50,000/towards increase in the price of materials and a sum of Rs. 1,91,659/- on account of
increase in the labour charges. A further sum of Rs. 3,48,563/- was awarded by the
arbitrator on account of loss of anticipated profit on the balance of the work which
the contractor could not complete on account of termination. A total sum of Rs.
20,32,358/- was thus awarded by the arbitrator in favour of the respondent with
interest @ 18% per annum from 25/4/87 till realisation with cost. The arbitrator
directed that if the amount awarded by him was paid by the DDA within a period of
two months from the date of this award, the rate of interest would stand reduced to
12% per annum for the entire period mentioned above.
3.

Aggrieved by the award made by the arbitrator, the appellant DDA filed a

petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 for setting
aside the same on several grounds. These grounds were examined by Ms. Reva
Khetrapal, J. and rejected in terms of an order dated 18/4/07. Relying upon the
decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Santa Sila Devi Vs. Dhirendra Nath
Sen reported in AIR 1963 SC 1677; Hindustan Tea Co. V/s K. Sashikant and
Anr. AIR 1987 SC 81; International Airports Authority V/s K.D. Bali AIR
1988 SC 1099, Gujrat Water Supply and Sewerage Board V/s Unique
Erectors (Gujrat (P) Ltd. AIR 1989 SC

973; Bhagwati Oxygen Ltd. V/s.

Hindustan Copper Ltd. AIR 2005 SC 2071 the Court held that while dealing
with the objections to the arbitral award it was not sitting in appeal over the
findings recorded by the arbitrator nor could the Court examine the correctness of
the award on a reappraisal of the evidence adduced before the arbitrator.
FAO(OS) 322/2007

page 2 of 10

The

Court affirmed the finding of the arbitrator that time was not the essence of the
contract and that the appellant Authority had committed a breach of its obligations
under the contract thereby entitling the contractor to the refund of the amount of
security lying in deposit with it. The Court also affirmed the finding of the learned
arbitrator that the extra cost incurred by the contractor on account of the breach of
its obligations by the appellant authority entitled the contractor to claim the
reimbursement of the same from the authority.

The forfeiture of the security

amount could not, observed the Court, be justified in the light of that default.
So far as the claim of Rs. 10,42,136/- on account of the work done by the contractor
and not paid for is concerned, the learned Single Judge held that the claim was
rightly allowed by the arbitrator on the basis of joint measurement of the work
recorded under the order of the High Court. Similarly, the award of a sum of Rs.
3,50,000/- on account of the increase in the price of material was also held to be
justified as was the sum of Rs. 1,91,659/- on account of increase of labour charges.
Relying upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Brij Paul Singh Vs.
State of Gujrat AIR 1984 SC 1703 the Court upheld the award made by the
arbitrator even in regard to a sum of Rs. 3,48,563/- on account of loss of profit. The
Court upheld even the award of interest by the arbitrator relying upon the decision
of Hon'ble Supreme Court Santok Singh Arora Vs. Union of India and Ors.
AIR 1992 SC 1809 and dismissed the petition.
4.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record. The

scope of the interference with an arbitral award has been settled by a long line of
decisions rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court including those upon which
reliance has been placed by the learned Single Judge. The decisions authoritatively
declare that a Court hearing objections against an arbitral award does not sit in
appeal over the same nor can it reappraise evidence adduced before the arbitrator
to substitute the findings recorded by the arbitrator by those arrived at by the
Court. The jurisdiction of a Court while dealing with an arbitral award was limited
FAO(OS) 322/2007

page 3 of 10

to the grounds enumerated under Section 33 of the Arbitration Act 1940 which
provision is now replaced by Section 34 of Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996.
Section 34 of the Act reads as under:“34. Application for setting aside arbitral award.
34. Application for setting aside arbitral award. (1) Recourse
to a Court against an arbitral award may be made only by
an application for setting aside such award in accordance
with sub-section (2) and subsection (3).
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that(i) a party was under some incapacity, or
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law to
which the parties have subjected it or, failing any
indication thereon, under the law for the time being
in
force; or
(iii) the party making the application was not given proper
notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral
proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not
contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on
matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration:
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to
arbitration
can
be separated from those not
so
submitted,only that part of the arbitral award which
contains decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration
may be set aside; or
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral
procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the
parties, unless such agreement was in conflict with a
provision of this Part from which the parties cannot
derogate, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance
with this Part; or
(b) the Court finds that(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of
settlement by arbitration under the law for the time being in
force, or
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of
India.
Explanation.-Without prejudice to the generality of subFAO(OS) 322/2007

page 4 of 10

clause (ii), it is hereby declared, for the avoidance of any
doubt, that an award is in conflict with the public
policy of India if the making of the award was induced or
affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of
section 75 or section 81.
(3) An application for setting aside may not be made after
three months have elapsed from the date on which the party
making that application had received the arbitral award or,
if a request had been made under section 33, from the date
on which that request had been disposed of by the arbitral
tribunal:
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the applicant was
prevented by sufficient cause from making the application
within the said period of three months it may entertain the
application within a further period of thirty days, but not
thereafter.
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the
Court may, where it is appropriate and it is so requested by a
party, adjourn the proceedings for
a period of time
determined by it in order to give the arbitral tribunal an
opportunity to resume the arbitral proceedings or to take
such other action as in the opinion of arbitral tribunal
will eliminate the grounds for setting aside the arbitral
award.”
5.

A plain reading of the above would show that an arbitral award can be

questioned only on one or more of the grounds enumerated under the above
provision. It is not in dispute that the petition filed by the appellant under Section
34 did not make out a case for interference with the award on any one of the
grounds enumerated in Section 34 (2) (a) (i) to (v) . Such being the position, the
only provision to which the appellant could refer in support of its objections was
Section 34 (2) (b) (i) and (ii). Even under that provision clause (i) had not been
invoked by the appellant nor is it the case of the appellant that the subject matter
of the dispute, was not capable of settlement by arbitration. The only ground to
which the appellant could possibly refer in support of its challenge was Section 34
(2) (b) (ii) that the award is in conflict with the public policy of India. As to what is
public policy of India has been explained by the Supreme Court in 2003(5) SCC
705 Oil & Natural Gas Corporation V/s Saw Pipes Ltd. in the following words:-

FAO(OS) 322/2007

page 5 of 10

“From the judgments discussed above, it can be held that
the terms “public policy of India” is required to be
interpreted in the context of the jurisdiction of the court
where the validity of award is challenged before it
becomes final and executable. The concept of enforcement
of the award after it becomes final is different and the
jurisdiction of the court at that stage could be limited.
Similar is the position with regard to the execution of a
decree. It is settled law as well as it is provided under the
Code of Civil Procedure that once the decree has attained
finality, in an execution proceedings, it may be challenged
only on limited grounds such as the decree being without
jurisdiction or a nullity. But in a case where the
judgment and decree is challenged before the appellate
court or the court exercising revisional jurisdiction, the
jurisdiction of such court would be wider. Therefore, in a
case where the validity of award is challenged, there is no
necessity of giving a narrower meaning to the term “public
policy of India”. On the contrary, wider meaning is
required to be given so that the “patently illegal award”
passed by the Arbitral Tribunal could be set aside. If
narrow meaning as contended by the learned Senior
Counsel Mr. Dave is given, some of the provisions of the
Arbitration Act would become nugatory.
Take for
illustration a case wherein there is a specific provision in
the contract that for delayed payment of the amount due
and payable, no interest would be payable, still however,
if the arbitrator has passed an award granting interest, it
would be against the terms of the contract and thereby
against the provision of Section 28(3) of the Act which
specifically provides that “Arbitral Tribunal shall decide
in accordance with the terms of the contract”. Further,
where there is a specific usage of the trade that if the
payment is made beyond a period of one month, then the
party would be required to pay the said amount with
interest at the rate of 15 per cent. Despite the evidence
being produced on record for such usage, if the arbitrator
refuses to grant such interest on the ground of equity,
such award would also be in violation of sub-sections (2)
and (3) of Section 28. Section 28(2) specifically provides
that the arbitrator shall decide ex aequo et bono
(according to what is just and good) only if the parties
have expressly authorised him to do so. Similarly, if the
award is patently against the statutory provisions of
substantive law which is in force in India or is passed
without giving an opportunity of hearing to the parties as
provided under Section 24 or without giving any reason
in a case where parties have not agreed that no reasons
are to be recorded, it would be against the statutory
provisions. In all such cases, the award is required to be
set aside on the ground of “patent illegality”.
6.

In the present case, appellant had not urged any ground or laid any

foundation for the Court to declare that any part of the award or any one of the
FAO(OS) 322/2007

page 6 of 10

principal claims was in conflict with the public policy of India. Whether or not the
appellant had committed any default in handing over the work site or discharging
other contractual obligations and whether or not the appellant had suffered any
loss on that account, if so the extent of any such loss were all questions of fact on
which the arbitrator was entitled to take a view as indeed he has done. Similarly,
the question as to whether the respondent was entitled to any reimbursement on
account of the cost of the material used during the extended period and if so what
was the extent of reimbursement required on that account were matters that
depended upon appreciation of evidence and the material placed on record. Suffice
it to say that none of the principal claims made by the respondent could be
described as barred by any law or tantamounting to undue enrichment of the
respondent or granting an undue advantage to it so as to come in conflict with
public policy of India. That is so especially, when the arbitrator, has while arriving
at his conclusion in regard to the claims A to I given reasons and discussed the
juristic basis on which the said claims were being allowed. It is true that while
awarding a sum of Rs. 1,91,659/- towards increase in the labour charges and Rs.
3,50,000/- on account of the increase in the price of materials, the arbitrator has
observed that no books of accounts had been produced before him and that he has
determined the amount from whatever is available on record yet interference with
that part of the award would also not be justified in view of the settled legal
positions that the court would not set aside an award simply because it was to an
extent based upon some guesswork. Reference may in this regard be made to
Mohd. Salamatullah and Ors. Vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh 1977 SC
1481 where the court has observed :“We are not able to discern any tangible material
on the strength of which the High Court reduced the
damages from 15% of the contract price to 10% of the
contract price. If the first was a guess, it was at least a
better guess than the second one. We see no justification
for the appellate court to interfere with a finding of fact
given by the trial Court unless some reason, based on
FAO(OS) 322/2007

page 7 of 10

some fact, is traceable on the record. There being none we
are constrained to set aside the judgment of the High
Court in regard to the assessment of damages for breach
of contract.”
7.

Coming then to the question whether the arbitrator was legally right in

awarding interest @ 18% per annum for a period of 17 years or so, the arbitrator
has justified the same on the authority of Santok Singh Arora Vs. Union of
India and Ors. AIR 1992 SC 1809. There can be no quarrel with the proposition
stated in the said decision which recognises the right of a claimant to be
compensated for denial of its legitimate dues during the period the claim remained
under adjudication. Having said that, we are of the opinion that the rate of interest
awarded by the arbitrator appears to be excessive.

As noticed earlier, the

arbitrator has directed payment of interest @ 18% per annum from 25/4/87 subject
to the condition that in case the award amount is paid with interest and cost within
a period of two months from the date of award, the DDA would pay interest @ 12%
per annum only for the entire period. Higher rate of interest thus awarded by the
arbitrator appears to us to be in terrorem only to ensure that DDA pays as quickly
as possible the amount held payable. The alternative rate at which the arbitrator
stipulated in the event of payment is indeed more realistic though still on the
higher side. In the circumstances, therefore, we are inclined to interfere with the
award made by the arbitrator but only to that limited extent. While the power of
the arbitrator to award interest is not under challenge before us the said power has
to be exercised in a reasonable manner keeping in view the rate of interest that was
prevailing during the period for which the same is being awarded. It is common
knowledge that the rate of interest on term deposits has for the last decade
fluctuated between 6 to 8 per cent. It is true that for the period of a decade after
April, 1987 the rate of such deposit ranged up to 10% or so, yet keeping the totality
of the facts and circumstances of the case in view and especially the long period for
which the interest is being awarded, we are of the opinion that interest @ 9% per
FAO(OS) 322/2007

page 8 of 10

annum in stead of 18% per annum from 25/4/87 till date of deposit of the amount in
this Court on the principal amount of Rs. 20,32,358/- would meet the ends of justice.
We may in this regard draw support from the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in State of Rajasthan and Anr. Vs. Nav Bharat Construction Co. AIR
2002 SC 258, where the Hon'ble Supreme Court had, in similar circumstances,
reduced the rate of interest from 18% per annum to 6% per annum. The Court
observed:
“8.However considering the dispute involved and overall
circumstances of the case we modify the award qua the
rate of interest and reduce the same at the rate of 6% per
annum. The arbitrator in paragraph 21.8.1 of the award
has granted interest on the principal amount of claims no.
1 to 8 from 01/7/1990 to 30/4/1998 and 10 to 18 from
29/4/1991 to 30/4/1998 at the rate of 18% and the
District Court has awarded interest at the rate of 15%
from the date of decree. The part of the award and decree
is modified and it is held that respondent-claimant is
entitled to recover the said amount with interest at the rate
of 6% only. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. Parties
to bear their own costs of litigation all throughout.”
8.

We may also refer to recent decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in

Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam Ltd. Vs. G. Harischandra Reddy and Anr.,
(2007) 2 SCC 720, where too the Court reduced the rate of interest from 18% per
annum to 9% per annum pendente lite and future taking more economic reforms of
the country and the change in interest regime. The Court observed:“11. On the merits of the claims made by the contractor we
find from the impugned Award dated 25/6/2000 that it
contains several Heads. The Arbitrator has meticulously
examined the claims of the contractor under each page
0711 separate Heads. We do not see any reason to interfere
except on the rates of interest and on the quantum
awarded for letting machines of the contractor remaining
idle for the periods mentioned in the Award. Here also we
may add that we don not wish to interfere with the Award
except to say that after economic reforms in our country the
interest regime has changed and the rates have
substantially reduced and, therefore, we are of the view
that the interest awarded by the Arbitrator at 18% for the
pre-arbitration period, for the pendente lite period and
future interest be reduced to 9%.”

FAO(OS) 322/2007

page 9 of 10

9.

In the result, we allow this appeal and modify the award as also the order

passed by the learned Single Judge to the extent that interest amount awarded on
the principal sum of Rs. 20,32,358/- shall be payable to the appellant @ 9% per
annum w.e.f. 25/4/87 onwards only in substitution of @18% per annum awarded by
the arbitrator. Since the appellant has already deposited the decretal amount in
this Court, we direct that after release of the amount payable under the award as
modified by us, the entire balance amount shall together with interest accrued on
the same be refunded to the appellant.

T.S. THAKUR,J

FEBRUARY 08, 2008
mr

FAO(OS) 322/2007

VEENA BIRBAL, J

page 10 of 10

