*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision : 8TH FEBRUARY, 2008

+

FAO(OS) 392/2007
UNITED ENGINEERS (MALAYSIA) ESSAR
PROJECTS LTD.
..... Appellant
Through : Mr. Ashok H. Desai, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Rishi
Aggarwal, Mr. Mahesh Aggarwal, Mr. B.S. Shukla,
Mr. S. Mittal, Mr. Akshay, Advocates
versus
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
..... Respondent
Through : Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Ravi
Singhania, Mr. Vikas Goel, Mr. R.N. Sharma, Mr.Santosh
Pandey, Advocates

+

FAO(OS) 393/2007
UNITED ENGINEERS (MALAYASIA) ESSAR
PROJECTS LTD.
..... Appellant
Through : Mr. Ashok H. Desai, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Rishi
Aggarwal, Mr. Mahesh Aggarwal, Mr. B.S. Shukla,
Mr. S. Mittal, Advocates
versus
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
..... Respondent
Through : Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Ravi
Singhania, Mr. Vikas Goel, Mr. R.N. Sharma, Mr.Santosh
Pandey, Mr. Mahesh Chibber, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL

1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? YES
To be referred to the Reporter or not? YES

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? YES

Per Thakur, J :
Encashment of bank guarantees run into rough waters when amounts
payable under the same are sizeable and the contractual relationship between the
parties embittered by disputes. More often than not the party who has provided the
bank guarantees takes a chance to stall the encashment by seeking judicial
intervention undeterred by the fact that such intervention is limited to certain
exceptional situations not always easy to establish. The present appeals arise out of
a similar failed attempt on the part of the contractor appellant to prevent
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 1 of 17

encashment of the bank guarantees furnished by it. A Single Judge of this Court
has by a well reasoned order repelled the contentions of the appellant that the
encashment of the guarantees was likely to cause irretrievable damage to the
appellant or that the appellant had made out a case on the ground of special
equities in its favour to protect it against encashment. The appellant assails that
order to canvass over again the very same contentions in a bid to persuade us to
take a different view.
2.

The appellant Joint Venture entered into a contract for the construction of

two sections of National Highway No. 4 (NH-4) forming part of the Western
Transport Corridor of the prestigious National Highway (Golden Quadrilateral) in
the State of Karnataka. In Package 4 forming subject matter of the said Contract,
the Joint Venture had to construct the Highway admeasuring 77 Kms. (4 lane) of
the main carriage way in addition to service/side road with road fixtures, jewelery
items etc. The total contract price for this package was over Two Hundred and Sixty
Four Crores (Rs.2,64,87,23,756/- to be precise). Package 5 also forming subject
matter of the same contract involved construction of the Highway over a length of
56 Kms. (4 lane) of the main carriage way with service/side road, jewelery items
and road fixtures at a total contract price of Rs.200,91,94,490/-.
3.

It is common ground that the appellant joint venture furnished to the

respondent Highway Authority bank guarantees for a sum of Rs.79,46,45,899.56 in
connection with the Package 4 and Rs.59,87,39,959/- in connection with Package 5.
These bank guarantees comprised performance bank guarantees, retention money
bank guarantees, machinery advance bank guarantees and mobilisation advance
bank guarantees. The details of the bank guarantees when presented in a tabular
form would be as under :

PACKAGE 4

FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 2 of 17

S.No.

Category

Essar

UEM

1

Performance BG

Rs. 12,97,81,465/- Rs. 13,50,84,911/-

2

Retention Money BG Rs. 13,24,36,188/- NIL

Rs. 13,24,36,188/Rs. 13,24,64,960/-

3

Machinery Advance Rs. 13,24,64,960/- NIL
BG

4

Mobilisation
Advance

Rs. 12,97,87,464/- Rs. 13,50,84,911.56
Rs. 52,44,76,077/- Rs. 27,01,69,822/-

Total
Rs. 26,48,72,376/-

Rs. 26,48,72,375.56

Rs. 79,46,45,899.56

PACKAGE 5
S.No.

Category

Essar

UEM

Total

1

Performance BG

Rs. 9,84,50,530/-

Rs. 9,84,50,530/-

Rs. 19,69,01,060/-

2

Retention Money BG

Rs. 10,04,59,725/- NIL

Rs. 10,04,59,725/-

Advance Rs. 10,04,59,725/- NIL

Rs. 10,04,59,725/-

3

Machinery
BG

4

Mobilisation Advance

Rs. 9,84,50,530/-

Rs. 10,24,68,919/-

Rs. 20,09,19,449/-

Rs. 39,78,20,510/- Rs. 20,09,19,449/- Rs. 59,87,39,959/-

4.

It is not in dispute that the bank guarantees were unconditional and

encashable at the instance of the respondent Highway Authority. The bank
furnishing the bank guarantees had undertaken to pay to the Highway Authority
upon first written demand and without cavil or argument any sum or sums within
the outer limits fixed in the guarantees without the Highway Authority being called
upon to prove or to show grounds or reasons for the demand made by it. They also
waived the necessity of the Highway Authority demanding the debt from the
contractor before presenting its demand to the bank. The relevant portion of the
performance bank guarantees furnished by the bank may be gainfully extracted at
this stage :
“We undertake to pay you, upon your first written demand
and without cavil or argument, any sum or sums within
the limits of Rs.135,084,911.56 (Indian Rupees One
Hundred Thirty Five Million Eighty Four Thousand Nine
Hundred Eleven and Paise Fifty Six only) as aforesaid
without your needing to prove or to show grounds of
reasons for your demand for the sum specified therein.
We hereby waive the necessity of your demanding the said
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 3 of 17

debt from the Contractor before presenting us with the
demand.
We further agree that no change or addition to or other
modification of the terms of the Contract or of the Works
to be performed thereunder or any of the Contract
documents which may be made between you and the
Contractor shall in any way release us from any liability
under this guarantee and we hereby waive notice of any
such change, addition or modification.”
5.

Similar provisions undertaking to pay unconditionally and without proof of

any damage or loss appear in the remaining bank guarantees, six out of whom were
guarantees to secure the amounts advanced by the Highway Authority to the Joint
Venture for the performance of the contract.
6.

The contracted works had to be completed by the Joint Venture by the 31st

August, 2004. On account of certain bottlenecks and hindrance at the site of
construction, the Joint Venture sought extension of 15 months period ending 30th
November, 2005 in respect of Package 4 and 17 months period ending 31st January,
2006 in respect of Package 5. The Engineer upon consideration of the request
recommended only 4 months extension of time ending 31st December, 2004 and
referred the matter to the Highway Authority for its approval. The Engineer all the
same invoked Clause 46.1 of the General Conditions of the Contract and pointed out
to the Joint Venture that its progress of work at site was going slow. Aggrieved by
the view taken by the Engineer, the Joint Venture referred the disputes regarding
the determination of the extension of time and the alleged wrongful invocation of
Clause 46.1 in respect of both the packages to the Dispute Adjudication Board
(DAB) under the Contract who, in turn, granted 12 months extension of time up to
31st July, 2005 to the Joint Venture and set aside the notice for invocation of Clause
46.1 of the Contract stating that if a party was found entitled to extension, there
was no invocation of Clause 46.1 for slow progress of work.
7.

The contracted works were not, however, completed even during the extended

period forcing the Joint Venture to seek a further extension of 8 months ending 30 th
April, 2006. The Joint Venture cited continued hindrance and obstruction at the site
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 4 of 17

as a justification for the extension sought by it. The Engineer recommended an
extension up to 31st December, 2005 in terms of Clause 44 of the Contract despite
which, the contracted works remained incomplete with the Joint Venture asking for
further extension up to 30th June, 2006.
8.

A review meeting was in the above backdrop held between the appellant

Joint Venture, the Highway Authority and the Engineer in presence of the Union
Minister of Road Transport. It was in the said meeting mutually agreed between
the parties that the appellant would complete 60 Km of DBM and 25 Km of BC in
respect of Package 4 and 50 Km of DBM and 15 Km of BC in respect of Package 5.
According to the report of the Engineer, the Joint Venture failed to achieve those
milestones. Notices and letters issued by the Engineer and the Highway Authority
then followed in which the Joint Venture was accused of going slow with the
completion of the contracted works.
9.

By its letter dated 24th December, 2006, the Highway Authority pointed out

to the Joint Venture that it had been extremely slow and its performance was
dismal in the completion of the contracted works despite the respondent having
been able to clear most of the obstructions at the construction site. Shortly
thereafter came a letter dated 28th December, 2006 by which the Joint Venture
terminated the contract in a bid to discharge itself of the obligation to carry out any
further works. This was followed by a notice dated 12 th January, 2007 issued by the
Engineer to the appellant under Clause 63.1 of the General Conditions of Contract
alleging slow progress in the completion of the contract and recommending the
termination of its services. The respondent Highway Authority by its letter dated
16th January, 2007 expelled the petitioner from the work site in exercise of its
powers under Clause 63.1 of the General Conditions of Contract and intimated to
the Joint Venture its intention to invoke the bank guarantees, forcing the Joint
Venture to file OMP Nos. 32/2007 and 33/2007 for an injunction restraining the

FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 5 of 17

former from doing so.
10.

The petitions primarily proceeded on the basis that the invocation of the

Bank Guarantees was unjust and inequitable as according to the appellant joint
venture, the delay in the completion of the contracted works had occurred on
account of a failure of the Highway Authority in removing the hindrance from the
site of construction. The grant of extensions, argued the Joint Venture, were
tantamount to an admission on the part of the Highway Authority that it had failed
in the discharge of its contractual obligation, including the obligation of providing
an unhindered site for execution of the works. The Joint Venture claimed that it
had lived up to its commitment made in the joint meeting held before the Union
Minister of Road and Transport and completed a substantial part of the work. It
also contended that the bank guarantees could be encashed only during the
subsistence of the contract between the parties and that since the same stood
repudiated by the Joint Venture, the guarantees furnished by it were no longer
available for encashment.
11.

The petitions were opposed by the respondent Highway Authority who

alleged suppression of material facts and documents which according to the
respondent dis-entitled the Joint Venture from invoking the equitable jurisdiction
of the Court. It was alleged that the Engineer's monthly progress report of
December, 2005 completely falsified the Joint Venture's claim of achieving 100%
progress in the completion of the contract. According to the Highway Authority, the
Joint Venture had completed only 38.71 Kms. of main carriage way (out of 76 Km)
in Package 4 and 37.70 km (out of 56 km) in Package 5 thereby achieving no more
than 55% progress in completion of the work on the main carriage ways leaving
other works untouched. It was also asserted by the Highway Authority that
extensions were granted to the Joint Venture not on account of hindrances at the
site of construction but with a view to somehow get the work completed keeping in

FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 6 of 17

view its national importance. The extensions did not according to the Highway
Authority absolve the Joint Venture of its obligation or liabilities arising out of the
breach thereof. The plea of irreparable damage or irretrievable injury on account of
the encashment of bank guarantees was also stoutly refuted.
12.

Relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court in U.P. Cooperative

Federation Ltd. Vs. Singh Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd. (1988) 1 SCC 174
and BSES (Now Reliance Energy Ltd.) v. Fenner India Ltd. and Another (2006) 2
SCC 728, a learned Single Judge of this Court dismissed the petitions holding that
encashment of a bank guarantee could be injuncted only in cases falling under four
exceptional situations to the general Rule that a court does not interfere with the
encashment of a bank guarantee which is an independent and distinct contract
between the bank and the beneficiary. The Court further held on an appreciation of
the material placed on record that despite the Highway Authority removing
substantially the hindrances afflicting the site of work, the Joint Venture had owing
to various factors squarely attributable to it viz. poor planning, financing,
inefficient running of machinery and lack of requisite labour, failed to expedite the
work of construction resulting eventually in the failure of the contract. The learned
Single Judge further held that the hindrance at the construction site had been
reduced by the Highway Authority to a mere 4.5 Km length in respect of Package 4
and 900 meters length in respect of Package 5 despite which the Joint Venture had
failed to increase the pace of the progress and take up even the scrubbing and
grubbing work of the side and service roads along the main carriage way. Relying
upon the monthly progress reports filed by the Engineer in respect of the two
packages, the learned Single Judge recorded the following findings of fact:
(i) That the hindrances and obstructions afflicting the site
of construction were variable in nature and removed by
the respondent on a timely basis.
(ii) Although the respondent managed to clear the
hindrances to a considerable extent, the petitioner could
not complete the work of construction despite seeking
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 7 of 17

several extensions of time.
(iii) That the performance of the petitioner was constantly
evaluated and reviewed by the Engineer and the petitioner
was regularly intimated of its shortcomings on account of
poor planning, inadequate manpower and machinery, etc.
(iv) That despite constant reminders of its dismal
performance, neither could the petitioner overcome its
shortcomings nor could it expedite the work of
construction.
(v)That, even otherwise if the hindrance area is to be
excluded, the petitioner had failed to explain why no
substantial work has been done by it on the site.
13.

The Court interpreted Clause 46.1 and 63.1 of the General Conditions of

Contract and held that the Engineer had rightly invoked Clause 46.1 having regard
to the default on the part of the Joint Venture in carrying out the contracted works
with reasonable despatch. The Court found that the invocation of Clause 46.1 was
in no way in conflict with the DAB Award dated 21st July, 2004. Relying upon the
letters dated 11th December, 2006 and 12th January, 2007 from the Engineer to the
Joint Venture, the Court recorded a finding that the Joint Venture had shown an
extremely dismal pace of progress and was negligent in the completion of the
contract despite hindrance free site having been made available to it for carrying
out the work. The Court also repelled the contention that the Joint Venture would
suffer irretrievable injury or that any special equities existed in its favour to justify
an injunction against the invocation of the bank guarantees. The court declared
that the bank guarantees being in absolute terms, the validity of their invocation
did not depend on the existence or otherwise of any dispute between the Joint
Venture and the Highway Authority.
14.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable length and

perused the record. The law relating to invocation of bank guarantees is fairly
well-settled by a long line of decisions rendered by the Supreme Court. In UP
Cooperative Federation Ltd. Versus Singh Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd.,
1988 (1) SCC 174, the Apex Court referred extensively to English and Indian cases
on the subject and declared that a guarantee must be honoured in accordance with
its terms. The bank which gives the guarantee is concerned the least with the
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 8 of 17

relations between the supplier and the customer nor even with the question
whether the supplier has performed his contractual obligation or not. So also the
bank is not concerned with the question whether the supplier is in default or not. It
must pay, according to the tenor of its guarantee, without proof or condition.
Having said so, the court recognised two exceptions to that rule. The first exception
covers cases where a clear fraud of egregious nature is committed which vitiates the
underlying transaction is established. The second exception covers cases where an
irretrievable injury shall be caused to the party furnishing the bank guarantee if an
injunction against its encashment is not granted. This position was reiterated by
their lordships in General Electric Technical Services Co. Inc. Versus Punj Sons (P)
Ltd. & Another, 1991 (4) SCC 230, Svenska Handelsbanken Versus M/s. Indian
Charge Chrome and Others, 1994 (1) SCC 502 and The State Trading Corporation
of India Ltd. Versus Jainsons Clothing Corporation and Another, AIR 1994 SC
2778.
15.

In Larsen & Toubro Limited Versus Maharashtra State Electricity Board and

Others, 1995 (6) SCC 68, the Court ruled against injunctions prohibiting
encashment of bank guarantees unless the case fell under one of the two exceptions,
namely, fraud and/or irretrievable injury. The court held that there should be a
prima facie case of fraud and special equities in the form of preventing irretrievable
injustice between the parties.

Mere irretrievable injustice without prima facie

cases of establishing fraud was of no consequence in restraining the encashment of
bank guarantee, declared the Court.
16.

In UP State Sugar Corporation Versus Sumac International Ltd., 1997 (1)

SCC 568, the question was once again examined by their lordships and the legal
position reiterated upon a review of the case law on the subject.
17.

The court summed up the legal position on the subject in the following words

:“The law relating to invocation of such bank guarantees is
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 9 of 17

by now well settled. When in the course of commercial
dealings an unconditional bank guarantee is given or
accepted, the beneficiary is entitled to realize such a bank
guarantee in terms thereof irrespective of any pending
disputes. The bank giving such a guarantee is bound to
honour it as per its terms irrespective of any dispute raised
by its customer. The very purpose of giving such a bank
guarantee would otherwise be defeated. The courts should,
therefore, be slow in granting an injunction to restrain the
realization of such a bank guarantee. The courts have
carved out only two exceptions. A fraud in connection with
such a bank guarantee would vitiate the very foundation of
such a bank guarantee. Hence if there is such a fraud of
which the beneficiary seeks to take advantage, he can be
restrained from doing so. The second exception relates to
cases where allowing the encashment of an unconditional
bank guarantee would result in irretrievable harm or
injustice to one of the parties concerned. Since in most
cases payment of money under such a bank guarantee
would adversely affect the bank and its customer at whose
instance the guarantee is given, the harm or injustice
contemplated under this head must be of such an
exceptional and irretrievable nature as would override the
terms of the guarantee and the adverse effect of such an
injunction on commercial dealings in the country. The two
grounds are not necessarily connected, though both may
coexist in some cases. In the case of U.P. Coop. Federation
Ltd. V. Singh Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd. which
was the case of a works contract where the performance
guarantee given under the contract was sought to be
invoked, this Court, after referring extensively to English
and Indian cases on the subject, said that the guarantee
must be honoured in accordance with its terms. The bank
which gives the guarantee is not concerned in the least
with the relations between the supplier and the customer;
nor with the question whether the supplier has performed
his contractual obligation or not, nor with the question
whether the supplier is in default or not. The bank must
pay according to the tenor of its guarantee on demand
without proof or condition. There are only two exceptions
to this rule. The first exception is a case when there is a
clear fraud of which the bank has notice. The fraud must
be of an egregious nature such as to vitiate the entire
underlying transaction. Explaining the kind of fraud that
may absolve a bank from honouring its guarantee, this
Court in the above case quoted with the approval the
observations of Sir John Donaldson, M.R. in Bolivinter Oil
SA v. Chase Manhattan Bank (All ER at p352): (at SCC
p.197)
“The wholly exceptional case where an injunction
may be granted is where it is proved that the bank knows
that any demand for payment already made or which may
thereafter be made will clearly be fraudulent. But the
evidence must be clear both as to the fact of fraud and as to
the bank’s knowledge. It would certainly not normally be
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 10 of 17

18.

sufficient that this rests on the uncorroborated statement of
the customer, for irreparable damage can be done to a
bank’s credit in the relatively brief time which must elapse
between the granting of such an injunction and an
application by the bank to have it charged” (emphasis
supplied)
The court explained that the fraud in order to constitute an exception

justifying an injunction against encashment must be a fraud in connection with the
bank guarantee. The High Court in that case had held that the termination of the
contract by the appellant was contrary to the terms of the contract thereby making
the invocation of the bank guarantee fraudulent. Their lordships of the Supreme
Court did not approve of that line of reasoning and observed that the disputes
between the parties relating to the termination of the contract could not make the
invocation of the bank guarantee fraudulent. This is evident from the following
passage:“Clearly, therefore, the existence of any dispute between the
parties to the contract is not a ground for issuing an
injunction to restrain the enforcement of bank guarantees.
There must be a fraud in connection with the bank
guarantee. In the present case we fail to see any such
fraud. The High Court seems to have come to the
conclusion that the termination of the contract by the
appellant and his claim that time was of the essence of the
contract, are not based on the terms of the contract and,
therefore, there is a fraud in the invocation of the bank
guarantee. This is an erroneous view. The disputes
between the parties relating to the termination of the
contract cannot make invocation of the bank guarantees
fraudulent. The High Court has also referred to the
conduct of the appellant in invoking the bank guarantees
on an earlier occasion on 12/4/1992 and subsequently its
withdrawing such invocation. The court has used this
circumstance in aid of its view that the time was not of the
essence of the contract. We fail to see how an earlier
invocation of the bank guarantees and subsequent
withdrawal of this invocation make the bank guarantees
or their invocation tainted with fraud in any manner.
Under the terms of the contract it s stipulated that the
respondent is required to give unconditional bank
guarantees against advance payments as also a similar
bank guarantee for due delivery of the contracted plant
within the stipulated period. In the absence of any fraud
the appellant is entitled to realize the bank guarantees.”
19.

In so far as irretrievable injury is concerned, the court applied the standard

FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 11 of 17

laid down in Itek Corpn. Versus First National Bank of Boston, 566 Fed Supp
1210 and held that recovery of any amount from the party demanding the
encashment of the bank guarantee was in that case a clear possibility thereby
taking the case out of the second exception. In Itek Corpn.’s Case (supra), absence
of a clear possibility of recovery of the money being paid under the guarantee to the
party who had furnished the guarantee was taken as making out a case of
irretrievable injury. The ratio in Itek Corp's case was approved by their Lordships
in Svenska case (supra) in which the Court had vacated the injunction against
encashment of the bank guarantee holding that the fact situation in that case was
not similar to Itek Corpn.’s case as once the plaintiff was able to establish fraud
and obtain a decree for damages by diminution in price there would be no problem
for effecting recoveries in a a friendly country where the bankers or the suppliers
are located. The court observed :

20.

“The High Court was also in error in considering the
questions of balance of convenience. In law relating to
bank guarantees, a party seeking injunction from
encashing of bank guarantee by the suppliers has to show
prima facie case of established fraud and an irretrievable
injury. Irretrievable injury is of the nature as noticed in
the case of Itek Corpn. Here there is no such problem.
Once the plaintiff is able to establish fraud against the
suppliers or suppliers-cum-lenders and obtains any decree
for damages or diminution in price, there is no problem for
effecting recoveries in a friendly country where the bankers
and the suppliers are located. Nothing has been pointed
out to show that the decree passed by the Indian Courts
could not be executable in Sweden.”
The above legal position was reiterated by the Supreme Court in BSES Ltd.

(Now Reliance Energy Ltd.) Versus Fenner India Ltd. and Another, 2006 (2) SCC
728 where the law was summed up in the following words :“There are, however, two exceptions to this rule. The first
is when there is a clear fraud of which the bank has notice
and a fraud of the beneficiary from which it seeks to
benefit. The fraud must be of an egregious nature as to
vitiate the entire underlying transaction. The second
exception to the general rule of non-intervention is when
there are “special equities” in favour of injunction, such as
when “irretrievable injury” or “irretrievable injustice”
would occur if such an injunction were not granted. The
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 12 of 17

21.

general rule and its exceptions has been reiterated in so
many judgments of this Court, that in U.P. State Sugar
Corpn. v. Sumac International Ltd. (hereinafter “U.P.
State Sugar Corpn.”) this Court, correctly declared that
the law was “settled”.”
It is in our opinion unnecessary to burden the judgment with any further

references to decisions rendered by different courts including this court, as the legal
position is authoritatively settled by the above decisions.
22.

The only question that arises for consideration in the light of the above legal

position is whether the appellant has made out a case for issue of an injunction
against the encashment of the bank guarantees on the ground of fraud or
irretrievable injury and whether any special equities exist in its favour to call for an
injunction as prayed for.
23.

In fairness to Mr. Desai, senior counsel for the appellant, we must mention

that no attempt was made by him to bring his case under the first exception of the
guarantee being vitiated by fraud.

All that was argued was that since serious

disputes as to the cause for the delayed execution of the work had arisen between
the parties, the invocation of the bank guarantees would cause irreparable injury to
the appellant. Neither in the petitions under Section 9 nor in any document or in
the memo of appeal has any assertion been made by the appellant to the effect that
the transactions underlying the bank guarantees or the guarantees themselves
were vitiated by any fraud. We have in that view no hesitation in affirming the
finding recorded by the learned single Judge that the case of the appellant did not
fall under the first exception covering cases involving fraud. We may, while parting
with this aspect, mention that the encashment of the bank guarantee has not been
assailed by the appellant on the ground of any procedural failure.

The bank

guarantees are in any case unequivocal and unambiguous in their language and
being independent and distinct contracts between the bank and the respondent
beneficiary both the parties are bound by the same.
24.

That brings us to the question whether the appellant has made out a case for

FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 13 of 17

injunction on the ground of irretrievable injury to it and whether special equities if
any exist to justify the intervention of the court. The very same question has been
addressed by the learned single Judge before whom it was argued that an
irretrievable injury would be caused to the petitioner by encashment of the bank
guarantees as the banks would upon payment of the amount initiate recoveries
against the petitioner thereby bringing its business to a stand still.
25.

It was also contended that the encashment of the bank guarantees would

result in undue enrichment of the respondent thereby justifying interference by the
court with the process of encashment.

Both these contentions were however

repelled by the learned single Judge and in our opinion rightly so. Firstly because
the question of irretrievable injury has to be of the kind referred to in Itek Corpn.’s
case and Svenska’s case (supra).

Just because the banks would start recovery

proceedings against the appellant, does not bring the case close to the fact situation
in which the decision in Itek Corpn.’s Case (supra) was delivered.

What is

important is whether the appellant would have no remedy to recover the amount
paid under the bank guarantees from the

respondent

beneficiary. In Itek

Corpn.’s case (supra), the case of irretrievable injury was made out on account of the
near impossibility of recovery of the amount from the beneficiary of the guarantee.
No such case has been either pleaded or can be countenanced in the fact situation of
this case. We say so because it is not the case of the appellant that if the arbitral
award eventually holds the appellant entitled to recover either entirely or in part,
the amount covered by the bank guarantees, it would be difficult, leave alone,
impossible for the appellant to do so.

The respondent beneficiary of the bank

guarantees is a statutory corporation wholly financed and controlled by the
Government of India. It is in its very nature an instrumentality of the Government
of India.

The question of amounts held payable to the appellant becoming

unrecoverable for any reason does not arise qua such an agency with tremendous
resources. Just because the appellant foresees recovery proceedings against it by
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 14 of 17

the bank, who has furnished the bank guarantee, does not lend any support to its
claim for injunction nor can the appellants case be equated with situations in which
the courts have forbidden encashment on the ground of irretrievable injury.
26.

That brings us to the question whether any special equities have been

established by the appellant to justify the grant of an injunction against the
encashment of the guarantees. The burden of the case argued on behalf of the
appellant consistently has been that the delay in the execution of the work was on
account of hindrances at the construction site. The appellant’s version is that but
for the hindrances it would have completed the works as it had taken the necessary
steps for an early completion of the contracted works.

That position has been

disputed by the respondents on the basis of the documents placed on record
especially the reports of the engineer. The engineer has by its letter dated 26th July,
2006 comprehensively brought out how the hindrances at the site of construction
have been reduced to a mere 4.5 Kms length in respect of the Package IV and 900
metres in respect of Package V. The said letter has been referred to and extracted
in extenso by the learned Single Judge. Also relevant are the monthly progress
reports filed by the engineer in respect of both the packages, portions whereof have
been noted by the learned Single Judge while recording a finding of fact that even
when the respondents had cleared hindrances to a considerable extent, the
petitioner could neither complete the work nor expedite its completion.

These

findings are, in our view, perfectly justified in the light of the material on record
and in the absence of any allegation of mala fides against anyone connected with
the preparation of the monthly progress reports or the supervision of the contracted
works at site. That being so, the argument that encashment of the bank guarantees
even when the appellant was not at fault for the delay in the execution of the works
needs notice only to be rejected.

The performance of the appellant and its

deficiencies and shortcomings are summed up in the engineer’s letter dated 12th
January, 2007, the relevant portion whereof reads as under :
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 15 of 17

“ICT : 362 : KKK : 397
Mr. A.V. Sinha
Member (Technical)
National Highway Authority of India
G5 &6, Sector 10, Dwarka
New Delhi-110 075

12th January, 2007

Subject:
Western Transport Corridor, Tumkur – Haveri
Construction Packate 4 : Chitradurga to Harihar Section of NH4
in Karnakata state : Notice under clause 63.1
Dear Sir,
The Contract Agreement for the execution of works for
Rehabilitation and Upgradation of Chitradurga – Haveri sectin
(Km 207 to Km 284) in the State of Karnataka was signed on the
16th day of January, 2002 between National Highway Authority
of India (The Employer) and M/s. United Engineers (Malaysia) –
Essar Projects Limited, Joint Venture (The Contractor).
The date of commencement of works for this package was
01/3/02 and the same had to be completed by 31/8/04. It will
be seen that to complete the works in time an average monthly
progress asking rate would be 3.3%. However, the contractors
need time for mobilization and time is also lost due to bad
weather, holidays/festivals and other reasons and therefore an
average monthly progress asking rate of 4% was required to
successfully complete the works in time.
Whereas, the
demonstrated progress of the contractor has been consistently
much lower, as would be seen from the average monthly progress
achieved since the year 2002. The same is given here under for
your ready perusal.
a). 2002- No progress
b). 2003 – 1.1%
c). 2004 – 1.5%
d). 2005 – 1.45%
e). 2006 – 1.1%
The performance of the contractor has suffered due to the poor
site organization, shortage of materials, lack of planning and
professional pride to do a job well. The shortcomings and
deficiencies of the contractor have been repeatedly brought to
their notice during meetings at various levels and through letters.
However, all these had little effect and contractor continued to
perform poorly, achieving only 69.5% physical progress upto the
end of December, 2006.
The completion date for the works had been extended upto 31 st
December, 2005 and further extension of time has been
recommended upto 31st December, 2006, which is under active
consideration of the authorities. The contractor has failed to
show any sense of urgency to speed up the progress and complete
the works even by the recommended extended time. Therefore,
under the provision of clause 46.1 of the conditions of the
contract, a notice was last served on the Contractor vide our
FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

page 16 of 17

letter No. ICT : 362 : KK : 10914 dated 11 December, 2006, to
demonstrate clearly improved rate of progress within 28 (twenty
eight) days of the receipt of the notice. It is sad that even this had
no effect on the contract and practically hardly any works is
being carried out. In fact the work has been virtually stopped
and only 0.06% work has been done in last 28 days, after the
issue of notice. Non availability of basic inputs like diesel and
bitumen for days shows complete lack of responsibility and will
of the contractor to fulfill his contractual obligation. As
‘Engineer’, it is my considered view tht there is no hope of
contractor taking appropriate steps to improve their performance.
Having exhausted all contractually available means to make the
contractor perform and seeing no chance of the contract works
beign completed in near future and persistent attitude of the
contractor to continue harping on its claims and other issues,
action under clause 63.1 of the conditions of the contract by the
employer is strongly recommended. (emphasis supplied)
With regards,

27.

Yours truly,
Sd/(K.K. Kapila)
Project Director & Engineer
CMD – ICT Pvt. Ltd.”
In the light of the above and the finding recorded by the learned single Judge

with which we entirely agree, there is no basis for holding that the encashment of
the bank guarantees was justified or that there were any special equities in favour
of the appellant making the encashment of the bank guarantees unjustified or
unreasonable or onerous. There is no merit in these appeals which fail and are
hereby dismissed with costs assessed to Rs.10000/- in each case.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

FEBRUARY 08, 2008
pk

FAO(OS) 392/07 & 393/07

VEENA BIRBAL, J.

page 17 of 17

