*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 9005/2007
Date of Decision: 8th February, 2008
M/S DEEPAK RESORTS & HOTELS PVT. LTD. & ANR.
..... Petitioners
Through
Mr. J.P. Sengh with Ms. Priyanka
Gupta, advs.
versus

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through Mr. Sanjay Poddar, adv. for R-1-3.
Mr. Sandeep Aggarwal, adv. for R-4.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes
Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

T.S. Thakur, J
More than 15 years have rolled by since the Supreme Court first
expressed its serious concern about the quality of environment in the
National Capital Region of Delhi. Such was the failure on the part of
the Delhi Development Authority, the MCD, the Central Pollution
Control Board as also the Delhi Pollution Control Committee in the
discharge of their duties that the court castigated them for their
inaction in the matter in M.C. Mehta Versus Union of India, 1992 (3)
SCC 256. Referring to a World Health Organization study, the court
observed that utter disregard to environment has placed Delhi in an
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 1 of 15

unenviable position of being the world’s third grubbiest and most
polluted and unhealthy city. The court observed :“We are conscious that environmental changes are the
inevitable consequence of industrial development in our
country, but at the same time the quality of environment
cannot be permitted to be damaged by polluting the Air,
Water and Land to such an extent that it becomes a
health-hazard for the residents of the area. We are
constrained to record that Delhi Development Authority,
Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Central Pollution
Control Board and Delhi Pollution Control Committee
have been wholly re-miss in the performance of their
statutory duties and have failed to protect the
environments and control air- pollution in the Union
territory of Delhi. Utter disregard to environment has
placed Delhi in an unenviable position of being the
world's third grubbiest, most polluted and unhealthy city
as per a study conducted by the World Health
Organisation. Needless to say that every citizen has a
right to fresh air and to live in pollution-free
environments.”
2.

By an order passed in the very same petition on 22nd April,

1994, the Court emphasized the urgent need to set up sewage
treatment plants for the ever increasing population of Delhi within a
time bound schedule and started monitoring the setting up of such
plants. The court observed :
“The Delhi Development Authority has filed an affidavit
through its Secretary Mr. V.N. Bansal. It is stated that the
Authority is ready and willing to provide land to the
M.C.D. for setting up of the Sewage Treatment tanks.
Keeping in view the urgency of the matter, we request
Mr. Subhash Sharma, Commissioner, M.C.D., Mr. S.P.
Jkhanwal, Vice Chairman, D.D.A., Mr. Ashok Kumar,
Additional Commissioner, Water and Mr. J.K. Mathur,
Chief Engineer of the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage
Disposal Undertaking to be present in Court on May 6,
1994. We are requesting the officers to be present in Court
so that we can have their view points for taking
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 2 of 15

appropriate decisions on the spot. Needless to say that
with the increase of population in Delhi, it is of utmost
urgency to set up the Sewage Treatment Plants within the
time-bound Schedule.”
3.

Subsequent orders passed by their lordships in the said

proceedings maintained a continuous pressure on the authorities to
ensure that sewage treatment plants are set up on a war footing. By
order dated 21st April, 1995, the court once again described the
treatment of sewage as of utmost importance for health and supply of
pure water to citizens of Delhi. “Any delay in this respect is a health
hazard and cannot be tolerated”, observed the Court.
4.

In Jai Narain and Others Versus Union of India and Others,

1996 (1) SCC 9, the Supreme Court transferred the petitions filed in
this court to itself for disposal.

These petitions challenged the

acquisition proceedings in respect of revenue estate of village Nilothi
in the National Capital Territory of Delhi. One of the issues that
arose for consideration was whether the authorities were justified in
invoking the provisions of Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act as
according to the petitioner land owners, there was no urgency to
justify the invocation of the said provision. While dismissing the said
petitions with costs quantified at Rs.10000/- in each petition, their
lordships observed :
“This Court repeatedly indicated in the orders/directions
that there was urgency in taking over the possession of
the land, under acquisition, for the construction of STP at
Keshopur. The authorities were directed to take up the
work of land acquisition and construction of STPs on war
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 3 of 15

footing. "Likely" in the background of this Court's order
passed from time to time for a time bound programme for
setting up the STPs means, for purposes of this case,
"certainly" and "urgently".
5.

It is in the above backdrop that the respondents have continued

the process of setting up of sewage treatment plants in different areas
including in village Kapashera with which we are presently
concerned. The respondents have on the analogy of the earlier cases
of acquisitions for STPs monitored directly by the Supreme Court,
invoked the provisions of Section 17(1) and 17(4) of the Land
Acquisition Act in respect of an area measuring 19 bighas and 4
biswas situate in different survey numbers of village Kapashera
mentioned in a notification dated 23rd August, 2007 issued under
Section 4 readwith Section 17(1) and 17(4) of the Act. A declaration
dated 31st October, 2007 issued under Section 6 of the Act and a
notification of even date issued under Section 17(1) of the said Act
has also been assailed with a prayer for a mandamus restraining the
respondents not to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment and
possession of the land presently in the occupation of the petitioners.
6.

Appearing for the petitioners, Mr. J.P. Sengh, strenuously

argued that the notification under Section 17(1) and 17(4) of the Act
was vitiated in as much as the same uses the expression “likely to be
acquired”, which implies that there was no existing need for the land
in question and that the land may be required some time in future. It
was, on that basis, contended by Mr. Singh that there was no urgency
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 4 of 15

involved in the acquisition proceedings so as to justify the invocation
of the powers vested in the Government under Section 17(4) of the
Act.
7.

On behalf of the respondents, Mr. Poddar on the other hand

argued that the use of the expression “likely to be acquired” was not
conclusive of the matter. He urged that the question of urgency
involved in any acquisition could not be determined solely by the
expression

used in the notification under Section 4 of the Act

especially when that existence of an urgency is a matter which is
entirely based on the subjective satisfaction of the Government. He
submitted that looking to the background in which the entire process
of setting up of sewage treatment plants has been started by the
authorities and the urgency which the Supreme Court has attached to
that process, there was no room for holding that there was no
urgency in the setting up of the proposed STP. It was, according to
Mr. Poddar, a case where the urgency was evident on the face of
public purpose for which the land was being acquired. Reliance was
also placed by Mr. Poddar on the decision of the Supreme Court in
State of UP Versus Pista Devi, AIR 1986 SC 2025 where the court
took judicial notice of the fact that housing accommodation was a
matter of national urgency and upheld the invocation of the powers
under Section 17(4) in relation to acquisition of land for providing
house sites.
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 5 of 15

8.

There is, in our opinion, considerable merit in the submission

made by Mr. Poddar. As already noticed earlier, the entire process
relating to the setting up of sewage treatment plants in Delhi has its
genesis in judicial proceedings in public interest and the directions
issued by their lordships in the same from time to time.

As seen

earlier the Apex Court has repeatedly emphasized the need for
immediate action being taken by the authorities for setting up of the
STPs which are considered absolutely essential for providing a
pollution free environment to the inhabitants of Delhi. It is also
evident from the decision of the Supreme Court in Pista Devi’s case
(supra) relied upon by Mr. Poddar that pressing needs of the time
like housing accommodation can be taken judicial notice of and
invocation of the emergency provisions justified on that basis. The
following observations made by the Apex Court in Pista Devi’s case
are instructive :
“In the circumstances of the case it cannot be said that the
decision of the State Government in resorting to Section
17(1) of the Act was unwarranted. The provision of
housing accommodation in these days has become a
matter of national urgency. We may take judicial notice of
this fact. Now it is difficult to hold that in the case of
proceedings relating to acquisition of land for providing
house sites it is unnecessary to invoke Section 17(1) of the
Act and to dispense with the compliance with Section 5A
of the Act.”
9.

An argument similar to the one urged by Mr. J.P. Sengh before

us was advanced even in Jai Narain’s Case(supra). Their lordships,
however, repelled the contention that the use of the expression “is
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 6 of 15

likely to be needed for a public purpose” was conclusive or that it
suggested the non-existence of an immediate need and a consequent
urgency for acquisition.

The court observed that whether or not

there was an urgency to justify invocation of Section 17(4) of the Act
was a matter entirely based on the subjective satisfaction of the
Government and the Court would not interfere with the exercise of
the powers vested in the Government unless the reasons given were
wholly irrelevant or no application of mind evident from the record.
The following observations made by the Court are in this regard
apposite :“The First contention raised by the Learned counsel is
based on the language of Section 4 of the Act. The power
under Section 4 of the Act can be exercised when it
appears to the Government that the "land in any locality
is needed or is likely to be needed for any public
purpose". It is no doubt correct that the expression "is
needed" indicates the existing need whereas the
expression "is likely to be needed" refers to the future
need. When the later expression is used in the notification
under Section 4 of the Act it may be suggestive of the fact
that there may not be emergency to acquire the land, but
the question of urgency cannot be determined solely by
the expressions used in the notification under Section 4 of
the Act. The emergency must be reflected in the need of
the acquisition. The existence of urgency is a matter
which is entirely based on the subjective satisfaction of
the Government. The courts do not interfere unless the
reasons given are wholly irrelevant and there is no
application of mind. When a notification under Section 4
of the Act uses the expression "is likely to be needed" it
may be necessary, in a given case, to examine the records
or the attendant circumstances to satisfy that there was
material before the Government justifying the Order
under Section 17, dispensing with the provisions of
Section 5A of the Act. If the public purpose on the face of
it shows that the land is needed urgently, that by itself is
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 7 of 15

a relevant circumstance for justifying the action under
Section 17(4) of the Act.”(Emphasis Supplied)
10.

The above observations, in our view, provide a complete

answer to the argument advanced by Mr. J.P. Sengh. Having regard
to the fact that the urgency regarding the need for setting up of the
sewage treatment plants, has been judicially recognised by the
Supreme Court and the work of setting up of such plants has been
directed to be undertaken forthwith and completed at war footing, it
is futile for the petitioners to contend that there was no real
justification for invoking the emergency provisions of Section 17(4).
A number of sewage treatment plants have already been set up by
the respondents but the fact that there is need for setting up one at
Kapashera is not in dispute. That being so, no fault can be found
with the Government taking adequate steps for setting up of such a
plant on an urgent basis by invoking the provisions of Section 17(1)
and 17(4) of the Act. The first limb of the challenge to the acquisition
proceedings thus fails and is hereby rejected.
11.

It was next argued by Mr. J.P. Sengh that the choice of the site

at which the proposed STP is to be constructed was not proper. It
was argued that the site was too close to the human habitation at
Kapashera which is likely to adversely affect the living environment
for the people in the neighbourhood. We do not think so for two
precise reasons. Firstly, because the choice of the site at which the
STP should be constructed is a matter which must be left to the
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 8 of 15

Executive to determine.

Interference with that choice would be

uncalled for unless the decision is so outrageously perverse that no
reasonable person could countenance the same. No such perversity
has been established in the instant case.

Merely because the

proposed STP could as well be constructed at another place is, in our
view, no reason for us to meddle with the acquisition proceedings.
12.

Secondly, because the issue regarding the suitability of the site

of construction has been examined by us in WP(C) No. 6526/2007
filed in public interest. We have in that petition addressed the entire
background in which the challenge to the lack of the STP was
mounted by the petitioner in that case and held that there was no
legal or other infirmity in the choice of the site where the STP was
being constructed to warrant interference in public interest. We need
only recall that the concerns shown by the inhabitants of village
Kapashera regarding the possible health hazards arising out of the
construction of the STP near their village was looked into by the
monitoring committee headed by the Chief Secretary, Government of
Delhi and found to be without any basis. We do not propose to go
into the question whether the said public interest petition was also
inspired by the petitioners in the present writ petition whose land are
being acquired for the STP, for it is unnecessary for us to establish
any such connection between the two petitions. All that we need say
is that the choice of the location of the STP has not been shown to be
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 9 of 15

vitiated by either any illegality or perversity to warrant interference
by us.
13.

That brings us to the question whether the acquisition

proceedings were vitiated by mala fides of respondents Nos. 5 and 6.
It was contended by Mr. J.P. Sengh that R-5 and 6 who were
inimically disposed towards the petitioner were holding key
positions in the Government of NCT of Delhi and the Delhi Jal Board
which positions they had misused to influence the location of the
Sewage Treatment Plant at Village Kapashera. The petitioners allege
that initially land bearing Khasra No. 157 of Village Bijwasan was
surveyed by the authorities for the project but subsequently due to
the opposition of the Delhi Jal Board, the location of the proposed
STP was changed from Khasra No. 157, Bijwasan to the present
location.

The selection of the present site was, according to the

petitioner, mala fide and intended to cause financial loss to the
petitioners who have a history of litigation and acrimony with R-5
and 6. The writ petition alleges that the petitioner company is a
group company of Deepak Bhardwaj group which has been in
litigation with various officers of the State Government. Contempt
Case Civil No. 307/97 is according to the petitioner pending between
Smt. Ramesh Kumari and Shri Manoj Kumar, respondent No. 5 and
6. The said proceedings have, according to the petitioner, given rise
to an animus in the minds of Respondents No. 5 and 6 against the
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 10 of 15

petitioner with the result that a deliberate attempt has been made by
the said respondents to notify land which was not otherwise suitable
for the purpose for which it is being acquired.

There is, in our

opinion, no merit even in this contention urged by Mr. Sengh. It is
true that the petitioners have made allegations about the pendency of
some proceedings between a group company of Deepak Bhardwaj
Group on the one hand and officers of the GNCT of Delhi but mere
pendency of the said proceedings either against Shri Manoj Kumar or
any other officer without any material to show that Shri Manoj
Kumar or any other officer was in any way connected with the
decision regarding the location of the proposed STP does not lend
any credence to the allegation of mala fides. The writ petition is
silent as to how and at what stage and in what manner the
respondent Nos. 5 and 6 or any one of them influence the decision
making process regarding the location of the proposed STP at
Kapashera in preference to Bijwasan. So long as respondent No. 5
and 6 are not shown to be in any way connected with the decision
making process especially in relation to the location of the STP at
Kapashera, the pendency of any proceedings between a group
company of Deepak Bhardwaj Group and the said two respondents
or any one of them would be of little consequence. Messrs Poddar
and Sandeep Aggarwal,

counsel appearing for the respondents

emphatically stated that neither Shri Manoj Kumar nor Shri X.K.
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 11 of 15

Mahto, Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 in the petition was in any way
connected with or instrumental in the decision regarding the location
of the STP at Kapashera. They produced for our perusal the original
record which does not suggest the association of the said two
respondents with the decision making process leading to the location
of the proposed STP at Kapashera. The challenge to the acquisition
proceedings on the ground of malafides must also in that view fail.
14.

That leaves us with the question whether the Government had

applied its mind while invoking powers under Section 17(1) and (4)
of the Act. A perusal of the original record which was produced
before us shows that the Executive Engineer, DR-XIV, Delhi Jal Board
had initiated a proposal for acquisition of 0.5 hectacres of land near
Kapashera for construction of mini Sewage Treatment Plant. The
proposal referred to the directions issued by this Court in WP(C) No.
3637/1998 disposed of on 3rd September, 2002. That proposal was
later revised in April 2007 for acquisition of 1.6 hectares of land in
place of 0.5 hectares only which was processed and the matter
recommended to the Lieutenant Governor for approving the
acquisition of land measuring 90 bighas 4 biswas in Kapashera by
issuing a notification under Section 4 read with Section 17(4) (6) and
(1). The matter was then examined by the Principal Secretary, Land
and Development who recommended the case for approval to the
Lieutenant Governor pointing out that the requirement was urgent.
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 12 of 15

A draft notification under Section 4 readwith Section 17(4), (6) and
17(1) of the Act was also placed for the perusal of the worthy
Lieutenant Governor who upon consideration passed an order which
reads as under :
“I have gone through the records and requirement of
Delhi Jal Board for construction of Sewage Treatment
Plant at Kapashera and the draft notifications prepared
by LAC.
I am fully satisfied that the land measuring 19 Bigha 04
Biswa of Village Kapashera is urgently required for above
purpose. In view of the urgency of the scheme, I order
that notifications under Section 4 read with Section 17(4),
(6) and 17(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 be issued
immediately.
TEJENDRA KHANNA
LT. GOVERNOR, DELHI
DATED : 16.08.07”
15.

The above in our opinion sufficiently meets the requirement of

law as to a due and proper application of mind by the Government
before the emergency provisions of Section 17(1) and (4) are invoked.
It is true that the order passed by the Lt. Governor does not spell out
the reasons for his satisfaction but that in our view is not necessary in
view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India and
Others Versus Praveen Gupta and Others, 1997 (9) SCC 78 according
to which the decision regarding urgency is an administrative decision
and a matter of subjective satisfaction of the appropriate government
to be taken at on the basis of the material available on record. There
is in that view no need to pass a reasoned order to justify the

W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 13 of 15

conclusion that there is any urgency in the acquisition justifying the
dispensing with an inquiry under Section 5-A. The court observed :
“It is now settled legal position that decision on urgency
is an administrative decision and is a matter of subjective
satisfaction of the appropriate Government on the basis of
the material available on record. Therefore, there was no
need to pass any reasoned order to reach the conclusion
that there is urgency so as to dispense with the enquiry
under Section 5-A in exercise of power under Section
17(4).”
16.

We may also refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in First

Land Acquisition Collector Versus Nirodhi Prakash Gangoli and
Another, 2002 (4) SCC 160 where the Supreme Court has reiterated
that the question of urgency for an acquisition under Section 17(1)
and (4) of the Act are matters of subjective satisfaction of the
Government and that a writ court would not ordinarily scrutinize the
propriety of that satisfaction on objective appraisal of the facts. All
that the court may do, in cases where the invocation of Section 17(4)
is assailed, is to enquire where the appropriate authority had the
relevant material before it and whether there was any nonapplication of mind in the making of the order.

The following

observations are in this regard instructive.
“The question of urgency of an acquisition under Sections
17(1) and (4) of the Act is a matter of subjective
satisfaction of the Government and ordinarily it is not
open to the court to make a scrutiny of the propriety of
that satisfaction on an objective appraisal of facts. In this
view of the matter when the Government takes a
decision, taking all relevant considerations into account
and is satisfied that there exists emergency for invoking
powers under Sections 17(1) and (4) of the Act, and issues
W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 14 of 15

notification accordingly, the same should not be
interfered with by the court unless the court comes to the
conclusion that the appropriate authority had not applied
its mind to the relevant factors or that the decision has
been taken by the appropriate authority mala fide.
Whether in a given situation there existed urgency or not
is left to the discretion and decision of the authorities
concerned. If an order invoking power under Section
17(4) is assailed, the courts may enquire whether the
appropriate authority had all the relevant materials
before it or whether the order has been passed by the
non-application of mind.”
17.

In the light of the above settled legal position and what we

have stated while dealing with the question of urgency underlying
the acquisition of land for setting up of STPs in Delhi, we have no
hesitation in holding that the invocation of the powers under Section
17(1) and 17(4) of the Act was perfectly justified and that there was
neither any illegality nor any irregularity or perversity in the decision
to invoke the said powers.
18.

In the result, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed but in

the circumstances without any orders as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

VEENA BIRBAL, J
FEBRUARY 08, 2008

manish

W.P.(C)9005/2007

Page 15 of 15

