*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 1839/2008
SHAMO DEVI & ORS
..... Petitioners
Through : Mr. V.K. Shali, Adv. with Mr. C. Sharma, Adv.
versus
UOI & ORS

..... Respondents
Through : Mr. Sanjay Poddar, Adv. for LAC
Mr. Gaurav Sarin, Adv. for DDA

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

%
Per Thakur, J (Oral):

ORDER
07.03.2008

More than 40 years after a certain piece of land was allegedly occupied by the
respondent MCD for construction of a drain, the petitioners, most of whom happen to be
the LRs of the original owners have approached this Court by way of the present writ
petition for a mandamus directing the MCD to vacate the illegal occupation or in the
alternative to acquire the land and pay compensation to them. Mr. Shali, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioners, argued that although there is considerable delay in the filing
of the petition, yet this court ought to ignore the same and grant relief because it is a case
of illegal deprivation of the property owned by a citizen on account of an arbitrary act of
the State. He submitted that the State could not justify its action of occupying the
citizen's property, building a drain on the same and denying compensation to the land
owners.
WP(C) 1839/2008

Page No. 1 of 4

On behalf of the respondents, Messrs Poddar and Sarin on the other hand, argued
that the writ petition was liable to be dismissed on the ground of inordinate and
unexplained delay and laches. They submitted that even if the allegations made by the
petitioners were taken to be true on their face value and the occupation of the land held to
be unauthorized, yet the petitioners ought to have pursued their remedies against such
illegal/unauthorized occupation diligently. Having failed to do so, the petitioners cannot
at this belated point of time seek the intervention of this Court in its extra ordinary writ
jurisdiction. Reliance in support was placed by Mr. Poddar upon a decision of the
Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra v. Digambar AIR 1995 SC 1991.
There is, in our opinion, considerable merit in the submission made by
Mr.Poddar. The writ petition does appear to us to be barred by inordinate delay and
unexplained laches.

The alleged unauthorized occupation of the petitioners' land

measuring three bighas in Survey No. 1256/1 and 1257/2 had taken place long before the
making of an award in respect of the adjacent land by the Collector for the public purpose
of planned development of Delhi. Award No. 1415 dated 16th November, 1962, a copy
whereof was produced by Mr. Shali before us, makes a mention about the utilization of a
certain portion of land in the above mentioned two khasra numbers by the MCD for
purposes of construction of a municipal drain.

This implies that the drain stood

constructed much earlier than the date of the award. For nearly 45 years since the
making of the award the petitioners and their predecessors in interest remained content
with the said position and did not move their little finger to either get the unauthorized
occupation removed or claim compensation for the land. Such being the position, it is
not permissible in our view at this stage for the petitioners to seek intervention of this
court in the exercise of its extraordinary writ jurisdiction either for vacation of the

WP(C) 1839/2008

Page No. 2 of 4

unauthorized occupation or for a direction to the respondents to acquire the same. That is
especially so when there is no explanation much less a cogent and acceptable one
forthcoming from the petitioners for their inaction over a period of more than four
decades.

The legal position as to whether unauthorized and illegal deprivation of

property would by itself be a sufficient action for a writ court to interfere regardless of
the conduct of the person so deprived, stands settled by the decision of the Supreme
Court in Digambar's case (supra) relied upon by Mr. Poddar. The Supreme Court has, in
the said decision, authoritatively declared that in order that a citizen may seek and obtain
equitable relief under the provisions of Article 226 of the Constitution, his conduct must
not be blameworthy either on account of laches or undue delay or acquiescence, waiver
and the like. In the application of that principle, it does not matter that the infringement
of the right of the citizen relates to the property owned by him. The following passage
from the above decision sets the controversy at rest:
“12. How a person who alleges against the State of deprivation
of his legal right, can get relief of compensation from the State
by invoking writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Article
226 of the Constitution even though, he is guilty of laches or
undue delay is difficult to comprehend, when it is well settled
by decision of this Court that no person, be he a citizen or
otherwise, is entitled to obtain the equitable relief under Article
226 of the Constitution if his conduct is blame-worthy because
of laches, undue delay, acquiescence, waiver and the like.
Moreover, how a citizen claiming discretionary relief under
Article 226 of the Constitution against a State, could be relieved
of his obligation to establish his unblameworthy conduct for
getting such relief, where the State against which relief is sought
is a welfare State, is also difficult to comprehend. Where the
relief sought under Article 226 of the Constitution by a person
against the welfare State is founded on its alleged illegal or
wrongful executive action, the need to explain laches or undue
delay on his part to obtain such relief, should, if anything, be
more stringent than in other cases, for the reason that the State
due to laches or undue delay on the part of the person seeking
relief, may not be able to show that the executive action
complained of was legal or correct for want of records
WP(C) 1839/2008

Page No. 3 of 4

pertaining to the action or for the officers who were responsible
for such action not being available later on. Further, where
granting of relief is claimed against the State on alleged
unwarranted executive action, is bound to result in loss to the
public exchequer of the State or in damage to other public
interest, the High Court before granting such relief is required to
satisfy itself that the delay or laches on the part of a citizen or
any other person in approaching for relief under Article 226 of
the Constitution on the alleged violation of his legal right, was
wholly justified in the facts and circumstances, instead of
ignoring the same or leniently considering it. Thus, in our view,
persons seeking relief against the State under Article 226 of the
Constitution, be they citizens or otherwise, cannot get
discretionary relief obtainable thereunder unless they fully
satisfy the High Court that the facts and circumstances of the
case clearly justified the laches or undue delay on their part in
approaching the Court for grant of such discretionary relief.
Therefore, where a High Court grants relief to a citizen or any
other person under Article 226 of the Constitution against any
person including the State without considering his blameworthy conduct, such as laches or undue delay, acquiescence or
waiver, the relief so granted becomes unsustainable even if the
relief was granted in respect of alleged deprivation of his legal
right by the State.”
In the light of the above, we have no hesitation in holding that this writ petition is
liable to be dismissed. The same is accordingly dismissed but in the circumstances
without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
MARCH 07, 2008
pk

WP(C) 1839/2008

Page No. 4 of 4

