*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) 601/2006

Date of Decision: 8th FEBRUARY, 2008

LARSEN & TOUBRO LIMITED
..... Appellant
Through
Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, Sr. adv. with
Mr. Sharukh Kanthawala, Ms.
Purnima Sethi, Mr. Ashish Wad, Mr.
Neeraj Kumar, Mr. Chirag Dave,
advs.
versus

M/S LACHMI NARAIN TRADES. & ORS.
.... Respondents
Through
Mr. Neeraj .K. Kaul, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Rishi Aggarwal, Mr. Akshay
Ringe, advs.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

T.S.Thakur, J:
This appeal arises out of an order dated 28th July, 2006 passed by a
learned Single Judge of this Court whereby an ad interim order of
injunction earlier issued against the defendant-respondent herein has
been made absolute with the modification that the defendant can
continue to use the alphabets 'LNT' in an explanatory extended form as
given in the order to avoid the likelihood of any confusion that the goods
being sold by it are those of the plaintiff-appellant. Dissatisfied with the

FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 1 of 12

said order even the defendant-respondent has filed cross objections inter

alia challenging the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge that
the adoption and use of the trade mark 'LNT' by it is malafide and
intended to take advantage of the tremendous reputation which the
plaintiff-appellant has earned in the commercial world. The controversy
arises in the following backdrop:
2.

The appellant Larsen and Toubro Ltd. for short 'L&T' is engaged in

diverse business activities including transportation and infrastructural
development, finance, information technology within and outside this
country.

Nearly a dozen subsidiary companies using the 'L&T' prefix

with their names have been incorporated over the years to carry on the
said business activities.

The plaintiff’s case is that it has applied for

registering

“Larsen

the

marks

and

applications are pending consideration.

Toubro”

and

“L&T”

which

The plaintiff’s further case is

that its turnover and annual profits run into thousands of crores and that
goods manufactured and services provided by it are being advertised
extensively in print and visual media.

The publicity expenditure, has

according to the plaintiff-appellant, gone up from Rs.7 crores in 19911992 to Rs.53 crores in 2001-2002. Suffice it to say that according to
the averments made in the plaint, the words/abbreviation 'L&T' has
acquired a secondary meaning associating the same exclusively with the
plaintiff which abbreviated or stylised form has been used by the
appellant exclusively and extensively for considerable length of time
stretching over nearly half a century. The plaintiff indeed claims to be
one of the Asia's top most companies in India in the category of high
quality service/products.
3.

Aggrieved by the use of the names/abbreviation 'LNT' and

'ELENTE' as brand names for electrical goods including electrical

FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 2 of 12

distribution

systems

like

miniature

circuit

breakers

etc.

by

the

defendants, the plaintiff company filed a suit restraining it from passing
of the said goods as that of the plaintiff by confusing the unwary
customers. The plaintiff’s case, as set out in the plaint, was that the use
of name/abbreviation 'LNT' by the defendant was intended to capitalize
on the goodwill of the plaintiff, for otherwise there was no reason for the
defendant to adopt such a name and abbreviation. It was also alleged
that the defendant/respondent had applied for registration of the trade
mark 'LNT' under Section 18 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act
before the trade marks authority.

Pending the disposal of the

application, the defendant had, despite notice issued to it, refused to stop
the user of the mark 'LNT' leaving no alternative for the plaintiff except
to file the suit and seek an injunction.
4.

An application seeking an ad interim injunction restraining the

defendants from using the mark LNT/ELENTE was also filed by the
plaintiff on which a learned Single Judge sitting on original side of this
Court passed an ex parte injunction on 27th June, 2003 restraining the
defendants,

their

servants,

marks/names/words/abbreviation

agents

etc.

LNT/ELENTE

from
and

using
any

the
other

deceptively similar name in relation to any of the goods being marketed
by the defendants.
5.

The defendants contested the suit in the written statement filed by

them inter alia alleging that the name LNT/ELENTE was not similar to
the trade mark and trade name used by the plaintiff. It was alleged that
while the plaintiff was using the letters L and T for its products in
conjunction with other brand names Hager and Salzer, the defendant
was using the trade name LNT which cannot be said to be similar to the
brand name of the plaintiff L & T. The defendants further alleged that

FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 3 of 12

defendant no. 1 was carrying on his family business under the trade
name Lachmi Narain Trades since April 2001 and that the brand name
LNT was nothing but the abbreviated form of its business name. It was
also alleged that the first concern of the defendant started in the name of
Lachmi Narain Stores at Ooty in the year 1952 followed by certain other
firms in the name of Lachmi Narain Electricals, Lachmi Narain Trades,
Lachmi Narain Cables and Lachmi Narain Manas Export Oriented unit.
It was further alleged that the defendants have been trading in electric
miniature circuit breakers, electric rotary switches, electric PVC
insulating tape, electric fluorescent chokes under the trade name LNT
and that the plaintiff was aware of the business carried on by them.
There was, according to the defendant, neither any similarity in the
brand names nor any confusion likely to arise out of the user of the said
names. The defendants on that premise sought dismissal of the suit and
vacation of the ex parte order issued by the Court.
6.

Rival contentions urged by learned counsel for the parties led the

learned Single Judge to record the following significant findings of fact
while disposing off the application for ad interim injunction by the order
impugned in this appeal:
1)

The plaintiff is a market leader in respect of its goods.

2)

The abbreviation L&T used by the plaintiff-appellant are wellknown and are identified with the goods manufactured and
marketed by the plaintiff.

3)

The abbreviation L&T has acquired a secondary meaning
inasmuch as the moment the words L and T appear on a
product, the consumer associates the same with the plaintiff.

4)

The adoption of abbreviation LNT by the defendant does not
appear to be bonafide inasmuch as even when the defendants

FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 4 of 12

have been in business for a number of years it never
occurred to them to use the said abbreviation till as late as in
the year 2003.
5)

Even the letter 'N' appearing between the alphabets L and T
is not written in the ordinary manner but symbolizes a
thunderbolt thereby making it obscure from the view of an
ordinary person.

6)

The use of trade mark logo LNT in the manner the same is
being used by the defendant is likely to create confusion
thereby entitling the plaintiff to the grant of injunction
prayed for.

7.

Having said so, the Court adverted to a suggestion made by the

defendants and their willingness to use the trade name on the products
in the following form:
“LNT/ELENTE-Lachmi Narain Traders”
8.

That suggestion found favour with the learned Single Judge, who

felt that the user of the trade name in the manner indicated above was
bound to rule out any confusion in the minds of the customers with the
product being purchased by them for that of the plaintiff. The ex parte
injunction earlier issued was in that view confirmed with a modification
by the learned Single Judge in the following words:

“Therefore, while confirming the injunction order
dated 27th June 2003, it is made clear that the
defendant is allowed to use the following
description on its goods:“LNT/ELENTE-Lachmi Narain Trades”
19. If these changes are made, injunction order
would not come in its way.
20. The application is disposed of in the above
terms.”
9.

Appearing for the appellant Mr. Chandhiok argued that learned

FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 5 of 12

Single Judge having found on a question of fact that the use of
trademark/logo LNT by the defendants was likely to create confusion and
that the adoption of the said trademark/logo was not bonafide, there was
no room for allowing the defendants to continue using the same in an
extended form. The appellant had, according to the learned counsel, no
objection to the use of the full form of “Lachmi Narain Trades” by the
defendants-respondents herein so long as the defendants did not use the
abbreviated form of LNT or ELENTE which was likely to continue the
confusion in the minds of the customers that the products being sold by
the defendants were those of the plaintiff's. It was contended that the
operative part of the order passed by the learned Single Judge was in
conflict with the finding recorded by him to the effect that L&T or
ELENTE were associated with the plaintiff's goods which had acquired a
definite and distinct reputation amongst the buyers. Reliance in support
was placed by Mr.Chandhiok upon the following passage of the order
passed by the learned Single Judge:
“12.

In so far as reputation acquired by the plaintiff in
respect of its goods is concerned, it hardly needs
elaborate discussion. From the documents on record,
sales figures and amounts spent on advertisements etc.,
it is clearly established that the plaintiff is a market
leader in respect of its goods are well known. It can
safely be said that these words are identified with the
goods manufactured and/or marketed by the plaintiff.
The word L&T or ELENTE are, therefore, associated
with the plaintiff's goods and these trade marks of the
plaintiff have acquired a definite and distinct reputation
amongst buyers.
They have, therefore, acquired a
secondary meaning as the moment word 'L' and 'T' or
L&T appear on a product, the consumer will associate
the same with the plaintiffs. In fact, learned counsel for
the defendants did not even try to question this claim of
the plaintiffs. His attempt was to show distinguishing
features between the two trade marks.”

10.

There is in our opinion considerable merit in the submissions made

by Mr.Chandhiok. Once the learned Single Judge came to the conclusion
that the words 'L&T' or ELENTE are associated with the plaintiff's goods

FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 6 of 12

and have acquired a definite and distinct reputation amongst the buyers,
there was no justification for allowing the defendant to make use of the
said words or any word or words phonetically similar to them. This was
especially so when the learned Single Judge had recorded a specific
finding to the effect that the adoption of the abbreviation LNT by the
defendant was not bonafide no matter the defendants name may be
Lachmi Narain Trades and LNT/ELENTE an abbreviated form thereof.
The Single Judge has, in this regard, observed:
“In the present case, adoption of the abbreviation LNT
by the defendants does not appear to be a bona fide.
Maybe name of the defendants is Lachmi Narain Trades
and the alphabet LNT are the abbreviation of this
name.”

11.

In the light of the findings of fact recorded by the learned Single

Judge which are, in our opinion, perfectly justified in the facts and
circumstances of the case, there was no justification for allowing the
defendants-respondents herein to use the very same trademark/logo with
or without the extended full form of the abbreviation Lachmi Narain
Trades.

If use of 'LNT/ELENTE' was not permissible for the reasons

given by the Single Judge with which we agree, its user could not
become permissible simply because the defendants were using the
offending logo/trademark with someother expression like Lachmi Narain
Trades in the present case.

Inasmuch as the learned Single Judge

permitted user of the offending expression LNT/ELENTE by the
defendants, he, in our opinion, committed a mistake that needs to be
corrected.
12.

Mr. Kaul, learned counsel for the respondents, however, argued

that since some of the products marketed by the defendants under the
trademark/logo LNT/ELENTE are not even manufactured or marketed by
the plaintiff-appellant herein there was no justification for restraining the
FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 7 of 12

use of the said trademark or logo vis a vis such products. We do not
think so. As rightly held by the learned Single Judge the test of “field of
activity” is no more valid. The question really is one of real likelihood of
confusion or deception among the consumers and the resultant damage
to the plaintiff. The legal position on the subject is fairly well settled by a
long line of decisions rendered by this Court as also the Apex Court.
13.

In Sunder Parmanand Lalwani and Ors. V. Caltex (India) Ltd.,

AIR 1969 Bombay 24, a division bench of Bombay High court while
dealing with the question whether there was any tangible danger of
confusion between Caltex watches and Caltex petrol and various other oil
products of the opponents, observed that although the goods were totally
different and there was no trade connection between them still there was
a likelihood of deception or confusion. The court observed :

“On the facts of this case, we have no hesitation
in holding that a large number of persons, if they
see or hear about the mark “Caltex” in
connection with watches, would be led to think
that the watches were in some way connected
with the opponents, or they would at least
wonder whether they were in any way connected
with the opponents. Persons seeing the mark
attached to watches, which is a new class of
goods, would assume, or are most likely to
assume, that they originated from the proprietor
of the mark, namely, the opponents”
14.

In Bata India Ltd. V. M/s. Pyare Lal & Co. Meerut City and

Ors. AIR 1985 Allahabad 242, the Allahabad High Court was dealing
with a situation where the plaintiff was manufacturing shoes, while the
defendant was producing goods like foam and analogous products.
Rejecting the argument that there was no possibility of any deception on
the purchaser of foam materials in the market, the Court observed:

“This argument loses sight of an important
feature viz., how would a lay customer know in
the first place that the plaintiff was not
producing foam or foam material? How would
FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 8 of 12

the customers know that Bata were not
producing foam? It is well known that the name
represented makers of shoes and analogous
products, but a question would also arise in the
mind of the lay customers whether Bata were
also producing foam. Who is going to answer
this question? Does an ordinary customer ask
the seller as to whose product it is? The answer
generally is in the negative. He buys a thing on
the basis of his own impression.
xxxxxxxxx
Merely because the plaintiff in case is not
producing foam is not enough to hold that there
can be no passing off action in respect of the user
of the name 'Bata' to the products marketed by
the defendants. The user of the name or mark
'Bata' by the defendants is indicative of their
intent. It appears that they desire to market
their foam with a view to gain some advantage in
a competitive market. As seen earlier, there is
no plausible explanation as to why the name
'Bata' was being used by them. A passing off
action would lie even if the defendants were not
manufacturing or producing any goods similar to
that of the plaintiff. A passing off action would
lie where a misrepresentation is likely to be
caused or a wrong impression created, as if the
product was of some one else.”
15.

In

Daimler

Benz

Aktiegesellschft

and

Anr.

V.

Hybo

Hindustan, AIR 1994 Delhi 239, a single judge of this court while
issuing an injunction against the defendant from using the word ‘Benz’
with reference to any underwear manufactured by them in the face of the
same being used by the plaintiffs therein for their cars, observed as
follows:

“5. I think it will be a great perversion of the
law relating to Trade Marks and Designs, if a
mark of the order of the “Mercedes Benz” its
symbol, a three pointed star, is humbled by
indiscriminate colourable imitation by all or
anyone; whether they are persons, who make
undergarments like the defendant, or any one
else. Such a mark is not up for grabs – not
available to any person to apply upon anything or
goods. That name which is well known in India
and world wide, with respect to cars, as is its
symbol a three pointed star.”

FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 9 of 12

16.

In Kiriloskar Diesel Recon (P) Ltd. Vs. Kirloskar Proprietary

Ltd., AIR 1996 Bombay 149, Bombay High Court while dealing with a
similar contention as is raised in the present case observed as follows:
“13. The expression 'common field of activity' was
coined by Wynne-Parry J. in McCulloch v. Levis A.
May (Product Distributors) Ltd. polularly known as
'Uncle Mac' case reported in 65 RPC 58 in which he
held that its presence or absence was conclusive in
determining whether or not there was passing off.
However, the requirement that a 'common field of
activity' is conclusive in determining whether there
can be passing off has been extensively criticised by
Manning J. in the case of Henderson v. Radio Corp.
Pty. reportded in (1969) RPC 218 holding that it
would be unsafe to adopt the view expressed in
McCulloch v. Mary that what has been called a
common field of activity must be established in every
case to entitle the plaintiff to succeed. He further held
that it is going too far to say that the absence of this
so-called common field of activity necessarily bars a
plaintiff from relief. With the passage of time, law on
requirement of common field of activity in a passing
off action has radically changed. There is no
requirement for a common field of activity to found a
claim in passing off. In Marage Studies v. Counter
Feat Clothing Co. Ltd. reported in (1991) FSR 145,
Browne Wilkison V-C said that the so-called
requirement of the law that there should be a common
field of activity is now discredited. The real question
in each case is whether there is as a result of
misrepresentation a real likelihood of confusion or
deception of the public and consequent damage to the
plaintiff. The focus is shifted from the external
objective test of making comparison of activities of
parties to the state of mind of public in deciding
whether it will be confused.”

17.

The Bombay High Court after observing that with the passage of

time and reputation acquired, the trade mark ‘Kirloskar’ has acquired
the secondary meaning and has become almost the household word laid
down the following proposition in para 14 of the judgment:
“14. In the case of trading name which has become
almost a household word and under which trading
name a variety of activities are undertaken, a passing
off can successfully lie if the defendant has adopted
identical or similar trading name and even when the
defendant does not carry on similar activity. Even if
the defendant's activities in such circumstances, are
remote, the same are likely to be presumed a possible
extension of plaintiff's business or activities.”
FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 10 of 12

18

In Mahendra & Mahendra Paper Mills Ltd. V. Mahindra

Mahindra Ltd. 2002(2) SCC 147, the Apex Court after extensively
quoting with approval from the above judgments summed up the
principles applicable in deciding an application for interim injunction as
follows:

“Without intending to be exhaustive some of the
principles which are accepted as well settled may
be stated thus: that whether there is a likelihood
of deception or confusion arising is a matter for
decision by the court, and no witness is entitled
to say whether the mark is likely to deceive or to
cause confusion; that all factors which are likely
to create or allay deception or confusion must be
considered
in
combination;
that
broadly
speaking, factors creating confusion would be,
for example, the nature of the market itself, the
class of customers, the extent of the reputation,
the trade channels, the existence of any
connection in course of trade, and others.”
19.

We have, in the light of the above pronouncements, no difficulty in

holding that the dissimilarity in some of the products in which the parties
trade does not make any material difference insofar as the grant or
refusal

of

injunction

against

the

defendants

in

the

facts

and

circumstances of this case are concerned.
20.

In the result, we allow this appeal and modify the order passed by

the learned Single Judge to the extent that the ex parte ad interim order
dated 27th June, 2003 in I.A. 6716/2003 is made absolute and the
defendants-respondents restrained from using the trademark/ names
LNT/ELENTE or other deceptively similar name in relation to any of its
products. We, however, make it clear that the defendants shall be free
to use Lachmi Narain Trades only in its full and extended form as a
trademark/logo for marketing its goods. No costs.
Cross-Objections
In the light of our findings and order in the FAO(OS)601/2006
FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 11 of 12

there is no merit in these cross-objections which fail and are hereby
dismissed but in the circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

VEENA BIRBAL, J
FEBRUARY 08, 2008
anb

FAO(OS)601/2006

Page 12 of 12

