*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO(OS) 507/2007
Date of Decision : 8th February, 2008

NUMERO UNO INTERNATIONAL LTD.
..... Appellant
Through : Mr. Arun Jaitley, Sr. Adv. with
Ms. Bina Madhvan, Mr. Hemal K. Sheth, Advs.
versus

PRASAR BHARTI

..... Respondent
Through : Mr. Rajeev Sharma, Mr.Abhishek
Birthray, Mr. N.R. Mohapatra, Advs.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

Yes
Yes

Per THAKUR, J.
Based entirely on the admissions of the appellant company, Justice
S.C. Aggarwal, a former Judge of the Supreme Court of India has, acting as
sole arbitrator, passed an interim award directing the appellant herein to
pay to the respondent Prasar Bharti the admitted amount of Rs.7.69 crores
outstanding against the former. Aggrieved by the said interim award, the
appellant filed a petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 before a Single Judge of this Court who has
dismissed the same by his order dated 20th August, 2007.

The learned

Single Judge was of the opinion that the arbitrator had given cogent reasons
FAO(OS)507/2007

page 1 of 7

for making an interim award in favour of the respondent. He repelled the
contention urged on behalf of the appellant that the provisions of Order 12
Rule 6 of the CPC were not applicable and declared that the arbitrator was
competent to make an interim award on the admissions of the parties
contained either in the pleadings or in the correspondence exchanged
between the parties. The Court relied upon two letters, one dated 17th May,
2001 and the other dated 31st May, 2001 to hold that a candid admission
had been made by the appellant company as to the outstanding liability of
Rs.7.69 Crores. The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the
said order.
2.

Appearing for the appellant, Mr. Jaitley made a solitary submission

before us. He contended that while the arbitrator was correct in holding
that the appellant had admitted its liability to the extent of Rs.7.69 Crores,
the arbitrator should have, while making an interim award, also kept in
view the fact that the appellant had made a counter claim of Rs.25 Crores
before him. He submitted that the interim award may have been justified if
the appellant had not made any counter claim, but once the counter claim
was made, the arbitrator could not have, relying upon the admissions of the
appellant, made any interim award or directed payment of the amount, no
matter the pleadings and the correspondence on the subject clearly
admitted the liability of the appellant to the tune of Rs.7.69 Crores.
3.

On behalf of the respondent, it was on the other hand argued by Mr.

Sharma that the arbitrator's power to make an interim arbitral award not
being in dispute, the only question which fell for consideration was whether
the award suffered from any patent illegality or perversity. He drew our
attention to Section 2(c) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 to
argue that an arbitral award includes an interim award. He placed reliance
upon Section 31(6) of the Act to contend that the tribunal may, at any time

FAO(OS)507/2007

page 2 of 7

during the arbitral proceedings, make an interim arbitral award.

He

submitted that the arbitrator had, in the instant case, correctly appraised
the material on record including the pleadings of the parties and the
correspondence which contained a clear acknowledgement of the liability of
the appellant to the tune of Rs.7.69 Crores after giving adjustment of the
payments made and even the set off claimed by it.

The fact that the

respondent had made a counter claim could not therefore, argued the
learned counsel, make any difference insofar as the power of the arbitrator
to make an interim award was concerned. Relying upon the decision of a
Division Bench of this Court in Cofex Exports Limited v. Canara Bank
AIR 1997 Delhi 355, Mr. Sharma argued that a defendant could not be
compelled to plead a set off or make a counter claim. Either one of those
could be maintained in an independent action and that even if a set off was
claimed or a counter claim made, the Court could, in appropriate cases,
direct the same to be tried separately.

The pendency of a counter claim

before the arbitrator was therefore wholly immaterial for determining
whether or not the interim award was legally valid. It was further argued
by Mr. Sharma that the counter claim in the instant case was ex-facie
frivolous and vexatious in nature and had been raised belatedly only in the
arbitral proceedings, long after the making of the admissions in the
correspondence exchanged between the parties.
4.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions made at

the bar. Section 31(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 clearly
empowers the arbitral tribunal to make an interim arbitral award on any
matter with respect to which it may make a final arbitral award. It reads :
“31. Form and contents of arbitral award. (1)
xxxxx
(2)
xxxxx
(3)
xxxxx
(4)
xxxxx
(5)
xxxxx
FAO(OS)507/2007

page 3 of 7

5.

(6)
The arbitral tribunal may, at any time during the arbitral
proceedings, make an interim arbitral award on any matter with
respect to which it may make a final arbitral award.”
In the light of the above, it is not open to the appellant to argue that

the interim award made by the arbitrator was incompetent. In fairness to
Mr. Jaitley, we must record that he did not question the jurisdiction of the
arbitrator to make an interim award as was, it appears, sought to be done
before the learned Single Judge at some stage.
6.

What then remains to be examined is whether the pendency of a

counter claim made by the appellant before the arbitrator was sufficient to
dis-entitle the respondent Prasar Bharti from claiming even the admitted
amount due from the appellant by way of an interim award in its favour.
According to Mr. Jaitley, since the claim made by the respondent and the
counter claim of the appellant were eventually to result in a net amount
which one or the other party would be required to pay, the payment of any
amount which the appellant may have admitted to be due and payable out
of the claim made by the respondent would not meet the ends of justice nor
was any such payment otherwise necessary. We do not however think so.
The legal position as regards the nature of a set off and counter claim was
examined in Canara Bank's case (supra) and summarised thus:
“34.
(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)

(5)

(6)
(7)
FAO(OS)507/2007

The following things are in common in set off and counter
claim:
None should exceed the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction
of the Court;
Both are pleaded in the written statement, if the law
governing the Court permits such plea being raised by the
defendant in the written statement;
The plaintiff is expected to file a written statement in
answer to a claim for set off or to a counter claim;
Even if permitted to be raised, the Court may in
appropriate cases direct for set off or counter claim being
tried separately;
A defendant cannot be compelled to plead a set off nor a
counter claim; he may as well maintain an independent
action for enforcing the claim forming subject matter f set
off or counter claim.
Both are liable to payment of court fee under Sch. 1 Art. 1
of Court-fees Act, 1870.
Dismissal of suit or its withdrawal would not debar a set
page 4 of 7

7.

off or counter claim being tried, may be followed by a
decree against the plaintiff.”
In the light of the above, there is no gainsaying that the making of a

counter claim is tantamounting to institution of an independent suit for
adjudication of the claim of the defendant. Not only court fee is payable on
the counter claim but the counter claim remains unaffected by the
withdrawal of the original suit evidently on the principle that the counter
claim is a suit in itself. So also the court has always the power to direct a
set off or counter claim being tried separately from the original suit. Such
being the legal nature and character of a counter claim, its pendency does
not denude the arbitrator of the power to make an interim award in the
original suit/claim if such an interim award is otherwise justified. What is
significant is that the legality of an interim award may be tested by
reference to the material on which it is based rather than the areas of
dispute that may still call for adjudication between the parties. If an interim
award on the basis of material available on record is not justified, the Court
may set aside the same under Section 34 of the Act. No interference with
an interim award would, however, be permissible only because the
defendant has made a counter claim or because some areas of dispute
independent of the area covered by the interim award remains to be
resolved.
8.

The issue can be viewed from yet another angle. The making of the

interim award ensures to the party in whose favour the same is made the
payment of an amount which is an admitted position payable to it. There is
no reason why the payment of what is admittedly due should await the
determination of other disputes which may take years before they are finally
resolved.

If at the conclusion of the arbitral proceedings, the defendant

were to succeed in his claim, either wholly or partially, and if after
adjustment of the amounts found payable to the plaintiff, any amount is

FAO(OS)507/2007

page 5 of 7

eventually held payable to one or the other party, the arbitrator can
undoubtedly make such an adjustment and direct payment of the amount to
one or the other party, as the case may be. The final award would in any
such case also take into consideration the payments, if any, made under the
interim award. Suffice it to say that the making of the interim award in no
way prevents the arbitrator from making adjustments of the amount in the
final award and doing complete justice between the parties. By that logic
even if we assume that the Prasar Bharti was to fail in substantiating its
further claims which are disputed and the appellant were to succeed wholly
in the counter claim that it has made, all that it would result in is an award
in favour of the appellant.

There is, therefore, no inherent illegality or

perversity in the making of the interim award by the arbitrator so as to call
for interference by this Court under Section 34 of the Act.
9.

As regards the question whether the amount of Rs.7.69 Crores was

admittedly payable to the respondent, Mr. Jaitley did not make any attempt
to assail that finding and in our opinion rightly so. The arbitrator has, on
the basis of the pleadings of the parties and the correspondences exchanged
between them, clearly arrived at a finding that a sum of Rs.7.69 Crores is
outstanding against the appellant on its known admissions. The arbitrator
has in that regard observed :
“Having regard to the fact that the amount has been admitted by
the Respondent as payable to the Claimant against the amounts
payable against the bills for telecast of episodes of various serials,
I consider it appropriate to make an interim award in favour of
the Claimant directing the Respondent to make a payment of a
sum of Rs.7.69 Crores to the Claimant towards discharge of its
admitted liability. This interim award will be taken into
consideration at the time of making the final award after
determination of the amount payable by the Respondent to the
Claimant under the Statement of Claim, including the claim
regarding interest as well as the amount found payable to the
Respondent under the counter claim.
Accordingly I make this Interim Award and direct the
Respondent to pay to the Claimant a sum of Rs.7.69 crores
(Rupees seven crores sixty nine lakhs only) against the claim
FAO(OS)507/2007

page 6 of 7

10.

made by the Claimant, which is the subject-matter of these
arbitral proceedings.”
In the light of the above findings which have been affirmed even by

the learned Single Judge, there is no room for taking a contrary view by us.
In the result, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed but in the
circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

VEENA BIRBAL, J
FEBRUARY 08, 2008
pk

FAO(OS)507/2007

page 7 of 7

