*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C)6526/2007
Date of Decision: 8TH FEBRUARY, 2008

GRAMIN UTHAN AVAM JANKALYAN SAMITI (REGD.)
..... Appellant
Through:

Mr. Sanjay Jain, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Pankaj
Vivek and Mr. Sarfaraj, advs.

versus

GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Sandeep Agarwal, Adv. for DJB
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

Per Thakur, J:
This is yet another writ petition filed by the petitioner samiti in public
interest. The earlier two petitions, like the present one, also raised public
health related issues for the benefit of those residing in village Kapashera in
Delhi. W.P.(C)3637/1998 filed by the petitioner highlighted the unhygienic
living conditions arising out of the neglect of the State Authorities giving
rise to serious concerns as to public health environment in the village and
apprehension of epidemics like Dengue, Malaria and other diseases
spreading in the area. The petition, in particular, brought into focus the
poor sanitary conditions prevailing in the area on account of the sewage
from the villages in the vicinity getting discharged into a drain that
WP(C)6526/2007

Page 1 of 15

commences close to Rajokhri crossing on the NH-8 and flows through the
villages along the Oberoi Farms to finally empty itself into the Najafgarh
drain west of village Bijwasan. Intervention of this Court was sought by the
petitioner in an attempt to protect the rights guaranteed to the villagers
under Article 21 of the Constitution. That petition was finally disposed of by
this Court by an order dated 18th April, 2001 with a direction that industries
located in HSIDC, Udyog Vihar, Phase-V, Gurgaon and elsewhere in
Gurgaon shall be surveyed and action in accordance with law taken in case
the same were found to be causing environmental or water pollution. The
Court noted that HSIDC was setting up three parks in the area in Phase I, II
and III which would improve the environment of the area. Permission was
also granted to the petitioner society to revive the writ petition if the need
so arose.
2.

It was in pursuance to the above that the petitioner filed CM

5709/2001 for revival of the petition and for directions to the Delhi Jal
Board and other authorities. The said application was then disposed of with
several directions to the respondents including the Delhi Jal Board and the
Irrigation and Flood Control Department of Delhi Government to maintain
and clean the Bijwasan drain and to take action against those found
polluting or indulging in any activity which contributes to the pollution of
the said drain. A direction was also issued to the HSIDC to ensure that no
polluted effluent is discharged into the drain apart from a direction to the
HSIDC to ensure that the industries located in HSIDC complex do not cause
any such pollution. The MCD was directed to clear the garbage dumped
along nala flowing behind Kapashera and Oberai Farm and to ensure that
the same is not made a place for dumping of garbage by the residents of the
area.

Directions to provide public receptacle, depots and places for

temporary dumping of garbage were also issued to the MCD and a
Committee consisting of an officer of the MCD, the police, the DPCC and
citizens constituted to help keep a vigil and to ensure compliance of the
WP(C)6526/2007

Page 2 of 15

directions of the Court.
3.

Then came W.P.(C)3502/2000 and connected matters in which the

petitioners drew the attention of the Court towards a total lack of concern
by the respondents towards the issue of water management in the city of
The petitioners inter alia alleged that the distribution losses of

Delhi.

drinking water on account of leakage of pipes, pilferage, overflowing of
storage tank etc. could be minimized by taking proper corrective measures
by the Government of Delhi and Delhi Jal Board. Directions for rescuing
water bodies in the city of Delhi from unauthorized occupation and reviving
the same were also prayed for apart from directions to the Government to
frame schemes for recycling of water by water harvesting.
4.

In the above petition this court by order dated 1st March, 2006

constituted a nodal agency headed by the Chief Secretary, Government of
NCT of Delhi to coordinate with the Departments concerned to deal with
the problem pointed out by the petitioners including discharge of sewage
and sullage in storm water drains which ultimately pollute river Yamuna.
The court had emphasized the need for the authorities to act in coordination
to achieve the target of cleaning the river and preventing sewage and
sullage form flowing into the storm water drains. It had also noted the
assurance given by the officers who were present in the Court that they
would act promptly and that the Delhi Jal Board would appoint consultants
by 31st March, 2006 for submitting a feasibility and study report with
regard to the mechanism and method of treating the problem of sewage and
sullage.

The consultants were then to submit their report within four

months whereupon the respondents had to indicate the time-frame within
which the same would be implemented. The nodal agency was directed to
constantly monitor the progress made by the concerned agencies and
submit monthly reports to this Court.
5.

The respondents pursuant to the directions issued by this court, filed

WP(C)6526/2007

Page 3 of 15

an affidavit inter alia stating that the nodal agency has held half a dozen
meetings with Divisional Commissioner, MCD, DDA, ASI, IIT, DPCC, PWD
and Delhi Jal Board officials and undertaken a comprehensive review of the
progress made in connection with the plan for providing sewage facilities to
all rural villages. It was further stated that the tender documents for all the
189 villages in Delhi had been received from the consultants and the
proposals made in the same were being technically scrutinized.

The

affidavit went on to state that the villages had been divided into three
categories. According to the respondents 74 villages were being connected
with the existing peripheral sewage system, 66 villages to be covered
through 37 waste stabilization ponds and 49 villages were to be covered
through 19 Sewage Treatment Plants. The affidavit also expressed the hope
that an appropriate sewage disposal mechanism for all 189 villages will be
in place by the end of 2009.
6.

This Court recorded its satisfaction with the steps taken by the

Committee headed by the Chief Secretary making it unnecessary for the
Court to monitor the implementation of the schemes any further. WP(C)
3502/2000 and the connected matters were in that view disposed of by this
Court with the following observations:
“8. In the light of the steps that have been taken
by the respondents and the fact that the entire exercise
and progress made in that direction is being monitored
by the Committee headed by the Chief Secretary,
nothing further in our opinion needs to be done in the
present proceedings. These proceedings have in fact
served the purpose for which the same were instituted
inasmuch as the authorities concerned have been
sensitized about their duties and an action plan drawn
up for achieving the broad objectives that have been
identified. What now remains to be done is execution of
the proposals which is a matter that need not be
necessarily monitored closely by this court. This is so
particularly when the Committee appointed by this Court
is doing a satisfactory work in the matter and monitoring
the progress of work on a regular basis. All that we
need say is that the Committee appointed by this Court
WP(C)6526/2007

Page 4 of 15

would continue to monitor the progress made in the
execution of the plans and the schemes that have been
formulated and ensured that the objections enumerated
above which are laudable in themselves are achieved in
good time. Minor issues such as whether a water body
can be retrieved and if so to what extent are also
matters that can in our opinion be left to the Committee
to be suitably handled at its own level. We have no doubt
that in case the petitioners have any concrete proposals
or suggestions to make on the subject, they can do so
before the Committee, in which event, the Committee
would certainly take up the said proposals and
suggestions also for discussions and take suitable
decisions on the same at the appropriate level. Beyond
that, it is in our opinion neither necessary nor proper for
us to say anything at this stage. The writ petitions are
with the above observations, disposed of leaving the
parties to bear their own costs.”

7.

Pursuant to the aforementioned directions, the respondent appear to

have initiated steps for the construction of a sewage treatment plant (STP
for short) for treating sewage of 5 villages

viz; Mehrauli, Rangpuri,

Kapashera, Samhalka and Rajokari with a total population of about 2,50,000
people.

The proposed STP has to come up over an area of 4 to 5 acres

comprising khasras No. 23//4, 6/1, 6/2, 6/3, 7/1, 7/2, 15/1, 15/2, 15/3 and
24//11 in the revenue estate of village Kapashera. The residents of village
Kapashera, it appears, were unhappy with the location of the proposed STP
in which connection they filed representations to the Deputy Commissioner
and their elected representatives including the Chief Minister of NCT of
Delhi pointing out that the proposed STP was being located too close to the
Lal Dora Habitation of village Kapashera. It was further alleged that the
construction of STP would adversely affect the environment in the vicinity
on account of breeding of mosquitoes, spread of viral diseases and foul
smell. A request for re-locating the proposed STP was accordingly made by
them. The petitioner has placed on record letters addressed by the Member
of Legislative Assembly, Kapashera and by the Councilor MCD, Kapashera
to the Lt. Governor and to the Chief Minister recommending a change in the

WP(C)6526/2007

Page 5 of 15

location of the STP. They have also placed on record a communication dated
10.8.2007 sent from the office of the Lt. Governor, Delhi reassuring the
residents of Kapashera through Shri Anil Yadav Councilor MCD, Kapashera
that the proposed construction of STP, would in no way lead to any pollution
or spread of diseases. The communication further states that almost all the
STPs are located within the Lal Dora Habitats and that the same in no way
pollute environment or spread disease.
8.

In the present petition filed by the petitioner society, the petitioner

prays for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to relocate the
sewage treatment plant far away from the village habitate of Kapashera and
to formulate proper guidelines for location of STPs in residential areas so
that living environment for those living in vicinity is not degraded by the
obnoxious emissions from such STPs.
9.

When this petition came up for admission before this Court on

5.9.2007, the Court noticed that the prayer for relocation of the STP
proceeded on an assumption that the same would lead to pollution for the
villagers in the neighborhood. There was, however, nothing on record to
substantiate that allegation nor was there any averment in the petition that
an STP can by itself lead to pollution.

Mr. Jain, learned counsel for the

petitioner had, in that view, prayed for and was granted leave to amend the
petition and to incorporate appropriate averments and also to place on
record material in support of the plea that setting up of a sewage treatment
plant involved hazards of pollution for the inhabitant in the vicinity.

An

amended writ petition has been filed pursuant to the said order in which the
petitioner has primarily placed reliance upon the “Manual for Sewage and
Sewerage Treatment” prepared by an expert Committee of the Government
of India.

The petitioner alleges that in sewage treatment plants,

stabilization ponds are important design and engineering constituents. The
petitioner further alleges that the proposed STP at Kapashera is likely to

WP(C)6526/2007

Page 6 of 15

have a pond system. The petitioner has relied upon the manual to assert
that STPs using pond system should be located as far away as possible and
at least 200 metres from the residential area. Reliance is, in that regard,
placed upon para 15.4.1 of the manual which reads as under:
“15.4.1
Facultative pond sites should be located as far
away as practicable (at least 200 M) from habitations
or from any area likely to be built up within a
reasonable future period. If practicable the pond
should be located such that the directions of
preventing wind is towards uninhabitated areas.”
10.

In the light of the above, the petition alleges that the decision to

locate the proposed STP near village Kapashera is arbitrary and in violation
of the right to clean environment implicit in the right to life guaranteed
under article 21 of the constitution.
11.

Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Jain strenuously argued that STP

using pond system of sewage treatment gives rise to public health
considerations both in regard to design as also operation of the sewage
treatment and disposal.
discharge standard,

He urged that considerations like effluent

standards

for control of Toxic and

cumulative

substances in the food chain, potential for nitrate and microbial pollution of
ground waters deterioration of drinking water resources including wells and
deterioration of bathing water quality arise in relation to the sewage
treatment plants.

It is, therefore, necessary for the agencies engaged in

execution of such projects to address these concerns and take suitable
preventive and remedial measures. He further argued that as per the
manual on sewage and sewerage treatment, stabilization ponds system is
considered best suited and most commonly used for sewage. Relying upon
15.4.1 of the manual extracted earlier, he argued that the facultative ponds
system should be located as far away as practicable, at least 200 metres
from the habitation or from any area likely to be built up within reasonable
future period.
WP(C)6526/2007

In the present case, the proposed STP was according to
Page 7 of 15

Mr.Jain within a distance of less than 100 feet from the village habitat, thus
violating the norms set by the Expert Committee in the manual mentioned
above.

He argued that in the very nature of the process adopted for

treatment of sewage, the nuisance of breeding of mosquitoes' and emission
of foul smell and a possible spread of diseases were unavoidable.

The

apprehension of the villagers could not, therefore, be said to be unfounded,
argued the learned counsel.
12.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions made at

the bar and perused the record. Delhi, the capital of the largest democracy
in the world, is also known to be the third most polluted city that the world
knows. The need for improving the quality of life in the National Capital of
India was emphasized by the Supreme Court in a long line of decisions
delivered by their lordships in which a wide range of directions were issued
to rid Delhi of the label of being one of the dirtiest and the most polluted
city in the world. In M.C. Mehta V. Union of India (1992) 3 SCC 256
the Supreme Court while dealing with the question of treatment of sewage
in Delhi observed that the quality of life of those living in Delhi was
adversely affected by the absence of proper sewage treatment and the free
flow of untreated sewage almost everywhere in the city.

The Court

observed:
“A very grim picture emerges regarding increase of
pollution in the city of Delhi from the two affidavits filed
by Shri DS Negi, Secretary (Environment), Govt. of Delhi.
He has pointed out that the population of Delhi which
was about 17 lakh in 1951 has gone up to more than 94
lakhs as per the 1991 census. In fact, more than 4 lakh
people are being added to the population of Delhi every
year out of which about 3 lakh are migrants. Delhi has
been categorised as the fourth most polluted city in the
world with respect to concentration of Suspended
Particular Metal (SPM) in the ambient atmosphere as per
World Health Organisation Report, 1989. From NEERI's
annual report 1991 it is obvious that the major
contributions, so far as air pollution is concerned, is of
the vehicular traffic but the industries in the city are also
contributing about 30% of the air pollution. So far as the
discharge of effluent in Yamuna is concerned, the
industries are the prime contributors apart from the
MCD and NDMC which are also discharging sewage
directly into the river Yamuna. We are dealing with the
WP(C)6526/2007

Page 8 of 15

sewage problems in separate proceedings.”

13.

In an another order passed in the very same case on 21st April, 1995,

the Court emphasized the need for construction of STPs and observed:
“Treatment of sewage is of utmost importance for
health and for supply of pure water to the citizens of
Delhi. Any delay in this respect is health-hazard and
cannot be tolerated.”
14.

In Jai Narain & Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors. (1996) 1 SCC 9, the

Supreme Court once again noticed the dismal situation arising out of the
flow of untreated waste including sewage in the drains of Delhi including in
river Yamuna. The Court observed:
“11. Delhi - the capital of India - one of the world's great
and historic cities has come to be listed as third/fourth
most polluted and grubbiest city in the world. Apart from
air-pollution, the waters of river Yamuna are wholly
contaminated. It is a paradox that the Delhites - despite
river Yamuna being the primary source of water supply are discharging almost totality of untreated sewage into
the river. There are eighteen drains including Najafgarh
drain which carry industrial and domestic waste
including sewage to river Yamuna. Thirty eight smaller
drains fall into Najafgarh drain. The Najafgarh drain
basin is the biggest polluter to river Yamuna. Eight of the
drains including Najafgarh drain are untrapped, four fully
trapped and remaining six are partially trapped. All these
eighteen drains, by and large, carry untreated industrial
and domestic wastes and fall into river Yamuna. The river
Yamuna enters Delhi at Wazirabad in the North and
leaves at South after travelling a distance of about twenty
five kilometers. The water of river Yamuna till it enters
Najafgarh is fit for drinking after treatment, but the
confluence of Najafgarh drain and seventeen other drains
make the water heavily polluted. The water quality of
Yamuna, in Delhi stretch, is neither fit for drinking nor
for bathing. The Biochemcial Oxygen Demand (BOD)
level in the river has gone so high that no flora or fauna
can survive. It is of utmost importance and urgency to
complete the construction of the STP's in the city of
Delhi. The project is of great public importance. It is
indeed of National importance. We take judicial notice of
the fact that there was utmost urgency to acquire the
land in dispute and as such the emergency provisions of
the Act were rightly invoked. We reject the first
contention raised by the learned Counsel.”

15.

It was, in pursuance of the directions issued by their lordships in the

above decision followed by other directions issued from time to time, that
the process of setting up of sewage treatment plant was taken up on a war
footing.

It was only on account of the judicial intervention of the Apex

Court as also this Court that the Government and various statutory
WP(C)6526/2007

Page 9 of 15

authorities concerned with the process of setting up of sewage treatment
plants got activated resulting in setting up of a number of such plants at
different places in the city. Suffice it to say that the treatment of sewage by
setting up of proper STPs is seen by the Apex Court as also by this Court as
absolutely essential for reducing pollution resulting from free flow of
untreated sewage and sludge in the drains and open Nallahs that flow
through the capital.

Not only that the Court has more than once

emphasized the need for taking quick action even by invoking the
emergency provisions contained in the Land Acquisition Act to ensure that
the setting up of STPs is not delayed on account of the bureaucratic red
tapism or delaying tactics adopted by those affected by the acquisition of
the land.
16.

It is only when we see the setting up of the proposed STP at

Kapashera in the above backdrop that we can appreciate the true spirit in
which the exercise undertaken by the respondents has been initiated.
Superadded to the decisions delivered by the Supreme Court are the
directions issued by this Court in W.P.(C)3637/1998 and 3502/2000 in
which this Court had not only constituted a Nodal Agency headed by the
Chief Secretary of NCT of Delhi to co-ordinate with the department
concerned but also directed the said committee to constantly monitor the
progress made by the concerned agencies.

As noticed earlier, the Nodal

Agency has held half a dozen meetings with MCD, DDA, ASI, ITI, DPCC,
PWD and DJB officials to comprehensively review the progress made in the
matter of providing sewage facilities to all rural villages. The Court took
judicial notice of the fact that the Government had formulated an extensive
plan for connecting the existing peripheral sewage system in 74 villages and
providing stabilization ponds and sewage treatment plants in the same. The
Government has set a target of providing sewage disposal mechanism in all
the 189 Delhi villages by the end of 2009. The sewage treatment at village
Kapashera is a part of the said larger plan intended to deal on a scientific
WP(C)6526/2007

Page 10 of 15

basis with the problems of untreated sewage flowing in different drains and
nalas in and around the villages thereby creating serious health hazards for
the residents.
17.

We must mention to the credit of Mr. Jain that he did not find fault

with the objects sought to be achieved by the setting up of the STPs as
indeed there could be no two opinions on the question whether sewage
should or should not be treated.

What was argued by Mr. Jain was that the

location of the proposed STP at village Kapashera was not ideal and that
proposed STP could be shifted to another location at some distance from the
present location chosen by the respondents.
inability to accept that submission.

We, however, regret our

We say so for two distinct reasons.

Firstly, because the choice as to the location of proposed STP is a matter
which must be left to the executive. Whether or not a given place is ideal
for setting up a hospital, a school or even a sewage treatment plant and
whether or not another location is more suitable are matters that fall in the
realm of administrative discretion which the authorities are entitled to
exercise while taking a decision. A writ Court would not in the ordinary
course interfere with the exercise of any such discretion unless the decision
is so outrageously irrational that no reasonable person could countenance
the same.

The petitioner has, in the instant case, failed to establish any

such perversity in the choice made by the respondents as to the location of
the proposed STP. Just because the proposed STP could as well be set up at
another location or just because there are some peripheral advantages in
shifting to another location may not in itself be sufficient for the Court to
strike down the choice already made.

This is particularly so

because

another village would be equally resistant to the shifting of the STP in its
neighbourhood as the residents of Kapashera are.
18.

The second and an equally weighty reason that dissuades us from

interfering with the question whether the STP should or should not come up

WP(C)6526/2007

Page 11 of 15

at the present location is the fact that the said aspect has been examined by
experts on the subject and the monitoring committee headed by the Chief
Secretary.

If the concerns expressed by the petitioner and the elected

representatives of village Kapashera have been addressed and looked into
by experts who are totally dispassionate and objective in their assessment,
there is no reason why a Writ Court should disregard their opinion and
direct shifting of the location.

The experts have in their report to the

Monitoring Committee headed by the Chief Secretary observed:
“The existing conditions around the Lal Dora of
village Kapashere is extremely unhygienic. The open
drain gives a foul smell and is also used for dumping
of garbage, deal poultry etc. As informed by the DJB
at present untreated sewage is being discharged into
this open drain. This results in odour, mosquitoes,
nuisance in the vicinity and consequent adverse
impact on public health. Hence, in effect if the STP is
set up at Kapashere the air quality may in fact
improve. This has been certified by the DJB that with
the construction of STP as only treated effluent would
be discharged into the drain; the adverse impact on
public health would be mitigated to a large extent.
The officers of DJB were also of the opinion that in
case the site is changed then this will lead to further
litigation and a consequent delay in the setting up of
the STP.
An interaction with the villagers of Kapashere
reveals that the acquisition of the land is being
opposed essentially because of the low compensation
offered by the government as compared to the
prevailing market rates. It is the grievance of the
villagers that the land belonging to the original
habitants of the village is generally acquired while
the land owned by the outsiders who are generally
financially sound is not acquired. It has, therefore,
been proposed by the villagers that the land at Kh.
No. 157 of village Bijwasan, which is owned by a
company but are not original inhabitant of the village
be acquired for setting up of STP.
The following observations are made in context
of the present proposal and the observations of Sh.
Sajjan Kumar, Hon’ble M.P. in the meeting held
under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Delhi.
1. There are no norms available with respect to the
location of STPs. It would be difficult to list out norms
in view of the heavy urbanization in Delhi.
2. The land at Kapashere village for setting up of a
STP of about 5 MGD capacity for 5 villages was
identified by the consultant and officers of the DJB in
consultation with officials of DC (SW) after
considering all technical and financial aspects
relating to setting up of STP.
3. The land located in Kh. No. 157 of village Bijwasan
as suggested by the Hon’ble M.P. was also found
suitable by the officers of the DJB for setting up of
WP(C)6526/2007

Page 12 of 15

STP. But there will be extra cost for providing trunk
sewer for an additional length of 700 m, which would
result in extra expenditure.
4. The inspection of the STP set up opposite Sector4B Vasant Kunj, which is of 5.2 MGD, reveals that
minimum odour is released from the plant.
5. The existing drain that flows along the phirni of
Kapashera village is extremely dirty and gives
unbearable smell and the situation would surely
improve once the STP is set up.
6. The acquisition of land at Kapashera as per details
already given has been allowed by Hon’ble LG, Delhi
under Section 17(1) and 17(4) which has been
notified on 23/8/07 and published in Newspapers on
01.09.2007. As per demand letter 80% cost of land
amounting to Rs.73,14,944/- has been deposited by
Delhi Jal Board on 10.9.2007 with Deputy Secretary
(L&B). Further notification of land for possession of
land is under process.
7. The officers of the DJB were of the opinion that in
case the site as proposed by the Hon’ble M.P. which
is presently under the Bhumidari rights of M/s Akash
Ford Inter Pvt. Ltd., Alipur Road, New Delhi (which it
is informed is owned by the Oberoi group) is acquired
then it may lead to protracted litigation and resultant
delay in the project.
8. If the STP is set up at the new site then it may also
involve acquisition of part of the land of the holdings
of Dharamvir S/o Ram Mehar, Dilavar Singh S/o Late
Makhan Lal, M/s Kooka Investment Finance Pvt. Ltd.,
M/s Akash Ford Inter Pvt. Ltd and Jagmal Singh S/o
Sher Singh (Bhumidars and residents of village
Kapashera). This process can also result in agitation,
litigation etc.
9. The interaction with some residents of village
Kapashera reveals that the grievance is more due to
low compensation and less because of possible air
pollution. This is further corroborated by the fact that
at present the opposition is not from the villagers in
general but the family whose land is being acquired.
10. More than half the land proposed to be acquired
at Kapashera belongs to M/s Deepak Resorts and
Hotels Pvt. Ltd., (notification under section 4 and 17
of the Land Acquisition Act have already been
published) who are not original inhabitants of the
village. Moreover this land has been sold to these
companies by the other bhumidars, part of whose
holdings is also under acquisition.
It may also be mentioned that the land at Kh.
No. 157 of village Bijwasan recorded in the name of a
company measures around 10 acres of which a part
would be required to be acquired in case the site of
the proposed STP is shifted. If in due course of time
the capacity of the STP would be required to be
enhanced then this site could be the most appropriate
in case the entire land is acquired.
To summarize it may be stated that the present
site for which acquisition proceedings have already
been initiated is appropriate for setting up for the
STP. In view of the objections received with regard to
the settling up of STP in the present site and in case
the government decides to relocate the site then the
land bearing Kh. No. 157 of Village Bijwasan is found
WP(C)6526/2007

Page 13 of 15

to be fit for setting up the STP. However, there could
be some financial implications as the site at Bijwasan
is about 700 meters away from the identified site. The
relocation of site could lead to protracted litigation
and also delay in execution of Sewerage Treatment
Plant.
The Chief Secretary in the meeting held on
10.9.2007 had desired that after the report is
submitted by the committee then the site may be
visited by the Pr. Secretary (Revenue) and the Chief
Executive Officer, Delhi Jal Board.
(MCT Pareva)

(R.K. Jain)

Chief Engineer/I & FC

Chief Engineer/DJB

(RAJIV KALE)
Deputy Commissioner/SW “

(emphasis supplied)

19.

The lack of necessary expertise with the Court and the very nature of

the controversy involving determination of disputed questions of facts
makes it difficult for this Court to strike a discordant note and
authoritatively hold that the present location is either unsuitable or that an
alternative location suggested by the petitioners would prove to be more
appropriated.
20.

So also the argument that the proposed STP does not address public

health considerations as required by the manual on Sewarage and Sewer
treatment prepared by the expert committee of the Government of India
does not appear to be correct. It is not the case of the petitioner society
that the setting up of the STP would adversely affect anyone of the public
health concerns that the manual enumerates. These concerns as per the
manual are in the following areas:
“e)

Public Health

Public health considerations pervade through
all aspects of design and operation of sewage
treatment and disposal projects. Some aspects have
already been referred to earlier.
Public health
concepts are built into various bye laws, regulations
and codes of practice which must be observed, such
as:
i)
WP(C)6526/2007

effluent

discharge

standards

including
Page 14 of 15

permissible microbial and helminthic quality
requirements.
ii)
iii)

potential for nitrate and microbial pollution of
ground waters.

iv)

deterioration of
including wells

v)

deterioration of bathing water quality

vi)

21.

standards
for
control
of
toxic
and
accumulative substances in the food chain.

control measures for health and safety of
sewage plant operations and sewage farm
workers who are exposed to or handle raw
and/or treated sewage.”

drinking

water

resources

The report submitted by the consultants appointed for the project

takes note of the above areas of concern and does not recommend any
change in the location of the STP on the ground of any apprehension on any
one of the above counts.

That facultative ponds ought to be 200 meters

away from the habitation as suggested in para 15.4.1 of the manual can at
best be said to be recommendatory which aspect may be kept in view by the
authorities while selecting the site.

That would, however, be far from

saying that the 200 ms. from the habitation is a statutory requirement
which would render illegal the construction of the STP within 200 meters.
There is, in any case, no material before us to suggest that STP in the
present case would grossly violate the norm suggested in the manual. We,
therefore, see no real and compelling reason for interference in public
interest. This writ petition, accordingly, fails and is hereby dismissed but in
the circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

FEBRUARY 08, 2008

VEENA BIRBAL, J

anb

WP(C)6526/2007

Page 15 of 15

