*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 8791/2007
Date of Decision: 8th February, 2008
BAIJ NATH AGGARWAL DHARAMARTH TRUST SOCIETY
REGD. & ANR.
..... Petitioners
Through
Mr. Sanjay Parikh, Mr. Jitin Sahni,
Ms. Mamta Saxena, advs.
versus
LT.GOVERNOR OF DELHI & ANR.
..... Respondents
Through
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL

1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to
see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes
Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

T.S. Thakur,J

Dismissal of two earlier writ petitions filed by the petitioner has
not deterred the petitioner from filing the present writ petition to
challenge the legality of the acquisition proceedings initiated by the
respondents. What is significant is that the Special Leave Petitions
filed against the orders passed by this order were also dismissed by
the Supreme Court both on the ground of limitation as also on merits.
The finality thus attained by the orders notwithstanding the
petitioner seeks to re-agitate the issues touching the validity of the
proceedings in the present third round of litigation. The controversy
arises in the following circumstances :2.

By a composite notification dated 27th September, 2000 issued

W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 1 of 9

under Section 4 and 17 of the Land Acquisition Act, land measuring
18 bigha and 13 biswa situate in Survey No. 270 of Village Bahapur,
Delhi owned by the petitioner trust was notified for acquisition for
the public purpose of providing housing accommodation to
government servants. A Declaration under Section 6 was pursuant to
the said notification was issued on 9.4.2001. Aggrieved by the said
notifications, the petitioner trust filed WP(C) No. 6384/2000 in this
court during the pendency whereof it moved an application before
the Lieutenant Governor seeking de-notification and release of the
land. When the filing of the said application was brought to the
notice of the court hearing the writ petition, it passed an interim
order on 4th July, 2006 to the following effect :“The learned counsel for the petitioners submits that he
has moved an application before the Lt. Governor for denotification of the land sought to be acquired. The said
representation is stated to be still pending before the
Lt.Governor. The learned counsel for the respondent
states that a decision on petitioners’ representation shall
be taken expeditiously, not later than 7.8.2006. This
decision shall also be communicated to the petitioners
within two weeks from the date of the decision. The said
decision by way of an affidavit be placed on record before
the next date of hearing.”
3.

The prayer for de-notification of the land was pursuant to the

above direction examined by the respondents but declined in terms
of an order dated 21.8.06. The relevant portion of the order refusing
to denotify the land reads as under :“The land in question has been inspected by the staff of
the department and it was found that the two Banquet
W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 2 of 9

Halls were running their business on the open space
which was meant for school playground. Since the
society has blatantly violated the undertaking given
earlier and also that the land is still required for the
purpose of which it was notified, the representation of the
society for de-notification of land was considered and it
rejected by the competent authority.”
4.

Writ petition No. 6384/2000 was then heard and dismissed by a

Division Bench of this Court comprising Mukul Mudgal and S.
Muralidhar, JJ. who took the view that a prayer for de-notification of
the land before the Govt. tantamounted to giving up the challenge to
the validity of the impugned notification. The court observed :
“During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner
opted to seek de-notification of the land in question by
filing an application in terms of Section 48 of the Act.
Therefore, clearly, the petitioner gave up its challenge to
the validity of the notification under challenge”
5.

The Court on the above reasoning held that the writ petition no

longer survived for consideration and dismissed the petition giving
liberty to the petitioner to seek whatever remedies were available to
it as regards the rejection of its request for de-notification.

The

operative portion of the order passed by the court reads as under :
“In view of the request for de-notification having been
declined, the present petition no longer survives. It is
always open to the petitioner to seek whatever remedies
are available to it in law as regards the rejection of its
request for de-notification.
Accordingly this writ petition is dismissed. However,
interim order passed on 23.10.2000 by this Court shall
continue for one week from today, i.e., till 29.08.2006.”

W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 3 of 9

6.

Pursuant to the liberty given to it, the petitioner filed WP(C)

No. 13653-54/06 challenging the order passed by the Government
declining to denotify the land under Section 48. That petition was
dismissed by us by an order dated 18th September, 2007. This court
took the view that Section 48 of the Land Acquisition Act did not
create any enforceable right in the owner of the property to demand
de-notification of the land and that the request for de-notification had
been properly considered and rejected which rejection was not
vitiated by any perversity to warrant interference from this court.
The court observed :
“Section 48 of the Land Acquisition Act is, in our opinion,
a provision that simply enables the government to
withdraw from acquisition of any property at any time
before taking possession of the same. It does not create
any enforceable legal right in the owner of the property to
demand de-notification of the land. That apart, the
request for de-notification made by the petitioner appears
to have been considered and declined for reasons which
are neither irrelevant nor irrational or perverse to warrant
any interference from this Court.”
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, sought leave of the

court to seek such remedy as may be open to it in law against the
earlier order passed by the Division Bench in WP(C) No. 6384/2000
either by way of an appeal or a review petition which liberty was
granted subject to all just exceptions including limitation. A review
petition was then filed by the petitioner to seek recall of the order
dated 22nd August, 2006 in WP(C) No. 6384/2000. The said petition
also failed and was dismissed by a Division Bench comprising Mukul
W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 4 of 9

Mudgal and S. Muralidhar, JJ. by an order dated 12th October, 2007.
The petitioner then filed three Special Leave Petitions before the
Supreme Court against the three orders passed by this court in
WP(C) Nos. 6384/2000, 13653-54/2006 and Review Application No.
380/2007 in WP(C) No. 6384/2000 .

All these petitions were

dismissed by the Supreme Court by an order dated 23rd November,
2007 to the following effect :“UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
ORDER
SLP(C) No. ……CC 11030/2007 : The special leave
petition is dismissed on the ground of delay as well as on
merits.
SLP(C) No. 21346-21347 of 2007 : The special leave
petitions are dismissed on merits.
(A.D. Sharma)
Court Master
8.

(Phoolan Wati Arora)
Court Master”

The present writ petition has now been filed by the petitioner

once again challenging the validity of the acquisition proceedings.
9.

Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Parekh strenuously argued

that since the validity of the acquisition proceedings had not been
examined by this court in the earlier rounds of litigation, it was
legally open to the petitioner to maintain the present writ petition
and have the legality of the proceedings tested. He submitted that an
action for acquisition of land in exercise of powers of eminent
domain could not be said to have been given up without examining
W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 5 of 9

the legality of such action for otherwise it would amount to
approving any legal usurpation of the property owned by an
individual. He further contended that an act of a court could never
leave a person without a remedy and that a writ court could prevent
miscarriage of justice by invoking its inherent powers. The challenge
was not according to Mr. Parekh barred even by the principles of res
judicata or waiver or any such analogous principle in the present case
as the challenge to the validity of the acquisition proceedings had not
been examined or determined on merits in the earlier round of
litigation.
10.

On behalf of the respondents, it was per contra argued by Mr.

Poddar that the present writ petition was wholly misconceived in as
much as a second petition on the very same subject matter was not
legally maintainable.

He submitted that the challenge to the

acquisition proceedings having failed in the earlier round of litigation
and the order of dismissal passed by this court having been upheld
by the apex court, there was no justification for the petitioner to reagitate the same question on a fresh ground.

Relying upon the

decisions of the Supreme Court in Vikramjit Singh Versus State of
Madhya Pradesh, 1992 (Suppl.) 3 SCC 62 and Harjeet Singh @ Seeta
Versus State of Punjab and Another, 2002 (1) SCC 649, he argued that
this court could neither sit in judgment nor find fault with the view
taken by a Bench of coordinate jurisdiction and that judicial
W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 6 of 9

discipline required adherence to the doctrine of finality of decisions.
11.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions

made at the Bar. The notification impugned in the present petition
was admittedly challenged even in WP(C) No. 6384/2000.

That

challenge had eventually failed and the petition dismissed. The court
had taken the view that filing of a petition for de-notification of land
under Section 48 of the Land Acquisition Act tantamounted to giving
up the challenge to the validity of the notification although the
petitioner could question the decision of the Government whereby it
had declined to denotify the land. The petitioner, it is noteworthy
had not found fault with that reasoning. It accepted the view that
filing of a petition for de-notification tantamounted to accepting the
validity of the acquisition proceedings. It had, therefore, challenged
the refusal of the Government to denotify the land in WP(C) No.
13653-54/06. Unfortunately for it, the said petition also failed. The
petitioner then went back to the court that had dismissed the earlier
writ petition in a bid to persuade it to review the order of dismissal
and look into the validity of the acquisition proceedings.

That

petition was also dismissed thereby leaving no option for the
petitioner to challenge the validity of the dismissal order in the
Supreme Court. Even that attempt proved abortive for the petitioner.
The dismissal of the Special Leave Petitions against all the three
orders passed by this court gave a quietus to the controversy. It shut
W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 7 of 9

out the challenge to the acquisition proceedings as also the refusal of
the Government to denotify the land. Such being the position, there
is no legal principle on which the petitioner can file a second petition
to reagitate the very same controversy. It is trite that the matters that
have been finally settled cannot be reopened in a subsequent
proceeding for there can be no finality to judicial adjudications if
legal proceedings could be instituted consecutively one after the
other on the same subject matter and cause of action.

The legal

position in this regard is so well settled that we need not refer to
decisions to support the same. Reference to State of UP and Another
Versus Labh Chand, 1993 (2) SCC 495 should in our view suffice
where the court observed the principles of finality of decisions and
the doctrine of res judicata apart. Judicial discipline requires the
Court to respect the decision delivered by a court of coordinate
jurisdiction. We need only add that this court is not in the present
proceedings sitting in appeal over the view taken by another Bench
of coordinate jurisdiction.

It would, therefore, be legally

impermissible and indeed judicially improper to comment on the
view taken by the Bench hearing WP(C) No. 6384/2000 that the filing
of an application for de-notification of the land under Section 48 has
the legal effect of giving up the challenge to the validity of the
acquisition proceedings. The following passage from the decision of
the Supreme Court in Vikramjit Singh’s Case (supra) on the
W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 8 of 9

jurisdiction of a Bench of a coordinate jurisdiction to make
observations regarding decision delivered by another bench,

is

instructive :“No bench can comment on the functioning of a coordinate bench of the same court, much less sit in
judgment as an appellate court over its decision. That
which could not be done directly could also not be done
indirectly. Otherwise, a party aggrieved by an order
passed by one bench of the High Court would be tempted
to attempt to get the matter reopened before another
bench, and there would not be any end to such attempts.
Besides, it was not consistent with the judicial discipline
which must be maintained by courts both in the interest
of administration of justice by assuring the binding
nature of an order which becomes final, and the faith of
the people in the judiciary.”
12.

To the same effect is the decision in Harjeet

Singh’s Case

(Supra) relied upon by Mr. Poddar.
13.

In the circumstances, therefore, we see no room for any

interference with the acquisition proceedings the validity whereof
stands concluded by the orders already passed by this court and
upheld by the Supreme Court.
14.

This writ petition accordingly fails and is hereby dismissed but

in the circumstances without any orders as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

VEENA BIRBAL, J
FEBRUARY 08, 2008

manish
W.P.(C)8791/2007

Page 9 of 9

