*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 18832-33/2006
Date of Decision: 11th April, 2008
OSWAL MEDICAL STORES & ANR.
..... Petitioners
Through: Mr. Shashi Bhushan, adv.
versus

UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through: Mr. R.N. Singh, Adv. with
Mr. R.V. Sinha, adv. for R-1 to 4
Mr. Abhinit Das, adv. for R-5.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

T.S. Thakur, J:
A tender submitted by the petitioner in response to a notice
issued by the Joint Director, Central Government Health Scheme,
Meerut for supply of medicines to the beneficiaries of the said scheme
has been rejected on the ground that the petitioner did not have the
requisite license for the sale of the allopathic drugs under the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

Aggrieved by the said rejection, the

petitioner has filed the present writ petition inter alia for a writ of
certiorari quashing the order of rejection and for a mandamus
directing the respondents to appoint him as a local chemist for the
supply

of

medicines

to

Central

Government

Health

Scheme

beneficiaries.

W.P.(C)18832-33/2006

Page 1 of 7

2.

In terms of a tender notice dated 5th September, 2006, the

Central Government Health Scheme, Surajkund Road, Meerut invited
bids for day to day supply of drugs and medicines to the CGHS
Dispensaries situated in Meerut and other dispensaries that may be
opened from time to time. The successful bidder was to be appointed
as an authorized chemist for a period of 2 years from the date of
appointment unless short-closed by the Joint Director, CGHS, Meerut.
Apart from other stipulations, the tender notice required the bidders
to furnish copies of the relevant documents including a valid license in
the specified form for various categories of allopathic drugs issued by
the Drug Control Authority of the State under the Provisions of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. Clause 24 of the General Conditions
of the contract was in the following words:
“24. DOCUMENTS ESTABLISHING BIDDERS
ELIGIBILITY AND QUALIFICATION:
Bidder shall furnish as part of its bid, self
attested copies of the following documents
establishing the bidder's eligibility to bid and
its qualification to perform the contract, if the
bid is accepted, bidder shall produce originals
for verification:
(i)

A no conviction certificate from the State Drug
Controller stating that there is no case is
pending against the firm under the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act 7 & the rules made thereunder
as well as under Drugs Price Control order
issued from time to time.

(ii)

The supplier should hold valid licenses in
specified form for various categories of
Allopathic drugs issued by the Drug Control
Authority of the state under the provisions of
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

(iii)

A copy of PAN alloted to the firm.

(iv)

Sales
Tax
registration
and
clearance
certificate for the last three years from the
concerned STO (Sales Tax Officer)

(v)

The turnover of all bidders should be atleast
Rs.10(Ten) Lakh only in the last financial year.
The bidder must submit documentary evidence
like Profit and loss A/C, audited balance sheet
in support of their claim.

(vi)

Bank A/c details – A/c Number, Type of A/c

W.P.(C)18832-33/2006

Page 2 of 7

Bank's name and Address with MICR code on
the letter pad of the firm to facilitate the
payment through ECS.”(emphasis supplied)

3.

The petitioner submitted a tender which was, in the opinion of

the Purchase Committee appointed for the purpose, non-compliant
with the terms and conditions of the notice aforementioned inasmuch
as the petitioner did not have a duly renewed license in Form 21(C)
for sale and distribution of medicines as per the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 – a requirement that was mandatory. This resulted in the
rejection of the tender submitted by him, aggrieved whereof, the
petitioner has filed the present writ petition as already noticed earlier.
4.

In the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents 1 to 3,

it is inter alia stated that the rejection of the tender submitted by the
petitioner was justified in view of the fact that the petitioner had
admittedly failed to produce a duly renewed license in the form
prescribed under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

It is also

asserted that the acceptance of the bid of M/s Sahara Medical Store
did not suffer from any illegality or perversity to warrant interference
from this Court.
5.

The counter affidavit filed by respondent No. 5 has similarly

supported the acceptance of its bid and asserted that this Court had
no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the present writ petition as the
tenders were invited by an officer outside the jurisdiction of this Court
and culminated in a contract for supply of medicines at Meerut which
is beyond its territorial limits.
6.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

record.

The contract for supply of medicines on the terms settled

between the parties was limited to a period of 2 years and is
admittedly expiring in September, 2008.

Out of a total period of 2

years, the contract has, thus, already worked itself out for a period of
W.P.(C)18832-33/2006

Page 3 of 7

one year and nearly five months leaving just about 7 more months to
go.

Interference with the contract at this point of time may not,

therefore,

be feasible having regard to the fact that any such

interference would not only unsettle the arrangement made by the
respondents but also adversely affect the interest of the beneficiaries
of CGHS most of whom are retired senior citizens.
7.

Even independent of what is stated above, we do not find

anything illegal or perverse about the rejection of the tender
submitted by the petitioner.

As noticed earlier one of the

requirements, which was in its very nature mandatory in character
was that the chemist should have held a valid license for sale and
storage of drugs to be supplied to the CGHS dispensaries.

The

petitioner was not in a position to demonstrate either before the
Purchase Committee or before us that the license issued to him had
been duly renewed for the period during which he was to be
registered as local CGHS Chemist.

Learned counsel for the

petitioner, however, strenuously argued that the petitioner had made
an application for renewal and deposited the fee and that grant of
renewal would, therefore, be a matter of course. He further argued
that since the petitioner was actually running a chemist shop it clearly
proved that he held a license, no matter, the same was not renewed in
the form prescribed by Rule 63(B). In support of that submission, he
relied upon the observations made by the Joint Director, Central
Government Health

Scheme,

Meerut in

her

letter dated

14th

September, 2006 addressed to the Deputy Director, Administration,
CGHS, New Delhi. He also contended that the fact that the petitioner
had been allowed to continue making the supplies beyond the period
of its previous enlistment also showed that the petitioner was licensed
to carry on its business.
W.P.(C)18832-33/2006

Page 4 of 7

8.

We regret our inability to accept that submission of the learned

counsel. Rule 61 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 framed under
Section 18 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 inter alia forbids
distribution, sale or storage or exhibition or distribution of drug or
cosmetics except under and in accordance with law. Violation of the
said provision is an offense punishable under the Act. Rule 61 of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 in turn provides that a license for
sale, stock, exhibit or offer for sale or distribute the drugs of the
specified type shall be issued in the forms stipulated thereunder.
Rule 63 stipulates the duration of a license while Rule 63 (A) of the
Rules provides for the form in which the renewal has to be granted.
Rule 63(A) reads:
“63A. Certificate of renewal of sale licence.--A
certificate of renewal of a sale licence in Forms 20,
20A 20B[20F, 20G], 21, 21A and 21B shall be issued
in Form 21C.]”

9.

Reference may also be, at this stage, made to form 21(c) of the

forms prescribed under the Rules. The form is as under:
FORM 21 - C
[See Rule 63-A]
Certificate of renewal of [licence to sell, stock or exhibit or offer for sale
or distribute] drugs
1. Certified that licence No……………….in [Form 20, 20A, 20-B,
20-F, 20-G, 21, 21-A, 21-B], granted on the…………….to………….for sale
of the following drugs at the premises situated at……………has been
renewed for a period from…………………to……….
2. Categories or particulars of drugs……………………………….
3. Name (s) of qualified person (s) in-charge……………………..
Date……………

10.

Licensing Authority

It is not in dispute that the petitioner did not have a renewal

certificate in the above form on the date he submitted the bid nor has
any such renewal been granted to him till date. The mere fact that
the petitioner has applied for the grant of a renewal may not,

W.P.(C)18832-33/2006

Page 5 of 7

therefore, suffice. The argument that since an application for renewal
has been filed and the requisite fee deposited, the license should be
deemed to have been renewed has not impressed us. The Rules do
not, in our opinion, envisage a deemed renewal nor was any provision
to that effect brought to our notice. The Purchase Committee as also
the Director of Health, Government of India was, therefore, justified
in taking the view that an essential requirement of the tender notice
had not been satisfied by the petitioner inasmuch as he had not been
able to demonstrate renewal of the requisite license in its favour. So
also, the fact that the petitioner had made some supplies even beyond
the period of its previous enlistment had expired, did not, in our
opinion, make any difference.

What has to be seen is whether the

rejection of the tender submitted by the petitioner suffers from any
illegality or perversity. Our answer to that question is in the negative.
The requirement of a proper and duly renewed license under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act,1940 being a mandatory requirement not
only under the tender notice but also under the statute, the failure in
compliance of that requirement was sufficient to justify rejection of a
bid offered by the petitioner. Such being the position, the fact that
the petitioner's presence would have saved some money for the State
Exchequer is rendered wholly inconsequential. While financial angle
is important, no public authority can ignore the requirement of the
statute especially where the supplies of drugs and medicines are
concerned nor can the authority afford to deviate from the conditions
of the tender notice to benefit any single party.

Similarly, just

because the rejection of the petitioner's tender may have given rise to
a single tender situation also would be immaterial. What is significant
is that that the tender notice issued in the instant case was not the
first in the sequence. An earlier tender notice had also been issued in
W.P.(C)18832-33/2006

Page 6 of 7

response to which only one bidder had responded resulting in the
issue of a fresh tender notice. All told the grievance of the petitioner
on account of the alleged loss to the Exchequer by reason of a single
tenderer being left in the fray, would not in itself provide a good
ground for us to interfere having regard to the fact that the petitioner
was not himself eligible to make the supplies. The grievance against
the allotment of the work to respondent No. 5 is in any case not
coming from a party who was otherwise eligible or had shown interest
in the tendered supplies.
11.

In the result this writ petition fails and is hereby dismissed but

in the circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S.THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
APRIL 11, 2008
anb

W.P.(C)18832-33/2006

Page 7 of 7

