*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: 11th April, 2008

+

W.P.(C) 33/2008
MADU SINGH & ORS
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr. Pankaj Vivek, adv.

versus

UOI & ORS

..... Respondent
Through
Mr. D.N. Dewan, adv. for R-1.
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, adv. for LAC

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

Per Thakur, J :
This writ petition calls in question the validity of a notification
under Section 4 read with Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act
proposing to acquire land for the public purpose of setting up of a
Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) in village Kapashera, Tehsil Vasant
Kunj, New Delhi and a declaration under Section 6 of the said Act.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the issues that arise
for consideration in this petition are similar to the ones that fell for
determination of this Court in M/s Deepak Resorts & Hotels Pvt.

Ltd. And Anr. v. Union of India and Others (CWP 9005/2007)
and

Gramin

Uthan

Avam

Jankalyan

Samiti

(Regd.)

v.

Government of NCT of Delhi and Others (CWP 6526/2007).
Both these petitions have been dismissed by us by separate orders

WP(C) 33/2008

page 1 of 2

passed on 8th February, 2008. In Gramin Uthan's case, this Court has
examined issues concerning environment raised by the petitioner by
reference to the construction of the proposed sewage plant at
Kapashera and come to the conclusion that the said plant does not
violate any statutory provision nor does it involve any hazards of
environmental pollution for the residents of the area. This Court has
noticed that the Monitoring Committee headed by the Chief Secretary
had deputed experts to examine the suitability of the site for setting
up of the STP and recommended that the site in question was suitable
for that purpose.

The concerns expressed by the Samiti had thus

been looked into and found to be without any basis.

This Court,

therefore, found no reason for interference.
2.

In Deepak Resorts case, the validity of the impugned notification

under Section 4 and 17 and declaration under Section 6 of the Land
Acquisition Act were examined by this Court.

Repelling the

contentions urged by the petitioners, this Court found that neither the
preliminary notification under Section 4 read with Section 17 of the
Act nor the declaration under Section 6 suffered from any illegality or
irregularity to call for any interference. The questions raised in this
petition, thus, stand fully answered by the said two decisions.
Consequently, this petition must fail on a parity of reasoning.
3.

In the result, this writ petition fails and is hereby dismissed but

in the circumstances without any orders as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
FEBRUARY
pk

WP(C) 33/2008

, 2008

page 2 of 2

