*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 1458/2008
Date of Decision: 11th April, 2008
KOTAK MAHINDRA BANK LTD.
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Sr. Adv.
with Ms. Nandini Gore, Ms. Prachi
Goel, Ms. Lakshmi Ramchandran,
Mr. Amit Kr. Singh, Mr. Karan
Mehta, Ms. Shikha Sarin, Adv.
versus
A.A.I.F.R. & ORS.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Sandeep Sethi,Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Rajeev Ranjan Prasad,
Mr. Anirudh Sharma, Mr. Lakshay
Sawhney, Adv. for R-3.
Mr. Rajeev Nayyar, Sr. Adv. with
Ms. Sushmita Banerjee, Adv. for
R-4.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

T.S. Thakur, J
The short question that falls for consideration in this writ
petition is whether the order passed by the Appellate Authority for
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction(for short 'AAIFR') granting
permission under Section 18(1)(e) of Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (for short 'SICA) to approach the
appropriate

High

Court

for

submitting

a

scheme

of

arrangement/compromise qua the secured creditors of the company
under Section 391 of the Companies Act suffers from error of law or
jurisdiction. The petitioner, who claims to have secured in its favour
the assignment of a debt which the respondent-sick company owed to

W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 1 of 15

M/s Fuji Bank Ltd alleges that the order passed by the AAIFR granting
permission to the respondent-company suffers from an illegality
inasmuch as SICA is a special enactment no authority including the
High Court exercising powers under any other enactment can, during
the pendency of the proceedings under SICA, entertain or sanction
any scheme of arrangement or compromise. Before we examine the
merits of that contention, we may briefly set out the facts giving rise
to the controversy:
2.

The respondent-company was declared sick by the Board for

Industrial and Financial Reconstruction in terms of an order dated
20th April, 2006 passed in Case No. 395/2003. The Board noted that
the respondent-company was not in a position to work out a scheme
under Section 17(2) of the Act on its own and that the provisions of
Section 18 shall have to be explored in public interest. The Board,
accordingly, appointed the IDBI as an Operating Agency (OA) with
directions to advertise for change of management keeping in view the
guidelines given in the order. The Board noted that all the secured
creditors had decided not to support the present management thereby
necessitating a change. The following passage appearing in the order
passed by the BIFR makes this position clear.
“The Bench observed at that stage that the
company in its letter dated 18.4.06 had
submitted to BIFR that they were quite willing
to give up control of J&N to ensure J&N's
future. Moreover, all secured creditors had
unanimously decided not to support the
present management.”
3.

The Board permitted the present promoters also to participate

with a further direction that they would be given preference if their
offer equalled the offer of others. The operative portion of the order
passed by the BIFR was in the following words:

W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 2 of 15

“Considering the facts on records and the
submissions made at today's hearing, the
Bench observed that there were no valid
objections to the company's sickness from the
parties present today and considering that the
company had fulfilled the various criteria for
sickness under the Act, the Bench was
satisfied that the company had become a sick
industrial company in terms of Section 3(1)(o)
of the Act and accordingly declared it sick. On
a query from the Bench, the representative of
the company indicated that it would not be
possible for them to work out a scheme u/s
17(2) of the Act on their own. In view of this,
the Bench noted that the provisions of Section
18 of the Act would have to be explored in
public interest in relation to the company.
Accordingly, in terms of the powers vested
with it u/s 17(3) of the Act, the Bench
appointed IDBI as the Operating Agency (OA)
with directions to advertise for change of
management keeping in view the enclosed
guidelines. The present promoters are also
allowed to participate in response to the
advertisement to be issued by OA and they
would be given preference if their offer
equalled the offer of others. The OA shall
ensure wide publicity in this regard by
providing the test of the offer to industry
associations, federations of industrialists etc.
in order to endeavour to get maximum
response to the advertisement.
OA shall
ensure publication of advertisement within 15
days from today and in a further period of 6
weeks it shall submit a DRS keeping in view
the offers received and after holding a joint
meeting of all involved agencies together with
its recommendations.
The company shall
comply with provisions of the enclosed
guidelines in letter and spirit in so far as they
relate to them.” (emphasis supplied)
4.

Aggrieved by the above direction, the sick company preferred

an appeal before the appellate authority for industrial and financial
reconstruction, New Delhi. By an order dated 11th April, 2007 passed
by the AAIFR in the said appeal it appointed SBI Capital Markets
Limited for carrying out a Techno-Economic Feasibility Study and
evaluation of the prospects of the company. In the meantime, ARCIL
was directed to hold a joint meeting of the secured lenders to discuss

W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 3 of 15

the reconstruction proposal based on the Techno Economic Viability
Study and Revival Scheme (TEVS) and valuation report.
5.

When the matter came up before the appellate authority on 8th

January, 2008 it was reported that more than 75% of the creditors of
the sick company had agreed to the rehabilitation proposal subject to
minor modifications.

Less than 9% of the secured creditors had

expressed their objections to the scheme which provided for
mobilisation of resources by sale of surplus assets at Panvel and
Naihati near Kolkata.

The Company proposed to settle its dues

towards the secured creditors and statutory liabilities through sale of
these assets under the scheme in question.

It was on that basis

argued on behalf of the respondent-company that the company should
be permitted to sell the surplus assets through an Assets Sale
Committee and to approach the High Court of Calcutta for a scheme
of arrangements/compromise under Section 391 of the Companies
Act. That submission was opposed by the Kotak Mahindra Bank, the
petitioner herein, who also opposed the grant of any permission to the
sick company to approach the High Court for a scheme of
arrangement

under

Section

391

of

the

Companies

Act

since

proceedings under SICA were pending. The petitioner insisted that
the proposal of rehabilitation should be processed in accordance with
the provisions of SICA alone.
6.

The appellate authority, however, found that an overwhelming

majority of the secured creditors, viz; ARCIL holding 47.26% of the
total secured debts, Allahabad Bank holding 16.9% and

Standard

Chartered Bank holding 4.6% of the said debts, were all agreeable to
the proposal submitted by the company. Kotak Mahindra Bank, the
petitioner herein, in comparison held just about 2.02% of the secured
debt which it had acquired from the Fuji Bank Ltd. but was opposing
W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 4 of 15

the scheme or the grant of permission to the sick company to
approach the High Court under Section 391 of the Companies Act.
The Appellate Authority was of the view that there was no
inconsistency between the provisions of Section 32 of SICA on the one
hand and Sections 391 to 394 of the Companies Act on the other.

It

observed:
“The question at issue is the effect of Section
32 of SICA vis-a-vis provisions of Section 391
to 394 of the Companies Act. The overriding
effect of Section 32 will come in play only in a
situation where the provisions other laws are
inconsistent or not in conformity with the
provisions of SICA. In our opinion, there is no
inconsistency between the aforesaid two
provisions. SICA was enacted to make the
sick industrial company financially viable and
independent.
Similarly, the provisions of
Section 391 and 394 of the Companies Act are
also enacted with the similar object to
facilitate
merger,
demerger,
corporate
restructuring
and
scheme
of
arrangement/compromise to establish viable
corporate entities. Therefore, the provisions of
both the statutes are supplemental to each
other and are not inconsistent.”
7.

It was further of the view that accepting the suggestion made by

the

petitioner-company

would

mean

that

while

a

scheme

of

compromise/arrangement is permissible under Section 391 of the
Companies Act for a healthy company with the consent of 75% of the
secured creditors, the same would not be permissible for a sick
industrial company just because Section 19(2) of SICA requires
consent of all the secured lenders. Relying upon the decision of the
Supreme Court in Manohar N. Somnath Vs. Morotrao (1979) 4 SCC

93, the Appellate Authority held that a harmonious interpretation
could be adopted to effectuate the legislation especially when the
Court was dealing with a piece of beneficial legislation for which the
interpretation had to be liberal with a view to giving effect to the

W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 5 of 15

purpose for which the legislation was enacted. Allowing the appeal
filed by the petitioner-bank the appellate authority granted permission
to the respondent-company under Section 18(1)(e) of SICA to
approach

the

High

Court

for

submitting

a

scheme

of

arrangement/compromise for the secured creditors of the company. It
observed:
“In view of the aforesaid facts, we set aside the
impugned order dated 20.4.2006 and remand
the case to BIFR. The company is granted
permission under Section 18(1)(e) of SICA to
approach the appropriate High Court for
submitting
a
scheme
of
arrangement/compromise
qua
secured
creditors of the company.
BIFR should
incorporate the provisions of the scheme of
arrangement/compromise
as
and
when
approved by the appropriate High Court as
part of the rehabilitation scheme of the
company”
8.

Pending the proposed action under Section 391, the Appellate

Authority also constituted an Assets Sale Committee comprising the
representative

of

ARCIL,

representative

of

the

department

of

Industries, Government of Maharashtra and the Managing Director of
the Company. The sale proceeds of the surplus assets were directed
to be kept in an separate bank account with Allahabad Bank, the lead
bank in an 'interest bearing no lien account' to be disbursed as part of
the rehabilitation scheme after the same is sanctioned by BIFR. The
present writ petition calls in question the legality of the above order
as already noticed earlier.
9.

Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Kaul strenuously argued that

the order passed by the appellate authority was legally bad inasmuch
as neither the BIFR nor the appellate authority could grant permission
to the sick company to approach the High Court under Section 391394 of the Companies Act so long as proceedings under SICA were

W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 6 of 15

pending before them.

Reliance in support was placed by Mr. Kaul

upon the decision of the Supreme Court in NGEF Ltd. Vs. Chandra

Developers (P) Ltd. & Anr. (2005) 8 SCC 219.
10.

On behalf of the respondents, it was per contra argued by M/s

Sethi and Nayyar, senior counsel that there was no bar to the
institution of proceedings under Section 391-394 of the Companies
Act or even for winding up of a company pending formulation of a
revival scheme under SICA. It was further contended that Section 22
of SICA clearly empowered the Board as also the Appellate Authority
to permit institution and continuance of proceedings referred to
therein including those under Section 391-394 of the Companies Act
as the said proceedings fell within the expression “like” used in
Section 22.

It was further argued by learned counsel that the

petitioner had not disclosed complete facts in the present writ petition
and was, therefore, dis-entitled from seeking any relief from this
Court. In particular, the petitioner had suppressed the fact that in a
meeting of the secured creditors held on 29th October, 2007 it had
consented to the sale of assets by the Assets Sale Committee and
sharing of the sale proceeds in the ratio mentioned in the minutes of
that meeting. It was contended that there was in the instant case no
delegation of power or abdication by AAIFR in favour of the High
Court and that an order granting permission under Section 18(1)(e)
was considered necessary as the provisions of Section 19(2) of SICA
were ineffective unless all the secured creditors consented to the
scheme of arrangement/compromise proposed by the company.
11.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions

made at the bar and perused the record. Section 22 of the SICA is by
far the only provision under which the petitioner may claim a bar to
any proceedings referred to therein. Section 22, however, specifically
W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 7 of 15

empowers the Board and the Appellate Authority, as the case may be,
to permit proceedings for the winding up of the industrial company or
for execution, distress or the like against any of the properties of the
industrial company or for the appointment of a receiver in respect
thereof or for recovery of money, enforcement of any security against
the industrial company or of any guarantee in respect of any loans or
advance granted to such a company. It reads:
“22.
Suspension of legal proceedings,
contracts, etc.--(1) Where in respect of an
industrial company, an inquiry under section
16 is pending or any scheme referred to under
Section
17
is
under
preparation
or
consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under
implementation or where an appeal under
section 25 relating to an industrial company is
pending, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of
1956), or any other law or the memorandum
and articles of association of the industrial
company or any other instrument having effect
under the said Act or other law, no
proceedings for the winding up of the
industrial or for execution, distress or the like
against any of the properties of the industrial
company or for the appointment of a receiver
in respect thereof [and no suit for the recovery
of money or for the enforcement of any
security against the industrial company or of
any guarantee in respect of any loans or
advance granted to the industrial company]
shall lie or be proceeded with further, except
with the consent of the Board or, as the case
may be, the Appellate Authority.”
12.

A careful analysis of the above would show that where in

respect of an industrial company, an inquiry under Section 16 is
pending or a scheme under Section 17 is under preparation or
consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under the implementation or
where an appeal under Section 25 relating to industrial company is
pending then notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies
Act or any other law including any memorandum or articles of
association or any other instruction having the effect under the said
W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 8 of 15

Act or other law, no proceedings for the winding up of the industrial
company or for execution distress of the like against any of the
properties of the industrial company shall lie or be proceeded with
except with the consent of the Board or as the case may, the Appellate
Authority. What is significant is that even when proceedings under
Section 16 & 17 or an appeal under Section 25 of the Act are pending
as is the position in the instant case, the BIFR or the Appellate
Authority

may

permit

the

filing/institution

or

continuance

of

proceedings for the winding up of the industrial company or for
execution distress or the like against any of the properties of the
industrial company. They may also permit a suit for recovery of the
money or guarantee in respect of any loans or advance granted to the
company to be instituted or continued. It follows that proceedings in
the nature of winding up, distress and sale of the assets of the
company and those for recovery of money and enforcement of security
etc. if already instituted would remain suspended or may be permitted
to be instituted and continued depending upon whether the BIFR or
the Appellate Authority grant permission to do so.

The Appellate

Authority has, in the instant case, not only directed sale of the surplus
assets

of

the

sick

company

arrangement/compromise

for

formulated

effectuating
by

the

it vis-a-vis

scheme

of

its secured

creditors but also directed the sick company to approach the High
Court for sanctioning a scheme/compromise under Sections 391-394
of the Companies Act. To the extent the AAIFR directed the sale of
the surplus assets of the sick company and appointed an Assets Sales
Committee, Mr. Kaul had no difficulty, for even according to him it
was only either the BIFR or the AAIFR who could direct such a sale.
That apart, even the petitioner-company appears to have consented to
the sale of surplus assets of the company in a meeting of the secured
W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 9 of 15

creditors convened by ARCIL on 9th October, 2007.

The following

passages appearing in the minutes of the said meeting are in this
regard relevant:
1.

Sale of Assets at Panvel
Majority participants, namely, representatives
from Arcil, SIDBI, Canara Bank, Indian
Overseas Bank, Union Bank of India, Unit
Trust of India, Punjab National Bank, Kotak
Mahindra Bank and Standard Chartered Bank
(representing 68% in the secured debt) gave
their consent for sale of secured assets at
Panvel.
Further, representatives from Allahabad Bank
and Oriental Bank of Commerce (representing
21% in the secured debt) mentioned that they
are actively considering the proposal and shall
revert to Arcil shortly on their opinion.
The Secured lenders also felt that the
proposed sharing of proceeds with the
Company in a structured from needs to be
improved for secured lenders.
Sharing Ratio of Sale Realization
The representatives from Arcil, SIDBI, Canara
Bank, Indian Overseas Bank, Union Bank of
India, Punjab National Bank, Kotak Mahindra
Bank
and
Standard
Chartered
Bank
(representing 6.1% in the secured debt) gave
their consent for proposed sharing ratio of
60:40 between term lenders and working
capital lenders.
Representative form Unit Trust of India
suggested a sharing ratio of 75:25 between
term lenders and working capital bankers.
Representatives from Allahabad Bank and
Oriental Bank of Commerce mentioned that
they are actively considering the proposal and
shall revert to Arcil shortly on their opinion.
Process of Sale Secured Assets at Panvel:
The lenders suggested that the secured assets
at Panvel should be sold by an Asset Sale
Committee comprising of secured lenders(two
term lenders, one working capital lenders and
Company representative) by a public auction
process.
It was proposed that Asset Sale
Committee may comprise of Arcil, UTI,

W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 10 of 15

Allahabad
Bank
and
representative.(emphasis is ours)
13.

Company

In the light of the above, it is difficult for the petitioner to find

fault with the order passed by the AAIFR directing sale of the surplus
assets of the sick company or oppose the settlement of the dues
payable to the secured creditors.
14.

The only other aspect that remains to be examined is whether

the permission granted by the Appellate Authority to the company to
approach the jurisdictional High Court for sanctioning a scheme of
arrangements/compromise with the secured creditors suffers from
any illegality.

According to Mr. Kaul, the grant of permission was

impermissible in law inasmuch as proceedings under SICA would
operate as a complete bar to any other proceedings being instituted in
any other Court against the company especially if such proceedings
are aimed at revival of the sick company or a step in aid of any such
attempt. Heavy reliance is sought to be placed upon the decision of
the Supreme Court in NGEF Ltd. Vs. Chandra Developers (P) Ltd. &

Anr. (2005) 8 SCC 219 in support of that contention.

That was a

case where the NGEF Ltd. had been declared sick in terms of the
provisions of SICA. The company had been, with the permission of
BIFR and its secured creditors, selling surplus land for purposes of
paying wages to it workers and refund of loans borrowed from
financial institutions.

In the course of disinvestment of the shares

held by the State Government in the sick company, Chandra
Developers, a private company submitted a proposal for purchase of
40.45 acres of land.

In the meantime, the BIFR had held that the

company could not be revived and sent its recommendation to the
High Court for winding up of the company.

Insofar as sale of the

assets was concerned, the BIFR passed an order stating that the
W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 11 of 15

company shall have to seek a proper direction from the High Court
concerned. In the High Court of Karnataka, Chandra Developers, the
private company, filed an application praying for a direction upon the
company to execute a deed of sale in its favour in respect of the land
held by the company on the premise that a concluded contract
regarding the said sale had come about between the parties.

The

High Court allowed that application and later dismissed a review
petition filed against the order passed by it. The matter was, in that
background, brought to the Supreme Court in appeal after the
appeals before a Division Bench had failed. It was in that background
that a question fell for the consideration of the Apex Court whether
the order passed by the High Court was legally competent.

Their

lordships examined the legal position and held that SICA was a
special enactment which would prevail over the provisions of the
Companies Act.

The Court noted that the provisions of SICA

contained non obstente clauses. The act was, therefore, a complete
code in itself.

The jurisdiction of the Company court in relation to

winding up of a sick company, declared their lordships, would arise
only when BIFR or AAIFR, as the case may be, had exercised their
jurisdiction under Section 20 of SICA.

The Court further held that

under Section 536 (2) of the Companies Act the Court could not ipso

facto direct sale of the assets of the sick company and that the said
powers had to be exercised subject to the provisions of the special
statute (SICA) on the subject. In terms of Section 20(4) of SICA the
sale of assets of the industrial company could be authorized only by
the BIFR in such manner as it may deem fit. Leave of the company
Court for doing so was not required.

BIFR could in the event it

directed a sale forward the sale proceeds to the High Court for orders
of distribution in accordance with Section 529 (A).
W.P.(C)1458/2008

The Court
Page 12 of 15

observed:
“In terms of Section 20(4) SICA, BIFR is
authorised to sell the assets of the sick
industrial company in such a manner as it may
deem fit.
Leave of the Company Court,
therefore, is not required.
By reason of
Section 20(4) SICA, BIFR is also empowered
to forward the sale proceeds to the High Court
for orders for distribution in accordance with
Section 529-A and other provisions of the
Companies Act, which in no uncertain terms
would mean that the distribution of the sale
proceeds would be for the purpose of meeting
the claims of the creditors in the manner laid
down therein. The scheme suggests that BIFR
retains control over the assets of the Company
and in terms of the aforementioned provisions
may either prevent any sale or permit any sale
of the assets of the sick industrial company. A
company declared to be sick in terms of the
provisions of SICA, continues to be sick unless
it is directed to be wound up.
Till the
company remains a sick company, having
regard to the provisions of Section 20(4) BIFR
alone shall have jurisdiction as regards sale of
its assets. Such a power in BIFR remains till a
winding-up order is passed by the High Court
and a stage arrives for the High Court for
issuing orders for distribution of the sale
proceeds.”
15.

In the instant case, the fact situation is totally different from

that in the case of NGEF. Here, the sale of assets has been directed
by the AAIFR which was competent to do so. There is no abdication
or delegation in that regard in favour of the High Court. The order
passed by the AAIFR clearly records a decision to sell the surplus
assets. Even, Mr. Kaul did not find any fault with that direction. It
was, however, argued by learned counsel that so long as the
proceedings under SICA are pending, the company cannot be
permitted to approach the High Court even for purposes of a scheme
of arrangement/compromise regarding the debts payable to the
secured creditors.
opinion, go that far.

W.P.(C)1458/2008

The decision in NGEF's case does not, in our
It is confined to examining whether the BIFR

Page 13 of 15

could give up its role and either delegate its powers or abdicate in
favour of the High Court the exclusive power vested in the BIFR for
disposal of the assets of the company. The decision cannot be torn
out of the above context. The Supreme Court was not in the case of
NGEF examining whether a sick company can be permitted to
approach the High Court for a scheme of arrangement/compromise
with the secured creditors under Sections 391-392 of the Companies
Act, in a case where such an arrangement was not legally permissible
under Section 19(2) of the SICA which required the consent of all the
creditors. There may have been some merit in the contention of Mr.
Kaul if the AAIFR was permitting something to be done in the High
Court which was within its own competence, for in that case, it could
be argued that if the BIFR or AAIFR are themselves competent to
examine an issue or grant a relief, they should not refer the parties to
the High Court for any such determination under any other enactment
like the Companies Act.

The fact of the matter, however, is that a

scheme of arrangement was not possible under Section 19(3) of SICA
unless all the secured creditors consented to the same. The AAIFR
noted that while a overwhelming majority of the secured creditors
were agreeable to a settlement with the company by making
sacrifices, the petitioner Kotak Mahindra holding only 2% of the
outstanding debt was not ready to do so.

This attitude of the

petitioner frustrated any such scheme being made effective under
Section 19 of SICA. The only other option then was a scheme under
Sections 391-394 of the Act which could be brought about even with
the consent of the secured creditors holding 75% of the outstanding
debts. It is manifest that the AAIFR considered it necessary to make a
reference to the High Court under the Companies Act as it was not by
itself competent to bring about a scheme of settlement/compromise.
W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 14 of 15

There was, therefore, no question of any abdication nor was there any
delegation by the AAIFR of its functions to the High Court as was
sought to be contended by Mr. Kaul.

The decision in NGEF's case

does not, therefore, advance the case of the petitioner. So also the
decision of the High Court of Bombay in Ashok Organic Industries

Ltd. Vs. Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Ltd.(ARCIL) relied
upon by Mr. Kaul does not lend any support to the case of the
petitioner. The Court was not, in that case, concerned with Section
22 of the Companies Act nor has the court examined whether section
22 of SICA could be invoked by AAIFR to permit institution of
proceedings under Section 391-394 of the Companies Act in the fact
situation in which the said proceedings have been permitted in the
instant case.
16.

In the result this writ petition which fails and is hereby

dismissed with costs assessed at Rs.25000/-.

T.S.THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
APRIL 11, 2008
anb

W.P.(C)1458/2008

Page 15 of 15

