*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 908/2008
Date of Decision: 11th April, 2008
K.N.CHHIBBAR & ANR
..... Petitioners
Through : Mr. N.K. Kaul, Sr. Adv. with Mr.
Chinmoy Pradip Sharma, Adv.
versus
DELHI METRO RAIL CORPORATION LTD. & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through : Mr. V.K. Shali, Adv. for R-1/DMRC
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, Adv. for UOI

+

W.P.(C) 992/2008
RITAL IMPEX LTD.
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr. Rakesh U. Upadhyay, adv.

versus
GOVT. OF N.C.T. OF DELHI & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through
Mr. V.K. Shali, adv. for DMRC
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, adv. for LAC
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Yes
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

T.S. Thakur, J
The petitioner in these two petitions assail the legality of a
preliminary notification under Section 4(1) read with Section 17(1) and
17(4) of the Land Acquisition Act dated 17.01.2008 issued in respect of
properties bearing No. A-17, Kailash Colony and E-19 of East of
Kailash, New Delhi. The said two parcels of land which do not have
any built-up structure over the same are required for the public
purpose of construction of the proposed East of Kailash Metro Station
as a part of the “Delhi Metro Rail Project”.
2.

When W.P.(C)908/2008 first came up for admission on 4 th

February, 2008 the only ground that was urged on behalf of the

WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 1 of 11

petitioner in that petition was that the acquisition of the petitioner's
land could be avoided if the respondent/DMRC could shift the proposed
Metro Station to an alternative site suggested by the petitioner in
terms of a plan, a copy whereof has been placed on record with the
writ petition. Mr. Poddar, counsel appearing for the Collector and the
representative appearing for the DMRC, however, submitted that the
alternative sites suggested by the petitioner in the said plan had been
examined but was not found to be technically feasible.

It was also

pointed out that Mr. E. Sreedharan, Managing Director, DMRC had
personally visited the site to examine whether it was possible to shift
the station to the alternative site suggested by the petitioner. The site
inspection had, however, revealed that the proposed alternatives given
by the petitioner were not feasible for several reasons which were then
indicated to the petitioner in the said petition. Since there was nothing
on record before us to support that version, the respondents were
directed to place on affidavit the version of the DMRC as to the
feasibility of the station being shifted to the alternative site proposed
by the petitioners.

Mr. Shali, counsel for the respondent-DMRC has

accordingly filed an affidavit sworn by the Chief Project Manager of the
DMRC. A perusal of the said affidavit shows that property bearing No.
A-17, Kailash Colony measures 1092.69 sq. mt. out of which the DMRC
has acquired only 774 sq. mt. of vacant site for construction of the
proposed metro station. The affidavit further goes on to state that the
petitioners had been constantly making representations at different
levels against the proposed station in connection with which they were
given personal hearing at different levels but since none of the three
alternative proposals submitted by them were found to be technically
feasible, the same were rejected. An intimation to that effect was sent
even to the petitioners by the Managing Director of the Corporation by
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 2 of 11

his letter dated 21st September, 2007 wherein it was pointed out that
the three locations at i) Amar Colony Crossing, ii) Park near LSR & iii)
Park near Zamrudpur commercial complex on the Lal Lajpat Rai Path
were not either technically feasible due to the alignment in sharp
curvature or on account of proposed alternative location having been
heavily built up by the private property owners. The affidavit further
goes on to state that the alternative proposal which the petitioner has
made in the writ petition is not technically feasible for the following
three reasons:
i)

There is no vacant land on the opposite side of the track through
which entry and exit to the Station could be provided.

ii)

That shifting of the station to the proposed alternative site would
require acquisition of properties across the road/track which are
built-up.

iii)

The draft alternative plan given by the architects of the petitioner
is not acceptable as the said architects are not conversant with
the requirement of the respondent-DMRC.

3.

Appearing for the petitioner in W.P.(C)908/2008, Mr. Kaul

strenuously argued that the alternative plan given by the petitioners
was technically feasible and that the reasons given by the respondents
for rejecting the same were not sound and acceptable. He contended
that one of the reasons which the Corporation had given for rejecting
the alternative proposal was that there was no vacant land across the
road at the alternative site as was the position at the site chosen by the
corporation. It was urged that the requirement of the Corporation for
land on both sides of the track was not an essential requirement and
that the construction of a ticketing center on the opposite side of the
petitioners land could be dispensed with by providing such a center on
only one side of the track.
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

All that was, for that purpose, required,
page 3 of 11

according to learned counsel, was a staircase to provide access to
passengers to cross over to this side of the station to buy the tickets
and go back to board the train from the other side. This suggestion
was not, according to the learned counsel, seriously considered by the
respondent-corporation which could be directed to re-examine the
matter to save the petitioners' land from acquisition.
4.

On behalf of the respondents, it was on the other hand, argued by

Mr. Shali that the requirement of the Corporation was for land on both
the sides of the track and that the petitioner's suggestion that
acquisition on only one side should suffice was unacceptable especially
when the same would cause serious hardships and inconvenience to
passengers making use of the station in large numbers.

It was also

argued that the DMRC have examined all the three proposals given by
the petitioners including the one enclosed with the writ petition, and
that there was nothing further which the petitioner could ask for
especially when the petitioner had saved a substantial part of his land
which the DMRC had released from acquisition.
5.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions made

at the bar and perused the record. The petitioner has not pointed out
any illegality or procedural irregularity in the process of acquisition
initiated by the respondents. That the purpose for which the land in
question is being acquired constitutes a public purpose was not
disputed by Mr.Kaul appearing for the petitioner in CWP No. 908/2008,
nor was it contended that the notification suffered from any other
illegality or irregularity.

The only aspect that was argued right

through these proceedings was whether the respondent Corporation
could avoid the proposed acquisition by shifting the metro station to
another location. Three proposals were, it appears, in that connection
given by the petitioner to the Corporation each one of which was
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 4 of 11

evaluated by the Corporation but found unsuitable. This is evident not
only from the affidavit filed by the Chief Project Manager of the
Corporation but also letter dated 21st September, 2007 addressed by
Shri E. Shreedharan, Chairman of the Corporation to the petitioners in
which he has observed :
“In reference to your representation and meeting
with the undersigned, it is informed that the location
of East of Kailash Station has again been reviewed, in
particular, the locations suggested by you. I also had
a personal inspection of the station location.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)

Amar Colony Crossing
Park near LSR
Park near Zamrudpur commercial
complex on the Lal Lajpat Rai Path.

At these locations construction of station is either
technically not possible due to alignment in sharp;
curvature or it requires acquisition of heavily built up
private properties. As a result of the review we are of
the firm view that the location selected for East of
Kailash station is the most suitable.”
6.

It is, therefore, futile for the petitioners to argue that the

proposals given by them have not been examined or evaluated. Equally
untenable is the contention that the Corporation does not require land
on either side of the metro station and that all the facilities including
booking centre etc. could be provided only on one side by making a
provision for a staircase to access the booking centre from the other
side of the track. The Corporation cannot, in our opinion, be forced to
compromise the standards which it has set for the construction and
completion of the project including the stations to be constructed at
different places and the facilities to be provided for the convenience of
the public in the same. The owner of any private property is entitled to
question the validity of the acquisition proceedings on the ground that
the acquisition is not in accordance with the procedure established by
law or that the purpose for which the land is being acquired is not a
public purpose but once it is admitted that the purpose is a public
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 5 of 11

purpose and the acquisition proceedings have been conducted in the
manner prescribed by law, the owner cannot challenge the proceedings
on the ground that the purpose can be satisfied by acquiring a lesser
area or by compromising the standards fixed for the satisfaction
thereof. As to how much land is required for the satisfaction of the
public purpose, what kind of facilities are envisaged, what should be
the design according to which the project should be executed, are
matters which are exclusively within executive domain. Interference
with the acquisition proceedings by a writ court in exercise of its
powers of judicial review on those aspects would be really uncalled for.
Even so, since the petitioners had suggested non-application of mind
on the part of the authorities, we had issued notices to the respondents
to verify that position. In response to the same, the Corporation has on
affidavit and by reference to the record satisfactorily demonstrated
that the issue regarding the location of the metro stations has engaged
its attention and that the decision to build station at a given location is
a conscious decision taken on a comparative study of the advantages
and disadvantages of building the same at any other location. There is,
in the circumstances, no room for holding the said decision to be
mechanical or insensitive to the competing needs of the project on the
one hand and the owners’ reluctance to part with their property on the
other.
7.

That brings us to WP(C) 992/2008 in which the very same

notification has been assailed by the petitioner who is the owner of a
vacant plot of land located across the road on the opposite side of the
property owned by the petitioner in WP(C) 908/2008. Appearing for
the petitioner, Mr. Upadhyay argued that the impugned notification
was unsupported by any public purpose inasmuch as the notification
did not use the expression “public purpose” for the proposed
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 6 of 11

acquisition.

He submitted that the notification had used the word

“public expenses” which was not the same as “public purpose” defined
in Section 3(f) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

There is in our

opinion no merit in that contention.
8.

The expression “public purpose” has been the subject matter of a

long line of decisions by the Supreme Court. In Somwanti v. State of

Punjab AIR 1963 SC 151, the Court observed :
“Broadly speaking, the expression 'public purpose'
would, however, include a purpose in which the
general interest of the community, as opposed to the
particular interest of individuals, is directly and
vitally concerned. (para 24)
XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXXX
As already stated no attempt has been made in the
Act to define public purpose in a compendious way.
Public purpose is bound to vary with the times and
the prevailing conditions in a given locality and,
therefore, it would not be a practical proposition even
to attempt a comprehensive definition of it. It is
because of this that the legislature has left it to the
Government to say what is a public purpose and also
to declare the need of a given land for a public
purpose.” (para 31)
9.

A seven judges bench of Supreme Court in State of Karnataka v.

Ranganatha Reddy 1977 4 SCC 471 explained the expression “public
purpose” in the following words :
“The concept of 'public purpose' has been considered
in some academic writings and judicial rulings and a
glance at them may give theoretical nourishment to
juridical ideas. We have to remember that neither
socialist jurisprudence nor capitalist legal culture can
govern the concept of public purpose in India's mixed
economy and expanding public sector, in the context
of progressive developmental programmes. Even the
Privy Council, way back in 1914, in Framjee Petit
approved of the wide definition of 'public purpose'.
This Court has also taken a liberal view of 'public
purpose'.
In a host of cases beginning with
Kameshwar Agrarian reform, slum clearance to house
the homeless, procuring a house for a diplomat or an
office for the State Trading Corporation, acquisition
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 7 of 11

of land to construct a dharmashala, houses for
members of a cooperative society housing scheme,
houses for workmen or for a Mahatma Gandhi
Memorial, as pointed out by an Indian Jurist [Rajeev
Dhavan, in his study of 'The Supreme Court of India'
(Tripathi)] have been regarded in decided cases as
'public purposes'. (para 59)
XXXXX
XXXXX
XXXXX
When we ascertain the content of 'public purpose',
we have to bear the above factors in mind which
mean that acquisition of road transport undertakings
by the State will undoubtedly be a public purpose.
Indeed, even in England, 'public purposes' have been
defined to mean such 'purposes' of the administration
of the government of the country (p.228, Words and
Phrases Legally Defined, II Edn.). Theoretically, or
even otherwise, there is no warrant for linking up
public purpose with State necessity, or in the court
throwing off the State's declaration of public
purposes to make an economic research on its own.
It is indeed significant that in Section 40(b) of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the concept of 'public
use' took in acquisition for the construction of some
work even for the benefit of a company, provided
such work as likely to prove useful to the public.”
(para 61)
10.

In a recent decision delivered by the Supreme Court in Daulat

Singh Surana v. First Land Acquisition Collector 2007 1 SCC 641,
their lordships reviewed the entire case law on the subject and
observed :
“74. The power of compulsory acquisition as
described by the term “eminent domain” can be
exercised only in the interest and for the welfare of
the people. The concept of public purpose should
include the matters, such as, safety, security, health,
welfare and prosperity of the community or public at
large.
75. The concept of “eminent domain” is an essential
attribute of every State. This concept is based on the
fundamental principle that the interest and claim of
the whole community is always superior to the
interest of an individual.”
11.

It is true that the notification uses the expression “land is likely

to be required to be taken by Government at the public expenses”
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 8 of 11

but the purpose for which the said acquisition is being made has also
been clearly described in the same.

The notification states that the

land is required for “construction of Entry/Exit structure, Operational
and ancillary structures of East of Kailash MRTS Station of Central
Secretariat – Badarpur Corridor of Delhi MRTS Project Phase-II”.
There is no gainsaying that even if the notification did not use the word
“public purpose” but the purpose for which the land was being
acquired is disclosed in notification and the same constitutes a public
purpose within the meaning of Section 2(f) of the Act, the notification
would be legally valid. That is precisely the position in the instant case
also. No matter the notification does not use the expression “public
purpose”, it clearly sets out the purpose for which the land is being
acquired and that purpose is undoubtedly a public purpose within the
meaning of Section 2(f) of the Land Acquisition Act which gives an
inclusive definition of the said expression.
12.

It was next contended by Mr.Upadhyay that since the respondent

is a company, any acquisition in its favour was legally permissible only
under Chapter 7 of the Land Acquisition Act. There is no merit even in
that contention of the learned counsel.

Chapter 7 of the Land

Acquisition Act applies to acquisitions for companies. The expression
“company” has been defined in Section 2(e) of the Act to mean a
company defined in Section 3 of the Companies Act other than a
Government company referred to in Clause (cc) of Section 3 of the Act.
A society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, a
cooperative society within the meaning of any law relating to
cooperative societies other than a cooperative society referred to in
clause 3(cc) is also deemed to be a company. What is significant is that
a government company referred to in Clause (cc) of the Act is not a
company within the meaning of that expression appearing in the Act. A
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 9 of 11

reference to Section 3(cc) of the Act would show that a corporation
owned or controlled by the State means any body corporate established
by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, and includes a
Government company as defined in Section 617 of the Companies Act,
1956.

A Government company as defined under Section 617 of the

Companies Act, 1956, on the other hand, is a company in which not
less than 51% of the paid-up capital is held by the Central Government,
or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the Central
Government and partly by one or more State Governments.

The

respondent Corporation is, by that standard, a Government company
within the meaning of Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 as 50%
of its share holding is held by the Central Government while the
remaining 50% is with the State Government. That being so, it is a
corporation owned and controlled by the Government within the
meaning of Section 3(f)(iv) of the Act. Any acquisition of land for such
a Corporation would therefore constitute a public purpose.

The

respondents need not therefore take resort to Chapter VII of the Act for
satisfying any such purpose as acquisition proceedings meant to satisfy
any such requirement would be permissible otherwise than by resort to
Part VII.
13.

It was lastly contended by Mr. Upadhyay that there would be a

disparity in terms of compensation payable to an owner who loses land
as a result of acquisition under Part VII and another who is
expropriated pursuant to acquisition under Chapter II. It was argued
that to prevent any such disparity, the Court ought to lean in favour of
the owner getting a better deal which is possible only when the
acquisition for the respondent is made referable to Part VII instead of
Part II. That argument is equally fallacious in our opinion. It proceeds
on an assumption made without any real basis that an owner rightfully
WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 10 of 11

entitled to claim fair compensation representing the market value of
the land on the date of the publication of the preliminary notification
and other statutory benefits under the Act would not get what is
lawfully due and payable to him. There is, and can be, no denial of
those rights to the petitioner in the instant case. The determination of
the market value of the land and the sum total of the benefits available
to an expropriated owner have yet to be quantified. The Act provides
for a machinery for determination of any dispute regarding the
quantum of compensation assessed by the Collector by providing for a
reference to the civil court. There is therefore no real possibility of any
disparity or injustice being caused to an owner who loses land in
consequence of acquisition proceedings under Chapter II on the one
hand and another who loses his land to such proceedings under
Chapter VII. Even assuming that a disparity can at times arise in the
determination and payment of the amount for any reason, the same
would not invalidate the acquisition proceedings so long as the
procedure prescribed for the same is strictly followed by the acquiring
authority. We have therefore no hesitation in rejecting the contention
urged by Mr. Upadhyay that the acquisition proceedings are rendered
illegal on account of any assumed or anticipated disparity in the
amount of compensation that may be held payable to the petitioner.
In the result, these petitions fail and are hereby dismissed but in
the circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S.THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
APRIL 11, 2008
anb/pk

WP(C) 908/2008, 992/2008

page 11 of 11

