*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 17267/2006
Date of Judgment: 11th

April, 2008.

GODREJ SARA LEE LTD.
..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Rajeev K. Virmani, Adv. with
Mr. Rajeev M. Roy, Adv.
versus

UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through : Mr. Rajeeve Mehra, Adv. with
Ms.Rachitta Priyanka, Adv. for
Respondent No.1
Dr. Vijay Veer & Dr. D.K. Dubey,
DRDE, DRDO, Gwalior
Mr. Kaushal Kumar, Mr. Vinod
Kumar and Lt. Col. A.K. Sharma,
DGST.
Mr. Akhil Sibal, Mr. Pradeep
Chhindra, Ms. Sai Sabnis, Advs. for
Respondent No.5

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S.THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

T.S.THAKUR,J
The petitioner claims to be a leading manufacturer of hygiene
products and mosquito repellents which it sells not only in the open
market but even to the country's military and paramilitary forces. In
response to a tender inquiry issued by the Directorate General of
Supplies and Transport, New Delhi, the petitioner submitted its
tender for supply of what is called “Diethyl Phenyl Acetaminde”
(DEPA) in Isopropanol 50% (formulation) and was found to be the
W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 1 of 10

lowest tenderer for the same. Since, however, the petitioner was not
a registered manufacturer, only 20% of the supplies was reserved for
it. This was in keeping with the provisions of para 3(c) of the terms
and conditions regulating the supply which is in the following words:
“3(c) In case, offer of unregistered manufacturer
is lower than the registered manufacturer and is
commercially and technically acceptable, order for
qty upto 20% shall be reserved for unregistered
manufacturer if his rates are lower than the L-1
registered firm subject to their favourable capacity
verification and approval of advance sample by
DGQA or his authorised representative.
The
balance 80% quantity may be considered for
placement of order on registered firm as L-1
manufacturer. In case, there is no technically
acceptable offer from registered manufacturer, the
balance 80% quantity may also be considered for
placement on the unregistered L-1 manufacturer
after successful execution of initial order for 20%
quantity. In case of Limited Tender Enquiry (LTE),
order for placement of 100% qty shall be placed on
lowest acceptable offer of PSUs.”

2.

One of the grievances which the petitioner has made in the

present writ petition is that although 20% of the supplies in terms of
the above stipulation had to be allotted to the petitioner, no orders for
making the supplies were being placed with it. That aspect need not,
however, detain us for long keeping in view the statement made by
the respondents that a supply order for 20% of the supplies of DEPA
50% formulation shall be placed with the petitioner subject to the
product offered by it being sample tested by the appropriate
authority. Based on the said statement we had on 15th January, 2008
while reserving pronouncement of orders in the writ petition issued
the following directions:
“Heard.
reserved.

The pronouncement of the order is

2.
Learned counsel for the respondents agree
that in so far as supply of 50% DEPA for the year
2006-07 is concerned, 20% of the total supplies
remain to be undertaken while 80% of the said
supplies have already been assigned to M/s Alkyl

W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 2 of 10

Amines, Mumbai. It is further submitted by Mr.
Mehra that the said balance 20% have been
reserved for the petitioner subject to its capacity
verification and advance testing of samples of the
product. He submits on instructions that the
capacity verification of the petitioner's unit which
is established in the State of Meghalaya has to be
undertaken by the Senior Quality Assurance
Establishment, Kolkata which is under the direct
control of Director General Quality Assurance,
Delhi. For testing advance samples, Mr. Mehra
submits on instructions that the petitioner shall
have to give five samples of 5 Litre each of its
product( in the containers of 1 Litre or 5 Litre as
the case may be) to CQA(M), Kanpur. He submits
that if the petitioner submits the samples, the
same shall be got tested immediately and
depending upon the result thereof, orders for the
supply of the balance 20% of DEPA 50% lotion
placed with the petitioner.
3.
In the circumstances, therefore, and
pending the pronouncement of orders in the main
petition, we direct the DGQA, Delhi to have the
petitioner's
capacity
verified
through
the
concerned agency expeditiously and without any
loss of time. We further direct that the petitioner
shall be free to submit 5 samples of 5 Litre each
(in the containers of 1 Litre or 5 Litre as the case
may be) to CQA (M), Kanpur. The respondents
shall then have the samples tested and an
appropriate decision taken at the appropriate
level for placement of orders for supply of DEPA
50% lotion with the petitioner, if the parameters,
namely, capacity verification and advance testing
of samples are found in favour of the petitioner.
Order dasti under the signatures of the court
master.”

3.

The above order, in our opinion, sufficiently redresses the

petitioner's grievance insofar as the supply of 20% balance quantity of
DEPA 50% formulation is concerned. All that we need to add is that
the direction given by our order dated 15th January, 2008 shall be
treated to be a part and parcel of this judgment. It follows that upon
the twin requirements of capacity verification and testing of advance
samples for the product being satisfied by the petitioner, the
respondents shall take steps to place orders for the supply of the
requisite quantity of DEPA 50% (formulation), with the petitioner.
4.

Insofar as the petitioner's grievance regarding the supply of

W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 3 of 10

DEPA 20% spray for the year 2006-07 is concerned, it was argued
that even when the petitioner was the lowest tenderer, supply order
was not placed with it.

Although, Mr. Virmani, counsel for the

petitioner made a feeble attempt to contend that the respondents had
tried to frustrate the interim order of this Court dated 30 th November,
2006 by placing repeat orders on respondent No.5 against the tender
for the year 2005-06, the said submission was not pursued by him
further. The fact of the matter is that on account of orders placed by
the Directorate General for DEPA 20% Spray against the contract for
the year 2005-06, the Directorate General has secured sufficient
quantities of the said medicine to meet the anticipated requirement
for the year 2006-07 also.

This implies that the grievance of the

petitioner qua the supplies for the year 2006-07 survives only insofar
as 20% of the balance supply of DEPA 50% lotion is concerned which
grievance stands redressed by the order already made by this Court
on 15th January, 2008.
5.

The only other grievance which the petitioner has made in this

writ petition relates to the conditions stipulated in the addendum to
the tender inquiry for supply to be made in the year 2007-08 of DEPA
20% Spray and DEPA 50% lotion.

Addendum dated 3 rd November,

2006 issued to the tender notice contained the following important
stipulation regarding transfer of technology from DRDE, DRDO.
“For DEPA 20% Spray & DEPA 50% only: All
tenderers desirous to participate in the tender
process are required to get Transfer of Technology
(TOT) from DRDE, DRDO, Jhansi Road, Gwalior.
Tender Enquiry for these items will only be issued
to the firms on production of TOT to DDST, Delhi
Area, Delhi Cantt. Those firms who have applied
for TOT from the specified authorities, however,
have not been able to obtain the TOT at the time of
purchase of tenders would be issued with
Provisional Tenders pending obtaining of TOT on
production of documentary evidence in support of
their claim. In the absence of TOT, their bids will
W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 4 of 10

be treated as technically invalid and the status of
the firm on the date of tender opening will be
treated as final. The prospective tenderers are
advised to get in touch with DRDE, DRDO, Gwalior
for obtaining TOT and specification for the above
items.
All other terms and conditions of the
original tender notice shall remain unchanged”

6.

It is common ground that the petitioner has not applied for or

secured the transfer of technology stipulated in the addendum
extracted above.

It

is, on that account, rendered ineligible for

submitting any tender for the supply required by the Directorate
General of Supplies and Transport for the year 2007-08.

The

petitioner, however, assails the said stipulation on two precise
grounds. Firstly, it is contended that the patent granted in favour of
DRDE for DEPA 20% Spray and DEPA 50% Lotion had expired by
efflux of time thereby entitling every manufacturer to undertake
manufacture and marketing of the said product without any legal
impediment or compulsion of obtaining a Transfer of Technology.
Secondly, it is argued that there was nothing unique about the
formulation which the DRDE, DRDO claims to have evolved so as to
require

a

license/transfer

of

technology

from

it

before

the

manufacturers are permitted to submit their tenders.
7.

On behalf of the respondents, it was per contra argued by M/s.

Mehra and Sibal that the expiry of the patent by efflux of time was
wholly inconsequential to the question whether the respondents can
insist on a Transfer of Technology from them so long as the
formulation and the specifications of the product which the DRDE,
DRDO had evolved was unique or at least different from the
formulation under which the petitioner was manufacturing its
products.

It was contended by them that the DRDE, DRDO had a

secret know-how that

W.P.(C)17267/2006

has led to the development of a DEPA

Page 5 of 10

formulation which is efficacious and safe in different climatic
conditions of this country and which provides protection to the
soldiers from mosquito bites. This technology has been, according to
the respondents, perfected after conducting several laboratory and
field trials including human trials under the supervision of the
Director General Armed Forces Medical Services, the highest
technical authority on the subject.

The inventor does not, it was

contended, require a patent so long as he can give a transfer of
technology of his secret know-how to any one interested in the same.
Reliance was, in that connection, placed upon “Local Rules of
Technology Transfer in Asia”. It was submitted that enough time had
been given to the petitioner to approach the DRDE, DRDO to obtain a
transfer of technology which would then entitle the petitioner to
manufacture

and

market

the

products

as

per

formulations/specifications evolved by the former and also to compete
for marketing the supplies to the Army. The petitioner had, however,
deliberately avoided to obtain a Transfer of Technology and thus,
failed to acquire a qualification that was a condition of eligibility in
the context of the proposed supplies. It was argued that if the Indian
Army had, with the assistance of its own specialized agency,
developed a formulation which was, in its opinion the most suited for
its military and paramilitary forces, there was no illegality or
unfairness in the army insisting upon supplies being made only as per
the said formulations and those wishing to make such supply
obtaining the necessary Transfer of Technology from the agency that
possessed the secret know-how.
8.

We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions

made at the bar and perused the record. The short question that falls

W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 6 of 10

for consideration is whether the respondent/authorities can insist on
Transfer of Technology from DRDO as a condition precedent for the
manufacturer being treated eligible for making the required supplies.
The answer to the said question would, in turn, depend upon whether
the formulation is in any way unique or at least different from the one
which the petitioner is presently using for the manufacture of its
products. If the formulation which the DRDO has evolved, allegedly
after conducting various tests and trials, is indeed unique or at least
different from the formulation/specification under which petitioner
manufactures its products, it would be open to the respondents to
argue that the party offering to make supply must possess the
technology for the preparation of the product.

That technology, it

can insist, can be transferred only when the party concerned applies
to the authority who holds the secret know-how and who alone can
license its manufacturer by transferring the know-how as to the
components, formulae and techniques involved in the same.

The

position may have been different, if the agency that has the
technology, was unwilling to share the same with other parties
thereby dis-entitling such parties from entering the competitive field
not only for manufacture of the product but also for its marketing or
supply to the Armed Forces. The respondents have, however, at no
stage declined to offer the Transfer of Technology to the petitioner.
On the contrary their case is that the petitioner has, despite
opportunity, deliberately omitted to seek any such transfer.

The

petitioner ostensibly believes that its formulation is as effective as the
one evolved by the DRDO and the one it would not require adoption of
the said formulation to qualify for making the supplies. In a petition
seeking judicial review of a tender process, this Court cannot

W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 7 of 10

authoritatively determine the rival claims which the parties may make
as to the efficacy of their respective preparations. As to which of the
two preparations is more effective as a mosquito repellent is a matter
that only extensive tests and trials by scientists and users can
determine. We must, in fairness to Mr. Virmani, mention that he did
not call upon us to judicially determine the efficacy of the petitioners
preparations vis-a-vis that of the respondents. All that Mr. Virmain
contended before us was that DEPA 20% and DEPA 50% contained
components that were freely available in the market.

Mr. Virmani

argued that the components of its product DEPA 20% are as under:

Ingredient

%

DEPA 20% v/v 74.00
in IPA
Perfume

01.00

LPG

25.00

Total

100.00

9.

A perusal of the said compilation would show that the petitioner

manufactures its products using three distinct components namely
DEPA 20% v/v in IPA, Perfume & LPG in ratio of 74%, 1% and 25%
respectively. A perusal of the work instructions for the product would
reveal that while DEPA 20% is used with IPA and perfume, the IPA
and perfume are of 100% purity. DEPA 20% used in the manufacture
of the product is with 99.24% purity. The method of manufacture has
also been set out in the form of a flow chart by the petitioner. This
information when compared with the specifications and the formula

W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 8 of 10

which the DRDO has evolved would show that there is considerable
difference not only in terms of the inputs that go into the preparation
of the product which the army requires for its personnel but also the
method by which the said product is prepared.

We cannot, for

obvious reasons, enlist the salient features that distinguish the two
preparations in terms of the

method

of manufacture or the

composition of the product. Any such exercise is bound to result in a
public disclosure of what is, according to the DRDO, a secret formula
evolved by it which it is ready to share with only those willing to
approach it for the transfer of the technology. Suffice it to say that
there is a significant difference in the formula which the petitioner, on
the one hand and respondent/DRDO on the other, use for manufacture
of their respective products. Such being the position, the DRDO is
entitled to argue, as indeed it has, that its product is custom-made for
the Armed forces no matter any one, who seeks a Transfer of
Technology from it, would be entitled not only to make supplies to the
Army but also market the product within and outside the country. In
that view, therefore, the requirement of obtaining a transfer of
technology from the DRDO cannot be said to be irrelevant or arbitrary
nor can it be said that the said requirement has been stipulated to
benefit only the chosen few manufacturers of the product. It was and
continues to be open to the petitioner to seek a proper transfer of a
technology from the DRDO and thus, acquire the qualification
prescribed by the Directorate General for making of the supply of the
said product which must conform to the specifications and the
formula that has been prepared by the DRDO on the basis of extensive
tests and experiments. Such being the position, we see no reason to
interfere with the ongoing tender process insofar as the same insists

W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 9 of 10

on the Transfer of Technology from the DRDO as a condition of
eligibility for the manufacturers to submit their tenders in response to
the tender inquiry issued by the Directorate General of Supplies of
Transport.
10.

In the result, this petition succeeds but only in part and to the

extent that the respondents shall, in keeping with our order dated 15 th
January, 2008, have the capacity of the petitioner verified and its
sample tested and upon the tests and verification report going in its
favour place an order for the supply of balance of DEPA 50% Lotion
from the petitioner.

Insofar as the petitioner's grievance against

tender inquiry for the year 2007-08 and the Transfer of Technology as
a condition of eligibility is concerned, the writ petition fails and is
dismissed but in the circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S.THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
APRIL 11, 2008
anb

W.P.(C)17267/2006

Page 10 of 10

