*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 306/2008
LATHA PRIYANGA TEXTILE
Through : Mr. S. Aravindh, Adv.
versus

... Petitioner

BOARD FOR IND. AND FIN. RECONSTRUCTION & ORS ... Respondent
Through : Mr. Vikas Nanda, Adv. for Mr. Alok
Aggarwal, Adv. for Respondent No.2
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.
2.
3.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Not Necessary
To be referred to the Reporter or not? `
Not Necessary
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Not Necessary

%
Per Thakur, J (oral)

ORDER
14.01.2008

M/s Tamaraj Mills Ltd. is an old company in spinning and weaving Industry.
It appears to have gone sick despite efforts made by its promoters to keep it afloat.
The matter appears to have eventually landed up before the BIFR who noted that
since no viable proposal for restructuring of the company and its rehabilitation had
been presented, the same ought to be wound up. Aggrieved by the said order, the
company filed an appeal before the AAIFR.

The said appeal was eventually

disposed off by an order dated 11th August, 2006 with a direction to the BIFR to
consider the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme placed before the AAIFR and to proceed
to pass appropriate orders in accordance with the law on the same. The AAIFR
observed :
“We have considered carefully the averments and the
records placed before us as well as the facts and
circumstances of the case carefully. TML is a company
established more than 70 years ago and has been
continuously in this line of spinning and weaving
industry. This company became sick. In spite of lot of
efforts could not submit in a period of 6-7 years a viable
revival proposal because of which BIFR passed the
winding up order. The company came in appeal and has
ultimately submitted the proposal found acceptable by
WP(C) 306/2008

page 1 of 5

the secured creditors and the OA, on the basis of which a
DRA has been formulated. We have taken due note of
the orders/directions of the Hon'ble High Courts. We find
that the various interests evinced by various parties have
been on account of the effort being made by the sick
company itself and the OA to somehow find a way of
revival of the company. Though we have impleaded most
of them in order that all those interested are heard, their
offers are : not the result or consequence of any order, we
have passed, directions given to the OA to go in for a
change of management or a sale of total assets of the
company. We also find from the table above that none of
the parties who have showed interest belong directly in
the line of manufacturing yarn and cloth. The DRS
prepared on the other hand aims to continue with line of
production and business for which the company was
originally established. While in the earlier efforts made
before the BIFR no one was prepared even to put Rs.50
lakhs in a NLA, in the DRS under consideration, we see
that the appellant company has in fact, already placed
Rs.5 Cr. in a NLA with IDBI which is also non interest
bearing. We find that the secured creditors are presently
willing to repose faith in the future conduct of the
company and are willing to put up with an aggregate
sacrifice of Rs.124 Cr.
We are therefore, of the considered opinion that the
company is in position to revive, and in this context the
detailed proposal given by the company itself should be
considered. It is important to note here that even though
there are a couple of proposals which are marginally
more than what the company has offered, they have not
been considered favourably via-a-vis offer of the
company.
In the above stated context we allow the appeal and set
aside the impugned order. We also remand the case to
BIFR with the directions that the DRS placed before us,
shall be submitted to BIFR not later than 4 weeks of the
date this order and the that the BIFR will thereafter
proceed to consider the same in accordance with law and
as expeditiously as possible.” (emphasis supplied)
2.

Pursuant to the above order, the matter appears to have been taken up by the

BIFR who noted that the Company had, during the intervening period, become
viable on account of its net worth exceeding the outstanding liabilities. The BIFR in
this regard referred to a certificate dated 30th July, 2007 issued by the statutory
auditors of the company according to which the net worth of the company had risen
to Rs.5.43 Crores and exceeded the accumulated loss of Rs.3.59 Crores. The BIFR
WP(C) 306/2008

page 2 of 5

also took note of the audited balance sheet ending 31st March, 2007 and came to the
conclusion that the request made by the company for discharge from the
proceedings was perfectly justified. BIFR recorded a specific finding to the effect
that the company had taken a strategic investor who had brought in a large amount
of Rs.19.5 Crores which was sufficient to clear all the liabilities of the secured
creditors. It was in that backdrop that the BIFR by an order dated 13 th November,
2007 discharged the company from the purview of SICA. The following passages
from the order passed by the BIFR is in this regard relevant:
“3.
The company vide its communication dated 19.9.07
requested the Hon'ble Board for discharging it from the
purview of SICA as its net worth had turned positive as
on 30.6.08. They had also annexed a Certificate dated
30.7.07 from the Statutory Auditors of the company as per
which the net worth of Rs.5.43 crores was exceeding the
accumulated losses of Rs.3.59 crores by Rs.1.84 crores.
The company had also submitted the audited balance
sheet (ABS) upto financial year 31.3.07 as well as for the
period ending 30.6.07 to support its request for discharge.
4.
In today's hearing, the representative for IDBI (OA)
submitted that the net worth had turned positive as on
30.6.07 by Rs.1.84 crores and recommended for
discharging the company from the purview of SICA. He
further submitted that in order to ensure sustainable
revival of the company, they had inducted a strategic
investor (SSCL), who had already inducted Rs.19.50
crores into the company. The funds were utilized for
meeting the liabilities of the secured creditors. The
company was working.
5.
On a query with regard to specific observations of
the Statutory Auditors in respect of default committed by
the company in repayment of principal amounting to
Rs.16.49 crores and interest amounting to Rs.112.95
crores to banks and financial institutions, the
representative for the company submitted that these
observations were made by the Statutory Auditors in their
report dated 30.7.07 in the ABS for the period ending
31.3.07.
Subsequently, the Strategic Investor had
inducted Rs.19.5 crores with which all the liabilities of the
secured creditors were settled through OTS. No Due
Certificate had been obtained from them, IDBI had
assigned their debt to SSCL and issued No Due
Certificate to the company.
6.
XXXXX
7.
XXXXX
8.
After considering the material on record and
submissions made, the Bench observed that the net worth
of the company as on 30.6.07 was positive of Rs.5.43
WP(C) 306/2008

page 3 of 5

crores vis-a-vis accumulated losses of Rs.3.59 crores and
hence the company was no longer fitting the definition of
a sick industrial company in terms of section 3(1) of SICA.
The Bench, therefore discharged the company from the
purview of SICA.
3.

The petitioner, who was one of the intending purchasers of the company

while the same was being offered for sale, has challenged the aforementioned orders
in the present writ petition.
4.

Appearing for the petitioner Mr. S. Arvindh made a two-fold submission

before us. Firstly he contended that the order passed by the BIFR went beyond the
scope of the order which the AAIFR had passed. According to the learned counsel,
the BIFR was not justified in discharging the company from the purview of the Act
inasmuch as the AAIFR had restricted the scope of the remand to the consideration
of the DRS. Alternatively, he argued that the discharge was against public interest
inasmuch as the respondent No.2 company had made a gain by way of waivers from
various public institutions to the tune of Rs.245 crores.
5.

Having given our careful consideration to both the submissions, we find no

merit in either one of them. It is true that AAIFR had sent the matter back to the
BIFR to consider the DRS proposed by the company but the order passed by the
AAIFR did not in our view prevent the BIFR from passing appropriate orders in
accordance with law taking note of the subsequent developments as it had actually
done. If the BIFR came to the conclusion as it has in the present case, that the net
worth of the company had, on account of the investments made by the strategic
investor and the promoters, increased beyond the accumulated losses and that
arrangements for payment of the outstanding dues to the secured creditors had also
been made, it was competent to have discharged the company from the proceedings
pending before it. The order passed by the Appellate Board did not in our view limit
the scope of consideration by the BIFR leave alone prevent it from taking note of the
subsequent developments and passing an order appropriate to the circumstances.

WP(C) 306/2008

page 4 of 5

So also the argument that the BIFR could not discharge the company from the
purview of the Act having regard to the gains which it had allegedly made has not
appealed to us.

The details about how the gains were made have not been

adequately set out nor is there any material before us to substantiate the allegation
that there were any undeserved gains which the company had made on account of
the pendency of the proceedings before the BIFR.

At any rate, the petitioner

company has no locus standi whatsoever to make a grievance either against the
order passed by the BIFR discharging the company or against the grant of benefits
to the company so long as the authorities who have been induced to give such
benefits or the secured or unsecured creditors of the company do not have any such
grievance. The writ petition is in our view a clear abuse of the process of this court
hence deserve to be dismissed.
6.

In the result, this writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed but in the

circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

JANUARY 14, 2008
pk

WP(C) 306/2008

ARUNA SURESH, J

page 5 of 5

