*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 7423/2007
Date of Decision:
RAVI DUTT & ORS.
Through

11th April, 2008

..... Petitioners
Mr. N.S. Vashist, adv.

versus

UOI & ORS.
Through

..... Respondents
Mr. S.P. Sharma, adv. with Mr.
Munish Kumar, adv. for R-1.
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, adv. with Mr.
H.P. Sahu, Mr. Ramesh Ray, adv.
for LAC
Mr. Yatinder Chaudhary, adv. for
Mr. Gaurav Sarin, adv. for DDA

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

T.S. Thakur, J
This petition is barred by inordinate and unexplained delay and
laches on the part of the petitioner.

It challenges the legality of a

preliminary notification issued more than 27 years back and a
declaration issued nearly 22 years ago in respect of an area
admeasuring 43 Bighas 12 Biswas situated within the Revenue State
of Village Chhattarpur, Tehsil Hauz Khas in the National Capital
Territory of Delhi.

An earlier petition challenging the preliminary

notification was filed in the year 1984 but was dismissed as
withdrawn by an order dated 5th March, 1985 with liberty to the

W.P.(C)7423/2007

Page 1 of 6

petitioner to file a fresh petition as and when advised. No challenge,
however, was thrown to the preliminary notification or declaration
under Section 6 of the Act for more than 2 decades since the passing
of the said order nor is there any explanation for the failure of the
petitioners to do so.

The writ petition is blissfully silent as to the

reason why the petitioners remained content with the notifications all
these years even when the issue of a declaration under Section 6 of
the Act had given them the cause of action to challenge the same.
The legal position as to the approach to be adopted by the writ Courts
while dealing with belated challenges to land acquisition proceedings
is settled by a long line of decisions rendered by their lordships of the
Supreme Court and those delivered by this Court from time to time.
In Aflatoon & Ors. Vs. Lt. Governor of Delhi & Ors. (1975) 4 SCC

285 the challenge to the validity of the notification under Section 4
was delayed by 13 years. Dismissing the petition on the ground of
delay and laches, the Court observed:
“.......There was apparently no reason why the
writ petitioners should have waited till 1972 to
come to this Court for challenging the validity
of the notification issued in 1959 on the
ground that the particulars of the public
purpose were not specified.
A valid
notification under Section 4 is a sine non qua
for initiation of proceedings for acquisition of
property.
To have sat on the fence and
allowed the Government to complete the
acquisition proceedings on the basis that the
notification under Section 4 and the
declaration under Section 6 were valid and
then to attack the notification on grounds
which were available to them at the time when
the notification was published would be
putting a premium on dilatory tactics. The
writ petitions are liable to be dismissed on the
ground of laches and delay on the part of the
petitioners”
2.

In Municipal Council, Ahmednagar & Anr. Vs. Shah Hyder Beig

& Ors. (2002) 2 SCC 48, the petitioner challenged the acquisition

W.P.(C)7423/2007

Page 2 of 6

proceedings after 21 years from the date of preliminary notification
and 16 years from the date of the making of the award. The High
Court interfered with the acquisition proceedings but setting aside
the order passed by the High Court, the Supreme Court cautioned
that the Courts ought to give effect to the doctrine of “delay defeats
equity”.

Setting aside the view taken by the High Court, their

lordships observed:
“.......It is now a well-settled principle of law
that
while
no
period
of
limitation is fixed but in the normal course of
events, the period the party is required for
filing a civil proceeding ought to be the
guiding factor. While it is true that this
extraordinary jurisdiction is available to
mitigate the sufferings of the people in general
but it is not out of place to mention that this
extraordinary jurisdiction has been conferred
on the law courts under Article 226 of the
Constitution on a very sound equitable
principle. Hence, the equitable doctrine,
namely, “delay defeats equity” has its fullest
application in the matter of grant of relief
under Article 226 of the Constitution. The
discretionary relief can be had provided one
has not by his act or conduct given a go-by to
his rights. Equity favours a vigilant rather than
an indolent litigant and this being the basic
tenet of law, the question of grant of an order
as has been passed in the matter as regards
restoration of possession upon cancellation of
the
notification
does
not
and
cannot arise.”
3.

To the same effect are the decisions of the Supreme Court in

Senjeevanagar Medical and Health Employees Cooperative Housing
Society Vs. Mohd. Abdul Wahab and Ors.; (1996) 3 SCC 600;
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bomaby Vs. Industrial Development
Investment Co. Pvt. Ltd.; (1996) 11 SCC 501; Northern India Glass
Industries Vs. Jaswant Singh and Ors.; (2003) 1 SCC 335, Larsen
and Toubro Ltd. Vs. State of Gujarat and Ors.; (1998) 4 SCC 387,
Vishwas Nagar Evacuees Plot Purchasers Association and Anr. Vs.
Under Secretary, Delhi Administration and Ors.; (1990) 2 SCC 268).
W.P.(C)7423/2007

Page 3 of 6

4.

In Santosh Kumar & Ors. Vs. Union of India and Ors. 2006 VII

AD Delhi 7 a division bench of this Court had while dealing with
similar fact situation dismissed the writ petition on the ground of
delay and laches and observed:
“30. The legal position that emerges from all the
above decisions is that while the High Courts have
the discretion to entertain a petition under Article
226 of the Constitution, it would be sound exercise
of that discretion if the Court refuses to interfere
with land acquisition proceedings in cases where
the land owners have allowed the authorities to
complete the said proceedings and challenge the
same at a belated stage. The land owners cannot
allow the proceedings to go on, accepting by their
silence, the validity of the notifications under
Sections 4 and 6 of the Act and then turn around
to challenge the same after the Collector has made
his award or dispossessed the owners on the basis
thereof.
Even if the period post-Balak Ram
Gupta's judgment is deemed to have been
explained, there is no explanation for the pre-Balak
Ram Gupta period of three years, which is
sufficient to justify the dismissal of these petitions
on the ground of delay and laches.”

5.

To the same effect is the decision in Rajiv Prem (Sh.) Vs. UOI &

Ors. 2006 VIII AD 268 where this Court declined to interfere with
acquisition proceedings long after the issue of the declaration under
Section 6 of the Act. The Court held that even in cases where the
declaration

under

Section

6

and

the

subsequent

proceedings

culminating in the making of a award were void, the aggrieved party
must approach the Court within a reasonable time to get the same
invalidated,

he

dispossession.

cannot

wait

until

he

was

threatened

with

The Court declined to accept the view that just

because affected party was in possession, he could challenge the
acquisition proceedings at any time even belatedly.

The following

passage is, in this regard, relevant:
“Even if the declaration under Section 6 and
subsequent proceedings culminating into passing of
award
were
void,
the
petitioner
was
in
any event required to move the Court within a
reasonable
time
to
get
the
same
invalidated and could not have waited until he was

W.P.(C)7423/2007

Page 4 of 6

threatened to be dispossessed. Thus, possession of the
land
in
question
being
not
taken
pursuant
to the award dated 4th December, 1987, cannot be a
ground to overcome the adverse effect generated on
account of belated challenge to the acquisition
proceedings by the petitioner.”

6.

Reference may also be made to Ramjas Foundation & Ors. Vs.

Union of India & Ors., 1993 Supp (2) SCC 20 where neither a award
had been made nor possession of the land under the process of
acquisition taken. The Supreme Court, however, held that the same
could not be used to explain the delay in challenging the notifications
under Sections 4 & 6 of the Act. Their lordships observed that the
grounds of challenge to the notification under Sections 4 & 6 of the
Act were available to the petitioners at the time of publication of the
said notifications but since the petitioners were siting on the fence
and did not take any steps to challenge the same, he could not do so
at a subsequent stage.

To the same effect is the decision of the

Supreme Court in Delhi Development Authority Vs. Shyam Sunder

Khanna & Ors., 2004 (72) DRJ 356 (SC) where the writ petitions
challenging the acquisition proceedings were filed before the High
Court after about 18 years of issue of declaration under Section 6 on
the ground that the petitioner's property being evacuee property was
excluded from the purview of notification under Section 4 of the Act.
The High Court had, in that case, interfered and set aside the
notifications.

Their lordships of the Supreme Court, however,

referring to its earlier decisions in Vishwas Nagar Evacuees Plot

Purchasers

Association

Administration

&

Ors.,

&

Anr.

(1990)

Vs.
2

Under

SCC

268

Secretary,
and

in

Delhi
Ramjas

Foundation's case (supra) set aside the order passed by the High
Court and dismissed the writ petition holding that the High Court was
in error in entertaining such belated writ petitions. Reference may

W.P.(C)7423/2007

Page 5 of 6

also be made to the decisions of this Court in Bina Modi Vs. Union of

India & Ors. 2005 (85) DRJ 385 (DB) and Rajiv Prem Vs. Union of
India & Ors., 2006 VIII AD 268 where this Court has declined to
interfere with the acquisition proceedings if the challenge is belated.
7.

In the light of what we have stated above, we find no merit in

this petition which fails and is hereby dismissed with costs assessed at
Rs.10,000/-

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
APRIL 11, 2008
anb

W.P.(C)7423/2007

Page 6 of 6

