*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 4979/2007
Date of Decision: 11th APRIL, 2008
KOHINOOR FOODS LTD.
..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. G.L. Rawal, Sr. Adv. with Mr.
Rajes Rawal, Mr.Arvind Kumar Jha,
Advs.
versus

J.K.SYNTHETICS LTD. & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through : Ms. Manisha Dhir, Adv. with Mr.R.S.
Paliwal, Adv. for R-1
Mr. Manmohan, Sr. Adv. with Ms. Geeta
Sharma, Adv.for R-2
+

W.P.(C) 5105/2007
UMA NAIDU
Through : Mr. Ravi Gupta, Adv.

..... Petitioner

versus
ASSETS SALE COMMITTEE J.K.SYNTHETICS LTD. & ANR.
....Respondents
Through : Ms. Manisha Dhir, Adv. with Mr.R.S.
Paliwal, Adv. for R-1
Mr. Manmohan, Sr. Adv. with Ms. Geeta
Sharma, Adv.for R-2
+

W.P.(C) 5106/2007
S.K.GARG

..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Ravi Gupta, Adv.
versus

ASSETS SALE COMMITTEE, J.K.SYNTHETICS LTD. & ANR.
.... Respondents
Through : Ms. Manisha Dhir, Adv. with Mr.R.S.
Paliwal, Adv. for R-1
Mr. Manmohan, Sr. Adv. with Ms. Geeta
Sharma, Adv.for R-2
+

W.P.(C) 5107/2007

W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 1 of 10

P.S.KARTHIKEYAN
..... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Ravi Gupta, Adv.
versus
ASSETS SALE COMMITTEE, J.K.SYNTHETICS LTD. & ANR.
.... Respondents
Through : Ms. Manisha Dhir, Adv. with Mr.R.S.
Paliwal, Adv. for R-1
Mr. Manmohan, Sr. Adv. with Ms. Geeta
Sharma, Adv.for R-2
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

Yes
Yes

T.S. Thakur, J
M/s J. K. Synthetics Ltd. is a sick company within the meaning of
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985, hereinafter
called 'SICA' for short. A scheme for its rehabilitation appears to have
been approved under the provisions of the Act by the Appellate
Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction.

By an order

dated 21st January, 2003 passed in Appeal No. 301/2000 arising out of
BIFR Case No. 22/98, the AAIFR constituted what is described as an
Assets Sales Committee for the sale of surplus assets of the sick
company by inviting offers through advertisements. The Committee
comprised a representative of the IDBI, the operating agency, the
Managing Director or Executive Director of a sick company and a
representative of the State Bank of India which happens to be the lead
bank.

The AAIFR also authorized the Assets Sales Committee to

formulate the procedure for disposal of the surplus assets and to
submit a report on the same to the BIFR who was then to take a
decision in the matter in accordance with law. The relevant portion of

W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 2 of 10

the order passed by the AAIFR reads:
“As regards Jhalawar unit, it was admitted by
the learned counsel for the appellant with
instructions from two Senior Vice-Presidents
of the company and was not disputed by others
that none of the units comprising Jhalawar unit
are vi8abl, are lying closed since long and
cannot be revived and that these should be
disposed of and their sale proceeds realised
and distributed among other creditors and
towards other liabilities of company. We are
satisfied that the Jhalawar units are unviable
and cannot be revived. These units along with
some other surplus assets i.e. four flats and
guest house situated at Mumbai and flats in
Delhi and Amjher Palace at Kota be disposed
off. We accordingly constituted an Assets Sale
Committee comprising of the representatives
of IDBI – OA, Managing Director or Executive
Director of the appellant company and a
representative of State Bank of India, the lead
bank.
The Assets Sale Committee shall
formulate the procedure for disposal of these
assets by inviting offers through advertisement
and submit its report thereon to the BIFR who
will take a decision in the matter in
accordance with law.”(para 50)
2.

The Assets Sale Committee accordingly issued advertisements

and invited bids from intending purchasers of the surplus assets that
comprised four flats and a guest house situated in Mumbai, Flats in
Delhi

and

Ajmer

Palace

at

Kota.

In response

to

the

said

advertisements, the petitioner in W.P.(C)4979/2007 offered a bid of
Rs.1,82,84,000/- for a flat in the Masjid Moth area of Greater Kailash
-II, New Delhi.

Negotiations held before the Committee on 10th

December, 2005, however, resulted in the enhancement of the amount
offered by the petitioner in the said petition to Rs.2.70 Crores. The
Assets Sale Committee found the said amount to be reasonable and
accordingly recommended its acceptance to the AAIFR. The AAIFR
heard the matter on 31st August, 2006 but declined to approve the bid
offered by the petitioner in terms of its order dated 31 st May, 2007
impugned in this petition. The AAIFR was of the opinion that since
W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 3 of 10

the value of the properties would have substantially increased
between the date the bid was made and the date of the order, it would
not be appropriate to confirm the sale in favour of any of the bidders.
It was also of the view that before proceeding with the sale of the
assets, a fresh evaluation should be done in order to ensure that the
optimum price is realized for the asset.

The Committee was

accordingly directed to get the surplus asset of the sick company
revalued and fix a reserve price. It was also authorized to accept any
bid which was higher than the reserve price but if the bid was lower
than the reserve price, it was directed to submit a report to the BIFR
for further directions. In para 7 of the said order is under challenge
which reads:
“7. As regards the applications preferred by
the Asset Sales Committee constituted by this
Authority for the sale of surplus assets of the
JKSL to the identified parties, we find that the
Asset Sales Committee had identified the
parties interested in acquiring the surplus
assets of JKSL in the year 2005. We are of the
view that, at this stage, it would not be
appropriate to confirm the sale in favour of the
said parties since the asset value would have
substantially increased.
Before proceeding
with the sale of the said assets a fresh
valuation should be done in order to ensure
the maximum realization.
Accordingly, we
issue a direction to the Assets Sale Committee
(ASC) to get the surplus assets of JKSL
revalued and, thereafter fix a reserve price. If
the highest bid is higher than the reserve price
the ASC shall confirm the sale of assets.
However, if the bid is lower than the reserve
price the ASC shall submit a report to BIFR for
further directions.”
3.

A valuation report was pursuant to the above direction prepared

by the Asset Sale Committee in respect of each one of the assets
being offered for sale. Insofar as the value of the property for which
petitioner, Kohinoor Foods Ltd. had offered a bid, the Assets Sale
Committee fixed a reserve price of Rs.4.25 crores. On the basis of the

W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 4 of 10

said valuation, fresh bids were called by the Committee in response to
which it received two bids one of which was offered by the petitioner.
These bids were forwarded to this Court in terms of an order dated
12th

July,

2007.

Petitioner,

Kohinoor

Foods

Ltd.

has

filed

W.P.(C)4979/2007 to assail the validity of the order passed by AAIFR
directing fresh evaluation and invitation of bids. Since however the
petitioners had approached the Supreme Court by way of a Special
Leave Petition against the order of this Court dated 12th July, 2007
and obtained an order directing maintenance of status quo, the bids
received by this Court have not been opened so far.
4.

As regards petitioner in

W.P.(C)5105/2007, the initial bid

offered was Rs.10,05,000/- which was later revised in the course of
negotiations with the Assets Sale Committee to Rs.13,85,000/-. The
Assets Sale Committee had, however, fixed a reserve price of
Rs.14,00,000/- for the property in question. In response to the fresh
notice issued by the Committee inviting bids, the committee received
an offer of a sum of Rs.17.9 lacs for the said property which was
accepted by the Committee in exercise of the powers delegated to it
by the AAIFR.

Possession of the property in question has not,

however, been delivered to the purchaser in view of the interim order
passed by their lordships of the Supreme Court.
5.

Petitioner in W.P.(C)5106/2007 had offered a revised bid of

Rs.13.30 lacs for the property relevant to that case. Upon revaluation
of the property, the Committee had, however, fixed the reserve price
of the property at Rs.14,00,000/- as against which the highest bid
received by the committee was Rs.18.20 lacs which the Committee
has already accepted.
6.

That leaves us with W.P.(C)5107/2007 in which the revised price

offered by the petitioner after negotiations with the Assets Sale
W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 5 of 10

Committee was Rs.11.60 lacs. The reserve price was, however, fixed
at Rs.13 lacs on the basis of valuation of the property. The Committee
has against that price accepted the highest bid of Rs.15 lacs offered
for the property relevant to that petition.
7.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the

record. A two fold submission was urged on behalf of the petitioners
by the learned counsel appearing for them. Firstly it was contended
that in terms of the order of the AAIFR dated 30th May, 2007 the bids
received by the Assets Sale Committee had to be submitted to the
BIFR for acceptance. It was contended that inasmuch as AAIFR had
ignored the said order and itself taken a decision on the acceptance
or rejection of the said bids, it had committed an error of jurisdiction.
Secondly, it was contended that the AAIFR had heard the arguments
on the recommendations made by the Assets Sale Committee on 31 st
August, 2006 but final orders in the matter were pronounced only on
30th May, 2007 by which time the value of the assets had, in the
opinion of the AAIFR, gone up. The petitioners could not, however, be
punished for an act of omission on the part of AAIFR or its failure to
expeditiously dispose of the matter.

If the value of the assets had

gone up in the intervening period the same did not mean that as on
the date the bids were offered the amount offered by the petitioners
was inadequate having regard to the market value of the properties
offered for sale.
8.

On behalf of the respondent, it was on the other hand contended

by Mr. Manmohan that the submission of the bids by the prospective
purchasers did not by itself create any leagally enforceable right in
the bidder and that the AAIFR was justified in taking a prudent
decision in the matter by directing fixation of a reserve price for the
assets only with a view to ensuring that the assets were sold for the
W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 6 of 10

highest price offered in terms of their market value.

Reliance in

support of that submission was placed by Mr. Manmohan upon the
decisions of the Supreme Court in Divya Manufacturing Company (P)

Ltd. Tripuati Woolen Mills Shramik Sangarsha Samity and Anr. Vs.
Union Bank of India and Ors. 2000 (6) SCC 69, Union Bank of India
Vs. Official Liquidator H.C. Of Calcutta and Ors. 2000 (5) SCC 274,
Allahabad Bank And Ors. Vs. Bengal Paper Mills Cos. Ltd. 1999 (4)
SCC 383, Jainsons Export India Vs. Binatone Electronics Ltd. And
Anr. 1996 (85) CC 802, M/s. Navalkha And Sons Vs. Sri Ramayana
Das And Others. 1969 (3) SCC 537.
9.

There is, in our opinion, no merit in either one of the

submissions urged on behalf of the petitioners.

The intending

purchasers of the property owned by the sick company or for that
matter any other property does not acquire any indefeasible or
enforceable legal right only because of the fact that he has, in
response to a notice inviting offers submitted one such offer.

The

authority inviting the offers like the Assets Sale Committee, in the
instant case, could decline offers received by it just as the AAIFR
under the authority of whose order the bids were invited could do.
The legal position on the subject is, in our view, settled by the
decisions of the Supreme Court in M/s. Navalkha And Sons Vs. Sri

Ramayana Das And Others. 1969 (3) SCC 537 . The Court in that
case observed:
“6.
The
principles
which
should
govern
confirmation of sales are well-established. Where
the acceptance of the offer by the Commissioners
is subject to confirmation of the Court the offeror
does not by mere acceptance get any vested right
in the property so that he may demand automatic
confirmation of his offer. The condition of
confirmation by the Court operates as a safeguard
against the property being sold at inadequate price
whether or not it is a consequence of any
irregularity or fraud in the conduct of the sale. In
every case it is the duty of the Court to satisfy
W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 7 of 10

itself that having regard to the market value of the
property the price offered is reasonable. Unless
the Court is satisfied about the adequacy of the
price the act of confirmation of the sale would not
be a proper exercise of judicial discretion. In
Gordhan
Das
Chuni
Lai
v.
T.
Sriman
Kanthimathinatha Pillai A.I.R. 1971 Mad. 286.) it
was observed that where the property is
authorised to be sold by private contract or
otherwise it is the duty of the Court to satisfy itself
that the price fixed is the best that could be
expected to be offered. That is because the Court
is the custodian of the interests of the Company
and its creditors and the sanction of the Court
required under the Companies Act has to be
exercised with judicial discretion regard being had
to the interests of the Company and its creditors as
well. This principle was followed in Rathnaswami
Pillai v. Sadapathi Pillai A.I.R. 1925 Mad, 318. and
S. Souridarajan v. M/s. Roshan & Co. A.I.R. 1940
Mad. 42. In A. Subbaraya Mudaliar v. K.
Sundarajan it was pointed out that the condition of
confirmation by the Court being a safeguard
against the property being sold at an inadequate
price, it will be not only proper but necessary that
the Court in exercising the discretion which it
undoubtedly has of accepting or refusing the
highest bid at the auction held in pursuance of its
orders, should see that the price fetched at the
auction is an adequate price even though there is
no suggestion of irregularity or fraud.”

10.

In the light of the above, we have no hesitation in holding that

the petitioners do not have any legally enforceable right to insist that
the offers made by them should have been necessarily accepted
especially when the AAIFR had given a valid reason for directing fresh
offers to be called by the Assets Sale Committee after getting the
properties valued and after fixing the reserved price for the same. The
AAIFR was, in our opinion, justified in stating that the value of the
properties to be sold had gone up since the date the offers were
received from the petitioners. The mere fact that the petitioners were
not responsible for the delay in the acceptance of their bids and that
the delay might have been entirely on account of the time taken by
the AAIFR in deciding the matter would also make little difference.
Apart from the fact that the delay which had resulted in appreciation
in the value of the properties was on account of multiple rounds of

W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 8 of 10

litigation in this Court, the fact that there was bound to be some
appreciation in the value of the property on account of the time lag
between the date on which the bids were received and the date of the
pronouncement of the order could not be disputed.

In fairness to

counsel for the petitioner, we must say that even they did not dispute
the fact that during the period the matter remained pending with the
AAIFR, there was appreciation in the value of the property. That is
also revealed by the evaluation undertaken by the Assets Sale
Committee with the help of qualified valuers and the offers which
were received in response to the fresh bids invited by it. What was
contended was that since the delay was on account of the time taken
by the AAIFR, it

should not have been allowed to prejudice the

interest of the bidders.

We find no substance in that contention.

There was no question of the bidders being prejudiced on account of
non-acceptance of the bids offered by them especially when the nonacceptance was for a valid reason as was the position in the instant
case.

We have, therefore, no hesitation in rejecting the contention

urged by the petitioners that the AAIFR committed any illegality in
rejecting the bids offered by them and directing fresh bids after
evaluation of the properties and fixing of reserved price for the same.
11.

That brings us to the question whether the order passed by the

AAIFR suffered from any error of jurisdiction. The argument was that
AAIFR having authorized BIFR to accept the bids it could not, in
derogation of that order, examine the validity of the bids or issue
directions for evaluation of the property. That submission is also, in
our view, untenable in the light of the order passed by AAIFR on 7 th
January, 2005 modifying the earlier order.

In para 12 of the said

order, AAIFR had while reviewing the implementation of the scheme
issued a clear direction that the Assets Sale Committee shall submit
W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 9 of 10

the proposal regarding sale of the properties to AAIFR and not to
BIFR as directed earlier. Para 12 of the order passed by the AAIFR on
7th January, 2005 reads as under:
“12. In paragraph 50 of the same order dated
23.1.2003 of this Authority also states the ASC
shall formulate the proposal for disposal of
Jhalawar assets and hereafter submits its
report to BIFR to take a further decision in the
matter. Since this Authority is now reviewing
the implementation of the S.S. It is further
ordered that the proposal shall be now
submitted to the AAIFR.”
12.

In the light of the above, we see no illegality or jurisdictional

infirmity in the order passed by AAIFR on the proposals which the
Assets Sale Committee had put up to AAIFR in obedience to the above
directions.

The Assets Sale Committee had been constituted by

AAIFR and since the entire exercise was being monitored by it, it was
within the jurisdiction of the AAIFR to modify the earlier directions
and take up the proposals submitted by the Assets Sale Committee
itself rather than directing a consideration by the BIFR.

At any rate,

the question whether the sale of assets was approved by the BIFR or
the Appellate Authority would make little difference in the facts and
circumstances of the present case.
13.

In the result, these writ petitions fail and are hereby dismissed

with costs assessed at Rs.10,000/- in each case.

Costs shall

be

deposited in the Delhi High Court Advocates Welfare Fund within two
months.
T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
APRIL 11, 2008
anb

W.Ps.(C)4979, 5105-5107 of 2007

Page 10 of 10

