*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 8737/2007
Date of Decision: March 11, 2008.
The Animals Welfare Society Regd., Delhi .... Petitioners
Through
Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Amit Gupta, Mr. Gautam Narayan,
Advs.
versus
Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Anr.
..... Respondents
Through
Mr. Raj Kumar, Adv. for R-4
Ms. Sumita Kapil, Adv. for R-2/MCD
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH

1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment? Not Necessary
To be referred to the Reporter or not? Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Not necessary

T.S. Thakur,J
The short question that falls for consideration in this petition is
whether the rejection of the petitioner's bid for running of what is called a
“Rendering Plant” suffers from any illegality or procedural irregularity.
According to the respondent Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the bid offered
by the petitioner society was rejected as it did not have the experience or the
financial capacity to run the plant in question. The challenge to the order of
rejection is not therefore well founded, argues the Corporation. Before we
examine that aspect, we may set out the factual backdrop in which the
controversy arises.
2.

The respondent Corporation is constructing a modern slaughter house

at Ghazipur pursuant to the directions issued by the Supreme Court.

The

rendering plant in question forms a part of the said project. The setting up of
the slaughter house and the rendering plant is being monitored by their

WP(C) 8737/2007

page 1 of 8

Lordships of the Supreme Court in public interest proceedings pending before
the apex Court.
3.

The respondent Corporation appears to have invited expression of

interest from reputed experienced & financially strong parties for the
running and maintenance of the rendering plant, in response whereto, the
following four parties came forward to express their interest in the running
said plant:
(i)

M/s Hind Agro Industries;

(ii)

M/s (respondent No.4);

(iii)

M/s Consortium Engineering Pvt. Ltd.; and

(iv)

Animal Welfare Socity (Regd.) (Petitioner)

4.

A pre-qualification Committee constituted by the MCD for short-listing

the firms examined. The credentials of the above concerns and found that the
petitioner society did not have the requisite experience or the financial
backing necessary for an efficient running of the said plant. The remaining
three concerns were found to have the requisite experience and the financial
backing to undertake the work in question.

The requisite documents for

submission of the bids were accordingly issued to the said three parties to
enable them to submit their technical and financial offers by the 27th June,
2005.
5.

When the tender box was opened on 27th June, 2005 at 3:00 PM, only

one offer made by respondent No.4 which was examined by the Evaluation
Committee under the Chairmanship of the Additional Director (H&A). The
Committee found respondent No.4 was found in the same to be technically
competent to run the rendering plant, but since a single tender situation had
arisen on account of the failure of the remaining tenderers to make their
offers, all the pre-qualified tenderers were given one more chance to submit
their offers by 7th September, 2005 in the office of the ACA, Veterinary
WP(C) 8737/2007

page 2 of 8

Services, Chandni Chowk, Delhi. When the tender box was opened again on
7th September, 2005, it was noticed that no new bid had been received. The
Commissioner of MCD however appears to have called and persuaded the
remaining two pre-qualified bidders to participate in the bid despite which
they did not respond. The commercial bid of respondent No.4 was eventually
opened on 23rd September, 2005 in the office of the Assistant Chief
Accountant (Veterinary Services). The bid contained an offer to provide a
monthly lease rent of Rs.12,01,050/- on the terms and conditions contained in
the tender documents. The MCD by its resolution dated 30th March, 2006
eventually approved the lease of the rendering plant in favour of respondent
No.4.

Trial runs of the rendering plant were also completed.

In the

meantime, the present writ petition was filed by the petitioner challenging
the decision of the respondent Corporation whereby the petitioner was denied
participation in the bidding process on the ground of its having no experience
and financial capacity to undertake the work.

A mandamus directing

respondents No.2 and 3 to consider the petitioner for the award of the
running of the rendering plant has also been prayed for.
6.

We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the

record. The short question that falls for consideration is whether the decision
of the respondent corporation to shortlist only three out of the four parties
who had expressed interest suffers from any illegality or procedural
irregularity. The respondent Corporation has, in support of the said decision,
filed an affidavit in which it is inter alia alleged that the petitioner's
expression of interest was evaluated by the Pre-Qualification Committee
constituted for the purpose who was of the view that it had neither the
experience of running a rendering plant nor the financial backing to enable it
to do so.

In the additional affidavit filed by Dr. R.B.S. Tyagi, Director

Veterinary Sciences, it is inter alia stated that a decision to re-advertise the
WP(C) 8737/2007

page 3 of 8

project had no doubt been taken by the Evaluation Committee to invite more
tenderers, but upon consideration the then Commissioner, MCD had directed
that the other two pre-qualified bidders who had not responded and
submitted their bids could be invited to do so by extending time in their
favour. Both the companies who had pre-qualified along with respondent
No.4 were accordingly invited for a meeting convened by the Commissioner
on 29th August, 2005, but only one of the said two pre-qualified companies, i.e.
M/s Consortium Engineering Ltd. attended the same and agreed to submit its
technical and financial offer within a week.

The second pre-qualified

tenderer, namely, M/s Hind Agro Industries also attended a meeting with the
Commissioner on 1st September, 2005, but expressed its inability to submit a
tender. The Commissioner, all the same, gave both the companies time to
submit their technical and financial offers by 7th September, 2005 which they
failed to do. It was in that background that respondent No.4 was found to be
the only eligible bidder in whose favour the allotment of work was authorized
by the Corporation by passing a resolution. The affidavit further goes on to
state that respondent No.4 had deployed the requisite manpower to get
training during trial runs of the rendering plant which had continued for 1-½
months. Certain mechanical problems in the functioning of the plant were
also rectified by the Engineers deputed by the manufacturers of the plant
from Denmark.
7.

The petitioner society claims to be an animal welfare society. A copy of

the Memorandum of Association of the society placed on record sets out
objectives of the society which include working for the welfare of the animals,
establishing, running and managing shelter homes for stranded animals,
taking care of the dead animals and establishing places for disposal of their
carcasses, providing medical facilities for animals, promoting national
conscience among citizens to work for the welfare of the animals and
WP(C) 8737/2007

page 4 of 8

generally to do all such acts, deeds and things as may be helpful for the
promotion of the aims and objectives of the society.

Apart from the

memorandum of association and the registration certificate, the petitioner
has not produced any document to show that the society has either
established any rendering plant anywhere in the country or undertaken any
other work relating to such a plant. There is also nothing on record to show
that the society has any income or financial resources to enable it to
undertake the work in question. As a matter of fact, the society is not even
approved as a contractor for removal of dead animals from within the
jurisdiction of MCD at any point of time. A list of contractors engaged for
removal of dead animals in MCD limits for the period 2003 to 2005 has been
filed by the respondent Corporation which does not include the name of the
petitioner society. This lends credence to the version of the respondent that
the society although registered for achieving the objectives mentioned in its
memorandum of association, has no experience in the establishment or
running of any rendering plant or in the removal of the carcasses of dead
animals or their disposal. The argument advanced on behalf of the petitioner
society that Mr. Ghanshyam Singh who happens to be one of the office
bearers of the society has worked in the Animal Husbandry or Food
Processing Centres in different capacities or in the slaughter houses or
Carcasses Utilization Unit does not constitute the experience of the society to
run a rendering house. It is this lack of experience and the lack of financial
capacity of the society that has proved fatal to its expression of interest and
the attempt to enter the bidding process. We had in specific terms asked
learned counsel for the petitioner whether the society had any financial
reserves, regardless of the sources from which the same have been arranged
to undertake the work. We did not receive any satisfactory answer from him
nor was any material produced before us to demonstrate that the decision of
WP(C) 8737/2007

page 5 of 8

the MCD excluding it from the bidding process was arbitrary, high handed or
discriminatory in nature. In comparison to the petitioner's lack of experience
and absence of financial backing, respondent No.4 has demonstrated, to the
satisfaction of the competent authority, not only its experience in
undertaking the work of running and managing Abattoirs through M/s
Organic Foods Limited, its sister company but also its financial standing. It
was, no doubt, argued on behalf of the petitioner that the experience claimed
by respondent No.4 was by reference to its sister concern which was running
an Abattoir in Nigeria on lease from Government which could not according
to the petitioner count towards experience of respondent No.4 but as against
petitioner No.1 which has no experience whatsoever in the field of running
the rendering plant or disposal of carcasses, the experience of respondent
No.4 company could not be said to be unsatisfactory especially when none of
the other companies who had earlier expressed interest had come forward to
submit their bids.

Respondent No.4 has described its experience and

financial capacity in the following words, which cannot be termed as a case of
no experience:
“EXPERIENCE OF THE COMPANY
Aztec Exim Pvt. Ltd., the Indian company of the
group at the moment has a turnover of about Rs.20
crores a year and is at presently involved in
importing into India, several commodities through
its sister companies based in Mauritius, Nigeria,
Cameroon, Ethiopia and several other countries in
Africa and the Middle East.
The expertise of the group extends to metals and its
processing which includes Steel, Lead and
Aluminium. The company as a group also trades in
several agricultural commodities including Rice,
Wood and other specialized Organic Foods. One of
the companies in the group, M/s Organic Foods Ltd.,
Nigeria, has run an Abattoir Complex including
Rendering Plant for a period of three years on lease
from the Government of Nigeria. This Abattoir, M/s
Mokwa Ranch and Abattoir Ltd., based in the Niger
State of Nigeria had a capacity for about 60000
WP(C) 8737/2007

page 6 of 8

heads per year.
The group is currently looking for an Abattoir on
Lease and also several Rendering facilities as a
drive for diversification of our groups' activities.
The operational staff of Organic Foods Ltd., Nigeria
is well experienced in the operation of running an
Abattoir and rendering plant and will be available
to operate and manage the rendering facilities
currently being leased out by Delhi Municipal
Corporation, Delhi.
They comprise of a chief
engineer assisted by specialist engineers (Electrical,
Mechanical, Processing, Rendering and Civil) most
are Indian nationals except one. The chairman is
the major stake holder in all these companies and is
leading the diversification drive.
Aztec Exim Pvt. Ltd. and the other companies in
the group have tie ups with several banks both in
India and abroad and have the know-how end
technologies which are needed in terms of trained
manpower to run the rendering plant.”
8.

We also do not find any merit in the submission made on behalf of the

petitioner that since a decision had at one stage been taken to re-advertise
the work, the failure of the respondent corporation to do so rendered the
allotment of work to respondent No.4 illegal. It is true that at some stage in
the process of evaluation of the expression of interest received from the
intending parties, a recommendation was made for re-tendering the work but
the mere fact that the fresh tenders were not invited pursuant to the said
recommendation does not invalidate the allotment of work in favour of
respondent No.4.

We say so because the grievance against non-

advertisement of the work in terms of the said recommendation could be
made only by a party who was denied an opportunity by any such failure and
not by a party who has, upon consideration of its offer, been found to be
unsuitable or unworthy of the job. That apart, the alternative to the retendering process which the Commissioner had chosen could not be said to be
wholly impracticable or wide off the mark. The Commissioner appears to
have held the view that the fixation of a contract for running of the plant

WP(C) 8737/2007

page 7 of 8

could not be expedited by simply re-tendering the same especially when
neither any agency nor any company had shown any interest in the said
work.

His attempt to persuade the other two pre-qualified tenderers to

submit their tenders was therefore one of the options which was available
and could cut short the delay and provide a realistic solution to the problem
of finding a suitable party. The said effort having failed respondent No.4
alone was left in the fray whose offer was eventually accepted by the MCD by
passing a resolution in the house to that effect. We find nothing irregular or
illegal about this process especially when the same has met the approval of
the elected representatives of the Corporation and culminated in a resolution
favouring allotment of the work to the said respondent.
9.

In the totality of these circumstances, therefore, we see no reason to

interfere with the ongoing process of fixing a proper contract for running of
the rendering plant. This petition accordingly fails and is hereby dismissed
but in the circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

ARUNA SURESH, J.
MARCH 11, 2008
pk

WP(C) 8737/2007

page 8 of 8

