*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 1810/2007
Date of Decision: 11th April, 2008.
ASHOK K. PARASHRAMKA
.... Petitioner
Through : Mr. Mathews J. Nedumpara, Adv.
versus
UOI & ORS.

..... Respondents
Through : Mr. Rajeeve Mehra, Adv. with
Ms. Divya Chatuvedi, Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

T.S. Thakur,J:

Appellate Authority for Foreign Exchange has, by the two orders impugned
in this petition, declined to waive the pre-deposit of the amount of penalty levied
against the petitioners in terms of Sections 18 (Payment of exported goods), 50
(Penalty) and 51 (Power to adjudicate) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1973 read with sub-sections 3 and 4 of Section 49 of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999. Aggrieved the petitioners have assailed the validity of the
th

said orders apart from challenging the vires of the Constitution 39 Amendment
Act, 1975 and Sections 18(2), (3), 40(4), 56 and 59 of FERA, 1973.

The

controversy arises in the following circumstances:
2.

A memorandum dated 3

rd

May, 2002 was issued by the Enforcement

Directorate, Ministry of Finance to M/s Panchamukhi India Pvt. Ltd. whereby the
WP(C) 1810/2007

page 1 of 8

latter and its directors Messrs Mahesh Phool Modi and Ashok Kumar Parashramka
were called upon to show cause as to why adjudication proceedings as
contemplated in Section 51 of the FERA, 1973 read with Section 49 of FEMA be
not initiated against them for their failure to take any action to secure the receipt of
export proceeds to the tune of US$ 5,19,338.60 being the value of goods supplied
by them to M/s Golden Impex Trading Company, UAE, Dubai.

The

memorandum inter alia pointed out that the noticees had failed to take/refrained
from taking any action and all reasonable steps necessary to secure the export
proceeds of the aforesaid amount in the prescribed manner within the stipulated
period without the permission of the Reserve Bank of India which was tantamount
to a contravention of the provisions of Section 18(2) of FERA, 1973 read with
Central Government notification dated 1st January, 1974 issued on the subject.
3.

The adjudication proceedings initiated in pursuance of the above

memorandum culminated in an order dated 26th December, 2003 passed by the
adjudicating authority levying a penalty of Rs.20 lacs on the company M/s
Panchmukhi India Pvt. Ltd. and Rs.4 lacs each on Sh. Mahesh Phoolchand Modi
and Mr.Ashok Kumar Parashramka, its directors.

The adjudication order

recorded, among others, the following findings:
(i)

The noticees had despite letters intimating them about the date fixed
for personal hearing on 18th November, 2003, neither cared to attend
the proceedings nor sent any communication seeking adjournment.
Even on 22nd December, 2003, they did not appear for personal

WP(C) 1810/2007

page 2 of 8

hearing for which they gave a reason which was neither convincing
nor acceptable.
(ii)

The amount involved in contravention related to eight export
invoices in respect of exports effected during 1999 for a value of
US$ 5,19,338.60.

The noticees had not taken adequate and

reasonable steps to satisfy the requirements of FERA for realization
of the amount covered by the aforementioned invoices. In particular,
the noticees had not furnished the reply, if any, received from the
authorities in UAE to the letters allegedly addressed to them, nor
was any information given as to whether the buyers were contacted
by the noticees.
(iii)

The RBI had not granted any extension for realization of the amount
beyond 31st March, 2000.

(iv)

The suits filed before Kolkata High Court for recovery of the dues
from the defaulting parties did not constitute a proper remedy and
could not be construed as sufficient and reasonable steps taken for
realizing the outstanding amounts.

(v)

The circumstantial evidence available on record clearly suggested
that the export proceeds had been misappropriated in collusion with
Sh. Suresh Modi of Dubai.

(vi)

The argument advanced on behalf of the noticees that initiation of
legal proceedings in Dubai would have entailed heavy expenses was

WP(C) 1810/2007

page 3 of 8

not acceptable.
4.

Aggrieved by the order passed by the adjudicating authority, the petitioner

preferred an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal for Foreign Exchange and filed
together with an application, an interim application seeking dispensation of predeposit amount. The said application was rejected by an order dated 28th August,
2007. The Appellate Tribunal noted that the order under challenge was ex facie
good order especially when the appellants had failed to show any extension of
time granted by the RBI beyond 31st March, 2000. The Tribunal also noted that
the appellant had not denied that he was a director of the noticee company when
the contravention took place and that the appellant had not pleaded any financial
hardship.
5.

The petitioner then filed a review application before the Tribunal which too

failed and was dismissed by an order dated 22nd January, 2008. The Appellate
Tribunal rejected on a prima facie basis the contention urged on behalf of the
petitioners that the adjudication proceedings were legally impermissible with the
repeal of FERA, 1973. Relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court in
Gurcharan Singh Baldev Singh v. Yashwant Singh and Others (1992) 1 SCC
428, the Tribunal held that the language employed in Section 49(4) of the
repealing Act clearly stipulated that all offences committed under the repealed Act
would continue to be governed by the provision of the repealed Act as if that Act
had not been repealed. It also noted that the appeal preferred by the petitioners
was itself an appeal under Section 52(2) of FERA, 2003 read with Section 49 of

WP(C) 1810/2007

page 4 of 8

FEMA, 1999. The Tribunal also relied upon M/s Gammon India Ltd. v. Spl.
Chief Secretary (2006) 3 SCC 352 and held that in the absence of any intention to
the contrary appearing in Section 49 of the repealing Act, anything done under the
old Act would continue to be governed by the provisions of the said Act. On the
merits of the contentions urged before the Tribunal, it noted that since the RBI had
not granted any extension for realization of the outstanding amount beyond 31st
March, 2000, a contravention of the repealed Act had been established. It also
prima facie found that the noticee company and its director had failed to establish
that they had taken reasonable steps for realizing the outstanding export proceeds.
6.

On the question of financial hardship, the Court rejected the contention

urged on behalf of the petitioners relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court
in S. Vasudeva v. State of Karnataka and Ors. AIR 1994 SC 923 and observed:
“In the light of the above discussion, it is felt that no
material has been brought on record requiring this
Tribunal to delve into its order under review except
what has been indicated above. The application for
review is disposed of accordingly. The appellant is,
however, permitted to make pre deposit of the penalty
amount within 15 days from the date of the receipt of
this order failing which this appeal will be dismissed on
this ground alone. This appeal will be listed on 4th
March, 2008.”
7.

Aggrieved by the above orders, the petitioner has filed the present writ

petition as already noticed earlier.
8.

We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the record.

On the findings recorded by the adjudicating authority which findings have not
been sworn to be perverse in nature, we are not inclined to hold that the refusal of
WP(C) 1810/2007

page 5 of 8

the Tribunal to waive the pre-deposits does not suffer from any illegality to
warrant interference of this Court in its extraordinary writ jurisdiction. We say so
because the material facts relating to the question of levy of penalty and its waiver
are not in dispute. That the noticee company was engaged in exports and had
exported goods worth the amount mentioned earlier is admitted.

That the

petitioner was a director of the said company during the relevant period is also not
in dispute. That the sale proceeds of the exports made by the company have not
been realized by the company within the stipulated period and even the extended
period granted for the purpose by the RBI is also admitted. Such being the
position all that remains to be examined is whether the exporter company had
taken reasonable steps to pursue the buyers for realization of the amount in the
country to which the exports were made. Even here the answer is in the negative.
Admittedly neither the noticee company nor its directors have taken any steps for
realization of the amounts covered by the goods receipts in question. The only
explanation offered by the company for its failure to do so was that it would
involve heavy expenditure. That explanation has been rejected by the Tribunal
and in our opinion rightly so. Filing of suits in the Kolkata High Court for
recovery of money from a foreign company outside the jurisdiction of that court
was not an efficacious remedy that could prove the bonafides of the petitioner or
the noticee company. In the course of the arguments before us, learned counsel
for the petitioner even admitted that the suits have also been since dismissed for
non-prosecution. This implies that even the institution of such suits was only a

WP(C) 1810/2007

page 6 of 8

pretense of an attempt to realize the sale proceeds and not a real and effective step
for recovery of the outstanding amount.

The adjudicating authority and the

Tribunal have both concurrently rejected the case of the petitioner that they had
addressed communications to authorities in UAE for recovery of the amount from
the defaulting purchaser. These communications were seen and, in our opinion,
rightly so as one sided, self-serving documents which had not evoked any
response as admittedly no communication received from the authorities in
response to the letters addressed by the petitioner have been placed on record
either before the adjudicating authority or before the Tribunal. The inference
drawn by the adjudicating authority from all these circumstances that the export
proceeds had been misappropriated could not be said to be wholly unjustified or
perverse to warrant interference.
9.

That apart, on the question of financial hardship also, the Tribunal has

examined the matter and rejected the case set up by the petitioner. We do not find
any perversity in the view taken by the Tribunal even on that aspect. Simply
saying that the petitioner is financially hard-up is not enough. Applying the ratio
of the decision of the Supreme Court in S. Vasudeva's case (supra) as to what
would constitute “undue hardship” to the present case, we are of the opinion that
the petitioner has failed to provide the requisite proof of such hardship,
documentary or otherwise.
10.

In the circumstances, therefore, we see no reason to interfere with the

orders passed by the Tribunal declining the prayer for waiver of pre-deposit. We

WP(C) 1810/2007

page 7 of 8

also consider it unnecessary for us to examine the question of validity of the
provisions of the Constitution 39th Amendment Act, 1975 and Sections 18(2), (3),
40(4), 56 and 59 of FERA, 1973 in the present proceedings that arise out of adinterim order passed by the Tribunal.

We, however, reserve liberty to the

petitioner to assail the validity of the provisions mentioned above if the need so
arises after the Tribunal disposes of the appeal. The writ petition accordingly fails
and is hereby dismissed. Time for making the deposit is, however, extended by
three months from today. We make it clear that nothing stated by us in this order
shall be taken to be expression of any final opinion on any aspect that may fall for
determination of the Tribunal in the main appeal pending before it.
11.

No costs.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

ARUNA SURESH, J.
APRIL 11, 2008
Pk.

WP(C) 1810/2007

page 8 of 8

