*

THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) 3720/2002
Date of Decision : 11th April, 2008
PRATAP STEEL ROLLING MILLS LTD.
..... Petitioner
Through
Mr. Ravi Kant Chadha, Sr. Adv. with
Ms. Mansi Chadha, Ms. Asha, Advs.
Mr. Kailash Maheshwari, Joint MD
versus
AAIFR & ORS.
Through

..... Respondent
Mr. Rajiv Shakdhar, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Rajive R. Raj, Adv. for ICICI/Kotak
Mahindra Bank.
Ms. Maneesha Dhir, Adv. for SBI
Ms. Preeti Dalal, Adv. for R-4 & R-20
Mr. Suresh Dutt Dobhal, Adv. for R-6
Mr. S.P. Suman, Adv. for R-16
Mr. Vageesh Sharma,Adv. for R-17
Ms. Manjusha Wadhwa, Adv. for R-21

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?
Not Necessary
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Not Necessary
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
1.

Not Necessary

T.S. THAKUR, J :
In this petition for a writ of certiorari, the petitioner company
calls in question the correctness of an order dated 16th May, 2002
passed by the Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction, New Delhi (AAIFR) whereby Appeal No. 66/2002 filed
by the petitioner has been dismissed and the order passed by the
BIFR directing the winding up of the petitioner company in terms of
Section 20(1) of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)
Act, 1985 upheld.

The controversy arises in the following

circumstances:
2.

The petitioner company is engaged in the manufacturing of

WP(C) 3720/2002

page 1 of 13

special steel products in two mini steel plants one of which is at
Chheharata in Amritsar and the other at Pithampura near Indore in
Madhya Pradesh.

A third mini plant at Mandi Govindgarh, Punjab

was also operated by the Company on lease which has since been
terminated. A variety of reasonings like recession in steel industry,
inability of the promoters to bring in the additional funds, extremism
in Punjab, low capacity utilization and shortage of working capital
appear to have affected the performance of the company forcing it to
make a reference to BIFR under Section 15(1) of SICA on 16th
October, 1995. The accounts of the company for the financial year
ending 31st March, 1995 showed an accumulated loss of Rs.21.56
Crores as against the net worth of Rs.10.38 Crores.

The reference

prayed for a declaration of sickness of the company and determination
of measures for its rehabilitation.
3.

The BIFR upon consideration of the relevant material, declared

the company sick in terms of Section 3(1)(o) of SICA and held that it
was not possible for the petitioner to revive on its own. The Board
accordingly appointed IDBI as the operating agency under Section
17(3) of the Act and directed the petitioner to submit a comprehensive
rehabilitation proposal to the said agency.
4.

The petitioner accordingly submitted a proposal pursuant to the

above directions on the basis whereof the operating agency submitted
a

rehabilitation

scheme

on

10th

September,

1996

which

was

considered by the BIFR at the hearing held on 23rd September, 1996.
The BIFR however gave certain directions to the operating agency for
modifying the scheme while directing the promoters to deposit a sum
of Rs.2 Crore in an interest-bearing no-lien account with SBI.
5.

The modified scheme was then submitted to the operating

agency but although the promoters deposited a sum of Rs.50 lacs in a
WP(C) 3720/2002

page 2 of 13

no lien account with SBI, the remaining amount of Rs.1.5 Crores was
not deposited despite extension of time granted for the purpose.
Suffice it to say that the matter remained pending before the BIFR
between 1995 till the year 2001 during which period the BIFR heard
the matter on several occasions and passed orders, all aimed at
finding ways and means of rehabilitating the company by bringing
about a one time settlement of the dues payable to several creditors,
secured and unsecured and by encouraging the finalization of a long
term agreement with the workers union.

It was during this period

that the BIFR had on the basis of the report of the operating agency
circulated a Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS-2000) under Section
19(2) of SICA, brief particulars whereof were published in the
newspapers also.

Several responses submitted to the said scheme

were heard by the BIFR on different dates of hearing.

While the

financial institutions were agreeable to the one time settlement terms
suggested in the DRS, objections to the same were raised by some
other parties. The orders passed by the BIFR and the AAIFR set out
in considerable detail the steps that have been taken over the years to
rehabilitate the petitioner company and the reasons for their failure.
What is important is that the BIFR eventually came to a prima facie
conclusion that the DRS circulated by the Board was no longer
feasible for implementation.

It was also of the opinion that since

opportunities had already been allowed to the company to work out a
revival scheme, there was no chance of a revival of the company or its
net worth turning positive within a reasonable time frame.

The

Board, therefore, concluded that it would be just and equitable in
public interest to wind up the petitioner company and accordingly
issued a show cause notice directing the interested parties to file their
objections/suggestions/alternative proposals in response to the same.
WP(C) 3720/2002

page 3 of 13

The relevant portion of the order passed by the Board on 3rd October,
2002 was in the following words:

“14. Having heard the submissions, the Bench
observed that the company could not blame anyone
else for the delay, since even on the date there was
no general agreement regarding the scheme and
several specific directions of the Bench were also
not complied with by the company. Even the ABSs
upto 2001-01 were not supplied to all the secured
creditors. The company's Provisional Balance Sheet
(PBS) as on 31.3.2001 was not even ready and the
upto date position of its assets and liabilities was
also furnished, on account of which it could not be
ascertained whether the scheme took care of all the
liabilities of the company with suitable restructuring
where possible. There were huge variation in the
dues of Central Excise and the demand for interest
on debentures as raised by PNB, was likely to raise
similar demands from others. PNB could not be
faulted for taking the stand as conveyed today, since
the company had not even provided the detailed lists
of debenture-holders to it.
There was no
confirmation from most of the statutory authorities
regarding the position of their dues and the position
conveyed by the company could not be accepted
based merely on its statements and it had not
brought any documentary evidence in support of its
various claims regarding EPF, Central Excise, Sales
Tax and MPSEB's dues etc. Even the secured
creditors were not dithering and seeking down
payment under OTS within one month's time, which
the company apparently was unable to do. In these
circumstances, the DRS earlier circulated by the
Board was no longer considered workable or
feasible for consideration and implementation.
Further, since enough time and opportunity had
already been allowed to the company and other
possible avenues to work out a revival scheme also
exhausted, the Bench came to the conclusion that no
workable revival scheme could be worked out for
the company enabling it to turn its networth positive
within a reasonable time frame, while discharging
all its due financial obligations.
In these
circumstances, the Bench formed a prima-facie
opinion in terms of Section 20(1) of the Act that it
would be just and equitable in public interest if the
sick company – PSRML – was would up. The Bench
directed that a SCN should be issued in this regard
and published in one National and one local
vernacular newspaper as per the procedure, asking
the
interested
parties
to
file
their
objections/suggestions/alternative
proposals
in
response to this opinion. The Bench would take up
the responses to SCN for consideration at the next
hearing to be held on 21.1.02 at 11.30AM.”
WP(C) 3720/2002

page 4 of 13

(emphasis supplied)
6.

An appeal preferred against the above order was subsequently

withdrawn with liberty to file another appeal after the said order was
confirmed by the BIFR.
7.

After objections and responses to the show cause notice were

received by the BIFR, the prima facie opinion was confirmed by it by
its order dated 21st January, 2002.

The Board held that despite

adequate time and opportunity given to the company and its
promoters and despite all efforts made to explore possible avenues for
rehabilitation, it had not been possible to work out any acceptable
revival scheme to enable the company to turn its net worth positive
within a reasonable time frame. The Board accordingly forwarded its
recommendation to the High Court for winding up the petitioner
company in terms of Section 20(1) of the Act. Aggrieved by the said
order, the petitioner preferred an appeal before the AAIFR which, as
already noticed earlier, has been dismissed in terms of the impugned
order dated 16th May, 2002. The AAIFR has summed up the reasons
for upholding the order passed by the Board in the following words :

“(a) First, PRSML is too heavily indebted. Its
balance sheet for the financial year ending 31.3.97
shows the accumulated loss of Rs.38.42 cr as
against the net worth of Rs.14.03 cr. The accounts
were qualified by the statutory auditors who pointed
out that accumulated loss would have been higher
by Rs.20 cr if provisions were made for various
liabilities. Moreover, the dues of FIs/SBI have been
shown at a uniform figure of Rs.55.41 cr upto
31.3.2001 because no provision for interest has
been made after April, 1996. The accumulated
losses in successive balance sheets have been
understated.
(b) Secondly, the OTS terms are not accepted by
IFCI, IFCI has insisted on payment of interest on
OTS amount from the date of acceptance of the
proposal by FIs (IFCI fax dated 9.1.2002 to IDBI
(OA) referred to by the learned counsel for PRSML).
During proceedings before BIFR also, IFCI had
declined to waive interest on OTS amount from 1996
WP(C) 3720/2002

page 5 of 13

(para 23 of BIFR's order dated 21.2.2002). Without
IFCI's consent u/s 19(2) of SICA, the scheme cannot
be sanctioned.
(c)
Thirdly, DRS-96 prepared earlier could not be
circulated/sanctioned because the promoters were
unable to deposit even Rs.2 cr in no-lien account.
Even now, the promoters want three months' time to
bring in Rs.2 cr. They have either no resources or
are not willing to firmly commit their own funds
though under the scheme (revised DRS-2000) they
have to bring in Rs.2.23 cr as their own contribution
as well as additional funds as unsecured loans to
meet shortfalls in profitability projections.
The
promoters are depending on sale proceeds from
disposal of surplus land in order to bring in their
contribution. This is not workable because the sale
proceeds from PRSML's surplus assets have to be
paid to FIs who will not release their charges until
their OTS amounts are paid, and the sale proceeds
from ARSML's land, which has been mortgaged to
SBI as collateral security, would have to be paid to
SBI.
(d) Fourthly, the scheme envisages that a sum of
Rs.15.98 cr would be raised from the sale of
PSRML's surplus assets within six months for OTS
payments to FIs. The experience of schemes based
on sale of surplus assets, particularly real estate,
shows that sale proceeds are realized in time only if
prospective buyers are identified and undertake firm
commitments by bringing in substantial funds in
advance. In schemes, wherein the process of sale of
real estate is started after sanction, sale proceeds
are not realized for years. In the present case, there
are no identified buyers with firm commitments.
There is no likelihood of a sum of Rs.15.98 cr being
raised within six months.
(e)
Fifthly, a sum of Rs.13.00 cr is proposed to be
raised from sale of about 25 acres of ARSML's land
for payment to SBI. There was no legal bar to
ARSML selling this land and making payment to
SBI. However, the promoters, instead of selling it,
gave it as security to SBI and avoided selling it on
the pretext that only distress sale price was being
offered by prospective buyers. SBI has insisted on
payment of interest if the OTS payment is not
completed in six months. There is no likelihood of
the land being sold in time for payment to SBI,
keeping in view the fact that the promoters want
three months even to bring in a sum of Rs.2 cr only.
(f)
Sixthly, the scheme envisages internal
accruals of Rs.2.01 cr as part of means of finance.
Internal accruals can be expected only if working
capital finance is tied up. The working capital
WP(C) 3720/2002

page 6 of 13

requirements is assessed at Rs.7.77 cr in the first
year (Annexure III to the scheme), including
working capital margin (Rs.1.94 cr – shown as
Rs.1.97 cr in 'cost of scheme') and Rs.5.83 cr as
bank finance.
SBI has declined any further
exposure. PSRML has not tied up with any bank(s).
No bank finance will be available without margin
money of Rs.1.94 cr to be brought in by
PSRML/promoters. The promoters have not shown
resourcefulness for bringing in the margin money.
Sale proceeds from disposal of assets of
PSRML/ARSML would first go to Fis/SBI for OTS
payments, which are not likely to materialise within
the projected time-schedule. In the absence of
adequate working capital (margin and bank
finance), the operations will be far below the
projected levels and the scheme will be a nonstarter.
(g) Seventhly, the scheme also depends upon
deferment of collection of sales/purchase/entry tax
and past liabilities for five years.
State
Governments (Punjab and Madhya Pradesh) have
not given consent thereto u/s 19(2) of SICA. Again,
the scheme envisages some settlement of the dues
of Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board which
has demanded payment of its dues of Rs.13.61 cr in
18-36 monthly installments but the scheme does not
include provision therefor. Similarly, the scheme
does not contain sufficient provisions for payment of
statutory liabilities towards Central Excise, EPF etc.
The profitability projections are unrealistically
optimistic, based as they are on non-provision for
inescapable liabilities. The scheme will, therefore,
flounder in the very first year of its operation.
(h) Eighthly, PSRML's claim of the value of its
assets being worth Rs.76 cr is based on
“replacement value” and not on “realisable value”
and does not provide any basis for preparing a
workable rehabilitation scheme.”
8.

The present writ petition calls in question the validity of the

above order as already noticed earlier.
9.

Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Chadha fairly conceded that on

the date the BIFR and the AAIFR passed their respective orders, the
circumstances then prevailing and the financial health of the
petitioner company did not present a healthy picture worthy of any
possible rehabilitation.

He therefore did not make any attempt to

assail either the findings recorded by the AAIFR or the ultimate
WP(C) 3720/2002

page 7 of 13

conclusion drawn by it on the basis thereof. What was contended by
Mr. Chadha was that pursuant to a one time settlement with the four
secured creditors, namely, IDBI, ICICI, IFCI and State Bank of India,
the possibility of a rehabilitation had re-emerged and that this Court
could, in the light of the said one time settlement and the order of this
Court dated 15th July, 2003, explore the possibilities of formulating a
revival scheme.
10.

On behalf of the respondents, it was on the other hand

submitted that the one time settlement referred to by the petitioner
had not been given effect to in full and that substantial amounts of
money due under the said settlement continued to remain recoverable
from the petitioner company. The said amounts were not, according
to the respondents, being arranged by the company despite repeated
requests and despite expiry of the period fixed for payment of the
outstandings under the OTS. The secured creditors therefore sought
dismissal of the petition as did the unsecured creditors who also
claimed substantial amount to be outstanding against the company
which it was in no position to pay.
11.

A perusal of the order dated 15th July, 2003 passed by a division

bench of this Court would show that during the pendency of the
petition, the financial institutions mentioned above and the State Bank
of India to whom the company owes substantial amounts were
reported to have entered into a one time settlement under which the
petitioner had agreed to pay Rs.15.15 Crores to IDBI, ICICI and IFCI
on the terms that have been set out in the said order.

One of the

conditions stipulated in the said settlement was that the cut off date
for reliefs and concessions would be 31st March, 2003 and that the
amount of Rs.15.15 Crores shall be paid by the company within one
year from the date of approval, i.e. 20th June, 2003.
WP(C) 3720/2002

The terms of
page 8 of 13

settlement incorporated in the order of this Court may at this stage be
extracted :

(1) The cut-off date for reliefs and concessions
under OTS would be March 31, 2003.
(2) The company shall pay the OTS amount of
Rs.15.15 crores within one year from the date of
approval, i.e. June 20, 2003.
(3) The outstanding crystalised dues to carry
interest at PLR (12.5% p.a.) from the date of
approval, i.e. June 20, 2003.
(4) In the event of default in payment of the
crystalised dues, the company's obligation and
liability under the loan agreement shall revive to the
full extent and the institutions shall be entitled to
recover from the company all the amounts of
principal, interest and other charges under the
respective agreements in full and shall be entitled to
enforce the security available to them for recovery
of their respective claims in full.
(5) The sale of the assets shall be done in a
transparent manner, if necessary, through an asset
sale
committee,
with
representation
from
institutions.
(6) The company shall deposit the proceeds from
sale of surplus assets/other assets in a `No lien'
account with IDBI to be utilised towards OTS
payment to institutions (IDBI, ICICI and IFCI).
(7) All securities, guarantees and legal documents
shall continue to be valid till the entire OTS amount
is paid and all conditions shall apply mutatismutandis.
(8) The charges on the company's assets shall be
released only on receipt of entire OTS amount.
Charge would be released on specific assets as and
when sold.
(9) The promoters shall undertake to meet any
shortfall in OTS amount.”
12.

It is evident from Condition No. 4 above that in the event of

default in payment of the crystalised dues, the company's obligation
and liability under the loan agreement were to stand revived to the
full extent and the institutions entitled to recover from the company
the amounts towards principal, interest and other charges under their
respective agreements in full. They were also entitled to enforce the
security available to them for recovery of their respective claims to
the fullest. Similarly, the one time settlement with the State Bank of
India involved an assured payment of Rs.14 Crores subject to the
WP(C) 3720/2002

page 9 of 13

condition that in the event of failure/default of the company and the
guarantors to meet their commitments for settlement of the bank's
dues, the bank shall have the absolute right to revoke the
arrangements, forfeit the amount, if any, already paid and recall the
entire amount of interest and principal outstanding, together with
compound and/or penal interest thereon as per the provisions of the
original loan agreements.
13.

It is common ground that the amounts due to the financial

institutions and to the State Bank of India were not paid to the
creditors within the time stipulated in the OTS scheme.

When the

matter came up on 3rd April, 2007, the Court noted that the affidavit
filed by the company in an attempt to show that order dated 15 th July,
2003 had been complied with and the amounts under the OTS
liquidated did not present a satisfactory picture. The Court therefore
appointed an auditor to determine the amounts due and payable by
the petitioner to the various creditors after taking note of the
payments made and the interest liability accrued on the same.

An

interim report was submitted by the auditor, but despite grant of four
months time to the auditor, no final report came forth from him.
When the matter again came up on 8th February, 2008 for hearing, the
petitioner company was directed to file a detailed statement
indicating the exact amount due to the ICICI, IFCI and SBI, the
secured creditors of the company, as it was admitted that the dues
payable to IDBI stood liquidated.

The petitioner was also asked to

indicate the amounts due to unsecured creditors like VLSF, Bright
Leasing & Finance Ltd. and Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board
as on 31st January, 2008. Pursuant to the said direction, the petitioner
has filed an affidavit on 12th February, 2008 setting out the
outstanding liability towards secured creditors of the company.
WP(C) 3720/2002

A

page 10 of 13

perusal of the said affidavit would show that the company owes
substantial amounts to all the three secured creditors even in terms of
the one time settlement, the terms whereof the company has already
violated by committing a default.

From the tabular information

contained in the affidavit filed by the petitioner, the outstanding
liability is as under:
S.No FIs
.

Paid
Balance Interes
(Lakhs) OTS
t on
(Lakhs) OTS
(Lakhs)

1

IFCI

323.75

105.04

218.71

137.22 355.93

2

ICICI 350.00

213.55

136.45

119.67 256.12

3

SBI

1400.00 1137.24 262.76

402.13 664.89

Total

14.

OTS
amount
(Lakhs)

659.02 1276.94

1455.83 617.92

Total
dues as
per OTS
(Lakhs)

It is evident from the above that the company has failed to

liquidate the amounts payable to the secured creditors under the OTS
and that even in terms of the said scheme, there is a substantial
amount of Rs.12,76,94,000/- outstanding against it as on date.
15.

In so far as the unsecured creditors are concerned, while

according to the petitioner no amount is due to Bright Leasing &
Finance Ltd. and VLS Finance Ltd., respondents No. 16 and 17
respectively, the affidavit does not make any mention about the dues
of Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board.

Learned counsel

appearing for M/s VLS Finance Ltd., Respondent No.17 has however
filed a statement indicating the amount of Rs.58,77,677/- to be due
and recoverable on account of the principal and interest on the same.
Similarly, counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent Madhya
Pradesh State Electricity Board has also filed a statement indicating
that a sum of Rs.718.46 lacs was recoverable from the petitioner on
account of electric energy supplied to the mini steel plant, payment
whereof has not been made.
WP(C) 3720/2002

Learned counsel appearing for Bright
page 11 of 13

Leasing & Finance Ltd. concern, respondent No.16, pointed out that a
sum of Rs.3.18 crores was outstanding against the petitioner company
in terms of nine arbitral awards made against the petitioner in which
the liability of the petitioner had been adjudged.
16.

It is manifest from the above that apart from a sum of

Rs.12,76,94,000/- due to the secured creditors under the OTS, there is
an admitted sum of Rs.7.18 Crores due to the Madhya Pradesh State
Electricity Board.

A liability of more than Rs.20 crores thus exists

against the petitioner even on its own admission.

Apart from that,

Respondents No.16 and 17 make a further claim of nearly Rs.4 crores
which takes the total liability in the neighbourhood of Rs.24 crores or
so.

Confronted with this position, Mr. Chaddha, learned counsel

appearing for the petitioner, made a candid admission on the
instructions of Sh. Kailash Chand Maheshwari, the Joint Managing
Director of the company who was present in person on 14th February,
2008, that neither the company nor its promoters were in a position to
arrange that amount to pave way for a possible rehabilitation of the
company. What was argued by Mr.Chaddha was that the company is
negotiating with certain investors who may join the management and
bring in the required investment to pay up the outstanding liabilities
to bring the company on the path to recovery.

Since there was

nothing on record before us to support the assertion that any
negotiations were going on with any investor who are ready to pumpin that kind of money, we had given two weeks time to the company to
place on record a copy of the scheme, if any, formulated with the help
of the investors and affidavits of the investors to the effect that they
were ready to pump-in the additional investment required.

The

petitioner company has not however filed any such affidavit or scheme
which clearly implies that the prospects of any investor joining the
WP(C) 3720/2002

page 12 of 13

management of the company to help it out of the financial morass in
which it has landed itself are also bleak. Such being the position, no
useful purpose would be served by keeping these proceedings
pending any further. As on the date the orders of the BIFR and the
AAIFR were passed, the company was in no position to make its net
worth positive after liquidating the outstanding liability. Even after
the one time settlement which the company negotiated with the
secured creditors, the liability that remains outstanding is so huge
that the prospects of rehabilitation continue to remain dark.

The

inability of the promoters to bring in the additional investment for any
rehabilitative exercise either by themselves or with the help of any
investors leaves no option for the Court except to uphold the order
passed by the AAIFR for in the absence of any workable scheme of
rehabilitation, winding up would remain the only other option. Any
further attempts at finding newer and more ingenious ways of
rehabilitation would only be tantamount to “flogging a dead horse” –
to use the expression of their lordships of the Supreme Court in U.P.

Financial Corporation and Others v. Naini Oxygen & Acetylene
Gas Ltd. and Another (1995) 2 SCC 754.
17.

In the result, this writ petition fails and is hereby dismissed but

in the circumstances without any order as to costs.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

ARUNA SURESH, J.
APRIL 11, 2008
pk

WP(C) 3720/2002

page 13 of 13

