THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
DATE OF DECISION : 11.04.2008
+ W.P.(C) 573/2008
SUMMIT INPORT SERVICES LTD. & ANR. ..... Petitioners
Through Mr. Arun Jaitley, Sr. Adv. with Mr. P.D. Gupta,
Mr. Kamal Gupta, Abhishek Gupta, advs.
versus
DELHI METRO RAIL CORPORATION & ORS .... Respondents
Through Mr. V.K. Shali, adv. for DMRC
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, adv. with Mr. Ramesh Ray, Mr. H.P.
Sahu, advs. for LAC
+ W.P.(C) 716/2008
NEERA JAIN

..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Arun Jaitley, Sr. Adv. with Mr. P.D. Gupta,
Mr. Kamal Gupta, Abhishek Gupta, advs.

versus
DELHI METRO RAIL CORPORATION & ORS. ..... Respondents
Through Mr. V.K. Shali, adv. for DMRC
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, adv. with Mr. Ramesh Ray, Mr. H.P.
Sahu, advs. for LAC
+ W.P.(C) 802/2008
SULTANPUR FARMS WELFARE ASSOCIATION..... Petitioner
Through Mr. Ravinder Sethi, Sr. adv. with Mr. Rajat
Aneja, Mr. Neeraj Grover, advs.
versus
DELHI METRO RAIL CORPORATION & ORS. ..... Respondents
Through Mr. V.K. Shali, adv. for DMRC
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, adv. with Mr. Ramesh Ray, Mr. H.P.

Sahu, advs. for LAC
CORAM:

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH

1Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the judgment?YES
2To be referred to the Reporter or not?YES
3Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?YES

Per Thakur, J.

In these petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the
petitioners have assailed the validity of a notification dated 10.08.07 issued
under Sections 4, 17(1) and 17(4) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 proposing
to acquire an area measuring 16468.76 square metres comprising different
survey numbers mentioned in the said notification situate in Village Sultanpur of
Delhi. A declaration dated 1st November, 2007 issued under Section 6 of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 in relation to the said land has also been assailed.
2.

The petitioners are owners of different parcels of land situate in different

survey numbers of village Sultanpur, Tehsil Hauz Khas, New Delhi. An area
measuring 16468.76 from out of the said survey numbers was requisitioned by
the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation for construction of its Depot at Ghitorni in
connection with what is known as “Qutub Minar-Gurgaon Corridor Delhi MRTS
Project Phase-II”.

Upon consideration of the said requirement of the

Corporation, the Lieutenant Governor issued a notification dated 10.08.07 under

Section 4(1) readwith Sections 17(1) and (4) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
proposing to acquire the aforementioned extent of land for the public purpose
referred to above. This was followed by Declarations dated 01.11.07 under
Section 6 of the Act, in respect of the aforementioned extent of the land and the
residential buildings constructed over the same. By another notification of even
date, the Land Acquisition Collector was directed to take the possession of the
aforesaid land and residential properties belonging to the petitioners at the end
of 15 days of publication of notice under Section 9(1) of the Act. Aggrieved, the
petitioners have assailed the said notifications in the present writ petitions, as
already indicated above.
3.

Appearing for the petitioners, Mr. Arun Jaitley, learned senior counsel

argued that the impugned notification, to the extent the same invoked the
emergency provisions under Section 17(1) and dispensed with the hearing of
objections under Section 5-A of the Act, was illegal. He urged that the proposal
for acquisition of the land in question had been sent by the Corporation on
19.3.2007 but a notification based on the said proposal was issued only 5
months later, i.e., on 10.08.07. He further argued that even the declaration

under Section 6 of the Act was also delayed by nearly 3 months and issued only

on 1

st

November, 2007.

This according to Mr. Jaitley, implied that the

authorities were taking their own time in proceeding with the proposed
acquisition of land and there was in reality no urgency in the same so as to
justify dispensing with the hearing of objections of the affected land owners.
Relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India and Others
Versus Krishan Lal Arneja and Others, 2004 (8) SCC 453, Mr. Jaitley contended
that the respondents could not take resort to emergency provisions only to cover
up their own lethargy in the matter.
4.

Alternatively, Mr. Jaitley argued that the proposed Depot of the DMRC

could be constructed on a slightly different alignment in which event the
respondents would not be required to acquire any private land. An alternative
plan for construction of the Depot on an altered alignment was presented by Mr.
Jaitley in the course of hearing. Relying upon an order passed by this Court in
Fountainhead Motels P. Ltd. Versus UOI and Ors., [WP(C) No. 6275/2007
Decided on 10.10.2007], Mr. Jaitley submitted that the respondents could even

in the present case examine the proposed modification and suitably alter the
plans to avoid hardship to the petitioners.

He urged that the proposed

acquisition would landlock the petitioners’ property left out of acquisition and
thereby deprive them of its gainful use and enjoyment.
5.

Mr. Sethi who also appeared for some of the petitioners, apart from

adopting the submissions made by Mr. Jaitley, contended that the proposed
acquisition of the land belonging to the petitioners for the benefit of the
respondent DMRC was impermissible under the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act. He urged that although a similar argument had been repelled
by a Division Bench of this Court in Pawan Singh & Ors. Versus Union of India
& Ors., 112 (2004) DLT 420 (DB) and Ram Niwas Versus Lt. Governor and
Ors., [WP(C) No. 4981/2007 Decided on 13.07.2007], yet this Court could reexamine the said question and refer the matter to a larger Bench especially
because the earlier decisions referred to above had not considered the effect
and purpose of Section 45 of the DMRC Act, while rejecting the contention
urged on behalf of the petitioners.
6.

Appearing for the respondents, Mr. Poddar, on the other hand, submitted

that the petitioners had not laid any foundation in the objections for the
contention that the invocation of the emergency provisions under Section 17 of
the Act was unjustified or that the authorities were lethargic in processing the
case for the proposed acquisition of land in question. He distinguished the
decision in Pawan Singh’s Case (supra) and submitted that the fact situation in
the case at hand was totally different. He urged on the basis of the official
records produced by him that there was indeed no delay in processing the
papers for acquisition of the land which was required by the DMRC on an urgent
basis and that the period between March 2007 when the proposal was sent and
August 2007 when the preliminary notification was issued had been utilized by
the authorities for conducting a joint survey identifying the actual Khasra Nos.
and actual area falling under each one of them as also the amount of
compensation payable to the land owners. The report by the Land Acquisition
Collector in that regard was received only on 8th July, 2007 which included the
estimate of the compensation, etc.

The matter was then put up to the Lt.

Governor on 19th July, 2007 who passed an order on 3rd August, 2007

authorising the issue of a preliminary notification and invoking the emergency
provisions of Section 17(1) and (4).
7.

As regards the validity of the acquisition of the land under the Land

Acquisition Act, for the benefit of DMRC, it was argued by Mr. Poddar that the
issue stood squarely covered by the two decisions rendered by this Court which
decisions having been rendered by a Bench of co-ordinate jurisdiction were
binding upon this Court.
8.

On behalf of DMRC, Mr. Shali, contended that the alternative plan which

the petitioners had proposed was not technically feasible and would involve
acquisition of private land from out of densely populated areas and farm houses
situate at the periphery of the NBCC Campus in which the Depot was to be
located as per the said plans. It was further submitted that the construction of
the Depot on the alignment suggested by the petitioners would render the
vacant area on either side of the Depot useless and hence a waste. Even so,
the DMRC was ready to examine the technical feasibility of the proposed
alignment in presence of the petitioners and submit its response and affidavit.
9.

We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions made at the

Bar and perused the record.

The invocation of emergency powers under

Sections 17(1) and (4) of the Act has been questioned by the petitioners only on
the ground of delay in the issue of the preliminary notification. The contention
urged is that a delay of 5 months between the date on which the proposal was
sent by the DMRC and the date of issue of the preliminary notification itself
showed that there was no urgency in the matter so as to justify the dispensing of
an enquiry under Section 5-A. Reliance as mentioned earlier was placed upon
a decision of the Supreme Court in Krishan Lal Arneja’s Case (Supra). A careful
reading of the said decision, however, shows that the fact situation in which the
same was rendered was entirely different and clearly distinguishable from the
facts of the present case. In that case, the properties in question had been
requisitioned for a long time before the Government decided to acquire the
same in the year 1987 by invoking its emergency powers.

The acquisition

proceedings were in that backdrop successfully challenged before the High
Court by the petitioners. The High Court inter alia took the view that there was
no reference to urgency in the notification issued by the Government. In an
appeal filed by the Union of India against the judgment, one of the questions

that arose for consideration was whether the invocation of the emergency
provision was justified in the facts and circumstances of the case. Answering
the question in the negative, the court traced the historical background in which
the decision to permanently acquire the properties under acquisition was taken.
The court observed :
“In these appeals also, the properties in question had been under
requisition for a very long time. It appears, the Union Works and
Housing Minister on 28.3.1985 assured the Lok Sabha that the
Government would return all requisitioned properties within two
years or acquire it permanently after paying compensation. This
announcement came at the end of the debate on the Requisitioning
and Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment) Bill, 1985
which later became Act. From the debate, it is also clear that the
National Conference Member mentioned about the difficulties faced
by many people whose properties were requisitioned for one
purpose or the other. The Minister informed that he had written letter
to the concerned for making arrangements for vacating or
permanently acquiring the properties within next two years.”
10.

It is clear from the above passage that the decision to return the

requisitioned properties within two years or to acquire them permanently after
paying the compensation had been taken much before the date on which the
emergency powers were invoked by the Government.

Their lordships,

therefore, recorded a finding that the authorities were aware that the properties

were to be released or to be acquired and the maximum period for doing so was
extended by two years. During this period, the authorities had sufficient time to
provide an opportunity to the owners to file objections and the Collector to hold
an inquiry under Section 5-A of the Act thus making it necessary to invoke
emergency powers vested in the Government under Section 17 of the Act. The
following passage is in this regard is apposite :“It was, therefore, decided to extend the maximum period for which
the properties could be retained under requisition by a period of two
years. Thus, it is clear that the authorities were aware that the
properties were to be released or acquired and the maximum period
was extended upto two years for the purpose. From 1985 to 1987
they had sufficient time to acquire the properties in question in the
usual course. They had enough time to provide opportunity for filing
objections and holding inquiry under Section 5A of the Act. There
was no need to invoke Section 17 of the Act. The Office
Memorandum dated 19.7.1979 extracted above shows that the
Executive Council took the decision in view of the amendment in the
Requisition and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 with all
the requisitioned/leased houses which were with the Administration
for more than 10 years were to be released to their owners
immediately and all the occupants of requisitioned/leased houses
were requested to furnish the relevant information by 16.7.1979
failing which the officer concerned will be liable for eviction from the
requisitioned house without provision for alternative accommodation.
Here again, it is clear that the authorities were in know of the
situation in the year 1979 itself.”

11.

It was in the above background that their lordships declared that for

purposes of Section 17 of the Act, the urgency should be one arising naturally
out of the circumstances which exist when the decision to acquire the land is
taken and not such as is the result of serious lapse or gross delay on the part of
the acquiring authority.
12.

The ratio of the decision rendered by their lordships in Arneja’ Case

(supra) has to be understood in the context in which the decision in that case
was delivered. The juristic principle that emerges from the said decision simply
is that a serious lapse or gross delay on the part of the acquiring authority could
not justify invocation of the emergency provisions. The question whether there
has been any serious lapse or gross delay on the part of the acquiring body
would, however, have to be seen in the fact situation of each case.
13.

In the case at hand, there has been no gross delay or serious lapse of the

kind referred to in Arneja’s Case (supra). The proposal for acquisition of the
land was sent by the DMRC in March 2007 which was incomplete in many
respects in as much as the requisition was

accompanied only by a simple

sketch of the land without any further details. On receipt of the request, the

authorities had to carry out a survey, identify the actual khasra numbers under
which the land in question fell, verify the extent of land falling under each Khasra
No., prepare an estimate of the compensation payable to the land owners in
order to ensure that 80% of the compensation amount is paid to the land owners
at the time of taking over the possession from them.

All this required an

exercise which was bound to take time and was completed in a period of less
than three months by the authorities culminating in a report from the Land

Acquisition Collector on 8

th

June, 2007. The matter thereafter was examined at

the Government level and placed before the Lt. Governor who passed an order
dated 3.8.2007.
14.

It is difficult to see how a time gap of four to five months essential for

collecting the requisite information, conducting a survey, preparing estimates of
compensation can be said to be tantamount to gross delay on the part of the
authorities so as to invalidate the invocation of the emergency powers vested in
the Government under Section 17.

This is especially so when the land in

question is required for a very prestigious project like the Delhi Metro Rail

Project which has to be commissioned before the Common Wealth Games
scheduled to be held in 2010. In the circumstances, therefore, we have no
hesitation in rejecting the first limb of the submissions made by Mr. Jaitley that
the notification in question suffered from any legal infirmity on account of
wrongful denial of opportunity to file objections under Section 5-A of the Act.
15.

That brings us to the question whether the acquisition of land for the

benefit of DMRC project is permissible under the Land Acquisition Act.

As

noticed earlier, a similar question was raised before a Division Bench of this
Court in Pawan Singh’s Case (supra).

Relying upon the decision of the

Supreme Court in S.S. Darshan Versus State of Karnataka & Ors., AIR 1996 SC
671, Savitri Cairae Versus U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad & Anr., 2003 (5)
SCALE 93 and Nagpur Improvement Trust Versus Vasantrao and Others,
(2002) 7 SCC 657, the Court repelled the contention in the following words :
“Thus, however attractive may be the submission of the petitioners, it
has no merit in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in
the afore noted cases. No doubt, in view of the special scheme
provided under the Metro Railways Act, it is expected that when the
land, building, etc. is sought to be acquired for the purpose of metro
railways, provisions of this Act should normally be resorted to.
However, that is not to say that machinery under the Land

Acquisition Act cannot be resorted to at all. It may be noted that
resort to the provisions of Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act by
the Government thereby invoking the urgency clause is not
challenged by the petitioners. Therefore, the exercise of the
respondents in invoking the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act
for acquisition of land for the purpose of Prem Nagar MRTS Station,
i.e., the metro railway cannot be faulted with. We are, thus,
constrained to dismiss these writ petitions.”
16.

To the same effect is the decision of this Court in Ram Niwas Versus Lt.

Governor and Ors., [WP(C) No. 4981/2007 Decided on 13.07.2007], where the
Court has while dealing with a similar contention observed :
“So far as not resorting to the Metro Act and instead acquiring lands
via the Land Acquisition Act is concerned, the matter has been
considered in great detail in the decision of the Division Bench titled
as Pawan Singh and Ors. Versus UOI and Ors., 112 (2004) 420
(DB). Significantly, Mr. Vats also appeared in that case. The Court
upheld the acquisition under the Land Acquisition Act even though
an alternate method under the Metro Act was available and had not
been utilized. We find no reason whatever to take a different view
from this detailed and lucid judgment, and instead refer the matter to
Hon’ble the Chief Justice for constitution of a Larger Bench. The
argument is rejected.”
17.

Both the above decisions having been rendered by Division Benches of

this Court are binding upon us. In any event, the contention of Mr. Sethi that the
Court has not in the said cases examined the effect of Section 45 of the Metro

Railway Construction of Works Act, 1978 does not appear to be correct. A
reading of the decision in Pawan Singh’s Case (supra) would clearly show that
the Court was conscious of and has referred to the provisions of Section 45 of
the said Act. It is common ground that the decision in Pawan Singh’s Case
(supra) has been assailed in the Supreme Court where the same is presently
pending. In the circumstances, therefore, we see no compelling reason for us to
re-examine the question and would rest content with following the ratio of the
said decision which at any rate is binding upon us as a Bench of coordinate
jurisdiction.
18.

That leaves us with the only other question whether the alternative plan

which the petitioners had suggested is technically feasible and ought to be
implemented by them. As noticed earlier, the respondents DMRC has disputed
the technical feasibility of the alternative plan. Since however the parties were
not averse to examining the alternative suggested by petitioners more
thoroughly, they were given an opportunity to do so. Based on the exercise so
undertaken by the parties, they have submitted their versions on affidavits. The
DMRC has in the affidavit filed on its behalf asserted that the alternative

proposal given by the petitioners is not technically feasible and would involve
acquisition of private land from thickly populated areas located at the end of the
Depot towards Ghitorni. This court sitting in its extraordinary writ jurisdiction is
ill-equipped to sit in judgment over the view taken by the experts in whose
opinion the proposed alternative plan for the Depot is not technically feasible.
The choice of the location of the Depot or any other project for that matter is
ordinarily within the administrative discretion of the respondents. A writ court
would not in exercise of its powers of judicial review sit in judgment over the said
choice or embark upon an exercise to determine the locational advantages and
disadvantages of the project at one or the other place.

Interference in the

matter of such decisions may be called for only in cases of patent perversity or
irrationality. The court may be induced to examine the validity of any such
decision only in case it is shown to be so outrageously illogical that no person of
ordinary prudence would countenance the same.

The present is not in our

opinion one such case where the decision to locate the proposed Depot at the
site selected by the respondents can be said to be irrational or perverse. Simply
because another site may be equally good or even better, is no reason for this

court to interfere with the decision already taken by the authorities. The third
limb advanced on behalf of the petitioners must also in that view of the matter
fail and is hereby rejected.
19.

That brings us to the question whether the petitioners' land would get

landlocked by acquisition of their front. The respondent corporation has allayed
that apprehension of the petitioners and in the affidavit filed on its behalf clearly
stated that the petitioners farmhouses would be given access from a 5-3 metres
wide peripheral road located at the points indicated in the map enclosed with the
counter affidavit. Para 9 of the counter affidavit may in this regard be extracted.
“At the periphery of the Depot, there is a road provided for the
circulation of the vehicles and staff which is shown in dotted violet
colour. The petitioner and the owners of Akash Jain farm will be
given access from a peripheral road which will be 5-3 metres wide
from portion shown more particularly in the plan at point ‘A’
wherefrom they will proceed to their respective farms from point ‘B’
and point ‘C’. Therefore, the averments made by the petitioners that
their remaining land is becoming land locked, is totally incorrect and
right of access is being provided by the answering respondent from
the land which has been acquired by the respondent No. 2 to 4
without anything being charged from them.”
20.

In the light of the above clear statement made on behalf of the

respondents, we see no hardship being caused to the petitioner on account of

their property getting landlocked by reason of construction of the Depot. 21.
In the result, these writ petitions fail and are hereby dismissed but in the
circumstances without any orders as to costs.

We make it clear that the

petitioners shall be entitled to make use of the access to their farmhouse in
terms of para 9 of the counter affidavit and the site plan enclosed with the same.
T.S. THAKUR, J.

ARUNA SURESH, J.
APRIL 11, 2008
manish

