*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) No. 1524/2008
Date of Decision:

#
!

11th April, 2008

DEEPAK RESORTS & HOTELS P. LTD
& ANR.
..... Petitioners
Through : Mr.P.N. Lekhi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Pankaj Vivek, Adv.
versus

$
^

UOI & ORS.

...... Respondents
Through : Mr. Sanjay Poddar, Adv. for LAC
Mr. Sandeep Aggarwal, Mr. K.A.
Mr. K.A. Singh, Adv. for R-4

+

W.P.(C) No. 1537/2008

#
!

MADU SINGH & ORS.
..... Petitioners
Through : Mr. Sanjay Jain, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Arjun Mitra, Mr. Pankaj Vivek, Advs.
versus

$
^

UOI & ORS.

...... Respondents
Through : Mr. Sanjay Poddar, Adv. for LAC
Mr. Sandeep Aggarwal, Mr. K.A.
Mr. K.A. Singh, Adv. for R-4

%
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

Yes

:

T.S. THAKUR, J.
Undeterred by the dismissal of two earlier petitions aimed at stalling the

construction of a Sewerage Treatment Plant in village Kapashera of Delhi, the petitioners

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 1 of 14

have filed the present writ petitions assailing the acquisition proceedings mainly on the
ground that no public notice in terms of Section 9(1) of the Land Acquisition Act was
issued nor was the compensation payable to the petitioners in terms of Section 17(3-A)
tendered to them. This according to the petitioners not only renders their dispossession
illegal but vitiates the acquisition proceedings in toto. The writ petitions accordingly
pray for a declaration to the effect that issue of a notice under Section 9(3) of the Act is a
sine qua non for taking actual physical possession of the land and so is payment of 80%
of the compensation assessed under Section 17(3-A) thereof. A mandamus directing the
respondents not to interfere with the possession of the petitioners over the lands under
acquisition has also been prayed for.

The controversy arises in the following

circumstances :
2.

st

By a notification dated 1 September, 2007 issued under Section 4(17)(1)(4) of

the Land Acquisition Act, an area measuring 19 bigha and 4 biswas situate in different
survey numbers of village Kapashera mentioned in the said notification was notified for
acquisition for the public purpose of setting up of a Sewerage Treatment Plant. A
st

declaration under Section 6 of the Act was issued on 31 October, 2007 and so was an
st

order dated 31 October, 2007 under Section 17(1) of the Act authorising taking over of
possession of the said land. Aggrieved by the said notifications, the petitioners preferred
writ petition No. 9005/2007 which was heard and eventually dismissed by an order of
th

this Court dated 8 February, 2008. Repelling the contentions urged on behalf of the
petitioners, this court held that the acquisition proceedings were for a public purpose and
that the same were being conducted in accordance with the procedure established by law.
The court also repelled the contention that the location of the proposed Sewerage
WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 2 of 14

Treatment Plant was not conducive to the environment for the inhabitants of village
Kapashera. Another petition No. 6526/2007 filed in public interest in that regard was
th

also dismissed by a separate order passed by this court on 8 February, 2008. The Court
declared that the location of the proposed Sewerage Treatment Plant was a matter which
was in the discretion of the executive authorities and that interference with any decision
taken by them would be justified only if the same was outrageously irrational or perverse.
That apart, the Court noticed that the concerns expressed by the villagers regarding the
suitability of the location of the sewerage treatment plant had been examined by the
Monitoring Committee headed by the Chief Secretary of the State and the apprehensions
expressed found to be without any basis.

The dismissal of the earlier petitions

notwithstanding, the petitioners are back in the Court with the present two writ petitions
in which they have, as already noticed earlier, assailed the validity of the proceedings on
the ground that no notice in terms of Section 9(1) and Section 9(3) of the Act had been
issued to them nor was a compensation referred to in Section 17(3-A) ever tendered. The
failure of the respondents to strictly observe the said statutory requirements has,
according to the petitioners, the effect of vitiating the acquisition proceedings in toto.
3.

Appearing for the petitioners, Messrs P.N. Lekhi and Sanjay Jain argued that

taking over of possession even when authorised in terms of an order passed under Section
17(1) was possible only if the requirements of Section 9 of the Act were strictly complied
with. The failure of the respondents to do so, argued the learned counsel, had the effect
of rendering the entire process illegal including the notifications issued earlier, no matter
the same may have been upheld by this Court in the previous round of litigation.
Reliance in support of that submission was placed upon the decisions of the Supreme
WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 3 of 14

Court in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India & Ors.
(1979) 3 SCC 489, Pratibha Nema and Ors. v. State of MP & Ors. (2003) 10 SCC 626,
M/s G.J. Fernandez v. State of Karnataka and Ors. (1990) 2 SCC 488, Pramod Jha &
Ors. v. State of Bihar and Ors. (2003) 4 SCC 619.
4.

Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act inter alia provides that in cases of

urgency, whenever the appropriate Government so directs, the Collector may even in the
absence of an award, take possession of any land needed for any public purpose upon
expiration of 15 days from the publication of the notice mentioned in Section 9(1). Subsection 3 of Section 17 further provides that the Collector shall, at the time of taking
possession, offer to the persons interested compensation for standing crops and trees, if
any, on such land and for any other damages sustained by them caused by such sudden
dispossession and not excepted in Section 24. In terms of sub-section 3A of Section 17,
the Collector is under an obligation to tender payment of 80% of the compensation for
such land as estimated by him to the persons interested and entitled thereto and pay the
same to them unless prevented by someone or more of the contingencies mentioned in
Section 31(2). Sub-section 3B of Section 17 provides that the amount paid or deposited
under sub-section 3A of Section 17 shall be taken into account for determining the
amount of compensation required to be tendered under Section 31 and where the amount
so paid or deposited exceeds the compensation awarded by the Collector under Section
11, the excess made unless refunded within three months be recovered as an arrear of
land revenue. For facility of easy reference, we may extract the provisions of Section
17(1), 17(3), 17(3A) and 17(3B) which alone are relevant for our purposes :
“17. Special powers in cases of urgency.-

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 4 of 14

(1) In cases of urgency, whenever the Appropriate
Government so directs, the Collector, though no such
award has been made, may, on the expiration of fifteen
days from the publication of the notice mentioned in
section 9, sub-section (1), [take possession of any waste
or arable land needed for a public purpose]. Such land
shall thereupon vest absolutely in the Government, free
from all encumbrances.
17(2) XXXX
17(3) In every case under either of the preceding subsections the Collector shall at the time of taking
possession offer to the persons interested, compensation
for the standing crops and trees (if any) on such land
and for any other damage sustained by them caused by
such sudden dispossession and not excepted in section
24; and, in case such offer is not accepted, the value of
such crops and trees and the amount of such other
damage shall be allowed for in awarding compensation
for the land under the provisions herein contained.
Section 17(3A) - Before taking possession of any land
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Collector
shall, without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section
(3),-(a) tender payment of eighty per centum of the
compensation for such land as estimated by him to the
persons interested entitled thereto, and
(b) pay it to them, unless prevented by some one or
more of the contingencies mentioned in section 31, subsection (2), and where the Collector is so prevented, the
provisions of section 31, sub-section (2), (except the
second proviso thereto), shall apply as they apply to the
payment of compensation under that section.
Section 17 (3-B) - The amount paid or deposited under
sub-section (3A), shall be taken into account for
determining the amount of compensation required to be
tendered under section 31, and where the amount so
paid or deposited exceeds the compensation awarded by
the Collector under section 11, the excess may, unless
refunded within three months from the date of the
Collector's award, be recovered as an arrear of land
revenue.”

5.

A careful reading of Section 17(1) would show that the same empowers the

appropriate Government to direct the Collector to take possession. What is important is
that such direction can authorise the Collector to take possession of the land under
acquisition even when no award has been made by him in respect of the land in question.
The only limitation on the power to take possession is that the same can be done upon
WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 5 of 14

expiration of 15 days from the publication of the notice mentioned in Section 9(1).
Section 9(1) of the Act envisages the issue of a public notice at convenient places on or
near the land to be taken stating that the Government intends to take possession of the
land and that claims to compensation for all interests in such land may be made to him. It
reads as under :
“9. Notice to persons interested.- (1) The Collector
shall then cause public notice to be given at convenient
places on or near the land to be taken, stating that the
Government intends to take possession of the land, and
that claims to compensation for all interests in such land
may be made to him.”

6.

A conjoint reading of Section 9(1) and Section 17(1) supra would leave no

manner of doubt that the very purpose underlying the issue of a public notice is to invite
claims for payment of compensation to all those interested in the same. The purpose
behind the issue of such a public notice is not to hear objections as to whether possession
of the land should or should not be taken over by the Collector. The purpose simply is to
invite claims for payment of compensation for all interests held in the land under
acquisition. Mr. Lekhi however argued that not only should a notice be issued under
Section 9(1) before possession can be taken over by the Collector, but a notice under
Section 9(3) to the occupier of the land and on all such persons known or believed to be
interested therein is also a mandatory condition precedent. He urged that the failure of
the Collector to issue notice in terms of Section 9(3) was tantamount to a fatal procedural
infirmity which would vitiate the entire acquisition proceedings. There is, in our opinion,
no merit in that contention whatsoever. Section 17(1) of the Act is specific and refers
only to notice under Section 9(1) of the Act as a requirement before possession can be
taken by the Collector in exercise of the special powers vested in the Government.

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 6 of 14

Section 17(1) does not in terms or by implication howsoever far fetched require the
Collector to wait till a notice is served by him upon the occupier of the land or persons
interested in the same within the comprehension of Section 9(3) of the Act. Accepting
the submissions made by Mr. Lekhi that a notice under Section 9(3) is also essential for
taking possession under Section 17(1) would amount to re-writing the Statute. There is,
in our view, no juristic or any other rational basis for the interpretation suggested by
learned counsel for the petitioners. The prayer for a declaration made by the petitioners
that a notice under sub-section 3 of Section 9 of the Act is a sine qua non for taking over
actual physical possession must therefore fail and is accordingly rejected.
7.

It was next argued by learned counsel for the petitioners that even a notice under

Section 9(1) of the Act had not been issued. This according to them has the effect of
vitiating the acquisition proceedings. We do not think so for two precise reasons. Firstly
because the official record produced by Mr. Poddar shows that a notice under Section
9(1) was in fact issued by the Collector 15 days before the possession of the land was
th

taken by him on the 5 December, 2007. Secondly because the failure of a notice under
Section 9(1) does not have the effect of vitiating the acquisition proceedings themselves
as was argued on behalf of the petitioners. That is because the purpose underlying the
issue of the notice is simply to invite claims for payment of compensation for the land
under acquisition. The non-issue of a public notice in terms of Section 9(1) of the Act
may be an irregularity but the same does not have the effect of nullifying the acquisition
proceedings themselves. The purpose underlying that notice is as well served by a notice
to the occupier and the persons interested under Section 9(3) of the Act. It is not the case
of the petitioners that the Collector has made an award without inviting claims as
WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 7 of 14

required under Section 9(3). The argument on the contrary was that no award has been
made by the Collector hence, there was no occasion for him to tender 80% of the
compensation payable for the land in question. We shall presently deal with the later
limb of the argument. Suffice it to say that so long as the occupier or the owner of the
land or any person interested in the land is given a notice under Section 9(3) before the
making of the award and so long as any such owner, occupier or person interested has an
opportunity to make a claim for payment of compensation before the making of the
award, the absence of a public notice under Section 9(1) would not invalidate the
proceedings. We are supported in that view by a Division Bench decision of this Court in
th

Shyam Lal CWP No. 4260/1998 decided on 10 February, 2003, where the Court
observed:“By notice under Section (1) the Government did
authorize the Collector Land Acquisition to take over
possession and obviously mandate was to take
possession after expiration of period of 15 days on
publication of notice under sub-section (1) of Section 9
but non-compliance of this requirement of issuing notice
under sub-section (1) of Section 9 will not vitiate the act
of taking over possession by the Collector. It is merely
an irregularity and will not make the action of the
Collector as void or non-est since he had authorisation of
the Government to take over possession of the land
sought to be acquired, which pre-supposed the
satisfaction of the Government of the urgency. It is not
shown that any prejudice has been caused to the
petitioner due to non-compliance, since compensation
has yet to be paid and the petitioner has already laid a
claim, may be by this very petition.”

8.

Reference may also be made to a Full Bench decision of this court in Roshnara

Begum v. Union of India 61 (1996) DLT 206 where the Court has observed :
“In some of the cases, the plea taken was that notices
under Sections 9 & 10 have not been served and thus
the acquisition proceedings have become void. In the
case of Jatan Singh (supra) the Supreme Court has held
that even if there has been no service of notices under
Sections 9 & 10 which are meant only for taking
proceeding for determining compensation even then the
same would not affect the acquisition proceedings. (para
113)

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 8 of 14

XXXX
XXXX
XXXX
.......A large number of judgments lay down that nonservice of notices under Sections 9, 10 or under Section
12 of the Act do not vitiate the acquisition proceedings.
(See Ezra Vs Secretary of State (supra ), Kasturi Pillai Vs
Municipal Council, AIR 1920 Madras 417, Shivdev Singh
Vs Stale of Bihar & Others, AIR 1963 Patna 201,
Prasanna Kumar Dass & Others Vs State of Orissa, 1956
Orissa 114, Yousuf Begam Vs State of Andhra Pradesh &
Others, AIR 1969 AP 10, P.KShaikh Vs Stale of West
Bengal & Others, AIR 1976 Calcutta 149, Lakhbir Chand
Vs Land Acquisition Collector, Delhi & Others, AIR 1979
Delhi 53, Slate of Punjab Vs Gurdial Singh & Another,
AIR 1984 P&H 1, Manakchand Sarupchand Lunavat &
Others Vs Stale of Maharashtra & Others, AIR 1989
Bombay 339 and Dr.G.H.Grant Vs State of Bihar, AIR
1966 SC 237.” (Para 121)

9.

It was next argued by Mr. Lekhi that tender of 80% of the compensation payable

for the land in terms of Section 17(3A) was a mandatory requirement, the failure whereof
would render the taking over of possession as also the acquisition proceedings legally
bad. It was contended that even when the term 'compensation' used in the Act has not
been defined, the term must be given the same meaning wherever it appears in the entire
enactment. Viewed thus, the payment of compensation referred to in Section 17(3A),
argued Mr. Lekhi, must necessarily mean compensation which is found to be payable
upon the making of an award by the Collector under Section 11 of the Act. This,
according to Mr. Lekhi, would lead us to the conclusion that possession under Section
17(1) cannot be taken over by the Collector so long as the Collector has not made an
award under Section 11 of the Act, 80% whereof must then be offered to the land owner
before the possession can be taken over from him. That contention appears to us to be
totally fallacious and is based on a complete misreading of the provisions contained in
Section 17. We say so for three distinct reasons. Firstly because Section 17(1) itself
provides that the appropriate Government may direct the Collector to take over

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 9 of 14

possession of the land in question even though no award has been made by him. The
words “though no such award has been made” are significant and imply that taking over
of possession by the Collector is a process that is not in the least dependent upon the
making of an award. Secondly because compensation referred to in sub-section 3A of
Section 17 is the estimated amount of compensation and not the amount eventually
determined as payable under the Award. This is evident from the use of the words
“tender payment of 80% of the compensation for such land as estimated by him”. The
difference between compensation payable in terms of the award and that payable under
Section 17(3A) is that while compensation determined by the award attains finality qua
the Collector in view of the provisions of Section 12, compensation payable under
Section 3A is only an estimate which the Collector makes, out of which 80% has to be
tendered to the owner before taking possession. Indeed if the interpretation offered by
Mr. Lekhi were to be accepted and making of a final award taken as a condition
precedent for dispossession of the owner, there would be no rationale behind withholding
20% compensation from him once the said compensation has been determined. That is
particularly so when Section 31 of the Act obliges the Collector to tender the payment of
compensation awarded by him to the persons interested thereto according to the award
and to pay it to them unless prevented by someone or more of the contingencies
mentioned in sub-section 2 thereof. Suffice it to say that payment of only 80% of the
compensation is provided for by the Act only because what is being paid is only an
estimate made at a point of time when the award has yet to be made and published by the
Collector.
10.

Thirdly because in terms of sub-section 3B of Section 17, the amount paid or

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 10 of 14

deposited under Section 3A has to be taken into account for determining the amount of
compensation required to be tendered under Section 31. The provision clearly envisages
recovery of the excess, if any, paid as arrears of land revenue unless the same is refunded
by the person who has received the same . The question of receiving excess or refunding
would not arise if the payment under Section 17 (3A) is a payment strictly in accordance
with the award made under Section 11. The scheme of the Act and in particular Section
17 is that payment of 80% estimated compensation is what is required as a condition
precedent for taking of possession and not the compensation finally held payable under
the award.
11.

In the instant cases, the Collector appears to have estimated the amount of

compensation payable to the owners on the basis of the minimum value of agricultural
land fixed by the Government. The official record produced by Mr. Poddar shows that
the Collector had estimated the value of the land at Rs.73,14,944/- by taking the market
value of the land to be Rs.17,58,400/- per acre as fixed by the Government in terms of the
notification issued by it. There was therefore a good basis for the estimate made by the
Collector. At any rate, the petitioners have not assailed the validity of the estimate before
us.
12.

The next question then is whether the amount mentioned above was offered to the

petitioners and in the event of a default, whether the same would render the acquisition
proceedings illegal.

Mr. Poddar placed reliance upon the official record in this

connection and argued that the amount of compensation was tendered to the land owners
th

in terms of a letter dated 25 February, 2008. The letter reads :
“OFFICE OF THE ADDL. DISTRICT MAGISTRATE/LAC
(SOUTH WEST), ROOM NO. 12, OLD TERMINAL
WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 11 of 14

TAX BUILDING, KAPASHERA, NEW DELHI
No. ADM/LAC/SW07-08/1527
25/02/08

Dated

To,
M/s Deepak Resorts & Hotels,
C-41, Anand Niketan,
New Delhi.
Sub : CWP No. 9005/2007 titled Deepak Resorts Vs/ UOI
village Kapashera, Khasra No. 23/6/1 (1-00); 6/2 (100), 15/1(1-02), 15/3(2-08), 24/11(2-06)
Sir,
It is to inform you that the 80% estimated
payment has already been received by the requisitioning
agency/L&B. The Hon'ble Court of Delhi vide order
dated 08/02/06 has decided the matter in favour of
govt. It is therefore requested to collect the amount of
80% compensation on any working day from the office
of undersigned and also follow the codal formalities like
submitting of surety bonds along with affidavits
regarding ownership.
Please expedite the formalities at your end as the
cheque is ready for dispersal.
Yours faithfully,
sd/Y.V.V.J. RAJASHEKHAR
ADM/LAC/SW”

13.

Although Mr. Lekhi denied the receipt of any such letter, the same need not halt

us in answering the question raised by Mr. Lekhi on the legal principles that now stand
settled by the decision of the Supreme Court in Satendra Prasad Jain v. State of U.P.
(1993) 4 SCC 369. One of the issues that fell for consideration in that case was whether
failure on the part of the authorities to tender 80% of the estimated compensation for the
land would vitiate the acquisition proceedings or render illegal the process of taking over
of possession. Answering the question in the negative, their Lordships observed:
“16. Further, Section 17(3-A) postulates that the owner
will be offered an amount equivalent to 80 per cent of
the estimated compensation for the land before the
Government takes possession of it under Section 17(1).
Section 11-A cannot be so construed as to leave the
Government holding title to the land without the
obligation to determine compensation, make an award

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 12 of 14

and pay to the owner the difference between the amount
of the award and the amount of 80 per cent of the
estimated compensation.
17. In the instant case, even that 80 per cent of the
estimated compensation was not paid to the appellants
although Section 17(3-A) required that it should have
been paid before possession of the said land was taken
but that does not mean that the possession was taken
illegally or that the said land did not thereupon vest in
the Ist respondent. It is, at any rate, not open to the
third respondent, who, as the letter of the Special Land
Acquisition Officer dated 27th June, 1990 shows, failed
to make the necessary monies available and who has
been in occupation of the said land ever since its
possession was taken, to urge that the possession was
taken illegally and that, therefore, the said land has not
vested in the first respondent and the first respondent is
under no obligation to make an award.”

14.

It is, in the light of the above authoritative pronouncement, futile for the

petitioners to argue that the alleged failure of the Collector to tender the amount of
compensation render illegal either the taking over of possession of the land or the
acquisition proceedings themselves. We may in this regard also refer to Section 34 of the
Act which provides for payment of interest when amount of compensation is not paid or
deposited on or before taking possession of the land. Section 34 reads :
34. Payment of interest.- When the amount of such
compensation is not paid or deposited on or before
taking possession of the land, the Collector shall pay the
amount awarded with interest thereon at the rate of nine
per centum per annum from the time of so taking
possession until it shall have been so paid or deposited.

15.

From the above, it is evident that if the amount of compensation is not paid or

deposited on or before taking possession of the land, the consequence that follows is in
the nature of a liability to pay interest. That consequence cannot, in our opinion, be
enlarged on any juristic principles to render the taking of possession itself to be illegal
especially in a case like the present where the validity of the acquisition proceedings has
been been examined by this Court and upheld.

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 13 of 14

16.

In the light of the above discussions, we have no hesitation in saying that these

writ petitions are nothing but an abuse of the process of this Court. The same are
therefore dismissed with costs assessed at Rs.25,000/- in each case.

T.S. THAKUR, J.

ARUNA SURESH, J.
April 11, 2008
pk

WP(C) 1524/08, 1537/08

page 14 of 14

