*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

LPA 1072/2007
Date of Decision: 28th March, 2008
KANWAR NATWAR SINGH
..... Appellant
Through: Mr. Arvind K. Nigam, Mr. Samrat K.
Nigam, advs.
versus
DIRECTOR OF ENFORCEMENT & ANR.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. P.P. Malhotra, ASG with Ms. Rajdipa
Behura, Mr. Chetan Chawla and Mr.
Gaurav Sharma, Adv.

+

LPA 1077/2007
KANWAR JAGAT SINGH
Through:

..... Appellant
Mr. Arvind K. Nigam, Mr. Samrat K.
Nigam, advs.

versus
DIRECTOR OF ENFORCEMENT & ANR.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. P.P. Malhotra, ASG with Ms. Rajdipa
Behura, Mr. Chetan Chawla and Mr.
Gaurav Sharma, Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
judgment? Yes

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? Yes

Yes

T.S.THAKUR, J:

One of the primary questions that falls for consideration in these two
appeals is whether the appellants are entitled to demand copies of even such
of the documents as are not relied upon against them by the Directorate of
Enforcement in connection with an Inquiry initiated under the provisions of

WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 1 of 13

Section 16(1) of Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 read with Rule 4 of
the Foreign Exchange Management (Adjudication Proceedings & Appeal)
Rules, 2000.

The Adjudicating Authority's refusal to supply the said

documents led to the filing of WPs(C) No. 1970/2007 and 1971/2007 by the
appellant, which were heard and dismissed by a learned Single Judge of this
Court, relying upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in Radhakrishnan
Prabhakaran v. State of T.N. And Others 2000 (9) SCC 170, Syndicate
Bank and Others v. Venkatesh Gururao Kurati 2006 (3) SCC 150,
Standard Chartered Bank & Others v. Directorate of Enforcement &
Others 2006 (4) SCC 278, Chandrama Tewari v. Union of India
(Through General Manager, Eastern Railways) 1987 (Supp) SCC 518
and Krishna Chandra Tandon v. The Union of India 1974 (4) SCC 374.
The learned Single Judge was of the opinion that supply of only such of the
documents as were relied upon by the Directorate of Enforcement was
necessary before the commencement of the enquiry proceedings. The
appellants assail the correctness of that view in these appeals and pray for a
direction to the respondent to supply copies of all such documents as are in
possession of the Directorate of Enforcement regardless whether or not such
documents are being relied upon by it before the Adjudicating Authority. The
controversy arises in the following backdrop:
2.

As a sequel to what came to be known as “Volkar Committee Report” on

Oil-For-Food Programme of the United Nations in Iraq and the report
submitted by the Pathak Committee of Inquiry, a complaint alleging violation
of the provisions of Section 13 of Foreign Exchange Management Act was
filed against the appellants before the Adjudicating Authority. The Authority
in turn issued a show cause notice to the appellants and a few others, interWP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 2 of 13

alia, calling upon them to show cause why adjudication proceedings as
contemplated under Section 16(1) of FEMA, 1999 read with Rule 4 of the
Foreign Exchange Management (Adjudication Proceedings and Appeal)
Rules, 2000 should not be held against them for the contraventions referred
to in the notice and why penalty as provided under Section 13(1) of the said
Act be not imposed upon them. On receipt of the show cause notice, the
appellants demanded copies of the documents referred to and relied upon in
the notices and also other documents relating to the proposed Inquiry. It is
not in dispute that copies of all such documents as are relied upon by the
Directorate of Enforcement were furnished to the appellant. Copies of other
documents complete details whereof were not indicated by the appellant
were, however, declined in terms of an order/communication dated 6th
December, 2006 sent to the appellants by the Adjudicating Authority. By
another order/communication of even date, the Adjudicating Authority
decided to hold an Inquiry in terms of Section 16(1) of FEMA, 1999 read with
Rule 4 of the Foreign Exchange Management (Adjudication Proceedings and
Appeal) Rules, 2000.
3.

Aggrieved by the aforesaid orders and communications, the appellant

Shri Natwar Singh filed writ petition No. 18901/2006 in this Court, which
was disposed of by a Single Judge of this Court by order dated 18th December,
2006 with the direction that the petitioner shall have four weeks further time
to file his reply to the show cause notice served upon him. As regards the
prayer for supply of copies of the documents, the Court gave liberty to the
petitioner to demand such copies but left the issue regarding the entitlement
of the petitioner to such documents open.
4.

In pursuance of the above directions, the petitioner-appellant filed a

WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 3 of 13

preliminary/short reply to the show cause notice but once again insisted that
documents not otherwise relied upon by the Directorate of Enforcement be
supplied to them before taking any further step in the adjudication
proceedings.

In response to the said reply and demand for additional

documents, the Adjudicating Authority passed an order dated 1st March, 2007
rejecting the plea for supply of documents other than those relied upon by the
Directorate of Enforcement and fixed the date of hearing under sub-Rule (3)
of Rule 4 of the Foreign Exchange Management (Adjudication Proceedings &
Appeal) Rules, 2000. These communications came under challenge in two
different writ petitions filed by the appellants before the Single Judge. It was
contended on behalf of the petitioner that he was entitled to copies of all
documents in possession of the Directorate of Enforcement regardless
whether or not the same were relied upon by the Directorate of Enforcement.
The Single Judge, as noticed earlier, dismissed the writ petitions holding that
the petitioner was not entitled to any documents over and above those that
are relied upon by the Directorate of Enforcement.

The present appeals

assail the correctness of the said view, as already noticed above.
5.

Appearing for the appellant, Mr. Nigam, made a two fold submission in

support of the appeals. Firstly, it was contended that the rejection of the
demand for additional documents was unjustified having regard to the fact
that the petitioner was entitled to prove his innocence and demand closure of
the proceedings on the basis of the documents that were available with the
Directorate of Enforcement.

Principles of fairness in action,

argued Mr.

Nigam, demand that any document, which was in possession of the public
authority like Directorate of Enforcement, is made available to the appellants
regardless of the fact whether or not the said document was relied upon by
WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 4 of 13

the Directorate of Enforcement.

What is, according to the petitioner,

important is that the document is relevant to the matters sought to be
inquired into. If it is, the same ought to be disclosed in the proceedings.
6.

Secondly, it was contended by Mr. Nigam that since the Court had

granted four weeks further time to the petitioner-appellant to file his reply to
the show cause notice, order dated 6th December, 2006 by which the
Adjudicating Authority had decided to proceed with the Inquiry should be
deemed to have been quashed, no matter the same had not been specifically
quashed or set aside. That being so, the proceedings must be deemed to be
pending at the stage from where the Adjudicating Authority has yet to decide
whether it is a fit case for holding an Inquiry.

He argued that although the

Adjudicating Authority was duty bound to afford to the petitioner-appellant a
personal hearing before initiating the inquiry because such a hearing would
subserve the interest of justice and could be directed by this Court,
particularly when there is no bar in the Rules governing the conduct of the
inquiry forbidding the grant of such a hearing.
7.

On behalf of the respondent it was argued by Mr. P.P. Malhotra,

Additional Solicitor General of India that the prayer for additional documents
was wholly misconceived and had been rightly rejected by the Adjudicating
Authority. The petitioner was, argued the learned counsel, entitled to copies
of only such of the documents as were relied upon by the Directorate of
Enforcement.

He could not be permitted to make a roving inquiry and

demand copies of all the documents in possession of the Directorate of
Enforcement. He further argued that the order passed by this Court in the
previous writ petition filed by the petitioner did not quash order dated 6th
December, 2006 and that grant of further time to file a reply to the show
WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 5 of 13

cause notice simply implied that the appellants had the liberty to place their
version on record without disturbing the order by which the Adjudicating
Authority had decided to proceed with the inquiry. Pursuant to the order
passed by this Court, the appellants had sent a short reply on 15th January,
2007 in which the appellants asserted that the allegations made in the show
cause notice were unfounded and that denial of additional documents though
not relied upon by the Directorate of Enforcement violated their fundamental
rights. The authority had after consideration rejected the plea for additional
documents in terms of the impugned communication dated 1.3.2007 and
adjourned the case for hearing to 19.3.2007 in terms of sub-Rule (3) of Rule 4
of the Foreign Exchange Management (Adjudication Proceedings & Appeal)
Rules, 2000.

On 19.3.2007, the date fixed, the appellants had appeared

through their counsel to whom the charges leveled in the show cause notice
were explained as is evident from the following portion of order dated
19.3.2007 :
“In view of above and in view of the procedure laid down
under Rule 4(3) having met, the Advocate for petitioners were
explained the charges leveled against them, contraventions alleged
to have been committed by them indicating the relevant the
provisions of Act, Rules, etc. as required under rule 4(4) of said
Rules read with FEMA, 1999.”

8.

Mr. Malhotra, further drew our attention to the proceedings recorded

on 9.4.2007 when a personal hearing was given to the learned counsel for the
appellants who stated that the short reply submitted on behalf of the
appellants on 15.01.2007 could be treated as the effective reply. He was also
asked to justify his request for cross-examination as contained in the short
reply dated 15.01.2007.

On two dates of hearing held thereafter on

19.07.2007 and 6.8.2007 also the appellants sought time to make submissions

WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 6 of 13

for supporting the request for cross-examination.

The proceedings had

therefore progressed beyond the initial stage. It was contended that the only
issue that was raised before the learned Single Judge was whether the
appellants-petitioners were entitled to copies of the documents which were
not relied upon in the show cause notice. The appellants could not, therefore,
enlarge the scope of the controversy in these appeals by raising issues that
were never raised in the writ petitions nor pursued before the learned Single
Judge. The Adjudicating Authority had in any event applied its mind to the
material placed before it, and come to a prima facie conclusion that an
inquiry under Section 13 of the FEMA was warranted. Having said so it had
initiated an enquiry affording an opportunity to the appellants to present
their version in defense. There was, therefore, neither any failure of justice
nor breach of any principle of natural justice to warrant interference by this
Court.
9.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions made at the

bar. Two precise questions arise for consideration. These are :
(i)

Whether Rule 4 of FEMA (Adjudication Proceedings & Appeal) Rules,

2000 envisages disclosure and supply of documents not relied upon in the
show cause notice to the noticee at any stage before the Adjudicating
Authority decides to hold an inquiry in terms of Section 13 of FEMA read
with Rule 4 of the Rules mentioned above;
(ii)

Was a personal hearing to the appellants-noticees necessary before the

Adjudicating Authority took a decision in terms of Rule 4(3) to initiate an
inquiry and have the said proceedings gone beyond the stage envisaged by
Rule 4(3) of the Rules?
10.

We shall examine the questions ad seriatim :

WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 7 of 13

Re Question No.1 :
11.

The provisions of Rule 4 of the Rules mentioned above prescribe the

procedure to be followed by the Adjudicating Authority while holding an
inquiry under Section 13 of the FEMA. It reads:
4.
(1)

(2)
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

12.

Holding of inquiry –
For the purpose of adjudication under Section 13 of the Act whether
any person has committed any contravention as specified in that
section of the Act, the Adjudicating Authority shall, issue a notice to
such person requiring him to show cause within such period as may
be specified in the notice (being not less than ten days from the date of
service thereof) why an inquiry should not be held against him.
Every notice under sub-rule (1) to any such person shall indicate the
nature of contravention alleged to have been committed by him.
After considering the cause, if any, shown by the such person, the
Adjudicating Authority is of the opinion that an inquiry should be
held, he shall issue a notice fixing a date for the appearance of that
person either personally or through his legal practitioner or a
chartered accountant duly authorised by him.
On the date fixed, the Adjudicating Authority shall explain to the
person proceeded against or his legal practitioner or the chartered
accountant, as the case may be, the contravention, alleged to have
been committed by such person indicating the provisions of the act or
the rules, regulations, notifications, direction or orders or any
condition subject to which an authorization is issued by the Reserve
Bank of India in respect of which contravention is alleged to have
taken place.
The Adjudicating Authority shall then give an opportunity to such
person to produce such documents or evidence as he may consider
relevant to the inquiry and if necessary the hearing may be adjourned
to future date and in taking such evidence the Adjudicating Authority
shall not be bound to observe the provisions of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).
While holding an inquiry under this rule the Adjudicating Authority
shall have the power to summon and enforce attendance of any
person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give
evidence or to produce any document which in the opinion of the
Adjudicating Authority may be useful for or relevant to the subject
matter of the inquiry.
If any person fails, neglects or refuses to appear as required by subrule (3) before the Adjudicating Authority, the Adjudicating Authority
may proceed with the adjudicating proceedings in the absence of such
person after recording the reasons for doing so.

It is evident from a bare perusal of the above that while sub-Rule 1 of

Rule 4 requires the Adjudicating Authority to issue a notice to any person
believed to have committed any contravention of Section 13 of FEMA, subrule 2 of the said rule requires the show cause notice to indicate the nature of
WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 8 of 13

contravention alleged to have been committed. Sub-rule 3 of Rule 4 provides
that if the adjudicating authority is of the opinion that an inquiry should be
held, it shall issue a notice fixing a date for the appearance of that person
either personally or through his legal practitioner or a Chartered Accountant
duly authorised by him. Sub-rule 4 of Rule 4 lays down the procedure to be
followed by the Adjudicating Authority on the date fixed in sub-Rule 3 of Rule
4, while sub-rule 5 of Rule 4 entitles the noticee to lead evidence in defence.
Failure, neglect or refusal to appear as required under sub-rule 3 empowers
the Adjudicating Authority to proceed in the absence of such person after
recording the reasons for doing so.
13.

It is clear from the scheme of Rule 4 (supra) that there are three

distinct stages through which an inquiry under Section 13 read with Rule 4
passes. The first stage is where the Adjudicating Authority issues a show
cause notice specifying the nature of the contravention alleged against the
noticee and determines after considering the reply, if any, whether an inquiry
should be held. At the second stage, the Adjudicating Authority explains to
the person concerned the contravention alleged to have been committed,
indicating the provisions of the Act or of the Rules, Regulations, Notifications
that are relevant in that connection and gives to the noticee an opportunity to
adduce the evidence that he may like to rely upon in his defence. At the third
stage of the proceedings, the authority examines the entire material available
before it and decides whether the noticee has committed any contravention
and imposes upon him a suitable penalty. The final order passed by the
Adjudicating Authority is subject to appeal before the prescribed appellate
authority.

WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 9 of 13

14.

It is evident that in sub-rule (1), (2) and (3) of Rule 4 which cover the

first stage of the proceedings, furnishing of any documents or summoning of
any record by the Adjudicating Authority is not specifically envisaged. Yet
once the Adjudicating Authority takes a decision to issue a notice of show
cause to any person for the purpose of adjudication under Section 13 of the
Act the same must be accompanied by the relevant material based on which
the Adjudicating Authority felt the necessity of initiating proceedings under
Section 13 of the Act. Even otherwise, principles of fairness, equity and good
conscience demand that the show cause notice is accompanied by the material
on the basis whereof the Adjudicating Authority has issued the same. That is
because unless the material forming the basis of the show cause notice is
disclosed to the noticee, his right to submit an effective reply to the notice
would remain illusory.

It is only when the material based on which the

Adjudicating Authority has decided to issue a notice is disclosed that the
noticee may be able to exercise his right effectively.
15.

It is not in dispute that the entire material referred to in the show

cause notice and relied upon by the Directorate of Enforcement has been
furnished to the noticees in the present cases. The noticees, therefore, knew
the exact basis on which the Adjudicating Authority proposed to initiate an
inquiry.

They had an opportunity to explain their position qua the said

material. The attempt made by the petitioner however was to seek disclosure
of all the documents in possession of the Directorate of Enforcement
regardless of whether or not the Directorate was placing any reliance upon
the same. What is significant is that the Adjudicating Authority was at that
stage taking only a prima facie view of the matter and was not either by the
provisions of the Rule or by any other principle of fairness or considerations of
WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 10 of 13

equity, required to supply the material upon which the Enforcement
Directorate did not place any reliance against the noticees. The insistence on
the part of the appellants for disclosure of documents that were not being
pressed into service against them was therefore unsupported by any legal
requirement under the rules or principles of natural justice as applicable to
such inquiries. The Adjudicating Authority was in that view legally correct in
declining the request for supply of documents not relied upon by the
Directorate of Enforcement. So also was the learned single Judge correct in
declining interference with the view taken by the Adjudicating Authority.
Re Question No. 2 :
16.

It was argued on behalf of the appellants that no hearing was afforded

to the appellants-noticees before the Adjudicating Authority decided to hold
an inquiry. Such a hearing though not compulsory argued Mr. Nigam was
not forbidden by provisions of Rule 4(3) supra and could have been given with
a view to making the process just and fair.
17.

Rule 4 in our opinion is a complete code in itself and ensures that the

affected parties are given an opportunity to defend themselves not only after
the inquiry starts but even before. The only difference is that while the rule
recognizes only the right to file a reply to the show cause notice before an
inquiry is ordered, the right to lead evidence in defence becomes available to
the noticees after the inquiry is initiated.

The difference in the rights

exercisable by the noticees at the two stages arises out of the nature of the
inquiry and its implications at each stage. At the preliminary stage of issuing
a notice and filing a reply, the Adjudicating Authority as observed earlier,
takes a prima facie view of the matter and simply decides whether or not it is
a case fit for initiating an inquiry.
WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

A personal hearing whether with or
page 11 of 13

without the assistance of a legal practitioner or other agent is at that stage
neither necessary nor recognized. That is largely because the initiation of an
inquiry does not in itself visits the noticees with any adverse consequence.
Even so, the rule provides that before the Adjudicating Authority decides to
initiate an inquiry, it would issue a notice to the person concerned and
consider his reply, if any filed.

That procedure was admittedly followed

inasmuch as the appellants were given a show cause notice, furnished the
documents relied upon in the same and asked to file their reply.

The

procedure followed by the Adjudicating Authority therefore did not suffer
from any infirmity to call for our interference.
18.

Equally untenable is the argument of the learned counsel for the

petitioner that the order passed by the adjudicating authority deciding to
hold an inquiry must be deemed to have been quashed by implication and
therefore, the proceedings revert back to a stage where the authority had to
consider afresh whether an inquiry was or was not to be conducted. The
order passed by the learned Single Judge in W.P.(C) No. 18901/2006 neither
finds fault with the decision of the adjudicating authority to initiate the
inquiry nor interferes with the same.

The mere fact that an additional

opportunity was granted to the petitioners to file their reply did not
necessarily mean that the opinion of the adjudicating authority that it was a
fit case for holding an inquiry stood reversed by the Court. In any case, the
order of the court could have but has not said so. That being the position, the
proceedings have indeed crossed the initial stage as is evident even from a
reading of the order passed by the adjudicating authority, especially order
dated 19.3.2007 in which the adjudicating authority has complied with the
requirements of Rule 4(3) & (4) of the Rules and explained the charges
WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 12 of 13

levelled against them, the contraventions alleged to have been committed by
them and the provisions of the Act and Rules relevant to such contraventions.
Our answer to the first part of the question No. 2 is accordingly in the
negative while the answer to the second part of that question is in the
affirmative.
19.

In the result, these appeals fail and are hereby dismissed but in the

circumstances without any order as to costs. The original record produced by
Mr.Malhotra shall be returned to him.

Parties to appear before the

Adjudicating Authority on 24th April, 2008 for directions at 3:00 PM.

T.S. THAKUR, J

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J
March 28, 2008
vk/pk

WP(C)1072, 1077 of 2007

page 13 of 13

