*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 7517/2000
Date of Decision: 21st January, 2008
GURVINDER PAL SINGH & ANR.
..... Petitioner
Through
Mr. P. Chakraborty, adv.

versus

UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS
..... Respondent
Through
Mr. Ramesh Ray, adv. for LAC
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

Per Thakur, J (oral):
W.P.(C)4954/1994 was filed by Mansarovar Residential Welfare
Association.

The petition pointed out that a park located in the said

residential locality was being converted by the DDA for carving out
house sites for allotment to different individuals.

The petitioners

opposed the said conversion and allotment by invoking the extraordinary
writ jurisdiction of this Court in public interest seeking a mandamus to
the respondents to maintain the area as a public park and to forebear
from changing the land use fixed for the same.
2.

The respondents, in the said writ petition, appeared to oppose the

petition and inter alia pointed out that a sufficiently large number of
parks including a district park besides open spaces were available in and

W.P.(C)7517/2000

Page 1 of 7

around the colony which fact was reflected even in the zonal
development plans for the said area.

It was alleged that a fully

developed park was located at a distance of barely 60ft. on the south of
the land in question whereas on the northern side there are open vacant
sites including one for a primary school measuring 2.6 acres.

The

respondents denied that area in question was ever shown as a green area
in the Master Plan or the Zonal plan then in force. They further pointed
out that as per the modified Master Plan MPD-2001 the site in question
has been earmarked for use for residential purposes.
3.

In the affidavit filed on behalf of the MCD it was inter alia

explained that the technical committee of DDA had on March 2, 1990
recorded a decision recommending that the site in question be used for
purposes of allocation of house sites to 21 individuals affected on
account of correction of the wrong alignment of Rama Road.

The

affidavit stated that the defect in the alignment had been detected at the
time of the construction of the Rama Road and that while finalizing the
allotment.
4.

A Division Bench of this Court by an order dated 17th May, 1995

dismissed the aforementioned writ petition holding that the explanation
offered by the MCD and DDA in their affidavits was satisfactory and that
there was neither any arbitrariness nor any illegality in the conversion of
the land use for allotment among eligible persons affected on account of
construction of Rama Road mentioned above.
5.

The Association felt dissatisfied with the above view and filed a

Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court which was eventually
dismissed as withdrawn by an order dated 25th October, 1996. The order
passed by their lordships runs as under:
“Delay condoned.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in
W.P.(C)7517/2000

Page 2 of 7

view of the further material placed on record by
the respondents and the express statement made
on behalf of DDA that there are several parks and
more than 92 trees in that area, the petitioner
does not want to pursue the writ petition as
originally framed. He submits that in view of
these further facts disclosed by the respondents
including the DDA and MCD, the petitioner seeks
leave to withdraw this Special Leave Petition as
well as the Writ Petition as originally filed with
liberty to resort to the appropriate remedy
available in accordance with law for the surviving
grievance of the petitioner.
This statement is placed on record and the
petitioner is permitted to withdraw the Special
Leave Petition as well as the Original Writ
Petition filed in the High Court with liberty as
above.
Consequently, the Special Leave Petition filed in
this Court and the original Writ Petition filed in
this High Court stand dismissed as withdrawn”
6.

The present writ petition was thereafter filed by the petitioners

who happen to be two of the members of the Association who had filed
the previous writ petition. The present writ petition, in substance, claims
the very same relief as was claimed in the previous petition with the
exception of an additional prayer by way of a writ, direction or order
striking down Section 11 A of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 insofar as
the same permits the change of land use from educational to residential
has also been added.

The challenge proceeds on the ground that the

power vested in the competent authority to permit change of land use is
ultra vires the provisions of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. For
the sake of ready reference we may gainfully extract the prayer
contained in the present writ petition:
“(i) To issue an appropriate writ or direction
holding that Section 11A of the D.D. Act, 1957 in
so far as it relates to change of land use from
educational to residential is ultravires of Article
14 and 21 of the Constitution.
(ii)
A writ of certiorari or any other appropriate
writ quashing the notification dated 20.02.62
W.P.(C)7517/2000

Page 3 of 7

proposing to change land use of primary school
site No. 10 Mansarovar
Garden Residential colony to residential.
(iii) A writ of mandamus quashing the allotment
of alternative residential plots in primary school
site No.10 on the basis of report dated 7.5.93 and
the decision of the MCD dated 5-8-98 and 13-7-98
refusing to approve the building activities in site
No. 10.
(iv) To issue any other appropriate writ or
direction this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and
proper in the above facts and circumstances of
the case.”
7.

The respondents have, in response to a notice issued by this Court,

appeared and filed their counter affidavits inter alia alleging that the
writ petition was not maintainable and that the issue regarding validity
of the conversion of the land use had attained finality.
8.

Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Chakraborty strenuously argued

that while the question of conversion of the land use in terms of the
impugned notification may have attained finality on account of the
judgment of this Court and the subsequent withdrawal of the writ
petition before the Supreme Court yet the petitioners were entitled to
question the validity of the allotments made in favour of those who had
allegedly lost their land in the course of the construction of Rama Road
on its changed alignment. Mr. Chakraborty was at pains to urge that the
allottees of the sites in question had not actually lost any land in
connection with the construction of Rama Road on the changed
alignment and that the authorities had not followed any transparent
procedure while making the allotments. He submitted that at least 10
out of 21 total allotments had been canceled by the authorities upon
verification of the true facts and that if a proper procedure had been
followed for making the allotments even the remaining allotments would
not have been made.

W.P.(C)7517/2000

He urged that this Court could set aside the

Page 4 of 7

allotment orders issued in favour of the allottees who had been
impleaded as party respondents to this petition.
9.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions made

at the bar and perused the record. The issue that fell for consideration
before this Court in the earlier round of litigation was whether the
proposed conversion of the land use which, according to the petitionerassociation in the said petition, was at the relevant time being used as a
park/green patch was justified.

The respondents, DDA and the MCD,

had, however, pointed out on affidavit that the area in question was not
reserved for use as a park or a green patch at any stage in the Master
Plan or the Zonal Development Plans. The affidavits further pointed out
that the land use for the land in question was residential and that the site
may have been at some stage earmarked even for Municipal School. The
question of conversion of the land use, however, was considered by the
authorities and land use permitted to be changed having regard to the
fact that there were adequate number of Municipal Schools in the area.
Suffice it to say that the reasons underlying the conversion of the land
use were examined by the Division Bench of this Court and upheld. The
Court felt that there was nothing arbitrary, unfair or irrational about the
conversion of the land use and accordingly dismissed the writ petition.
When the matter reached the Apex Court in appeal, the petitioner
withdrew the writ petition implying thereby that the grievance made by
the petitioner against the conversion of land use was also withdrawn. A
reading of the order passed by their lordships would make it clear that
the petitioner/association was given liberty only to the extent of seeking
redress for the remainder of any grievance. That did not, in our opinion,
imply that the petitioner/association or any of its members could file a
fresh round of writ petition in this Court challenging the validity of the
conversion order. That is precisely what the petitioners in the present
W.P.(C)7517/2000

Page 5 of 7

writ petition have done.

The petitioners have assailed the conversion

and not only is the notification permitting the same challenged but even
the provision under which such conversion has taken place has been
attacked. We, however, fail to appreciate how the petitioners can do so.
If the source of power available to the competent authority was itself
liable to be struck down as ultra vires, there was no reason why the
petitioner could not have attacked it in the previous round of litigation.
All such grounds of attack as were available to the petitioners in the said
petition could and indeed ought to have been urged in the said petition
alone. Neither the petitioner/association nor its members could, for that
purpose, maintain a separate round of litigation as is sought to be done
by them by filing the present writ petition. The result of the dismissal of
the writ petition by this Court and the withdrawal of the SLP from the
Supreme Court as also the writ petition is that the challenge to the
validity of the proposed conversion was itself withdrawn which could not
then be revived or re-agitated by filing a fresh petition on behalf of some
of the members of the Association.
10.

That leaves us with the only other aspect that Mr. Chakraborty

argued with considerable vehemence.

He submitted that while this

Court may not go into the validity of conversion of the land use, the
question of validity of the allotments made by the authorities could well
be gone into. We regret our inability to accept even that argument. We
say so because the petitioners do not claim to be themselves eligible for
an allotment out of the sites carved out by the respondents in the
disputed area. These sites are meant, according to the respondents, to
be alloted only to such of the land owners as had lost their land in
connection with the construction of the Rama Road on its changed
alignment. The petitioners did not, however, qualify for any such land in
the process and do not, therefore, qualify for an allotment. Such being
W.P.(C)7517/2000

Page 6 of 7

the position, they have no locus standi to question the validity of the
allotment made by the authorities. If a person eligible for an allotment in
the area on account of his/her having lost any land in connection with the
construction of Rama Road was excluded from consideration or given an
unfair or discriminatory treatment in the matter of making of allotment,
he or she could approach the authorities or seek redress in this Court.
Any one not otherwise eligible for allotment, however, could not do so
simply because at one point of time the land in question was a green
patch which the authorities have converted against the wishes of the
residents of the area. The petitioner's grievance, we may in fairness to
Mr. Chakraborty state, is not so much against the allotment of the sites
to different owners as it is to the conversion of the site from what,
according to the petitioners, was a green patch in a residential colony.
That aspect, however, stands concluded by the earlier round of litigation.
Even if one were to examine in detail the grievance against the individual
allotment made by the authorities in favour of different individuals, all
that it would lead to is that in stead of one allottee another one may step
in to his shoes. From the stand point of the petitioners, the area would
in any case remain a housing residential colony and not a green patch.
The petitioners attempt to relegate it back to be used as a green patch
does not appear to us to be realistic.
11.

There is no merit in this petition which fails and is hereby

dismissed with costs assessed at Rs.5000/-

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
JANUARY 21, 2008/anb

W.P.(C)7517/2000

Page 7 of 7

