*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 2683/2006
Date of Decision:
SH. VIJAY CHADHA
Through

23rd January, 2008

..... Petitioner
Mr. Yasobant Das, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. A.K. Srivastava, Mr. Arvind
Kumar Tiwary, advs.

versus
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through
Mr. A.K. Matta, Sr. Adv. with Ms.
Reema Khorana, adv. for R-1.
Mr. Jagdeep Anand,adv. for R-4 &5
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

Per Thakur, J (Oral):
This writ petition arises out of an order dated 30th November,
2005 passed by the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal, Delhi whereby
Miscellaneous Appeal No. 300/2002 filed before it by respondents No.
4 & 5 in this petition has been allowed and an ex parte decree passed
by DRT-I set aside qua the said respondents only.

The petitioner's

grievance is that although he was a party to the appeal mentioned
above and had filed an appropriate reply to the same in which it was

inter alia contended that the ex parte decree passed by DRT-I ought to
be set aside not only qua appellants/respondents No. 4 & 5 in the
present writ petition but also qua the petitioner yet the Tribunal had
neither noticed the said prayer nor dealt with the submission that the
decree was indivisible within the meaning of the proviso to Order 9
Rule 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
W.P.(C)2683/2006

Page 1 of 5

2.

Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Das, learned senior counsel

made a two fold submission before us. Firstly, he contended that the
question whether or not the decree could be set aside only against the
appellants in the appeal filed before the appellate tribunal or had to
be set aside against the rest of the respondents also, being an
indivisible decree within the meaning of proviso to Order 9 Rule 13 of
the CPC ought to have been addressed by the appellate Tribunal and a
proper view on the same taken.

The Tribunal had not, however,

examined the said matter and thereby deprived this Court of the
advantage of its opinion on the subject. The Tribunal could, therefore,
argued the learned counsel, be asked to examine the said aspect and
pass a fresh order on the request made by the petitioner for setting
aside the decree qua him also.
3.

Alternatively, it was submitted that the decree in question was

an indivisible decree within the meaning of proviso to Order 9 Rule
13 of the CPC and could, therefore, be set aside qua respondents 4
and 5, only if, it was set aside also against the petitioner herein.
4.

On behalf of the respondents, it was, on the other hand, argued

by Mr. Matta that the decree was not indivisible as argued by the
petitioner and that the same had attained finality as no appeal had
been filed against it. The question of setting aside the decree qua the
petitioner just because it was being set aside against the respondents
No. 4 & 5, did not, therefore, arise. He submitted that so long as the
decree against the principal borrower viz; respondent No. 2 remained
undisturbed, the liability of the petitioner as guarantor, being coextensive with the liability of the said respondent, could not be
disputed.

He further argued that the money decrees were, as a

general rule divisible in nature and that the proviso to Order 9 Rule
13 would not apply in cases where a decree could be passed by the

W.P.(C)2683/2006

Page 2 of 5

tribunal against only some of the defendants in the suit. That was,
according to him, the position in the instant case also, inasmuch as
the tribunal could, while deciding the suit decree the same against
some while dismissing it against some other depending upon whether
the plaintiff was able to substantiate the claim against the said
defendants. Reliance was, in support, placed by Mr. Matta upon the
decisions of this Court in Mehta Borthers & Ors. Vs. Bank of India and

Another 2001 II AD (Delhi) 506. Reliance was also placed upon a
decision of the High Court of Bombay in Vasant Jaiwantrao Mahajan

Vs. Tukaram Mahadaji Patil AIR 1960 Bombay 485 and the decision
of the Supreme Court in Kewal Ram Vs. Smt. Ram Lubhai & Ors. AIR

1987 Supreme Court 1304 and State Bank of India Vs. M/s
Indexport Registered And Ors. (1992) 3 Supreme Court 159.
5.

On the question of failure on the part of the Appellate Tribunal

to examine the above issue while deciding the appeal, Mr. Matta
submitted that the question does not appear to have been pursued
before the tribunal with the result that the tribunal has not examined
the same. In case, however, the Court felt that the tribunal ought to
have examined that aspect, the matter could be remitted back to it to
enable it to pass a proper order on the subject.
6.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions

made at the bar and perused the record. It is not in dispute that the
petitioner had submitted a proper reply to the memo of appeal before
the tribunal in which it had specifically raised the contention that the
decree in question had to be set aside even against the petitioner as
the same was indivisible.

In the said reply, the petitioner had

specifically urged:
“3.

W.P.(C)2683/2006

Even though this respondent no.4 has
not preferred any appeal against the
order dated 08.05.2002 but being party
respondent would be entitled to reap the
benefits of Appeal filed under Order 41
Page 3 of 5

Rule 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure
and the principles thereof. That any
decree or order of a Tribunal or Court, if,
is non est on account of any infirmity in
the proceedings, as in the present case
then that Order cannot be permitted to
remain valid as against co-defendant not
withstanding the fact that the order of
the Tribunal is joint and several
10.

7.

That in any view of the matter, the
impugned order is liable to be set aside,
and the appeal is liable to be allowed and
the case should be remitted back to the
original Tribunal for readjudication after
giving reasonable opportunity of hearing
to all parties concerned.”

It is common ground that the tribunal

has not examined the

above prayer nor even examined the question whether the decree in
question could be set aside only against the appellants/respondents 4
& 5. Whether or not the decree was indivisible in nature within the
meaning of proviso to Order 9 Rule 13 of the CPC appears to have
completely escaped the notice of the tribunal, resultantly depriving
this Court of the advantage of the opinion of the tribunal on the
question whether the decree was divisible and could, therefore, be set
aside qua only some of the parties. Mr. Matta was, in that view, fair
in submitting that the matter could be sent back to the tribunal to
enable it to examine the issue in the light of the contention sought to
be urged by the petitioner.

Any such remand would not, however,

affect the order already passed by the tribunal by which it has set
aside the decree against Respondents No. 4 & 5 because that part of
the order is indeed not assailed by the petitioner. What the petitioner
prays for is the extension of the said benefit even to him by setting
aside the decree qua him also. In the circumstances, therefore, we
consider it unnecessary to express any opinion on the question
whether the decree was indeed indivisible as was argued by Mr. Das.
The better course, in our opinion, is to remit the matter back to the

W.P.(C)2683/2006

Page 4 of 5

appellate tribunal with a request to examine the issue whether the
petitioner is entitled to an order of setting aside qua him also.
8.

In the result we allow this writ petition but only in part and to

the following extent:
i)

The Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal shall examine the
prayer made by the petitioner for setting aside of the ex

parte decree passed by the DRT-I even qua the petitioner
in terms of the proviso to Order 9 Rule 13 read with Order
41 Rule 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure and pass
appropriate orders on the same in accordance with law.
ii)

Since the matter has been pending for considerable
period, we hope and trust that the tribunal would
endeavour to dispose of the issue as far as possible within
a period of six months from the date a copy of this order is
received by it.

8.

No Costs.

9.

Order Dasti.

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
JANUARY 23, 2008
anb

W.P.(C)2683/2006

Page 5 of 5

