*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 2420/2007
Date of Decision: 25th February, 2008
HEMI

..... Petitioner
Through
Mr. Anil Amrit, Mr. Anil Kumar,
advs.
versus

UOI & ORS.

..... Respondent
Through
Mr. Pankaj Batra, adv. for UOI
Mr. Habibur Rahman for Mr.
Saleem Ahmed, adv. for R-2.
Mr. C. Mohan Rao, adv. for R-3
Mr. Ajay Monga, adv. for R-4

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

Per Thakur, J(oral)
In this petition for a writ of certiorari the petitioner has assailed
the constitutional validity of Section 13 and 14 of the Securitisation
and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 and sought quashing of an order dated 27th April,
2005 passed by ADJ-cum-CMM, Delhi in relation to plot No. J-116,
Malviya Nagar Extension, Saket Residential Scheme, New Delhi of
which the petitioner claims to be the owner.
2.

During the pendency of these proceedings the dues outstanding

against R-5, the alleged borrower and alleged owner and mortgagor of
the property mentioned above, have been cleared by the said
respondents. Learned counsel appearing for R-4 bank today submits,
on instructions, that the entire outstanding amount recoverable by the
bank on account of loan transaction between R-4 and R-5 stands fully
paid and nothing remains outstanding in the said account to call for
W.P.(C)2420/2007

Page 1 of 3

any further proceedings by the bank under the Act mentioned above.
He further states that the proceedings already instituted against
property No. J-116, Malviya Nagar Extension, Saket Residential
Scheme, New Delhi had resulted in take over of the possession of the
plot by the receiver which has subsequently been restored to R-5.
3.

Learned counsel for the petitioner, on the other hand, submits

that the entire process of the alleged take over of possession and its
subsequent restoration of R-5 is only a paper formality without actual
possession having ever been taken over by either the bank or the
receiver.

He drew our attention to paras 2 & 4 of the additional

affidavit filed by R-5 in which the said respondent has stated:
“2.
That the deponent submits that after
filing of the Counter Affidavit, the deponent
also perused the affidavit filed by the DDA
and also made inquiries from the office of
DDA in respect of allotment of plot No. J116, Malviya Nagar Extension, Saket, New
Delhi. It has been revealed that the said
plot being plot No. J-116, Malviya Nagar
Extension, Saket, New Delhi, was actually
allotted to the Petitioner, namely, Hemi s/o
Suneri and not to Hemi s/o Busan. It is also
revealed that the deponent was actually
cheated by Mohd. Aslam Siddiqui and his
associates and that the Sale Deed executed
by Hemi s/o Busan in favour of the deponent
was actually executed on the basis of forged
documents of ownership.
3.

XXXXXX

4.
That the deponent neither had nor
has any right, title or interest over the
property bearing No. J-116, Malviya Nagar
Extension, Saket, New Delhi.”

4.

It was argued that in the light of the clear admission on the part

of R-5 that he has no title to the plot in question and that he had been
cheated by one Mohd. Aslam Siddiqui and his associates in getting a
sale deed executed in respect of the said plot even when the seller
had no title to the property in question.

There was no question of

taking over possession from R-5 or restoring possession to him
W.P.(C)2420/2007

Page 2 of 3

especially when the said respondent himself admits having nothing to
do with the plot in question.
5.

We have given our careful consideration to the submission made

at the bar and perused the record. The challenge to the constitutional
validity of Section 13 and 14 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002
does not, in our opinion, survive for consideration in the light of the
subsequent developments.

It is also evident from the submissions

made at the bar that the entire controversy arose on account of nonpayment of the dues by R-5 to R-4 bank which dues have now been
fully paid. The affidavit filed by R-5 further leaves no manner of doubt
that he had no interest in the plot in question and that he had been
duped by Mohd. Aslam and his associates. Such being the position we
see no reason why the plot owned by the petitioner of which he claims
to be in possession should have been taken over or possession thereof
restored to R-5 particularly when the said respondent does not even
support that version, and admits that he is not in possession of the
said plot nor was ever in possession of the same.
6.

In the result, we allow this petition but only to the extent that

order passed by the ADJ-cum-CMM dated 27th April, 2005 shall stand
quashed. The respondents shall not, without adopting due process of
law, interfere with the possession of the petitioner over plot No. J-116,
Malviya Nagar Extension, Saket Residential Scheme, New Delhi
7.

No Costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
FEBRUARY 25, 2008/anb
W.P.(C)2420/2007

Page 3 of 3

