*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 7199/2007
Date of Decision:
GOYAL TEXTILES

22nd January, 2008
..... Petitioner

Through : Mr. Manish Jain, Adv.
versus
UNION BANK OF INDIA & ORS.
..... Respondents
Through : Mr. Shailendra Ojha,adv. for R-1
Mr. Suresh Kait, Adv. for R-6
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not? Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

Per Thakur, J(Oral)
Aggrieved by the measures taken by respondent No.1
under Section 13(2) and 13(4) of the Securitization and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, the petitioner who is
a tenant in the property mortgaged with the Bank as collateral
security for repayment of the debt borrowed by respondent No.3
to 5 has preferred an appeal before the Debt Recovery Tribunal
(DRT). The said appeal was accompanied by an application for
an ad interim stay also. Since however the DRT was not holding
its sittings on a regular basis, the petitioner apprehended that
he may be dispossessed from the property in its occupation
pursuant to the measures taken by the respondent bank.
WP(C) 7199/2007

The
Pg1 of 3

petitioner, therefore, approached this Court by way of the
present writ petition for not only an interim protection against
his eviction from the property in question but also challenging
the vires of Sections 13 and 17 of the Act aforementioned on the
ground that the said provisions do not provide for a remedy to a
person aggrieved of an order prior to his/her dispossession from
the property which he/she may be holding in his/her own right.
2.

By our order dated 28th September, 2007, we had protected

the

petitioner

against

eviction

from

the

property

in

its

occupation as a tenant making it clear at the same time that the
receiver shall be free to take symbolic possession of the property
subject to the ultimate outcome of the appeal pending before the
DRT as also the present writ petition. We had also directed the
DRT to expeditiously hear and dispose of the appeal and the
application filed by the petitioner.
3.

Learned counsel for the parties today submit that the DRT

has not been able to hear and finally dispose of the appeal or the
accompanying application. Even so, it is, according to learned
counsel, for respondent No.1 bank unnecessary to keep the
present writ petition pending in this court in the light of the
appeal that has been filed before the Tribunal. The same could,
therefore,

be

disposed

of

with

suitable

directions

for

continuance of the protection granted by this Court till the
disposal of the appeal.
4.

Mr. Jain, counsel appearing for the petitioner has no

objection to that course being followed provided the petitioner is

WP(C) 7199/2007

Pg2 of 3

given the liberty to re-agitate the issues regarding the vires of
the provisions of Sections 13 and 17 of the Act in case the DRT
takes a view against the petitioner.
5.

In the circumstances therefore and keeping in view the

submissions made at the bar, we dispose of this writ petition
with the direction that the DRT shall expeditiously dispose of the
appeal filed before it.

We further direct that the interim

arrangement made by this Court in terms of order dated 28th
September, 2007 restraining the respondents from interfering
with the petitioner's actual physical possession over the property
shall continue till the disposal of the appeal by the Tribunal. We
make it clear that in case the judgment which the Tribunal may
deliver eventually goes against the petitioner, the petitioner
shall have the liberty to challenge the said order and also
question the constitutional validity of Sections 13 and 17 in a
fresh petition that it may file. The parties are left to bear their
own costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
JANUARY 22, 2008
pk

WP(C) 7199/2007

Pg3 of 3

