*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

CO.APP. 63/2005
Date of Decision: 29th February, 2008.
CRB CAPITAL MARKETS LTD.

..... Appellant

versus

RESERVE BANK OF INDIA & ORS.

+

..... Respondent

CO.APP. 8/2006
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA

..... Appellant

versus
CRB CAPITAL MARKETS LTD.
+

..... Respondent

CO.APP. 9/2006
MALANPUR STEEL LTD.

..... Appellant

versus

CRB CAPITAL MARKETS LTD.
+

..... Respondent

CO.APP. 15/2006
SECURITIES & EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA

..... Appellant

versus
CRB CAPITAL MARKET LTD.

CO.APP.8/2006 & connected matter

..... Respondent

Page 1 of 7

+

CO.APP. 18/2006
GUJARAT INDUST.INVEST.CORPN.LT

..... Appellant

versus
CRB CAPITAL MARKETS LTD.
Present:

..... Respondent

Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, Sr. Adv. with Sudhanshu
Batra, Mr. Bhuvan Gugnani, Mr. Ritesh Kumar, Mr.
Navpreet S. Ahluwalia, Ms. Shikha Bhardwaj, advs. for
CRB Capital Markets Ltd.
Mr. Ramesh Babu.M.R., Ms. Manisha, Mr. Srinjoy
Banerjee, Ms. Swati Setia, advs. for Reserve Bank of
India.
Mr. Parag P. Tripathi, ASG. with Mr. Abhishek
Kumar, Mr. Sanjay Bhatt, Ms. Vismai Rao, advs. for SEBI.
Mr. R.P. Bhatt, Sr. adv. with Mr. Chirag Shroff, Mr.
Mukesh Kumar, Mr. Dattatray, Vyas, advs. for GIIC.
Mr. Susmit Pushkar, Ms. Neha Khatri, advs. for the
appellants in Co.APP. 9/2006.
Mr. P.J. Mehta, adv. for IDBI Bank Ltd.
Mr. Amit S. Chadha, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Kunal Sinha, adv.
for applicant in CA NO. 13223-27/2007
Mr. S.K. Luthra with Mr. Manish Tyagi, adv. for Official
Liquidator
Mr. Rekha Anand, adv. for KVB.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
1.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?

Not Necessary

2.

To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

Per Thakur, J(Oral):
This appeal arises out of an order passed by a Company Court in
Company Petition

No. 251/2002

whereby

the said

Court

has

sanctioned a scheme for the respondent, CRB Capital Markets Limited
in terms of Section 391-392 of the Companies Act, 1956.

While

Company Appeal No. 8/2006 has been filed by the RBI, Company
Appeal No. 15/2006 has been filed by SEBI.

Company Appeal No.

9/2006 is filed by Balarkut Steel Limited who claims to be a secured
CO.APP.8/2006 & connected matter

Page 2 of 7

creditor of the respondent-company.

Company Appeal No. 18/2006

has been filed by GIIC who also claims to be a secured creditor but is
admitted to be so only to the extent of a part of the debt due to the
said corporation.
2.

When these appeals came up for hearing before us on 7th

December, 2007 and were argued at considerable length, learned
counsel for the parties submitted that the order impugned in the
appeals could be set aside as certain important aspects that arose for
consideration had not been addressed in the same.

While M/s

Tripathi and Ramesh Babu appearing for two of the appellants pointed
out certain aspects that deserved to be examined and determined by
the Single Judge, learned counsel for the respondent-company
suggested certain other aspects which according to them required to
be similarly examined and determined. This Court had, however, left
the issues that required to be determined by the Company Judge open
and adjourned the appeals to enable the parties to articulate the
same.

For a better understanding of what transpired on 7th

December, 2007, we may extract the order in extenso:
“After arguing the matter at considerable
length, learned counsel for the parties submit
that the order passed by the learned Company
Court could be set aside as certain important
aspects that arise for consideration have not
been addressed in the order under appeal.
While M/s Tripathi and Ramesh Babu points
out certain aspects that deserve to be
examined and determined by learned Single
Judge but have not been so examined or
determined. Learned counsel appearing for
respondent/company
similarly
suggested
certain other aspects which according to him
had
not
been
examined
and
require
determination. We do not, for the present,
wish to identify the areas that arise for
consideration and ought to have been
examined by the learned Company Court. All
that we need say is that learned counsel for
the parties may identify the areas that are
required to be addressed before the Court
CO.APP.8/2006 & connected matter

Page 3 of 7

could approve the scheme proposed by the
company in which event this Court would
examine the matter further and pass an
appropriate order identifying the areas that
may, on remand, be looked into and
determined by the learned Single Judge while
passing a fresh order. Post on 14th December,
2007.”
3.

When the matter came up today, learned counsel for the RBI, in

whose petition filed under Section 45 MC(1) of the RBI Act the
impugned scheme has been sanctioned, has formulated four questions
which according to him need to be examined by the Company Court
after remand for a final and effectual adjudication of the matter in
controversy. These questions are as under:
i.

Whether the grounds for Winding-Up of the Company
under Section 45 MC(1) of the RBI Act as made out in the
Winding Up Petition exists and if so to what effect?

ii.

Whether a Scheme under Section 391 is maintainable in a
winding up petition filed by the Reserve Bank of India
under Section 45 MC (1) of the Act?

iii.

Whether the Scheme submitted by the propounder is
bonafide, fair and feasible?

iv.

Whether Criminal and Income Tax proceedings can be
stayed while sanctioning a scheme under Section 391?

4.

On behalf of respondent-CRB Capital Markets Limited also the

learned counsel appearing on its behalf filed a memo formulating the
following two questions that according to it need to be examined by
the Company Court after remand.
i.

Whether the grounds for Winding up of the Company
under Section 45 MC(1) of the RBI Act as made out in the
Winding Up petition exists and if so to what effect?

ii.

Whether a Scheme under Section 391 is maintainable in a

CO.APP.8/2006 & connected matter

Page 4 of 7

winding up Petition filed by the Reserve Bank of India
under Section 45 MC(1) of the Act?
5.

Mr. Tripathi, learned ASG appearing for the SEBI, however, has

added yet another question to the questions formulated on behalf of
the RBI. The said question is as under:
i.

Whether a scheme formulated under Section 391-392 of
the Company's Act could set aside the statutory orders
passed by a Statutory Authority like SEBI constituted
under the SEBI Act of 1992.

6.

Appearing

for

the

respondent-company,

Mr.

Chandhiok

submitted that instead of formulating four questions as suggested by
the RBI and the additional question suggested by Mr. Tripathi
appearing for SEBI, the remand order could be limited to the
examination of only two questions suggested by the respondentcompany and instead of setting aside the order passed by the
Company Court in toto, this Court could remand the matter for
consideration of those two questions only. We regret our inability to
accept that submission. The submission made by Mr. Chandhiok in
our opinion flies in the face of the concession which was made on
behalf of the respondent-company on 7th December, 2007 by Dr. A.M.
Singhvi, appearing on its behalf that the entire order passed by the
Company Court could be set aside and the matter remanded back for
consideration of such of the aspects as had not been examined by the
Company Court while passing the impugned order. We, therefore, fail
to appreciate how the respondent-company can today shift its ground
and urge that the order need not be set aside and a remand order
limited only for determination of the two questions proposed by the
respondent be passed.

This is particularly so when the questions

formulated by learned counsel for the appellants do not appear to
CO.APP.8/2006 & connected matter

Page 5 of 7

have been addressed by the Company Court while making the
impugned order. Whether or not a scheme under Section 391-392 of
Companies Act was maintainable in a winding-up petition filed by the
RBI under Section 45 MC(1) of the RBI Act; whether or not quasi
judicial orders passed by a statutory authority like SEBI constituted
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 could be
set aside by a scheme formulated under Section 391-392 of the
Companies Act; whether criminal and income tax proceedings
pending against the company and its Directors could be set aside by a
Company Court while sanctioning a scheme under Section 391-392
are all matters that have remained untouched by the Company Court.
It was in the above circumstances that learned counsel for the
respondent-company had on 7th December, 2007 agreed that the
impugned order could be set aside and the above aspects that were
being argued in the present appeals remitted back for examination
and proper determination by the Company Court.

Such being the

position, there is no room for the respondent-company to wriggle out
of that concession and seek a remand without the setting aside of the
order passed by the Company Court. At any rate we are satisfied that
the aspects that have been indicated above not having been properly
determined by the Company Court require to be so determined on a
remand to it. We accordingly set aside the impugned order passed by
the Company Court and remit the matter back for a fresh disposal in
accordance with law after addressing in particular following, among
other, issues if any raised before it.
i)

Whether

a

scheme

under

Section

391-392

of

the

Companies Act is maintainable in a winding up petition
filed by the RBI under Section 45 MC(1) of the RBI Act?
ii)

Whether

CO.APP.8/2006 & connected matter

a

scheme

under

Sections

391-392

of

the

Page 6 of 7

Companies Act could set aside quasi judicial orders passed
by a statutory authority like the SEBI constituted under
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992?
iii)

Whether criminal and income tax proceedings pending
against the company and its Directors could be stayed by
the Company Court while sanctioning a scheme under
Section 391-392 of the Companies Act?

iv)

Depending upon the answers of questions 1 to 4 above
whether the scheme formulated in the instant case is
bonafide, feasible and fair?

v)

Whether grounds for winding up of the company under
Section 45 MC (1) of the RBI as made out in the winding
up petition exist. If so, to what effect?

7.

Since the matter has remained pending before the Company

Court for a long time and the same involves payments to a very large
number of depositors, some of whom are senior citizens, women and
people who suffer from physical infirmities, we would request the
learned Company Court to expedite the disposal of the matter and
pass final orders on the subject as far as possible within a period of
six months from the date the parties appear before him in pursuance
of this order. The appeals are disposed of with the above directions
leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
8.

All pending applications shall stand disposed of in terms of the

above order.

T.S.THAKUR, J

VEENA BIRBAL, J
FEBRUARY 29, 2008/anb
CO.APP.8/2006 & connected matter

Page 7 of 7

