*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 812/2001
Date of Decision: 21st January, 2008
JAVED ABIDI
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, Amicus
Curiae with Mr. Anuj Aggarwal,
adv.

versus
UOI & ORS.
Through

..... Respondent
Ms. Saroj Bidawat, adv. for DTC
Mr. Rajeeve Mehra, adv. with Ms.
Divya Chaturvedi, adv. for UOI
Ms. Monika Garg, adv. for ASI
Mr. O.P. Saxena, adv. for MCD
Ms. Manika Tripathy Pandey, adv.
for Air Deccan.
Mr. Sanjay Pal, adv. for Sahara
Mr. Anurag Mathur, adv.
Ms. Neeraj Atri, Ms. Vineeta Atri,
advs. for Railways.
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Amit Kumar and Kumar Sheel,
advs. for AAI.
Mr. P.C. Sen, adv. for NDMC
Mr. Ashish Kumar, adv. for Indian
Airlines Limited.
Mr. Milanka Chaudhary, adv. for
Spicejet Limited, Delhi
International Airport (P) Ltd.
Mr. U.A. Rana, Mr. Nitesh Jain,
advs. for Jet Airway India Ltd.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH

1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Not Necessary
To be referred to the Reporter or not? Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

Per Thakur, J (Oral)
Section 46 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 inter alia enjoins
upon the appropriate Government and local authorities to provide for
ramps in public buildings, adaptation of toilets for wheel chair users,
W.P.(C)812/2001

Page 1 of 4

braille symbols and auditory signals in elevators or lifts, ramps in
hospitals, primary health centres and other medical care and
rehabilitation institutions. The provision reads as uder:
46. Non-discrimination
in
the
built
environment.- The appropriate Governments
and the local authorities shall, within the limits
of their economic capacity and development,
provide fora)

ramps in public buildings;

b)

adaptation of toilets for wheel chair
users;

c)

braille symbols and auditory signals in
elevators or lifts;

d)

ramps in hospitals, primary health
centres and other medical care and
rehabilitation institutions.

2.

A bare perusal of the above would show that while there is an

obligation on the part of the appropriate Government and local
authorities to provide for what is stipulated in clauses (a) to (d) above,
the obligation is limited to the economic capacity of the Government
and the local authorities. The petitioner's grievance, in the present
writ petition, is that despite the provisions of Section 46 neither the
appropriate Government nor the local authorities have taken any
meaningful steps towards providing

ramps in public buildings,

adaptation of toilets for wheel chair users, braille symbols and
auditory signals in elevators or lifts, ramps in hospitals, primary
health centres and other medical care and rehabilitation institutions
for the benefit of the physically challenged individuals visiting public
buildings,

hospitals,

family

health

centres,

medical

care

and

rehabilitation institutions and other public places.
3.

In response to

notices issued by this Court, the respondents

have appeared to file their counter affidavits in which they have inter
W.P.(C)812/2001

Page 2 of 4

alia pointed out that suitable steps are being taken by them to provide
for the facilities mentioned above in satisfactory discharge of the
obligations enjoined upon the Government and the local authorities
under Section 46.
4.

We had, in our order dated 17th April, 2007, directed learned

counsel for the petitioner to place in a tabular form the steps taken by
the authorities in terms of the said affidavits and the shortcomings, if
any, in the same to enable this Court to issue specific directions for
removal of the same within a time frame.

Mr. Aggarwal, counsel

appearing for the petitioner, today submits that he was unable to
prepare any such tabular statement because the information available
in the counter affidavits is not, according to him, adequate for the
preparation of any such statement.

Mr. Aggarwal was, however,

agreeable to the disposal of the writ petition with suitable directions
to the respondents to keep the provisions of Section 46 of the Act in
view and to take all such steps as are necessary to be taken for the
benefit of the physically challenged at public places in the form of
provisions for ramps and toilets, braille symbols etc. for use by such
handicapped people. Learned counsel appearing for the respondents
also did not have any serious objection to that course of action being
followed leaving it open to the petitioner or for any other person
interested in doing so to point out a failure or disobedience of the
directions should any such failure or disobedience occur.
5.

In the result, therefore, we allow this petition but only in part

and to the extent that the respondents shall in keeping with the
Section 46 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 take adequte
steps within the limits of their economic capacity and development to

W.P.(C)812/2001

Page 3 of 4

provide for ramps in public buildings, adaptation of toilets for wheel
chair users, braille symbols and auditory signals in elevators or lifts,
ramps in hospitals, primary health centres and other medical care and
rehabilitation institutions. Secretary to Government of India, Ministry
of Social Justice and Empowerment and Secretary to Government of
India, Ministry of Human Resourse Development would do well to
issue proper circular directions to all concerned in regard to the
statutory obligation created in terms of Section 46 of the Act and the
order passed by this Court on the basis thereof.

Similarly,

respondents 3 to 10 would keep these directions in view and issue
proper instructions to all concerned to ensure that the needful is done
in keeping with the letter and spirit underlying Section 46 of the Act.
Liberty is also given to the petitioner to bring to the notice of the
competent authority deficiencies, if any, in compliance with the
requirement of Section 46 in which event the parites concerned are
expected to look into the same and take appropriate steps for removal
of deficiencies within a reasonable time.
6.

No Costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
JANUARY 21, 2008
anb

W.P.(C)812/2001

Page 4 of 4

