*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 10424/2006
Date of Decision: 30th January, 2008.
SUGAM SINGH
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr. Aagney Sail, Mr. Jai Singh, advs.

versus
UOI AND ORS.
Through

.... Respondents
Mr. Rajiv Bansal, Mr. Harshit
Aggarwal, adv. for DDA.
Ms. Zubeda Begum with Ms. Iram
Majid, adv. for R-2.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S. THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH

1.
2.

Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
Not Necessary
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Not Necessary

3.

Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
Not Necessary

Per Thakur, J (Oral)
Section 43 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 enjoins upon the
appropriate Government and local authorities to frame schemes by
notification to be issued in that regard providing for preferential
allotment of land at concessional rates for purposes among others of
setting up business. Section 43 reads as under:
“43. Schemes for preferential allotment of land for
certain purposes.- The appropriate Governments
and local authorities shall by notification frame
schemes in favour of persons with disabilities, for
the preferential allotment of land at concessional
rates of(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

WP(C) 10424/2006

house;
setting up business;
setting up of special recreation centres;
establishment of special schools;
establishment of research centres;
establishment
of
factories
by

page 1 of 6

entrepreneurs with disabilities.”

2.

It is not in dispute that in discharge of the above statutory

obligation, the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India
had formulated a scheme notified in terms of notification dated 17th
November, 2003 providing for preferential allotment of land at
concessional rates to persons with disabilities. The said scheme was,
it appears, reviewed and a modified scheme published in terms of
notification dated 19th April, 2004. Even this scheme was, it appears,
reviewed by the Government pursuant to directions issued by this
Court in “Sarita Sinha Vs. DDA”, CWP 8877/2005 and a revised
scheme/policy published in terms of a memorandum dated 9 th
October, 2006.

A copy of the said scheme/memorandum has been

produced by the respondents as 'Annexure R-1' to the counter
affidavit filed by them. A reading of the said revised scheme would
show that the same inter alia provides for reservation of 1% in
allotment of flats and plots and 5% in allotment of shops for persons
with disability as defined in Section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
1995. Para I(i) of the scheme is in this regard relevant which may be
extracted:
“(I)

PREFERENTIAL ALLOTMENT:

(i)
1% reservation in allotment of flats and
plots and 5% reservation in allotment of shops
will henceforth be provided to the Persons
with disability as defined in Section 2 of the
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation)
Act, 1995. The above reservation will not be
applicable in case of auction mode of
disposal.”
3.

The petitioner's grievance in the present writ petition now is

that although he is a handicapped person eligible for an allotment
WP(C) 10424/2006

page 2 of 6

against the 5% quota reserved in connection with allotment of shops,
his claim has not been considered by the DDA.

He has also found

fault with the scheme dated 17th November, 2003 prevalent earlier
providing for preferential allotment of land among those eligible for
the same.
4.

When this petition came up for hearing before this Court on 6th

November, 2007, this Court directed the DDA to state on affidavit as
to how many shops/commercial units had been allotted after coming
into force the policy of reservation dated 19th April, 2004 and how
many out of the said allotments have been made in favour of persons
suffering from disabilities.

The Court observed that the said

information would be necessary for determining whether 5% of the
total number of shops available with the DDA have been allotted to
person suffering from disabilities.

The respondent/DDA has, in

compliance with the said direction, filed an additional affidavit inter

alia pointing out that for the year 2004-05, a total of 204 new shops
were added to the inventory out of which 116 were set apart for
allotment in general category while the remaining 88 were earmarked
for allotment to people belonging to different reserved categories
including the physically handicapped persons. Similarly, for the year
2005-06, the DDA claims to have added 65 more shops the inventory
out of which 37 were earmarked for general category candidates
while the remaining 28 were reserved for other reserved categories
including the physically handicapped candidates. For the year 200607, the DDA claims to have received 398 additional shops out of which
224 were earmarked for general category candidates while the
remaining 174 were set apart for reserved categories including the
physically handicapped.
5.

Mr. Bansal, learned counsel for the DDA explained that 10 shops

WP(C) 10424/2006

page 3 of 6

available

during

the

year

2004-05

for

physically

handicapped

candidates and 3 shops available during the year 2005-06 have
already been alloted but 20 shops available in the year 2006-07 for
the handicapped candidates have yet to be allotted. He further stated
that these shops are as per the prevalent practice offered for
allotment together with other shops reserved for other categories and
that since certain legal impediments remain to be sorted out in a
petition pending before this Court in regard to the said reserved
categories including the question of price chargeable for the same,
the DDA has not yet advertised the 20 shops available in the
physically handicapped category. He submits that the DDA shall take
appropriate steps for an early advertisement of the available shops for
physically handicapped candidates so that the benefit of reservation
available under Section 43 of the Act is extended to those entitled to
the same without any delay or procrastination.
6.

On behalf of the petitioner, it was on the other hand argued by

Mr. Aagney that the figures given by the respondents in the additional
affidavit especially those relating to the number of shops alloted to
the physically handicapped candidates and the number of actual
available in that category are not accurate. Our attention was drawn
to the averments made in the counter affidavit as also the additional
affidavit to point out that there are certain discrepancies in the
statement made on behalf of DDA as to the number of

shops that

were allotted over the years and those that were available against the
5% quota reserved for physically handicapped candidates. It was also
contended by the learned counsel that the petitioner is, no doubt, a
minor but was eligible for being considered for an allotment in the
handicapped quota.

It was urged that the respondents could be

directed to expedite the process of advertisement and allotment of the
WP(C) 10424/2006

page 4 of 6

shops among the eligible candidates as the delay in the conclusion of
that process denies to the eligible candidates their valuable right
under Section 43 of the Act.
7.

We have given our careful consideration to the submissions

made at the bar and perused the record. The writ petition, as noticed
earlier, makes a twin prayer, viz; one relating to the validity of the
reservation policy published in November, 2003 and the other seeking
a direction to the respondents to allot a shop in favour of the
petitioner, Jitesh Singh who has filed this petition through his father.
Insofar as the challenge to the reservation policy is concerned, the
same has, in our opinion, become academic keeping in view the fact
that the policy has undergone two reviews since the year 2003. Upon
the first review the Government have published a policy in April, 2004
which was then reviewed for the second time pursuant to the
directions issued by this Court in Sarita Sinha's Case referred to
earlier.

That review has eventually culminated in the issue of a

memorandum dated 9th October, 2006. What is significant is that the
said revised policy has not been assailed by the petitioner in the
present writ petition nor has anyone of the terms and the conditions
stipulated in the said policy come under attack.

In that view,

therefore, there is no need for this Court to examine whether the
impugned policy which already stands revised and superseded by
subsequent two policies and schemes, suffers from any legal infirmity.
The first limb of the petitioner's challenge in the writ petition must,
therefore, fail and is accordingly rejected.
8.

That brings us to the question whether the petitioner was

entitled to be considered for allotment of a shop in the physically
handicapped category against the 5% reservation made under the
statute.

The answer to that question has been made easy by Mr.

WP(C) 10424/2006

page 5 of 6

Bansal making a candid submission that as and when the shops
available for the physically handicapped category are advertised, the
petitioner, Jitesh Singh could make an application for consideration
and allotment of a shop, in which event the DDA would consider the
said claim strictly in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
scheme and allotment including the question whether the petitioner
was entitled to consideration even when he is a minor. All that we
need to add is that in case the petitioner, Jitesh Singh is found to be
ineligible on account of his being a minor, he shall be free to agitate
the issue in proper proceedings before this Court. We also make it
clear that it is unnecessary for us to go into the precise number of
shops that are available in the physically handicapped category.
Since the DDA has itself conceded that there are as many as 20 such
shops available in the said category, it is evident that the application
which the petitioner may make can be considered against the said
shops provided he is otherwise eligible for the consideration.
9.

With the above observations, this writ petition is disposed of

leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

T.S. THAKUR,J

ARUNA SURESH, J
JANUARY 30, 2008
anb

WP(C) 10424/2006

page 6 of 6

