*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

FAO (OS) No. 391/2007
M/S VALECHA ENGINEERING LTD.
..... Appellant
Through: Mr.A.K.Mata, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Sanjeev Narula and Mr.Sunil Dalal
and Ms.Sangeeta, Advocates.
versus
M/S D.S. CONSTRUCTIONS LTD.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr.R.S. Endlaw, Advocate for the
respondent.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE T.S.THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
ORDER
01.10.2007

%

+ CM No. 13520/2007
*
Heard. Allowed subject to all just exceptions.
CM No. 13519/2007
Heard. Allowed subject to all just exceptions.
FAO (OS) No. 391/2007
This appeal arises out of an order passed by a learned Single
Judge of this Court whereby an application for an interim measure
under Section 9 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 has
been adjourned to 05.10.2007 for a reply to be filed by the
respondent to the said application and for a possible hearing on the
application.
Mr. Endlaw, counsel appearing for the respondent raised an
preliminary objection to the maintainability of this appeal.

He

urged that since the learned Single Judge had not yet either

granted or refused to grant the interim measure prayed for by the
appellant, there was no occasion for the appellant to file the
present appeal. Reliance was in support of that submission placed
by Mr.Endlaw upon a Division Bench of this Court in

Niko

Resources Limited vs. Gujarat State Petroleum Corp. 2000 (55) DRJ
(DB) 654.
It is in our opinion unnecessary for us to either set out the
factual background in which the controversy arose before the
learned Single Judge or determine the issue relating to the
maintainability of the appeal. We say so because learned counsel
for the appellant has handed over to Mr.Endlaw

a cheque for a

sum of Rs.75 lacs, which according to the instructions received by
the former from his client, is good for payment to be treated by the
respondent as a payment pursuant to the bank guarantee sought
to be invoked by the respondent. It is submitted on behalf of the
appellant that the respondent need not now insist upon a further
payment from the bank in pursuance of the bank guarantee which
should be deemed to have been encashed in consideration of the
amount covered by the cheque.

It is further urged that this

payment should not, however, prevent the learned Single Judge
from examining the entitlement of the appeal to an interim order in
terms of Section 9 as prayed for by the appellant and that should
the learned Single Judge eventually come to the conclusion that a
case for an interim measure was made out, in directing refund of
the said amount to the appellant.

Mr.Endlaw, counsel appearing for the respondent company,
on instructions, states that without going into question of
maintainability of the present appeal and subject to the ultimate
determination by the learned Single Judge of all issues relating to
the prayer of the appellant for an order of restraint against
encashment, the respondent would have no objection to the
arrangement

being

suggested

by

the

appellant.

circumstances, therefore, we dispose of this appeal

In

the

with the

following directions:(1)

The respondent shall be free to receive the amount covered

by the cheque handed over in the Court today as though the said
payment is being recovered by it from the bank in pursuance the
bank guarantee furnished to the respondent.
(2)

In case, the learned Single Judge upon a proper consideration

of the application filed by the appellant eventually comes to the
conclusion that a case for intervention of the Court and grant of an
order of restraint against encashment under Section 9 of the Act is
made out, the learned Single Judge shall be free to direct refund of
the amount received by the respondent in which event the
respondent would have subject to its right to challenge the said
order no objection to such a refund.
(3)

Since

the respondent has received the amount in terms of

the cheque which is on the assurance given by the appellant good
for payment, it shall not pending final disposal of the application

before the learned Single Judge insist upon any further payment
from the bank pursuant to the bank guarantee.
All issues relating to the maintainability of this appeal as also
the merits of the controversy between the parties are left open.
A copy of this order be given dasti under the signature of the
Court Master.

T.S.THAKUR, J

VEENA BIRBAL, J
OCTOBER 1, 2007
ns

