IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

FAO(OS) No.463/2007
Date of Decision: 20th November, 2007

%
#
!

Smt. Shakuntala Rani
..... Appellant
Through: Mr.J.P. Sengh, Advocate with
Mr.Ashish Aggarwal, Advocate
versus

$
^
*
*
1.
2.
3.
No

Sh.D.P. Joshi

..... Respondent
Through:

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE T.S.THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?
No
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?

T.S.THAKUR, J. (ORAL)
CM No.15904/2007
Heard. Allowed, subject to just exceptions.
FAO(OS) No.463/2007 & CM No.15903/2007
This appeal arises out of an order dated 28.9.2007 passed by a
learned single Judge of this Court whereby an earlier order
passed by him on 11.9.2007 disposing of a petition under
Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 as
infructuous has been recalled.

FAO(OS) No.463/2007

Page 1 of 6

2.

A petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 was filed by the respondent in this appeal
seeking certain interim directions pending adjudication of the
disputes between the parties in terms of the arbitration
agreement entered into between them. While the petition was
pending, an agreement described by the appellant herein as a
settlement is alleged to have been executed between the
appellant and the respondent on 15th of June, 2006. When the
petition under Section 9 came up before the court for orders on
26.8.2006, it was argued by counsel for the appellant herein
that the same had become infructuous as the parties had
entered into an amicable settlement.

Instead of the matter

being disposed of on that statement and submission, the same
was adjourned to 9th November, 2006 and later to 23rd
November, 2006 when counsel for the petitioner, respondent in
this appeal, refuted the assertion that any settlement as alleged
had taken place between the parties.

This is evident from a

reading of the order passed by learned single Judge on
23.11.2006 which may be extracted at this stage:
“It is stated that no settlement has taken
place between the parties. Learned counsel
for the respondent seeks time to file reply to
the petition. Let reply be filed within two
weeks,
rejoinder within two weeks
thereafter.
FAO(OS) No.463/2007

Page 2 of 6

List on 15th March, 2007.
continue.”
3.

Interim order to

The matter then came up before the Court on 11th

September, 2007 when the learned single Judge passed an order
disposing of the petition as infructuous in the light of the
alleged settlement. The order reads as under:
“It is submitted that the matter between the
parties has been compromised. In view of the
compromise between the parties, this petition
has become infructuous. The learned counsel
for the petitioner seeks permission to
withdraw the present petition. The present
petition is accordingly dismissed as having
become infructuous. No order as to costs.”
4.

An

application

was

shortly

thereafter

filed

by

the

respondent in this appeal for recall of the above order in which
it was, inter alia, alleged that Shri Ajay Bansal counsel for the
respondent was out of Delhi on 11.9.2007 and that he had left
instructions with his colleague Mr.Ashish Garg, who was fresh
at the Bar, to seek an adjournment. It was further alleged that
when the matter came up before the court and the appellant
reasserted that a settlement had taken place, Shri Ashish Garg
the junior counsel kept quite as he did not have complete
instructions and being fresh at the Bar was unable to persuade
the court to adjourn the matter to take proper instructions. It
was asserted that no settlement like the one alleged by the

FAO(OS) No.463/2007

Page 3 of 6

appellant had actually been arrived at between the parties so as
to render the petition under Section 9 of the Act infructuous, or
justify its dismissal as directed by the Court. The learned single
Judge upon consideration of the rival contentions has by the
order impugned in this appeal recalled his order dated
11.9.2007 and restored OMP No.76/2006. The present appeal,
as already noticed earlier, assails the correctness of that order.
5.

Appearing for the appellant Mr.J.P. Sengh strenuously

argued that the learned single Judge was in error in having
disbelieved the version given by the appellant that a settlement
had indeed taken place. He submitted that the circumstances of
the case clearly showed that a settlement had actually been
arrived at between the parties in the light whereof the dismissal
of the petition as infructuous was perfectly justified. We regret
our inability to accept that submission. As noticed earlier and
as rightly observed by the learned single Judge, the question
whether there was an amicable settlement between the parties
is a disputed question.

While the appellant asserts that

agreement dated 15.6.2006 was in the nature of a final
settlement between the parties, the respondent herein disputes
that position.

Even on 23.11.2006 when the appellant had

asserted a settlement having taken place, the respondent in this

FAO(OS) No.463/2007

Page 4 of 6

appeal had disputed the same. That Shri Ajay Bansal counsel
for the respondent was not available in Delhi on the date, the
matter was eventually disposed of by the court is admitted. It is
also admitted that Shri Bansal was represented by a proxy
counsel Shri Ashish Garg.

It is, therefore, obvious that the

assertion which had earlier been made and which had not
prevailed with the Court had carried the day in favour of the
appellant without a proper contest on the part of the respondent
in tune with the stand which was already made clear on the
previous date of hearing. The learned singe Judge was in that
backdrop perfectly justified in holding that the disposal of the
petition as infructuous on a factual premise which was disputed
between the parties was not justified.
6.

Mr. J.P. Sengh next argued that the learned single Judge

had declared the settlement to be non est and thereby left no
option for the appellant to assert that such a settlement had
indeed taken place.

We do not think so.

The learned single

Judge has recalled the order passed by him on the ground that
the dismissal of the petition on a premise which was disputed
was not justified. He has simply held the alleged settlement to
be a disputed question without going into the question of the
genuineness of such a settlement. Whether or not a settlement

FAO(OS) No.463/2007

Page 5 of 6

has indeed taken place, therefore, remains at large and can be
examined by the court if the appellant were to rely upon the
same as a defence to the maintainability of the petition filed by
the respondent. There is in that view no prejudice caused to the
appellant on the question of the existence of the settlement as
such. Needless to say that it shall be open to the appellant to
assert that such a settlement had taken place as one of the
defences to the maintainability of the petition in which event the
court is expected to go into that aspect also.

With these

observations, this appeal fails and is dismissed in limine.

T.S.THAKUR, J

VEENA BIRBAL, J
November 20, 2007
srb

FAO(OS) No.463/2007

Page 6 of 6

