IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

W.P. (C) No.627/2007
Date of Decision:21st November, 2007

%
#
!

Pawan Sharma
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Navin Chawla with
Mr. Vikram Singh and
Mr.Sharath Sampath, Advocates

versus
$
^

Union of India
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Gaurav Duggal for
respondents No.1 & 2.
Mr. Harish Gulati, standing
counsel for CBI with Mr. Amit
Kumar for respondent No.6.
Mr. Ankur Chhibber and Mr. S.K.
Nanda for respondent
No.3/UPSC.

*
*
1.
2.
3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE T.S.THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the judgment?
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported in the
Digest?

T.S.THAKUR, J. (ORAL)
Thirty years after respondent No.4 was appointed as a GradeII, Obstetric & Gynecology Specialist in the Central Government
Health Services, the petitioner, who on his own showing is a
WP(C) 627/2007

Page No. 1 of 7

political activist has sought quashing of the said appointment in
public interest. According to the petitioner, the appointment which
was made as early as in the year 1979 was illegal inasmuch as
respondent No.4 who was not born as a scheduled caste claimed to
have acquired that status by her marriage to respondent No.5 admittedly a scheduled caste. The petitioner further alleges that
since the appointment of respondent No.4 was illegal and at any
rate irregular, once she assumed office as a specialist expert in
what is described as

contract award committee constituted to

purchase Single and Double Puncture Laparoscopes, she paid back
the debt of gratitude by approving certain supplies which the
earlier expert from the Committee had held to be unacceptable.
The petitioner in that backdrop not only prays for a writ of
mandamus declaring the appointment of respondent No.4 to the
post of Grade-II Specialist in

Obstetric & Gynecology

as illegal

and fraudulent but also for a mandamus directing respondents
No.1 to 3 not to consider her for appointment as Additional
Director General of Health services. Transfer of respondent No.5
husband

of

respondent

No.4

from

the

post

of

Medical

Superintendent, Safdarjung Hospital to any other equivalent post is
also the relief prayed for in the petition.
When the petition came up for admission before a Division
Bench of this Court on 24.01.2007, this Court issued a notice of
show cause to the respondents only in relation to prayer `a' made

WP(C) 627/2007

Page No. 2 of 7

in the petition.

That prayer was limited to a challenge to the

appointment of respondent No.4 as Grade-II, specialist in Obstetric
& Gynecology in the Central Health Services.

The rest of the

prayers, therefore, stood deleted as indeed learned counsel for the
petitioner did not even press before us the other prayers in the
light of the limited scope of the enquiry which the order of this
Court dated 24.01.2007 envisaged.
Mr.

Chawla,

strenuously

argued

Appearing for the petitioner
that

the

appointment

of

respondent No.4 was ex facie illegal. Relying upon the decision of
a Single Bench of this Court in Mrs. Urmila Ginda vs. Union of
India and Others AIR 1975 Delhi 115 and that of the Supreme
Court in Valsamma Paul (Mrs) vs. Cochin University and
Others (1993) 3 SCC 545 he contended that a person who did not
belong to a scheduled caste could not acquire that status by
marrying one belonging to that caste.

He urged that since

respondent No.4 did not admittedly belong to scheduled caste, no
matter her husband respondent No.5 was member of that caste,
she could not by marriage acquire that status.

Mr. Chawla

submitted that the appointment of respondent No.4 was not only
irregular but even illegal as the same was made against a vacancy
which was reserved for those belonging to scheduled caste.
On behalf of the respondents, it was on the other hand
argued that the issue regarding the appointment of respondent
No.4 had been examined in a departmental enquiry instituted by

WP(C) 627/2007

Page No. 3 of 7

the competent authority in which a charge was framed against
respondent No.4 for providing false information to the effect that
she is a member of the scheduled caste community.

The said

charge was held proved and the matter submitted before the CVC
who took the view that respondent No.4 may have been under a
genuine impression that marriage with a scheduled caste candidate
could confer upon her the same status.

The CVC, therefore,

advised the competent authority to impose a panelty other than
dismissal/removal/compulsory retirement upon respondent No.4.
The matter was then submitted to UPSC, who disagreeing with the
advice of the CVC suggested that a penalty of removal should be
imposed upon respondent No.4. The matter was then submitted to
Minister

of Health and Family Welfare, who directed that

respondent No.3 may be asked to reconsider its advice.
reconsideration also, the

UPSC

struck

to the

Upon

opinion that

respondent No.4 ought to be removed from services. The matter
was thereafter referred to the department of Personnel and
Training for their consideration who opined as under :“After careful perusal of the entire case records and
taking into consideration all relevant aspects, it is seen
that there is nothing to establish that Dr.(Mrs.) Sudha
Salhan had knowingly and willfully misrepresented
about her caste while applying for the post of
Obstetrician and Gynaecologist Grade II of the Central
Health Service.
There is no evidence that she
submitted the caste certificate of her husband as a
proof of her Scheduled Caste status with any mala fide
intention. Whether in terms of the Govt. instructions,
she could validly claim to belong to the Scheduled
Caste on the basis of the caste of the spouse, should
WP(C) 627/2007

Page No. 4 of 7

have been detected at the time of her appointment
which was not done by the UPSC/Competent authority.
Having appointed her to the post in 1979, it would be
a travesty of justice to penalize her at this stage.”
The matter was eventually submitted to the Prime Minsiter
who in terms of entry 39(ii) of Schedule III of Transaction of
business Rule, approved closure of the disciplinary case against
Dr.(Mrs.) Sudha Salhan. Consequently, the Government of India by
an order dated 01.11.1996 took the totality of the circumstances
into consideration of disagreeing with the opinion given by the
UPSC decided to close the case against respondent No.4. It was
argued that in the light of the above developments, it was neither
necessary nor proper for this Court to interfere with the
appointment of respondent No.4 at this point of time. It was also
argued that the writ petition was motivated inasmuch as the
petitioner did not have any public interest at heart in filing the
present petition. On the contrary it was the supply of equipment to
the Central Government, which was the immediate provocation for
the filing of this petition. It was contended that the equipment may
have been found fault with an earlier expert on the Committee but
the same was approved by respondent No.4 once she replaced the
earlier expert, on the basis of her honest opinion in the matter.
We have given our careful consideration to the submissions
made at the bar and perused the record. This petition is not only
barred by unexplained delay and laches but appears to be
motivated by extraneous considerations.

WP(C) 627/2007

The challenge to the

Page No. 5 of 7

appointment as noticed in the beginning of the order comes nearly
thirty years after the same was made.

There is no explanation

leave alone an acceptable one in the petition to justify the long and
in ordinary delay in the filing of the petition. Mr. Chawla no doubt
argued that proceedings against respondent No.4 were pending at
various stages before the Government till 1996, but we see no
explanation whatsoever forthcoming from the petitioner for the
delay after the Government had finally settled the matter in the
year 1996.
That apart the Department of Personnel and Training had in
our opinion, taken a pragmatic view of the matter, when it
observed that the appointing authority and even the UPSC who had
subsequently advised the removal of respondent No.4 from service
ought to have been diligent in verifying the claim of respondent
No.4 and preventing her appointment if the same was considered
to be undeserved. Having taken no such care and having allowed
the appointment to go through, it did not lie in the mouth of the
UPSC to advise removal of the candidate 30 years after she was
allowed to join. The real purpose as rightly observed by learned
counsel for the petitioner behind the filing of this petition appears
to be the controversy regarding supply of equipment to the Central
Government. From a reading of the averments made in the writ
petition as also the prayers made therein, it is evident that for a
long time the petitioner or for that matter no one else nor even a

WP(C) 627/2007

Page No. 6 of 7

scheduled caste candidate had made any grievance against the
appointment of respondent No.4.

The provocation for filing the

present writ petition came only in the context of her approving the
supply of equipment to the Central Government.

It is not,

therefore, unreasonable to assume that the petitioners' real
interest lay in the making of supplies by someone in whom he was
interested. We cannot allow any such ulterior motive of a political
activist to inspire interference with an appointment which has
worked for nearly 30 years and which has remained unquestioned
for over 11 years after the Government of India gave quietus to the
controversy. The present petition is in our opinion a clear abuse of
the process of this Court hence deserves to be dismissed with cost.
We accordingly dismiss this petition with cost assessed at
Rs.15,000/-. The costs shall be deposited in the Delhi High Court
Advocates' Welfare Fund within eight weeks.

T.S.THAKUR, J

November 21, 2007
ns

WP(C) 627/2007

VEENA BIRBAL, J

Page No. 7 of 7

