IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+

W.P.(C) No.2987/2007

%
#
!

Date of Decision: November 30, 2007
Mr.Umesh Chandra Sood
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr.Vivek Sood, Advocate with
Mr.Arun Goel, Advocate.
versus

$
^

Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr.Suresh Kait, Advocate.

*
*

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE T.S.THAKUR
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL

1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
the judgment?
No
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
No
Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
No

VEENA BIRBAL, J.
Present is a public interest litigation filed by the petitioner
wherein it is alleged that petitioner is a sportsman and has
played various games for Delhi, the details of which are given in
the petition.

The grievance of the petitioner is that the

Ambedkar Stadium which is the only football playing field left in
Delhi

has been used for political purposes,

such as holding

political rallies etc. having no connection with football game. It
is alleged that Ambedkar Stadium hosts over 700 football
matches every year and is already under immense pressure due
WP(C) No. 2987/2007

Page No.1 of 5

to lack of football infrastructure in Delhi.

It is alleged that

holding of political rallies and public functions at Ambedkar
Stadium damages its grass and ground and the said damage
takes months to repair. It is further alleged that when political
rallies are held at nearby places such as at the Ramlila Grounds
etc., Ambedkar Stadium becomes a place for people to squat,
sleep, cook, eat, litter and also to answer the call of nature and
the same also damages the place.

It is further alleged that

recently respondent No.2 i.e. Union of India had written a letter
dated 3.4.2007 to respondent No.1 i.e. MCD stating that the
Ambedkar Stadium is required for Nirmal Gram Puraskar
function on 4.5.2007. It is alleged that the said function is likely
to attract thousands of people which would result in the damage
of ground. It is alleged that the Ambedkar Stadium cannot be
used for holding any public function unconnected with the game
of football. It is contended that use of Ambedkar Stadium for
any other purpose i.e. for political rallies and public functions, is
violative of Article-14 and 21 of the Constitution of India.

It is

prayed that a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ
be issued to the

respondent to ensure that the stadium is

exclusively used for football purpose and for no other purpose.
It is further prayed that writ of certiorari be issued quashing the

WP(C) No. 2987/2007

Page No.2 of 5

decision to host Nirmal Gram Puraskar function on 4.5.2007.
2.

Counter affidavit is filed on behalf of the respondent No.1

i.e. MCD wherein it is alleged that present petition is not filed in
the public interest.
interest as such

It is alleged that the same is in personal

is liable to be dismissed.

It is alleged that

Ambedkar Stadium is being used only for the purpose of football
game and not for any other purpose as is alleged. It is alleged
that only one instance has been mentioned by the petitioner by
filing

letter

dated

3.4.2007

wherein

Under

Secretary

to

Government of India had requested for the use of stadium for
“Nirmal Gram Puraskar function” on 4.5.2007 and permission
was granted on the said request. It is denied that the stadium
was given to any political party or any individual as is alleged.
It is

specifically denied in the counter affidavit that when

political rallies are held at nearby places i.e. Ramlila ground, the
Stadium becomes a place for people to squat, sleep, cook, eat,
litter and also answer the calls of nature and damages the place
as is alleged in the petition.

It is reiterated in the counter

affidavit that the Ambedkar Stadium is being used only for
football game and for no other activities.

It is denied that

grounds of aforesaid stadium are being damaged as is alleged.
It is prayed that the writ petition may kindly be dismissed.

WP(C) No. 2987/2007

Page No.3 of 5

3.

We have heard counsel for the petitioner only as none had

appeared for respondents.

During arguments counsel for

petitioner reiterated the grievances as are stated above.

We

have also perused the record.
4.

No statutory violation is alleged to have been violated by

the respondents. The allegations of holding political rallies and
public functions in the said stadium have not been substantiated
by petitioner by placing any material on record.

Even

photographs are not placed on record to show that any political
rallies or public functions are being held in the stadium or that
any actual damage has been done to the grounds of stadium by
holding such functions as is alleged.

Even necessary details

like, who had held those functions and the dates on which such
functions were held are also not given in the petition. On the
other hand, respondent No.1 in

the counter affidavit has

categorically denied that any such political rallies or public
functions are being held in the Ambedkar Stadium.

It is

categorically stated in the counter affidavit that Ambedkar
Stadium is being used only for holding football matches.
5.

As regards holding of Nirmal Gram Puraskar function is

concerned, it may be seen that the said function was presided
over by His Excellency, the President of India and before

WP(C) No. 2987/2007

Page No.4 of 5

holding said function `No Objection Certificate' from concerned
authorities is taken as is evident from letter dated 03.04.2007
filed by petitioner.

The petitioner has failed to show how a

particular event has violated fundamental rights as is alleged.
In any event, the said function is already over.
6.

In view of the above discussion, the allegations regarding

alleged damage to stadium are totally devoid of any merits. In
the absence of any material on record, it is difficult for this
Court to conclude that there is any damage to the grounds of
the above said stadium.

No doubt, Amedkar Stadium is a

premier ground for football match.

It is hoped that while

granting permission, concerned authorities will keep in mind
that no damage would be done to the grounds of the said
stadium.
7.

The writ petition is hereby dismissed.

VEENA BIRBAL, J

November 30th, 2007
srb

WP(C) No. 2987/2007

T.S. THAKUR, J

Page No.5 of 5

