*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+
%

F.A.O. No. 329/1996
Judgment reserved on: 1st February, 2007
Date of Decision
: 5th February, 2007
The New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
Gulab Bhawan,
Bahadur Shah Zaffar Marg,
New Delhi
Also at:Jeevan Bharti Building,
Connaught Place,
New Delhi

.... Appellant

Through

None.

versus
1. Veena Devi Alias Veena Kumari
widow of Late Sh. Vinod Kumari
2. Deepa Minor Daughter of
Sh. Vinod Kumar
3. Gaurav Minor son of Sh. Vinod Kumar
(Petitioner 2 and 3 minors through their mother
next friends and natural guardian Smt. Veena Devi
alias Veena Kumari Petitioner No. 1 who has no
interest adverse to that of the minors.)
All residents of House No. 1280, Panna paposian,
Narela, Delhi-110040.

4. Sh. Prem S/o Sh. Bihari Lal
FAO No. 329/1996

Page No. 1 of 9

resident of Village Safiabad, Police
Station Rai, District Sonepat (Haryana)
5. Sh. Chander has S/o Sh. Attar Singh
H.No. 73/18/6, Gali No.1, Swantra Nagar,
Narela, Delhi-110040
6. M/s Chander Has Mahipal Singh,
R/o H.No. 73/18/6, Gali No. 1,
Shalinder Nagar, Narela, Delhi-40
Respondents
Through

Mr. O.P. Goyal, Advocate.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

V.B. GUPTA, J.
Present appeal

filed

by

the

Appellant/Insurance

Company raises the question of limited liability of the
Insurance Company.
2.

Brief facts of this case are that on 9th August, 1982

deceased Sh. Vinod Kumar was travelling in Bus No. DHP –
3430 from Narela to Delhi, when a Truck No. DIG-3919,
driven by Respondent No. 5, came from Randhawa side and

FAO No. 329/1996

Page No. 2 of 9

struck against the left portion of the Bus. The impact of the
accident was such that the engine of the said bus was
thrown away and the said Sh. Vinod Kumar received fatal
injuries whereas, other persons received grievous injuries.
The widow and two minor children of said Vinod Kumar,
deceased are Respondent Nos. 1,2 and 3 and the widowed
mother (who died during the pendency of the case and was
deleted from the array of the parties) filed claim petition
seeking compensation against the Driver, Owner and the
Insurer of the above said truck alleging therein that since
the accident occurred due to rash and negligent driving of
the truck on the said date, time and place by its driver
Respondent No. 5 causing fatal injuries to Shri Vinod Kumar,
they are entitled to receive compensation of Rs. 2,50,000/from them.
3.

In the joint written statement filed by the driver and

owners, it was pleaded that the said truck did not hit the left
side as alleged in the claim petition and the deceased was
travelling in the bus while standing on the Exit gate and due
to the sudden application of brakes by the bus driver, the
deceased hit against the front glass of the bus and as a
FAO No. 329/1996

Page No. 3 of 9

result thereof he fell down from the bus and came under the
wheel of the same bus.
4.

In the written statement filed on behalf of the

Insurance Company (Appellant), it has been pleaded that
under the Insurance Policy, at the time of the accident, the
liability of Insurance Company to pay compensation, if any,
was limited to Rs. 50,000 only.
5.

The learned Tribunal vide impugned judgment dated

30th May, 1996 held that the accident occurred due to rash
and negligent driving of Respondent No. 5 and awarded
compensation of Rs. 2,50,000/- in favour of Respondent Nos.
1, 2 and 3 and further held that Insurance company
(Appellant) has failed to prove its plea of limited liability of
Rs. 50,000/- under the contract of the Insurance and
directed

the

Appellant

to

pay

entire

amount

of

compensation alongwith interest @ 12% per annum from
the date of filing of the petition.
6.

Against the order of the Tribunal, Insurance Company

(Appellant) has filed the present appeal.
7.

The main plea taken up by the Appellant is that its

liability was limited to the extent of Rs. 50,000 only, since,
FAO No. 329/1996

Page No. 4 of 9

the owner of the vehicle, did not file the original policy of
insurance on record to prove that under the agreement with
the Appellant they has paid the extra premium to enhance
the limit of third party liability from the limit of “Rs.
50,000/-” to “Unlimited” and as such in the absence of any
of the evidence, the liability under the Insurance Policy
cannot be considered as “unlimited”.
8.

On 19th April, 2005 when the matter was listed, none

was present on behalf of Appellant whereas, counsel for
Respondents was present and the order was deferred.
9.

On 1st February 2007, when matter came up before

this Court, again none was present for the Appellant.
However, on behalf of Respondents Shri. O.P. Goyal,
Advocate was present.

Arguments advanced on behalf of

Respondents' counsel have been heard.
10.

It has been argued by learned counsel for the

Respondents that the Onus is upon insurance Company to
prove that the insurance policy in question was of “limited
liability”.

The Appellant did not place any proof of the

insurance policy on record.
11.

The learned counsel for Respondents in support of his

FAO No. 329/1996

Page No. 5 of 9

contentions has cited a recent decision of the Apex Court,
Tejinder Singh Gujral
(2007) ACJ 37.

V. Inderjit Singh & Another

In this case, the accident took place

between a tempo and scooter driver, due to negligence of
tempo driver and the scooterist sustained injuries.
insurance policy of tempo was not proved.

The

The question

was whether a presumption would arise that liability of the
Insurance Company was unlimited; it was held:-

12.

“The learned Tribunal, however,
committed an error in opining that the
insurance policy was not required to
be proved. Learned Single Judge of
the High Court, in our opinion, rightly
held that the insurance policy having
not brought on record, a presumption
would arise that the liability of the
insurer was unlimited.”
The learned Tribunal in its judgment has considered

the plea of “limited liability” taken by the Appellant and
relevant findings to this effect are as under:“ In this case the Respondent No. 3 Insurance
Company has also raised a plea of limited
liability with regard to the payment of
compensation. According to Respondent No. 3
its liability was only limited to Rs. 50,000/- (fifty
thousand only). Thus, it was incumbent upon the
Respondent No. 3 to prove the Insurance policy
properly.
In this regard Respondent No. 3 has
examined Rw1 who is a legal assistant of
FAO No. 329/1996

Page No. 6 of 9

13.

Insurance Company. He has proved on record a
letter written to the owner of the offending
vehicle and postal receipt, registered AD and
UPC all showing the dispatch of letter to owner as
ExRw1/1 to Rw1/4 respectively.
Similarly, premium paying receipt ExRw1/5
and other receipts ExRw1/6 have been placed on
record by the Respondents. But these are of no
help to the Respondent no. 3 as they have failed
to prove on the record the Insurance policy which
is the only document which stipulates the terms
and conditions to be adhered by the parties by
virtue of the contract of policy.
Before parting with my discussion on the
point of limited liability, I may like to add, a few
more lines which are the out come of the cross
examination of Rw1.
Rw1 did not know as to when the records
pertaining to this policy were destroyed. The
carbon copy of the policy was also destroyed.
The company has become aware of this case (as
was informed) on 18/2/83.
But I fail to
understand as to why the Respondent No.3
destroyed the records without ascertaining the
fate of this case.
Thus my above discussion leads me to a
conclusion that the Insurance Company failed in
proving its plea of limited liability of Rs. 50,000/-.
Consequently, this plea of limited liability of the
company is rejected and the Respondent No. 3 is
liable to pay the compensation of Rs. 2,50,000/to the petitioners.”
The onus is upon Appellant to prove that the policy

issued by it was of “limited liability” restricting the liability
of the Insurance Company to the extent of Rs. 50,000/-. The
Appellant-Insurance Company has not even proved on
record the office copy of the insurance policy which it could
FAO No. 329/1996

Page No. 7 of 9

have proved otherwise in accordance with the provisions of
law and the Appellant has failed to discharge this onus that
the policy was of “limited liability”.
14.

Further, the premium receipt Ex.RW-1/5 and other

receipt Ex.RW-1/6, does not co-relate to this plea of the
Appellant that these receipts are with regard to payment
made towards “limited liability” only. These receipts does
not prove that premium paid in this case was towards
Limited Liability Policy.

Insurance Policy is the only

document which stipulates the terms and conditions to be
adhered by the parties and as already held, the Appellant
has failed to prove its insurance Policy.
15.

Accordingly, I have no hesitation in holding that the

liability of the Insurance Company was “unlimited”.
16.

Learned counsel for Respondents during the course of

arguments has also pointed out that the entire amount of
compensation as awarded by the learned Tribunal has
already been received by the Respondents and nothing
remains to be paid by the Insurance Company.
17.

Under these circumstances, it is held, that the present

appeal is not maintainable and the same is, hereby,
FAO No. 329/1996

Page No. 8 of 9

dismissed.
18. No order as to costs.

February 05, 2007
rs

FAO No. 329/1996

(V. B. GUPTA)
JUDGE

Page No. 9 of 9

