* HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
ITA No.553 of 2004
%

Judgment reserved on: 25th March, 2008
Judgment delivered on:7th April, 2008

MRS. KRISHNA GUPTA
Prop.Studio Saket
C-269, Hauz Rani Market,
Malviya Nagar, New Delhi.

.....Appellant.

Through: Mr.A.K.Babbar with
Mr.Surender Kumar, Advs.
Vs.
THE ASST.COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
Investigation Circle, 20(1),
New Delhi.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr.R.D.Jolly, Adv.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.553/2004

Page 1 of 9

V.B.Gupta, J.
Present appeal has been filed by the Assessee against
the impugned order dated 12th February, 2004 passed by
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench „C‟ (for short
as „Tribunal‟) in ITA No.145/Del/1998 relevant for the
assessment year 1992-93.
2.

The short facts relevant for the disposal of this appeal

may be summed up as under that the Assessee was running
a Proprietary Business under the name and style Studio
Saket dealing in photographic films and still photography.
During the impugned assessment year, the Assessee had
declared

its

gross

profit

at

1.5%

on

the

sale

of

photographic films at Rs.8,98,56,016 to its registered
dealers.
3.

During the course of assessment proceedings, the

Assessing Officer issued summons under Section 131 of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short as „Act‟) to the aforesaid
registered dealers to whom the sales were made requiring
them to appear

along with

the books of accounts,

supporting bills, vouchers, bank pass books etc., but the
summons received back unserved as the respective parties

ITA No.553/2004

Page 2 of 9

were not in existence at the given addresses. The Assessee
was, therefore, asked to produce these parties and also to
furnish copies of the ledger accounts of these parties, bank
statements, month-wise purchase and sales.

It was,

however, contended that the Assessee made these sales to
the registered dealers in cash.
4.

The Assessing Officer observed that the large amount

of cash advance had been taken on various occasions from
these registered dealers and sales had also been effected
on credit for which the payments were received later. He
was, therefore, of the opinion that the registered dealers
were well-known to the Assessee or to her sons, who were
looking after the business.
5.

The Assessing Officer also took cognizance of the

assessment proceedings for the assessment year 1989-90
in which verification of registered dealers was done and
the sales tax authorities had informed that the registered
dealers were not in existence and their assessments had
been completed ex-parte.
6.

As the Assessee failed to produce the registered

dealers

and

ITA No.553/2004

copies

of

their

ledger

accounts

and

Page 3 of 9

quantitative details of the goods, the Assessing Officer
proceeded

to

analyze

the

information

whatever

was

available on record.
7.

Thus, in the light of the available information, the

Assessing Officer concluded that the Gross Profit declared
at 1.5% was wholly unreliable and the registered dealers
were either the bogus concerns of the Assessee‟s or the
goods were actually sold at a premium in the market. He
accordingly rejected the books of accounts and estimated
the Gross Profit rate of 10% of turnover resulting into an
addition of Rs.75,32,104/-.
8.

The

Assessee

preferred

appeal

before

the

Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [for short as
CIT(A)]. The CIT(A) re-examined the issue in the light of
these facts and material available on record and arrived at
a conclusion that the Assessee had declared the Gross
Profit rate at 4.3% for the first 11 months of the accounting
year and for the month of March, 1992 the gross profit was
declared to 1.5% for which no justification was furnished.
He, therefore, re-estimated the Gross Profit rate at 5% for

ITA No.553/2004

Page 4 of 9

the entire year and re-determined the Gross Profit at
Rs.44,42,575/- resulting into an addition of Rs.30,80,502/-.
9.

This order of the CIT(A) was not accepted by both the

parties and they challenged the same through their appeals
before the Tribunal. The Tribunal confirmed the order of
the CIT(A) and dismissed the Appeals vide impugned order.
10.

It is contended by the learned counsel for the

Assessee that the Assessee had led the primary evidence in
his possession, i.e., Sales Tax Department forms identifying
the sales made to dealers which had been issued to them
by Delhi Sales Tax Authoriteis under Delhi Sales Tax Act,
1975. He further contended that while making the sales in
cash it is not obligatory on the seller to find out the
antecedents of the buyer. Further, by presuming that the
Assessee has earned so much profit in lump sum, the
Tribunal was not correct in upholding the CIT(A) order
applying Gross Profit rate of 5%. Assessment cannot be
framed on assumption and presumption.
11.

It has been noted by the CIT(A) in its order that

ordinarily, a trader is not required to know the identity of
the customer who buys the goods, makes the payment in

ITA No.553/2004

Page 5 of 9

cash and does not maintain any account with the traders.
In such a situation, it cannot be the responsibility of the
trader to produce the customer for verification of sale.
However, when repeated sales of substantial amounts are
made during the year to the same person against huge
cash advances or the sales are at credit when sale
proceeds are realized, in this situation, there is a valid
presumption that the customers are known to the traders.
In such circumstances, the Assessee cannot be absolved of
the

obligation

customer‟s

to

account

furnish
or

to

a

confirmed
produce

the

copy

of

the

clients

for

verification of the transactions. The Assessee had received
huge cash advanced from the customers and had also
supplied goods on credit. The registered dealers were not
produced for verification despite sufficient opportunities
granted to the Assessee by the Assessing Officer.
12.

The Assessee had contended before the Tribunal that

he had sold at lesser rates than, the price fixed by the
manufacture but no evidence to this effect was filed. The
Tribunal also held that:“In case of short supply there is always a
possibility of sale of material at certain

ITA No.553/2004

Page 6 of 9

premium.
It is also evidenced from the
record that most of the times sales were
affected in cash. It means that the material
was not available in the market in plenty.
So, there may not be any chance of selling
the material at a rate of lower than the fixed
price. In any case, the primary onus is upon
the Assessee to place some evidence on
record to justify the transactions, but he
could not place the same despite various
opportunities given.”
13.

Though the case of the Assessee is that the Sales-tax

Authorites had issued sales tax forms to the customers
which established that they were in existence as the forms
must have been issued after proper verification but this
contention is not tenable. The Sales-tax Authorities have
reported that the parties‟ were not traceable and their
sales tax assessments had been concluded in absentia and
their registration had also been cancelled. Thus, details of
sales recorded in the sales tax forms cannot be regarded as
acceptable.

The books of accounts maintained by the

Assessee and the trading results shown therein which are
not open to verification cannot be accepted. The books of
accounts and the determination of profit on estimate has
been, thus, rightly rejected by the Tribunal.

ITA No.553/2004

Page 7 of 9

14.

Now, coming to the Gross Profit, the rate of Gross

Profit in a particular year depends on many factors, for
example, the general market conditions based on demand
and supply position, the rise or fall in market rates,
especially abrupt ones, the capital position vis-à-vis the
turnover achieved, and many others. It is for the Assessee
to explain the fall, if it so happens, and to substantiate his
reasons. On the estimation of profit, for the eleven months
of the accounting year the Assessee has declared a Gross
Profit rate of 4.3% and for the month of March it has gone
down to 1.5%. No plausible reasons had been furnished.
No doubt, after rejection of books of accounts, the
Assessing officer has to estimate the net profit on the basis
of the material available on record, but has no right to
estimate it exorbitantly.

The CIT(A) estimated the Gross

Profit rate at 5% for the entire year keeping in view the
Gross Profit rate for the 11 months and hence no unreasonableness in this estimation.
15.

The Tribunal has also confirmed the finding of the

CIT(A) on this issue. We also agree with reasoning given

ITA No.553/2004

Page 8 of 9

by the CIT(A) and do not find any perversity in the order of
the Tribunal.
16.

Thus, in our opinion, no substantial question of law

arises in this case and the present appeal filed by the
Assessee is, hereby dismissed.

V. B. GUPTA, J.

April 07, 2008
Bisht

ITA No.553/2004

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.

Page 9 of 9

