*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Crl.M.C.No. 2883 of 2007

%

Judgment reserved on: 4th October, 2007
Judgment delivered on: 8th January, 2008

Saheb Singh, Proprietor
M/s. Jai Jagdamba Enterpirses
4/24, Sector-2, Rajinder Nagar,
Sahibabad, Ghaziabad, U.P.

... Petitioner

Through: Mr.R.N.Mittal, Sr.Adv. with
Mr.Pradeep Sharma &
Mr.Satyapal Singh, Advs.
Vs.
1.State (NCT of Delhi)
Through Standing Counsel (Criminal)
2.M/s Skol Breweries Ltd.
Through its Managing Director
Regd. Office At No.1, Mahal Industrial Estate
Mahakali Road, Andheri (E)
Mumbai
Corporate Office at:
Jalahali Camp Road
Yeshwantpur, Bangalore
Regional Office at:
10th Floor, Orchid Square
Block-b, Sushant Lok-I
Gurgaon, Haryana

... Respondents

Through: Nemo
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 1 of

16

1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

V.B. GUPTA, J.
Present petition has been filed under Section 482
Cr.P.C. seeking quashing of the impugned summoning
order dated 8th January, 2007 and proceedings arising out
of criminal complaint case No.1955/1, under Section
138/141/142 of Negotiable Instrument Act (in short as Act)
pending before the court of Sh.Rakesh Pandit, M.M., New
Delhi.
2.

Respondent No.2 (M/s Skol Breweries Ltd.) the

complainant had filed complaint under Section 138, 141 &
142 of the Act read with Section 420 IPC against the
present petitioner as well as one Mohd. Raiz. The case of
respondent No.2 is that this company is engaged in the
business of manufacturing, selling, supply of different
brands of beers and also disposes of Spent Grain to
interested parties. M/s Jai Jagdamba Enterprises (accused

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 2 of

16

No.1) was a proprietorship concern and petitioner Saheb
Singh (accused No.2) was its proprietor. The petitioner on
behalf of the accused No.1 was buying goods from the
units of complainant company and as per agreement dated
1st May, 2005, an outstanding of Rs.62,52,028 had accrued
against the accused Nos.1 and 2 towards the price of said
goods.
3.

During the course of business, M/s Jai Jagdamba

Enterprises (accused No.1) was converted into partnership
with petitioner (accused No.2) and accused No.3 , i.e.
Mohd. Raiz as its partner.

Both of them assured the

complainant company that they will clear the outstanding
dues as soon as possible and in this respect Mohd Raiz
(accused No.3) sent letters dated 2nd March, 2006 and 7th
March, 2006 through fax to the complainant company
wherein they further assured that they will clear the
outstanding till 15th March, 2006 but they failed and
neglected to do so. Thereafter, respondent No.2 insisted
for clearing their outstanding dues and consequently
Mohd. Raiz on behalf of M/s Jai Jagdamba Enterprises

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 3 of

16

entered into an agreement wherein accused persons
acknowledged and admitted the aforesaid outstanding of
Rs.62,52,028/- and assured respondent No.2 to clear the
same and agreement dated 6th April, 2006 to this effect was
executed.
4.

Thereafter,

the

accused

persons

had

further

purchased goods from respondent No.2 and a further sum
of Rs.26,51,598/- has accrued against them.

Thus, the

accused persons became liable to make payment of
Rs.89,03,656/- to respondent No.2.

The above named

accused persons issued cheques bearing No.744222 and
744223 dated 10th August, 2006 each for a sum of
Rs.62,52,058 and Rs. 26,51,598/- towards price of the said
goods

and

debt/liability.

in

discharge

of

their

legally

payable

The impugned cheques were deposited in

the bank but were got dishonoured and returned unpaid
with the reason “Funds Insufficient”.

Thereafter, a

statutory legal notice was issued to the accused persons
calling upon them to make the payment but they did not
make any payment and sent a reply dated 11th September,

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 4 of

16

2006 wherein accused No.1 & 2 categorically denied their
liability, and even have gone to the extent by saying that
the accused No.3 has no concern with them.
5.

Later on, respondent No.2 filed criminal complaint

before the Metropolitan Magistrate and vide impugned
order, the accused persons have been summoned to face
trial under Section 138 of the Act.
6.

It appears that instead of appearing before the trial

court, the present petitioner has filed the present petition
seeking quashing of the complaint under Section 482
Cr.P.C.
7.

In the present petition, it has been stated by the

petitioner, that petitioner who is the sole proprietor of M/s
Jai Jagdamba Enterprises, entered into three separate
agreements/contract, out of which two were with M/s Skol
Breweries

and

third

agreement

with

M/s.

Rochees

Breweries Ltd. As per the agreements, petitioner was to
purchase

spent

grains

from

the

complainant.

The

petitioner deposited four cheques for a sum of Rs. 5 lacs
each as refundable security with the complainant. During

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 5 of

16

the period of the contract, petitioner could not purchase
any quantity of spent grain due to some unfortunate
incident in his family and as such there was no transaction
between the petitioner and the complainant. In the month
of May, 2005, petitioner informed the complainant about
his inability to make any transaction and requested the
complainant to refund the security amount of Rs.20 lacs.
Instead of refunding the security amount to the petitioner,
the complainant served the legal notice with regard to
dishonour of two cheques in question.

The petitioner

replied to the said legal notice.
8.

It has been contended by learned counsel for the

petitioner that petitioner did not purchase any quantity of
spent grain from the complainant and as such question of
issuing any such cheque to the complainant does not arise
at all. Further, it is contended that present complaint case
has been filed on the basis of forged and fabricated
documents by the complainant in connivance with accused
No.3 Mohd Raiz who has been shown as a partner of the
petitioner firm's in one of the agreements, which itself is a

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 6 of

16

white lie as the firm of the petitioner, that is, M/s Jai
Jagdamba Enterprises

is a sole proprietorship firm and

was never converted into a partnership firm by making any
person as a partner and the letters dated 2nd March, 2006
and 7th March, 2006 and agreement dated 6th April, 2006
have been written and executed by accused No.3 showing
him to be a partner, are forged and fabricated one.
Further, the dishonoured cheques in question have not
been issued either by the petitioner or from the account of
the firm of the petitioner and the same have been been
issued from the individual account of accused No.3 who
has no concern with the firm of the petitioner or with the
business though, he was made a witness in one of the
agreements entered by the petitioner with the complainant,
dated 1st May, 2005. Under these circumstance, no case is
made out against the petitioner and the present complaint
is not maintainable and liable to be quashed.
9.

I have summoned the trial court record and have gone

through the same.
10.

The present petition has been filed under Section 482

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 7 of

16

Cr.P.C. which reads as under:“482. Saving of inherent power of
High Court – Nothing in this Code shall
be deemed to limit or affect the inherent
powers of the High Court to make such
orders as may be necessary to give effect
to any order under the Code, or to prevent
abuse of the process of any Court or
otherwise to secure the ends of justice.”
11.

This provision of law envisages three circumstances

under which the inherent jurisdiction may be exercised,
namely i)to give effect to an order under the code,
ii)to prevent abuse of the process of court, and
iii)to otherwise secure the ends of justice.
12.

Further to seek interference under this Section, three

conditions are to be fulfilled, namely i) the injustice which comes to light should be of a
grave and not of a trivial character;
ii)it should be palpable and clear and not doubtful;
and
iii) there exists no other provisions of law by which
the party aggrieved could have sought relief.
13.

The case of the petitioner is that he is sole proprietor

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 8 of

16

of M/s Jai Jagdamba Enterprises and it was never
converted into a partnership firm nor accused No.3 Mohd.
Raiz, is partner of this firm.
14.

On the other hand, as per averments made in the

complaint, it has been stated that accused No.1 was

a

proprietorship concern and accused No.2, i.e., Mr.Saheb
Singh, was its proprietor and during the course of
business, accused No.1 M/s Jay Jagdamba was converted
into partnership with accused No.2 Saheb Singh and
accused No.3 Mohd. Raiz as its partner.
15.

So, in view of the denial made by the petitioner, it is a

triable

issue and is a matter of evidence, as to whether

M/s Jay Jagdamba Enterprises

is a sole proprietorship

concern or is a partnership concern and this question can
be decided only after recording of evidence in this case.
16.

With regard to the execution of the cheques in

question, admittedly, petitioner had executed certain
agreements with respondent No.2 for purchase of spent
grains and according to the petitioner, he could not
purchase any quantity of spent grains.

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 9 of

16

17.

Respondent No.2 has placed on record, in the trial

court, the original agreements made between the parties
and according to the petitioner, he executed four cheques
towards security amount of Rs. 20 lacs whereas, the
present complaint case is based on the two cheques which
were dishonoured due to insufficient funds as mentioned
above. So it is also a matter of evidence to be decided later
on as to for what purpose, these two cheques

had been

issued in favour of respondent No.2 company.
18.

In Goaplast (P) Ltd. vs. Chico Ursula D'souza and

another 2003 SCC(Crl) 603 a question arose before Apex
Court as to whether Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act is applicable or not where the payment
was stopped prior to the due date of the cheque. It was
held that-“In the present case the issue is very
different. The issue is regarding payment
of
a
post-dated
cheque
being
countermanded before the date mentioned
on the face of the cheque.
For the
purpose of considering the issue, it is
relevant to see Section 139 of the Act
which creates a presumption in favour of
the holder of a cheque. The said section
provides that:
Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 10 of

16

“139. It shall be presumed, unless
the contrary is proved, that the
holder of a cheque received the
cheque, of the nature referred to
in Section 138 for the discharge, in
whole or in part, of any debt or
other liability.”
Thus it has to be presumed that a cheque is
issued in discharge of any debt or other
liability. The presumption can be rebutted
by adducing evidence and the burden of
proof is on the person who wants to rebut
the presumption. This presumption coupled
with the object of Chapter XVII of the Act
which is to promote the efficacy of banking
operation and to ensure credibility in
business
transactions
through
banks
persuades us to take a view that by
countermanding payment of post-dates
cheque, a party should not be allowed to
get away from the penal provision of
Section 138 of the Act. A contrary view
would render Section 138 a dead letter and
will provide a handle to persons trying to
avoid payment under legal obligations
undertaken by them through their own acts
which in other words can be said to be
taking advantage of one's own wrong. If we
hold otherwise, by giving instructions to
banks to stop payment of a cheque after
issuing the same against a debt or liability,
a
drawer
will
easily
avoid
penal
consequences under Section 138. Once a
cheque is issued by a drawer, a
presumption under Section 139 must follow
and merely because the drawer issued
notice to the drawee or to the bank for
stoppage of payment it will not preclude an
Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 11 of

16

action under Section 138 of the Act by the
drawee or the holder of the cheque in due
course. This was the view taken by this
Court in Modi Cements Ltd. vs. Kuchil
Kumar nandi. On same facts is the decision
of this Court in Ashok Yeshwant Badave vs.
Surendras Madhavrao Nighojakar.
The
decision in Modi case overruled an earlier
decision of this Court in Electronics Trade
& Technology Development Corpn. Ltd. vs.
Indian
Technologists
&
Engineers
(Electronics)(P) Ltd.. which had taken a
contrary view.
We are in respectful
agreement with the view taken in Modi
case. The said view is in consonance with
the object of the legislation. On the faith of
payment by way of a post-dated cheque, the
payee alters his position by accepting the
cheque. If stoppage of payment before the
due date of the cheque is allowed to take
the trnsaction out of the purview of
Section138 of the Act, it will shake the
confidence which a cheque is otherwise
intended to inspire regarding payment
being available on the due date.”
19.

In I.C.D.S. Ltd. vs. Beena Shabeer and Anr. 2002

Crl.L.J. 3935, a question arose before the Apex Court to the
effect as to the maintainability of a proceedings under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881, vis-avis a guarantor. The High Court has negated it. However,
the Apex Court has held that:“In

order,

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

however,

to

appreciate

the

Page 12 of

16

contentions raised in the matter, it would be
worthwhile at this juncture to notice Section
138 for its true terms, scope and effect as also
to assess the situation ourselves. Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 reads
as below:
138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency,
etc., of funds in the account.--- Where any
cheque drawn by a person on an account
maintained by him with a banker for payment
of any amount of money to another person from
out of that account for the discharge, in whole
or in part, of any debt or other liability, is
returned by the bank unpaid, either because of
the amount of money standing to the credit of
that account is insufficient to honour the
cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged
to be paid from that account by an agreement
made with that bank, such person shall be
deemed to have committed an offence and
shall, without prejudice to any other provision
of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine which may extend to twice the amount of
the cheque, or with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this
section shall apply unless(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank
within a period of six months from the date on
which it is drawn or within the period of its
validity, whichever is earlier.
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the
cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand
for the payment of the said amount of money by
giving a notice, in writing, to the drawer of the
cheque within fifteen days of the receipt of
information by him from the bank regarding the
return of the cheque as unpaid, and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the
payment of the said amount of money to the
Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 13 of

16

payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in
due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of
the receipt of the said notice.
Explanation. --- For the purpose of this section,
“debt or other liability” means a legally
enforceable debt or other liability.”
3. It is on the basis of the provisions as above,
the High Court came to a conclusion when a
cheque was issued as security, no complaint
will lie under Section 138 of the Act since the
cheque issued cannot be said to be for the
purpose of discharging any debt or liability.”
20.

Further held:“9. As noticed hereinbefore, the principal
reason for quashing of the proceeding as also
the complaint by the High Court was by reason
of the fact that Section 138 of the Act provides
for issuance of a cheque to another person
towards the discharge in whole or in part of
any debt or liability and on the factual context,
the High Court came to a conclusion that
issuance of the cheque cannot be co-related for
the purpose of discharging any debt or liability
and as such complaint under Section 138
cannot be maintainable.
10. The language, however, has been rather
specific as regards the intent of the legislature.
The commencement of the Section stands with
the words “Where any cheque”. The above
noted three words are of extreme significance,
in particular, by reason of the user of the word
“any” the first three words suggest that in fact
for whatever reason if a cheque is drawn on an
account maintained by him with a banker in
favour of another person for the discharge of
any be debt or other liability, the highlighted

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 14 of

16

words if read with the first three words at the
commencement of Section 138, leave no
manner of doubt that for whatever reason it
may be, the liability under this provision cannot
be avoided in the event the same stands
returned by the banker unpaid. The legislature
has been careful enough to record not only
discharge in whole or in part of any debt but
the same includes other liability as well. This
aspect of the matter has not been appreciated
by the High Court, neither been dealt with or
even referred to in the impugned judgment.
11. The issue as regards the co-extensive
liability of the guarantor and the principal
debtor, in our view, is totally out of the purview
of Section 138 of the Act, neither the same
calls for any discussion therein. The language
of the Statute depicts the intent of the lawmakers to the effect that wherever there is a
default on the part of one in favour of another
and in the event a cheque is issued in
discharge of any debt or other liability there
cannot be any restriction or embagor in the
matter of application of the provisions of
Section 138 of the Act: 'Any cheque' and 'other
liability' are the two key expressions which
stands as clarifying the legislative intent so as
to bring the factual context within the ambit of
the provisions of the Statute.
Any contra
interpretation would defeat the intent of the
legislature.”
21.

Now, the question to be seen here in the present case

is as to whether these two cheques which have been issued
by the partnership firm are in discharge of liability due
towards respondent No.2 or not, is a matter of evidence

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

Page 15 of

16

and this issue cannot be decided by this Court.
22.

The complaint case filed by respondent No.2 is at very

initial stage and only summons have been issued and all
the points which have been urged in the present petition,
can be taken by the petitioner, before the trial court during
the course of trial.
23.

Under these circumstance, the present petition is

wholly misconceived and is not maintainable and the same
is, hereby dismissed with costs of Rs.5,000/24.

The cost of Rs.5,000/- be deposited by the petitioner

with the trial court within one month from today failing
which the trial court shall recover the same in accordance
with law.
25.

Trial court record be sent back forthwith.

January 08, 2008
Bisht

Crl.M.C.No.2883/2007

V.B.GUPTA, J.

Page 16 of

16

