*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
ITA No.495/2003
Judgment reserved on: 14th March, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on: 1st April, 2008
M/S INDUS VALLEY PROMOTERS LTD.
54, Deepak Building,
13, Nehru Place
New Delhi-110019.
..... Petitioner.
Through: Dr.Rakesh Gupta with
Ms.Poonam Ahuja, Advs.
Vs.
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
I.P.Estate
New Delhi.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr.R.D.Jolly, Adv.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

V.B.Gupta, J.
Present appeal has been filed under Section 260A of

ITA No.495/2003

Page 1 of 11

the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short as ‘Act’) by the
Assessee against the order dated 29th May, 2003 passed by
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Delhi Bench ‘B’ (for short as
‘Tribunal’)

in

ITA

No.3785/Del/01

relevant

for

the

assessment year 1998-99.
2.

The brief facts of this case are that the Assessee

company filed return declaring a loss of Rs.4,93,218/- and
which was processed under Section 143(1)(a) of the Act on
the same figure.

Subsequently, notice under Section

143(2) of the Act was issued and regular assessment
proceedings under Section 143(3) of the Act were taken
up.

During the course of assessment proceedings, the

Assessing

Officer

noticed

an

increase

in

the

share

application money account as compared to the preceding
assessment year and vis-à-vis the account of Shri Sanjay
Gupta who is the Director of the Assessee company, it was
noticed that a sum of Rs.11.82 lacs had been received
during the previous year under consideration. It was noted
by the Assessing Officer that in fact no shares were allotted
during the previous year under consideration and the share
application money retained the same form and character
ITA No.495/2003

Page 2 of 11

even in two subsequent years. Thus, the Assessing Officer
treated this amount as unsecured amount and not as share
application money.

The Assessing Officer proceeded to

test the credit on the touchstone of Section 68 of the Act
and asked the Assessee to explain the source of the amount
in question. As regard the account of Shri Sanjay Gupta
with M/s Indwheels, the Assessing Officer asked the
Assessee to explain the deposits in the said account as all
the deposits were made in cash.

As per enquiries

conducted by the Assessing Officer, the address furnished
by the Assessee to be the office of M/s Indwheels was not
found located at the said premises. A copy of Inspector’s
report dated 3rd January, 2001 vis-a-vis the aforesaid facts
were confronted to the Assessee but according to the
Assessing Officer, no further evidence was produced by the
Assessee and on the ground that the source of the deposits
were not explained within the meaning of Section 68 of the
Act and, thus, the Assessing Officer added a sum of
Rs.11,82 lacs.

ITA No.495/2003

Page 3 of 11

3.

The Assessing Officer also made additions in respect

of following amounts deposited in the Petitioner company’s
books:(1)Smt. Rima Sood

Rs. 2 lacs

(2)Sh.Rajiv Aggarwal

Rs. 2 lacs

(3)Sh.Mayank Jain

Rs. 2 lacs

These deposits were made against the booking of flat/plot
in the scheme of the Assessee company but were later
cancelled by the parties.
4.

Thus, the Assessing Officer had made addition of Rs.

5 lacs.
5.

Being dissatisfied with the decision of the Assessing

Officer, the Assessee filed an appeal before the CIT(A).
However, the CIT(A) dismissed the appeal filed by the
Assessee.
6.

Thereafter, the Assessee challenged the order passed

by the CIT(A) before the Tribunal and vide impugned order
it has dismissed the appeal filed by the Assessee with
regard to these additions.
7.

It is contended by learned counsel for the Assessee

that all the amounts credited in the account of Sanjay
ITA No.495/2003

Page 4 of 11

Gupta in the books of the Assessee have come directly from
the account of Sanjay Gupta in M/s Indwheels by cheques
and Sanjay Gupta is a partner in the firm M/s Indwheels
and he has explained the sources of amounts deposited in
cash with Indwheels. This burden is upon the Revenue to
show that the amount which was deposited in the name of
Sanjay Gupta in the books of the Assessee and was
withdrawn by cheques from the firm M/s Indwheels, in
which Sanjay Gupta was a partner, was in fact the income
of the Assessee. There is no direct nexus between the facts
found and the conclusion drawn by the Tribunal.
8.

Regarding addition of Rs. 5 lacs made by the

Assessing Officer, it is contended by learned counsel for
the Assessee that these deposits were made against
booking of Flat/Plot in the scheme of the Assessee but were
later on cancelled by three parties.

In support of the

amount deposited, Assessee produced confirmation letters
and reply of Smt. Rima Sood, Sh.Rajiv Aggarwal and
Sh.Mayank Jain in response to notice under Section 131 of
the Act and copies of account. Thus, the Assessing Officer

ITA No.495/2003

Page 5 of 11

was unjustified in treating these amount as unexplained
cash credit.
9.
the

No shares were allotted to Sh. Sanjay Gupta during
year

in

question

and

for

the

subsequent

two

assessment years and since the shares were allotted after
enquiry done by the Assessing Officer, therefore, the
amount of Rs. 11, 82,000/- will be treated as unsecured
loan. The perusal of the assessment order shows that the
return of Sh. Sanjay Gupta for the assessment year 199697 was filed as late as 31-3-98 and this does not prove his
financial capacity to deposit the huge amount of Rs.11,
82,000/-. While no return is available up to assessment
year 1997-98 and the return for the assessment year 199899 has been filed only when the enquiry started with
regard to the deposit in the petitioner company. Therefore,
Sh. Sanjay Gupta was not an Assessee on record at the
relevant time.
10.

M/s Indwheels firm was not located at the given

address as is evident from the inspector’s report dated 137-01. Only copy of account of M/s. Indwheels is not

ITA No.495/2003

Page 6 of 11

sufficient to explain the source and credit worthiness of Sh.
Sanjay Gupta.
11. The main plank of the Assessee arguments is that the
source of the source cannot be examined. In the present
case, the Revenue has seen through the ploy of the
Assessee whereby substantial amount have been deposited
in cash purportedly in the books of M/s Indwheels stated to
be a partnership firm and from where the amounts have
been withdrawn and credited to the account of Sh. Sanjay
Gupta in the books of the Assessee company. It is the case
of the Revenue that the same cash deposits could have
been made in the books of the Assessee company and the
method of choosing the circuitous path is only an attempt
to circumvent the provisions of Section 68 of Act.
12. The amount was deposited in cash and in spite of
enquiry, the source of the deposit was not explained. The
creditworthiness of the said payment is not clear from the
income shown by them. Therefore, the addition should be
confirmed. Since the Assessee was a Director in the
Assessee company having a regular account, what was the
reasoning to first deposit the cash in M/s Indwheels and
ITA No.495/2003

Page 7 of 11

thereafter transfer the funds to the Assessee company,
when the initial deposit could have been made in the books
of the Assessee company itself.
13.

Thus, we do not find any infirmity in the reasoning

given by the Tribunal in upholding the action of tax
authorities in bringing to tax the sum of Rs.11,82,000/-.
14.

Regarding the second issue, Ms.Rima Sood did not

come before the Assessing Officer in response to the
summons, therefore, he was not able to go into the
question of her capacity with regard to the loan of Rs. 1 lac
and inspector did not find her at the address given by the
Assessee and the Assessee failed to produce her for
verification of the source of deposit and as such the
addition should be confirmed.
15.

With regard to Rajiv Agarwal, the Inspector’s report

dated 30th July, 2001 has made it clear that Sh. Rajiv
Aggarwal on being contacted was unable to produce the
bank pass book and avoided to produce the same.
16.

In the case of Mr.Mayank Jain there are categorical

findings of the tax authorities that at one point of time he
was working with Sh.Rajiv Agarwal but later on took up
ITA No.495/2003

Page 8 of 11

employment in a co-operative bank at Meerut and in spite
of having a bank account, Sh.Mayank Jain chose to deposit
the sum of Rs.2 lacs in cash.
17.

In the present case, the above transactions have been

done in cash even though the said creditors had bank
account and on some occasions they have received back
payment

through

their

bank

accounts.

Further,

the

advances towards booking of flat/plot (whereas no flat/plot
were allotted) were returned later on, the amounts are
clearly in the nature of the cash credits, which have been
shown to be towards booking of flats.
18.

The only evidence given by the Assessee is with

regard to the names of the creditors is their confirmations
stating that they have paid the said amount to the Assessee
in cash and also the details of the return filed by the said
creditors for the relevant assessment year.

Further, in

some cases the return has been filed after the assessment
of the Assessee came in scrutiny only in order to explain
the transaction. Thus, the Assessee has filed the returns of
the so-called creditors only to create the legal situation
where the creditors can be described as an Assessee.
ITA No.495/2003

Page 9 of 11

19.

It is well settled that the Assessee must discharge

the burden of proving the identity of the creditors and also
to give the source of the deposits. In other words, the
credit worthiness of the depositors must be established to
the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer. Where there is an
unexplained cash credit, it is open to the Assessing Officer
to hold that it is income of the Assessee and no further
burden lies on the Assessing Officer to show that income in
question comes from any particular source.
20.

Thus, the

facts of this case clearly show that the

Assessee has not been able to prove the credit worthiness
of the said creditors with respect to the cash credits in
question. All the persons involved did not respond to the
summons. The Assessee received all the payments in cash
even though the most of the persons have bank accounts
but they did not enter into the said transaction through
their bank accounts. However, the overall situation as
discussed above clearly shows that the same has been done
to hood wink to tax authorities and to evade the tax.
Therefore, in view of the overall facts, it can be said that
the finding of the Tribunal are based on relevant material
ITA No.495/2003

Page 10 of 11

and are not perverse and thus, no substantial question of
law arises in this case.
21.

Accordingly, the appeal of the Assessee is, hereby

dismissed.

V. B. GUPTA, J.

April 01, 2008
Bisht

ITA No.495/2003

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.

Page 11 of 11

