*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
MAC APPEAL No.211 of 2006

%

Judgment reserved on: 27th February, 2008
Judgment delivered on: 5th May, 2008

National Insurance Co. Ltd.
R O-II, 2E/9, Jhandewalan Extension,
New Delhi

…..Appellant

Through: Ms. Neerja Sachdeva, Adv.
Versus
1. Nirabjit Kaur,
W/o. Late Sh. Devendar Singh,
2. Sh. Gurpreet Singh
S/o Late Sh. Devendar Singh,
3. Ravinder Singh
S/o. Late Sh. Devendar Singh
All R/o, E-4, Ist Floor, Man Sarover Garden,
New Delhi
4. Sh. Sayed Khan S/o Sh. Hamit Khan
R/o VIII-Mallo Patti, Khan Chowk,
Distt-Arharia, Bihar
5. Mohd. Naim, S/o Mohd. Kasim
R/o-910/JJ 272, Cement Godown,
Netaji Nagar, New Delhi

…..Respondents

Through: None.

MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 1 of 14

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

V.B.Gupta, J.
This is an appeal under section 173 of the Motor
Vehicles Act,1988 (for short as the “Act”) filed by National
Insurance Ltd. against the order dated 13.09.05, passed by
Ms. Ravinder Kaur, Judge, Motor Accident Claims Tribunal
(for short as “Tribunal”), Delhi.
2.

Facts in brief necessary for disposal of the present

appeal are that on 25.12.03 at about 8.30p.m., the
deceased, Sh. Devender Singh along with his wife was
returning back to his home from the Gurudwara situated at
Rajouri Garden. When they were crossing the Ring Road
near the aforesaid Gurudwara, all of a sudden the
offending vehicle tempo No. DL-IL-B-5759, driven rashly
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 2 of 14

and negligently by its driver, came and hit the deceased. As
a result, the deceased fell down on the pavement and
sustained grievous injuries all over his body. After hitting,
the driver of the said offending vehicle sped away towards
Raja Garden along with the offending vehicle and Devender
Singh was rushed to Kukreja Hospital in a precarious
condition by a car bearing no. DL 6CD 4415. Thereafter,
the driver of the offending vehicle stopped near police
booth at Raja Garden Chowk and one Mr. Dharmendar,
who was sitting just beside the driver, informed the police
about the said accident and DD no. 52B was registered
against the Driver.
3.

Sh. Devender Singh remained admitted in Kukreja

Hospital for one day and expired on 26.12.03 due to the
injuries sustained by him in the said accident.
4.

Petition seeking compensation was filed by the widow

and children of the deceased against the driver, owner, and
insurer of the offending vehicle.

MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 3 of 14

5.

The Tribunal based on the materials placed and the

evidence on record found that death was caused due to
rash and negligent driving of the driver and therefore, vide
impugned

judgment,

awarded

compensation

of

Rs.4,18,000/- along with interest @ 6% per annum from the
date of filing of the petition i.e. 20.05.04 till its realization.
6.

It has been contended by learned Counsel for the

Appellant that the Tribunal erred in holding that the
Insurance Company has failed to prove on record that the
driving licence possessed by the driver was invalid or
ineffective and that too as per the knowledge of the owner.
It is contended that it was a clear case of willful and
intentional breach of the terms and conditions of the
Insurance Policy on the part of the insured, since the driver
of the offending vehicle did not hold any licence and
neither the owner could place on record the licence of his
driver, in spite of the fact that he had been served with the
legal notice under Order 12 Rule 8 of the Code of Civil
Procedure nor give any reasons why he could not produce
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 4 of 14

the copy of the driving licence of the driver and thus the
Appellant is not liable to pay the compensation amount in
view of section 149(2)(a)(ii) of the Act. The owner of the
offending vehicle also had been served with the notice
under section 133 of the Act, on 27.12.03 i.e. one day after
the alleged accident, which was duly received by him with
the remark that “his vehicle was loaded and has gone out
of station and as soon as the vehicle returns he would
produce the driver of the said vehicle.”
7.

Further, widow of the deceased who got herself

examined as PW3 had not disclosed the number and the
colour of the offending vehicle and could not state whether
the offending vehicle was open body or close body. As per
the evidence on record, PW4 was the only eye witness, who
could speak about the manner of accident and he clearly
stated that the accident had taken place due to the fault of
the deceased himself.
8.

Thus, in view of section 149(2) of the Act, directions

to the Appellant to pay the claim amount to the claimants
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 5 of 14

without recovery rights of the compensation amount even
when the Appellant had successfully proved the limited
defence available to it by the statute that there was a
willful and intentional breach of the terms of Insurance
Policy, is arbitrary, untenable and is bad in law and as
such, is liable to be set aside.
9.

Ld. Counsel placed reliance on National Insurance

Co. Ltd. v. Swaran Singh and others, 2004 ACJ 1 in
support of its contentions.
10.

Thus,

the

principal

question

that

arises

for

determination in this appeal is as to “whether the
Insurance Company can avoid its liability on the ground
that the driver of the vehicle did not possess valid driving
licence at the time of accident?”
11.

Chapter

XI

of

the

Act,

providing

compulsory

insurance of vehicles against third party risks is a social
welfare legislation to extend relief by compensation to
victims of accidents caused by use of motor vehicles. The
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 6 of 14

provisions of compulsory insurance coverage of all vehicles
are with this paramount object and the provisions of the
Act have to be so interpreted as to effectuate the said
object.
12.

Section 149 of the Act provides as follows;
“149. Duty of insurers to satisfy
judgments and awards against persons
insured in respect of third party risks.(1)

x

x

x

(2)
No sum shall be payable by an
insurer under sub-section (1)in respect of any
judgment or award unless, before the
commencement of the proceedings in which
the judgment or award is given the insurer
had notice through the Court, or as the case
may be, the Claims Tribunal of the bringing of
the proceedings, or in respect of such
judgment or award so long as execution is
stayed thereon pending an appeal; and an
insurer to whom notice of the bringing of any
such proceedings is so given shall be entitled
to be made a party thereto and to defend the
action on any of the following grounds,
namely:
(a)

(i)
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
Page 7 of 14

(ii) a condition excluding driving by a
named person or persons or by any
person who is not duly licensed, or by
any person who has been disqualified for
holding or obtaining a driving licence
during the period of disqualifications;
13.

In a plethora of cases, the Apex Court and various

High Courts have held that if there is a condition in the
insurance policy that only a licensed driver is to drive the
vehicle, the insurance company would not be liable in case
there is a breach.
14.

There could be no doubt that in order to escape

liability, not only it should be proved that the driver of the
vehicle was not having a licence at the time of the accident,
but also the insurance company should prove that the
driver was disqualified from holding or obtaining a licence
or never had any licence at all. Merely proving that on the
date of the accident, the driver did not have a licence, is
not enough to hold that the insurance company is not liable
for claim. The onus of proving that the driver of the vehicle
never had a licence or was disqualified from holding a
licence is on the insurance company.
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 8 of 14

15.

Though Nirabjit Kaur, widow of deceased had not

disclosed the number of the offending vehicle in her
statement but the same has been proved during the
testimony of ASI Jora Singh, the Investigating Officer of the
criminal case and from the statement of PW4, Mr.
Dharmendar who was travelling in the offending vehicle.
As per the statement of Nirabjit Kaur along with the post
mortem report which has been proved on record as Ex PW
5/1, the accident took place due to the fault of the driver of
tempo and the same has not been rebutted or disputed in
any manner by the driver of the offending vehicle as he
failed to contest the claim despite the notice and had not
even filed written statement in defence.
16.

The Appellant in its written statement admitted that

the offending vehicle was insured with it. However, it is
claimed that its driver was not possessing valid and
effective driving licence at the time of accident.
17.

In support of their plea, the appellant examined

Dinesh Kumar Sikka, Senior Asst. of the Company who
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 9 of 14

proved the copy of the notice under Order 12 Rule 8 CPC
along with its postal receipt, sent to Owner to produce the
original Insurance policy and driving licence.
18.

It is very important to note that the driver has not

been examined by the Appellant. The owner of the vehicle
as R3W2 deposed in his statement that he had employed
Sayed Khan after verifying that he could drive efficiently
and was possessing driving licence issued from State of
Bihar for driving HMV. Further, he stated that the licence
which he had seen at that time was valid, even at the time
of accident, though, he did not possess any copy of the
same.
19.

Thus, from the above facts it is clear that the owner of

the offending vehicle has taken all precautions while
appointing Respondent no.4, (Sayed Khan) to drive the
vehicle in question, so the insurance company cannot
escape its statutory liability.

It is only when the insured

himself has placed the vehicle in charge of a person who
does not hold a driving licence, then it can be said that he
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 10 of 14

is guilty of the breach of the promise, that the vehicle will
be driven by a licenced driver. Unless the insured is at fault
and guilty of breach, the insurer cannot escape from the
obligation to indemnify the insured and

successfully

contend that he is exonerated having regard to the fact
that the promisor committed a breach of his promise. The
burden is, therefore, upon the insurer to establish that the
owner of the vehicle is guilty of willful breach of the
condition embodied in the policy.
20.

It was for the appellant to prove that the insured

consciously employed the driver without having licence.
Apart from taking a plea in the written statement, the
appellant did nothing to substantiate that the driver at the
pertinent time was not having a valid driving licence. The
Insurance Company has not proved any witness to prove
the same.
21.

The Apex Court in Narcinva V. Kamat and Anr. v.

Alfredo Antonia Doe Martins and Ors. [1985 ACJ 397],
observed;
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 11 of 14

“When the Insurance Company complains
of a breach of the term of contract, which
would permit it to disown its liability
under the contract of insurance, the
burden is squarely on the Insurance
Company to prove that the breach has
been committed by the other party to the
contract. The rest in such a situation
would be 'who would fail, if no such
evidence is led'. With this principle of law
in view, the evidence has to be judged.
Merely non-production of licence or nonexamination of the driver of the vehicle is
not enough nor any adverse inference can
be drawn against the person holding that
because of non-examination of the driver
or non-production of the licence, the
burden is discharged by a mere question
in cross examination nor the owner is
under any obligation to furnish the
evidence so as to enable the Insurance
Company not to riggle out its liability
under the contract of insurance.”
22.

A driving licence is expected to be with the Driver

and not with the owner of the vehicle. Thus, mere nonproduction of licence is not enough to discharge the
burden of the Insurance Company. Merely giving notice to
the owner of the vehicle to produce licence is not sufficient
nor any admission, if any, of the owner that the driver was
not holding a valid driving licence at the relevant time, and
MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 12 of 14

therefore cannot absolve the Insurance Company from
liability.
23.

When the Insurance Company takes the plea that it is

not liable to pay compensation or to idemnify the insured
as the driver was not holding a valid licence for driving the
vehicle on the date of the accident and the vehicle was
being driven in breach of the terms of the policy, the
Insurance Company has to discharge the burden by placing
legal and cogent evidence before the Tribunal (see

Narcinva V. Alfredo 1985 ACJ 397 (supra) : and the
Division Bench cases of this Court in Shajadibai v.
Babookhan and Ors. Vol. 1 1988 ACC 24).

24.

There is not dispute about the principles of law as

enunciating in National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Swaran
Singh (Supra). However, that decision of the Apex Court
is not applicable to the facts of the present case as the case
in hand the owner of offending vehicle has appeared in the

MAC Appeal No.211/2006

Page 13 of 14

witness box and stated that his driver was having a valid
driving licence at the time of accident.
25.

In absence of any iota of evidence from the side of

appellant.

I do not find any error in the impugned

judgment whereby the Tribunal directed the Insurance
Company to pay the compensation amount to the claimant
without any recovery rights.
26.

The instant appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.

5th May, 2008
rs

MAC Appeal No.211/2006

V. B. GUPTA
(JUDGE)

Page 14 of 14

