*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

ITA 406/2007

%

Decided on: 4th March, 2008
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
(Central)-I, New Delhi

..... Appellant

Through
Ms. P.L.Bansal, Adv.
versus
ANSAL BUILDWELL LTD.
118, Prakashdeep, 7, Tolstoy Marg,
New Delhi
..... Respondent
Through

Mr. Satyen Sethi with
Mr. Johnson Bara, Advs.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
MADAN B. LOKUR, J (Oral)
The Revenue is aggrieved by an order dated 25th August, 2006
passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi Bench „D‟ in
ITA No.406/2007

Page 1 of 9

I.T.[SS] Appeal No.362(Del)/2003 relevant for the block assessment
period 1st April, 1989 to 10th February, 2000.
2.

During a search of the office premises of the Assessee, a bill

for an amount of Rs.14,69,250/- in respect of commission on sale of
flats by M/s. Televista Electronics Limited was found. It appears
that the books of accounts of the Assessee indicated payment of an
amount of Rs.12,50,000/- towards commission.
3.

According to the Assessing Officer, post search inquiries

revealed that the bill was bogus and in fact no commission was paid
to M/s. Televista Electronics Limited. On this basis, the Assessing
Officer added an amount of Rs.12,50,000/- to the income of the
Assessee as undisclosed income.
4.

The view taken by the Assessing Officer was upheld by the

Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). However, the Tribunal has
deleted the addition in the second appeal filed by the Assessee
before the Tribunal.
5.

We find from a perusal of the order passed by the

ITA No.406/2007

Page 2 of 9

Tribunal that the amount of commission paid by the Assessee to
M/s. Televista Electronics Limited was shown in the books of
accounts maintained by the Assessee in the regular course of its
business prior to the search. This fact was not disputed before the
Tribunal. It appears that the amount had also been shown by the
Assessee in its regular returns.
6.

It is not clear from the record what happened in the regular

assessment of the Assessee but the fact that the amount is sought to
be included in the block assessment goes to suggest that the
contention of the Assessee was accepted in the regular assessment.
7.

It is submitted by learned counsel for the Revenue that

notwithstanding the fact that the income was disclosed in the
account books of M/s. Televista Electronics Ltd. and in the return of
the Assessee, the Tribunal was in error in interpreting the broad
definition of “undisclosed income” as appearing in Section 158B(b)
of the Act. This reads as under:
“158B. In this Chapter, unless the
context otherwise requires,ITA No.406/2007

Page 3 of 9

(a) xxx xxx xxx
(b) “undisclosed income” includes any
money, bullion, jewellery or other
valuable article or thing or any income
based on any entry in the books of
account or other document or
transaction represents wholly or partly
income or property which has not been
or would not have been disclosed for
the purposes of this Act, or any
expense, deduction or allowance
claimed under this Act which is found
to be false.”
8.

Learned counsel for the Revenue has relied on the last few

words namely “or any expense, deduction or allowance claimed
under this Act which is found to be false.” She says that these
words were added by an amendment with retrospective effect from
1st July, 1995 by virtue of the Finance Act, 2002.
9.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the Assessee has

placed reliance on another amendment brought by the same Finance
Act with retrospective effect from 1st July, 1995 as appearing in
Section 158BB(1) of the Act. The insertion made is underlined and
ITA No.406/2007

Page 4 of 9

this reads as follows:“Computation of undisclosed income of the block
period.
158BB (1) The undisclosed income of the block period
shall be the aggregate of the total income of the
previous years falling within the block period
computed, in accordance with the provisions of this
Act, on the basis of evidence found as a result of search
or requisition of books of account or other documents
and such other materials or information as are
available with the Assessing Officer and relatable to
such evidence, as reduced by the aggregate of the total
income, or as the case may be, as increased by the
aggregate of the losses of such previous years,
determined, (a) to (f) xxx
10.

xxx

xxx

On a reading of both these provisions of law, which are

inserted in the Act by the same amending statute, that is, the Finance
Act, 2002, it appears to us that undisclosed income should be that
which is discovered as a result, inter-alia, of a document or
transaction which has not been or would not have been disclosed for
the purpose of the Act. This pre-condition does not arise in so far as
the present case is concerned because admittedly the document
ITA No.406/2007

Page 5 of 9

recovered during the search represented a disclosed transaction of
sale of property that had taken place for which M/s. Televista
Electronics Limited had been paid a commission. In so far as the
falsity of the expense or deduction or allowance is concerned, that
must be necessarily be relatable to the document or transaction.
This is clear from Section 158BB(1) of the Act which specifically
requires that the material or information must be relatable to such
evidence.

Therefore, both requirements are necessary, namely,

material showing that the amount has not been or would not have
been disclosed and that the expense, deduction or allowance should
be false on the basis of the unearthed evidence.
11.

In so far as the present case is concerned, the very first

requirement namely of non-disclosure of the material does not arise
because in fact the Assessee had disclosed the transaction in its
account books and this is not disputed by the Revenue. Moreover,
the sale appears to have been considered by the Assessing Officer
during the course of regular assessment, although learned counsel
ITA No.406/2007

Page 6 of 9

for the parties are not in a position to tell us the exact facts. In any
case, since the first condition itself is not satisfied, the falsity of the
claim being relatable to that evidence does not arise.
12.

Apart from the fact that the transaction appears to have been

considered in the regular assessment, we find that the Assessing
Officer had considered the following facts (as noted in the order of
the Tribunal):“1. The person said to have mediated the deal i.e. Shri.
Vipin Luthra is son-in-law of Shr. Sushil Ansal,
Chairman and Managing Director of APIL and ABL at
the time of search;
2. Televista is a loss making company and the sole
purpose here seems to reduce the liability of ABL
through siphoning off taxable income by showing
commission payable to Televista as such diversion
would not make any impact on tax liability of
Televista.
3. M/s. Televista Electronics Ltd. is engaged in
manufacture of electronic product and does not deal in
real estate;
4. It cannot be said that the addition was not based on
any seized material. The addition has been made on
the basis of seized pages 1-6 of Annexure A-2, Party
HR-10 as well as post search investigation, which is
ITA No.406/2007

Page 7 of 9

permissible under Section 158BB of the Income Tax
Act;
5. The replies submitted by Shri Shankar Kaul,
Upendra Kaul and Anil Bhan conclusively establish the
fact that no intermediary was involved in the sale of
flats at Shalimar Residency. This is further supported
by the fact that a single bill has been raised against
commission received on account of sale of flats to
different persons. All the flats could not possibly have
been sold on the same date. “
13.

The Tribunal has opined that these were inadequate reasons

for coming to the conclusion that the commission paid by the
Assessee to M/s. Televista Electronics Limited was bogus. This is a
finding of fact arrived at by the Tribunal based on the material on
record. The facts considered by the Assessing Officer may raise a
doubt with regard to the genuineness of the transaction, but that by
itself is not enough. The facts must be relatable to the evidence
available and not inferential.
14.

Learned counsel for the Revenue asks us to reappreciate the

evidence. Unfortunately, we cannot do that since no perversity has
been shown from the conclusions arrived at by the Tribunal.
ITA No.406/2007

Page 8 of 9

15.

We are of the opinion that no substantial question of law

arises in the matter.
16.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J

V.B. GUPTA, J
4th MARCH, 2008
rs

ITA No.406/2007

Page 9 of 9

