*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
FAO No.227/1998

%

Judgment reserved on: 6th May, 2008
Judgment delivered on: 12th May, 2008

Smt.Manju Rani
W/o Sh.Mangal Sain
R/o 1/9802, Gorakh Park,
Delhi.
…Appellant
Through:Mr.Sanjay Kumar Ghosh, Adv.
Versus
1. Inderjeet Singh
S/o Sh.Hira Lal
2. Miss. Anjali
D/o Sh.Inderjeet Singh
3.Master Atul
S/o Sh.Inderjeet Singh
4.Master Ansul
S/o sh.Inderjeet Singh
(Respondents 2 to 4 through Sh.Inderjeet Singh
S/o Sh.Hira Lal).
All R/o A-54, Preet Vihar,
New Delhi-110092.
Through: Nemo.

…Respondents

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may

FA .No.227/1998

Page 1 of 10

be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

V.B.Gupta, J.
Present appeal under Section 173 of Motors Vehicles
Act, 1998 (for short as „Act‟) has been filed by the appellant
(who is the owner of offending vehicle) against the
judgment dated 25th November, 1997
passed by Sh.H.S.Sharma, Judge Motor Accident Claims
Tribunal (for short as „Tribunal‟), Karkardooma Court,
Delhi and also against the order dated 2nd January, 1998 on
the application of the appellant for reviewing of the
judgment dated 25th November, 1997.
2.

Brief facts are that, Smt.Sulochana Devi, aged about

29 years who was employed as a teacher in primary school
of Municipal Corporation of Delhi and was earning
Rs.2,814/- per month met with a fatal accident on 27 th July,
1998.

Her legal heirs, that is, her husband and her

children who are respondents 1 to 4, herein, have filed
claim petition under Section 110-A of the Act for grant of
compensation.

FA .No.227/1998

Page 2 of 10

3.

Vide the impugned judgment, the learned Tribunal

passed award for a sum of Rs.3,56,200/- along with 12%
interest

from the date of filing of the petition till

realization in favour of the claimants and against the
respondents, that is, the driver, owner and Insurance
Company.
4.

Since the liability of Insurance Company as per Motor

Vehicles Act, 1939 was limited to the extent of Rs.50,000/-,
it was ordered that driver and owner are jointly and
severally liable to pay the award amount as the liability of
the Insurance Company is limited to Rs.50,000/- in all. It
appears that thereafter the present appellant moved an
application for review before learned Tribunal and vide
order dated 2nd January, 1998 the application for review
filed by the present appellant was dismissed.
5.

Notice of this appeal was issued to respondents.

However, respondents have not been appeared in spite of
service.
6.

It has been contended by learned counsel for the

appellant that the learned Tribunal was not justified in
rejecting the application of the appellant for review of the

FA .No.227/1998

Page 3 of 10

judgment.

Further, the learned Tribunal has altogether

ignored the factum of the acquittal of the driver of the
offending vehicle by the criminal court.

It is contended

that once it has been established and decided that the
driver was not guilty for rash and negligent driving, the
present appellant/owner of the vehicle has no vicarious
liability to pay the compensation to the claimant.

It has

been fully established in the criminal trial by evidence that
the accident was caused due to negligence of the driver of
the scooter, who is the husband of the deceased and there
was contributory negligence on the part of the driver of the
scooter. Further the multiplier applied by the Tribunal is
not just and fair, rather it is arbitrary and excessive claim
has been granted to the claimant.
7.

This contention of learned counsel for the appellant

that the learned Tribunal was not justified in rejecting the
application of review is not sustainable, in view of the
order dated 27th July, 1998 passed by this Court when the
present appeal was listed for hearing.
6.

On 27th July, 1998 this Court has passed the following

Order:-

FA .No.227/1998

Page 4 of 10

“This appeal is directed against the judgment
delivered by Sh.H.S.Sharma, Judge, MACT,
Karkardooma Courts, Delhi on 25th November,
1997 and the order dated 2nd January, 1998 for
reviewing the judgment dated 25th November,
1997.
Learned counsel for the appellant has
argued only one point relating to the
appreciation of evidence in accident claim
petition. It is submitted that an independent
witness, who was examined before the Criminal
Court, did not support the prosecution case and
stated as if there was no negligence on the part
of the driver/respondent No.1 and the scooter
driver himself was negligent. The Criminal
Court acquitted the accused on the basis of the
statement of the witness. The witness who was
examined before the Criminal Court was not
examined before the Tribunal. It is stated that
the appellant came to know of it later. This
aspect cannot be considered, for at least the
driver knew about the statement. It is also not
the case of the appellant and all of a sudden the
appellant met him at cremation ground. It
appears to be just a device to delay. Moreover,
there is difference of nature of negligence in
respect of offence relating to rash and
negligent driving and nature of negligence
expected for the purpose of awarding
compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988. For the aforesaid reasons, I do not feel it
appropriate to interfere with the impugned
order and do not find any force in appeal
against the order of review. This part of prayer
in appeal is rejected keeping also in view that
appeal against main order dated 27th
November, 1997 has also been filed.”
9.

So, plea of the appellant with regard to review has

already been dismissed by this Court.

FA .No.227/1998

Page 5 of 10

10.

Now, coming to the merits of the present appeal, the

main contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that
the driver of the offending vehicle has been acquitted in
the criminal trial and the driver of the scooter was at fault
and he was also contributory negligence to the accident.
11.

In this regard, it may be pointed out that driver of

offending vehicle had not appeared in the witness box
before the trial court to prove his defence. On the other
hand, PW-3, the driver of the scooter, that is, husband of
the deceased, on which deceased was travelling has
appeared in the witness box and in his statement he stated
that he was driving scooter at a normal speed and was on
the correct side of the road and was hit from behind by bus
No.DEP-2424 being driven rashly and negligently by its
driver and due to this impact his scooter became disbalanced and they fell on the road and sustained injuries
and rear wheel of the bus passed through the body of his
wife. Further he has stated that this accident was caused
fully due to rash and negligent driving of the bus driver.
12.

Though the owner and driver of the offending bus had

filed their written statement in the trial court but PW-3 was

FA .No.227/1998

Page 6 of 10

not at all cross-examined either by the owner or by the
driver.

On the other hand this witness was only cross-

examined by counsel for the Insurance Company and PW-3
denied

the

suggestion

given

to

him

in

the

cross-

examination that the accident was caused due to his rash
and negligent driving or due to contributory negligence on
the part of both the drivers.
13.

As per written statement filed by the owner and

driver, their defence is that the accident took place due to
rash and negligent driving of the scooter and it was not
caused by the driver of the bus. Further the driver of the
offending bus has not appeared in the witness box for the
reason best known to him though he has filed written
statement in the trial court.
14.

Moreover the defence taken in the written statement

by the driver was nowhere put to the driver of the scooter
when he appeared in the witness box.
15.

From the testimony of PW-3, it stands clearly

established that the accident had occurred due to rash and
negligent driving of the bus driver and there is nothing on

FA .No.227/1998

Page 7 of 10

record to show that its driver had any enmity with the
deceased or her husband who was driving the scooter.
16.

Now, coming to the plea of the learned counsel for

the appellant that the bus driver has been acquitted by the
criminal court and as such the appellant is not liable to pay
any compensation to the present proceedings.
17.

It has been laid down by this Court in the case of

State of Haryana & Anr. Vs. Sh.Ajay Kumar & Ors.
(2008) I AD (Delhi) 93 that;
“Similarly the acquittal of the driver of the
offending vehicle of the appellant by the
criminal court cannot be taken to have any
adverse effect on the findings reached by the
Tribunal in an independent compensation case.
The MACT cases have to be decided on their
own footings and the same are not dependant
upon the result or an outcome of a criminal
case. In this regard the Hon‟ble Apex Court in
its judgment entitled N.K.V. bros. (P) Ltd. vs.
M.Kurumai Ammal & Ors., in AIR 1980 SC
1354 gave following observations:“The plea that the criminal case had
ended in acquittal and that, therefore, the
civil suit must follow suit, was rejected
and rightly. The requirement of culpable
rashness under Section 304-A, I.P.C. is
more drastic than negligence sufficient
under the law of Torts to create liability.
The quantum of compensation was
moderately fixed and although there was
perhaps, a case for enhancement, the
High Court dismissed the cross-claims

FA .No.227/1998

Page 8 of 10

also. Being questions of fact, we are
obviously unwilling to reopen the holding
on culpability and compensation.”
18.

Now

coming

to

the

quantum

of

compensation

awarded in this case, deceased was working as a school
teacher and she was aged 29 years and was to retire at the
age of 60 years. The husband of the deceased was aged
about 39 years at the time of accident, so multiplier of 15
was adopted.

This multiplier adopted by the learned

Tribunal has been rightly adopted keeping in view the age
of the deceased as well as her husband.

Further the

Tribunal has deducted a sum of 50% of her income as
personal expenses, as deceased being employed as a
government

teacher

and

as

such

the

compensation

awarded by the Tribunal is just and fair.
19.

Under the circumstances, no ambiguity can be found

that the impugned order passed by the learned Tribunal
and the present appeal is without any basis and is not
maintainable and the same is, hereby dismissed with costs
of Rs.5,000/-.
18.

Appellant is directed to deposit costs of Rs.5,000/-

with the trial court within a period of four weeks from

FA .No.227/1998

Page 9 of 10

today, failing which the trial court shall recover the same
in accordance with law.
19.

Copy of this judgment be sent to the trial court.

20.

Trial court record be sent back forthwith.

May 12, 2008
Bisht

FA .No.227/1998

V.B.GUPTA, J.

Page 10 of 10

