HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Bail Appl. No.2251 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: 13th December, 2007
Judgment delivered on: 18th February, 2008
Rakesh Jain
s/o Shri A.K. Jain
R/o B-154, Yojna Vihar
Delhi-110092

..... Petitioner
Through: Mr.Siddharth Luthra,
Sr.Adv. with Mr.Yogesh Sharma
and Mohd. Feroz, Advs.

Versus.
The State of NCT of Delhi
Through Ministry of Home Affairs,
New Delhi
5-Shamnath Marg, Delhi ….. Respondent
Through : Mr.R.N. Vats, Adv.
Mr.Nitesh Sharma,
Adv. for the
complainant.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

Bail Application No.2251/2007

page 1 of 7

V.B. GUPTA, J.
Petitioner is seeking anticipatory bail in this case.
2.

The brief facts of this case are that the present

petitioner along with his co-accused Mr.S.N. Sharma
floated a company under the name and style of M/s
Boutanika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.

They were not having

sufficient land and in spite of that they got money from the
investors by making false assurances.

Both of them

mislead the investors stating that they are the fastest
growing company whereas the record shows that company
was incorporated only on 11th May, 2006. Further, it was
also projected that they have 280 acres of land for the
township and the minimum requirements of 150 acres of
land for getting the license, whereas, in fact they were
having only a few acres of land which was purchased by
them.

It goes on to show the deep-rooted conspiracy to

cheat the investors and they have duped the investors of
their hard earned money.

Bail Application No.2251/2007

page 2 of 7

3.

It has been contended by learned counsel for the

petitioner that the complainant has agreed to purchase the
plots from the petitioner and the agreement has also been
between the parties. Thereafter, the complainant started
selling these plots without any permission/authority from
the petitioner and the complainant also served a notice for
return of the money which shows that there was a civil
dispute between the parties and no criminal liability is
there. The petitioner is not connected with the commission
of the offence as alleged and the complainant himself was
part of the business.

The complainant had given the

company two cheques worth Rs.71 Lacs as token money
and has agreed to buy 300 plots in the proposed township
and agreed to make the payment for the same by 19 th May,
2006, but due to some mala fide intention he is not inclined
to honour the above offer.

Further, the company was

basically being run by the other accused Mr.S.N. Sharma
and petitioner acted upon the representations made by the
co-accused and joined the company and invested huge sum
Bail Application No.2251/2007

page 3 of 7

of Rs.45 Lacs and Mr.S.N. Sharma used to look after the
sale and purchase of the land. In the month of July, 2006
petitioner came to know that company is not having the
land required for the purpose of township, so he decided to
leave the company and asked the co-accused Mr. Sharma
to reconcile the accounts and ultimately, the petitioner
resigned from the company on 14 th August, 2006 and he
was discharged from the liability of the company.

There

has been no siphoning off funds during the period when the
petitioner was director and he has not used even a single
paisa from the account of the company and petitioner has
never been in control of affairs of the company. Further, a
sum of Rs.60 Lacs has already been deposited with the
Court by Mr.S.N. Sharma and the petitioner is ready to join
the investigation as and when directed.
4.

On the other hand, it has been argued by learned

counsel for the State that petitioner along with co-accused
Mr.S.N. Sharma floated a company in the name of M/s
Boutanika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. and this company was
Bail Application No.2251/2007

page 4 of 7

not having sufficient funds despite that, they got money
from the investors by concealing the relevant facts.
Further, the company was not having sufficient land with it
and the petitioner and co-accused have cheated the
complainant by making mis-representation that they are
real estate developer in NCR having various townships and
a big group having 300 acres of land whereas in fact there
was

nothing

in

existence

and

since

the

custodial

interrogation of the petitioner is required, the petitioner
should not be granted anticipatory bail.
5.

Admittedly, the petitioner was the director and

according to averments made in the present petition, it was
Mr.S.N. Sharma who is the main culprit and Mr.S.N.
Sharma used to look after the sale and purchase of the
land.

The petitioner himself has admitted in the petition

that in the month of July, 2006 he came to know that the
company is not having the land required for the purpose of
township and therefore, he decided to leave the company
and asked Mr.Sharma to reconcile the accounts. All these
Bail Application No.2251/2007

page 5 of 7

averments, prima facie, goes on to show the involvement of
petitioner in this case.
6.

In Bal Chand Jain v. State of M.P. AIR 1977 SC

366,

the

Apex

Court

has

laid

down

the

following

proposition with regard to grant of anticipatory bail:“(i) The power under Section 438 Cr.P.C. is of
an extraordinary character and must be
exercised sparingly and in exceptional cases
only.
(ii) The said power is not unguided or
uncanalised but all the limitations imposed in
the preceding Section 437 Cr.P.C., are
implicit therein and must be read into Section
438 as well.
(iii) In addition to the limitations imposed in
Section 437, the petitioner must further make
out a special case for the exercise of the
power to grant anticipatory bail.”
7.

Further, in the present case, petitioner earlier moved

an application for anticipatory bail before this Court and to
demonstrate his bona fides, petitioner gave his willingness
to deposit a sum of Rs.60 Lacs with the Registrar of this
Court.
Bail Application No.2251/2007

page 6 of 7

8.

If petitioner has no concern with the present case or

if he is not involved in the commission of offence, then
there was no occasion for him to deposit Rs.60 Lacs in this
Court.

Moreover, on 1st March, 2007 petitioner sought

liberty to withdraw his application for anticipatory bail.
There is nothing on record to show that after withdrawal of
the earlier bail application, there has been any change in
circumstances which necessitated the petitioner to file the
present bail application.
9.

So, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of

the case, and the gravity and seriousness and nature of the
offence, no ground is made out for granting anticipatory
bail to the petitioner.
10.

Under these circumstances, the present application

for anticipatory bail is hereby dismissed.

18th February, 2008
ac
Bail Application No.2251/2007

(V.B.GUPTA)
JUDGE
page 7 of 7

