*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
ITA No.516/2007

%

Judgment delivered on: 10th March, 2008

Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-IV, New Delhi

.....Appellant.
Through: Ms. P.L.Bansal, Adv.

Vs.
ESPN Software India (P) Limited
Building No.22, Pushp Vihar,
Community Centre, New Delhi

..... Respondent

Through: Ms. Mahua C. Kalra, Adv.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.516/2007

Page 1 of 9

V.B.GUPTA, J. (Oral)
The short question before us in this appeal is as to whether the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short as „Tribunal‟) was right in
allowing the deduction of expenditure incurred by the Assessee on
or after 15th August, 1995 holding that the business has commenced
on this very date.
2.

Brief facts of this case are that the Assessee Company was

incorporated on 1st August, 1995 and as such this was the first year
for which the Assessee had filed its return declaring a loss at
Rs.3,01,78,033/- on 29th November, 1996.
3.

On 15th August, 1995, the Assessee had acquired license from

ESPN Inc to sub-license for distribution of ESPN Programming
Services in India via Cable Television System, Satellite Master
Antenna Systems and Direct to Home via Satellite. By virtue of this
license, the Assessee entered into an agreement on 1st October, 1995

ITA No.516/2007

Page 2 of 9

with M/s. Modi Entertainment Network (P) Limited (MEN) and
appointed MEN as its sole distributor for distribution of ESPN
Programmes to cable operators, hotels and other DTH subscribers.
4.

It was noticed by the Assessing Officer during the course of

assessment proceedings that the Assessee did not earn any income
except interest of Rs.95,522/-against which it debited expenses of
Rs.2,28,85,749/-, relating to the entire period from 1st August, 1995
to 31st March, 1996. It was claimed by the Assessee that the date of
incorporation is to be treated as date of commencement of business
and hence all the expenses are to be treated as Revenue expenses.
5.

The Assessing Officer held that since the agreement with the

parent company to distribute ESPN Services in India was dated 15th
August, 1995, while agreement with MEN was dated 1st October,
1995, therefore it could not be said that before this date, the Assessee
had commenced business. The Assessing Officer further noted that
even necessary infrastructure i.e. the decoders were purchased

ITA No.516/2007

Page 3 of 9

by the Assessee much later for an amount of Rs.8.41 crores and
accordingly it was held by the Assessing Officer that the business of
the Assessee did not commence during the year and he treated all
the expenses debited to Profit & Loss Account as expenses incurred
prior to commencement and did not allow the same as revenue
expenditure.
6.

Aggrieved by this order, the Assessee filed an appeal before

the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [for short as „CIT(A)]
who held that the business of the Assessee was set up on 15th
August, 1995 and therefore Assessee was entitled to claim all the
expenditure incurred on or before this date including depreciation
allowance.
7.

Not satisfied with the order passed by the CIT(A), the

Revenue preferred an appeal before the Tribunal. The Tribunal vide
its impugned order dated 8th September, 2006 passed in ITA
No.463/Del/02

ITA No.516/2007

relevant

for

the

assessment

year

1997-1998

Page 4 of 9

dismissed the appeal holding that the assessee has commenced the
business on 15th August, 1995.
8.

Aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, the Revenue has filed

the present appeal.
9.

It has been contended by learned counsel for the Revenue that

though the Assessee had obtained the license on 15th August, 1995,
however, it had appointed MEN as sole distributor only on 1st
October, 1995. Moreover, no business activity of revenue nature was
carried out by the Assessee during the year. It is also contended that
most of the equipment/infrastructure had arrived in India only in
the month of November and December and therefore Assessee was
not even in a condition to start business and merely getting
incorporation certificate did not mean that the business had
commenced.
10.

The question which arises for consideration in the present case

is as to when the Assessee is said to have commenced his business.
ITA No.516/2007

Page 5 of 9

It has to be borne in mind that there is a distinction between setting
up of the business and the commencement of the business. What
is relevant under the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short as „Act‟) is the
setting up of the business and not the commencement of the
business.
11.

The definition of the previous year as contained in Section 3(1)

of the Act, which is relevant for the present case reads as follows:“ 3. “Previous Year“ Defined
For the purposes of this Act, “previous year“
means the financial year immediately preceding
the assessment year:
Provided that, in the case of a business or
profession newly set up, or a source of income
newly coming into existence, in the said financial
year, the previous year shall be the period
beginning with the date of setting up of the
business or profession or, as the case may be, the
date on which the source of income newly comes
into existence and ending with the said financial
year.”
12.

According to this section, it is “setting up” of the business and

not the “commencement of the business” that is to be considered. A
ITA No.516/2007

Page 6 of 9

business is commenced as soon as an essential activity of that
business is started. Thus, a business commenced with first purchase
of stock in trade, the date when the first sale is made is not material
in that respect. Similarly, a manufacturer has to undertake several
activities in order to bring to produce financial goods and he
commences his business as soon as he undertakes first of such
activities (Commissioner of Income Tax vs. Saurashtra Cement and
Chemical Industries Ltd. 1973 (91) ITR 170 Gujrat).
13.

It is also well-settled that business is nothing more than a

continuous course of activities and for commencement of business
all the activities which go to make up the business need not be
started simultaneously. As soon as an activity which is the essential
activity in the course of carrying on the business is started, the
business must be said to have commenced.
14.

A finding regarding the date when a business was set up is a

finding of fact. Here in the present case, there is a finding of fact

ITA No.516/2007

Page 7 of 9

given by two statutory authorities below that Assessee was ready to
commence its business on 15th August, 1995 when it acquired license
to distribute in India through Cable Television Systems, Satellite
Master Antenna Systems and DTH etc. The relevant findings of the
Tribunal in this regard are as under:“The Assessee in the present case as one of its business
activity distribution of T.V. programmes in the area of
sports, entertainment etc. in furtherance of this objects
referred to above it obtained the license from ESPN Inc.
to distribute ESPN Channel Services. This was rightly
held by the Commissioner of Income Tax (A) to be the
point of time when the business of the Assessee has
been set up. By virtue of the license it could discharge
one of its objects as set out in the Memorandum of
association of the company. This was the activity,
which was first in point of time and which must
necessarily precede all other activities and on this
activity being done, the business of the Assessee,
would be deemed to have been set up.”
15.

Since the Assessee has acquired the license on 15th August,

1995, and after getting the license, the Assessee was in a position to
start the business, so, under these circumstances, we have no
hesitation in holding that the Assessee has commenced his business

ITA No.516/2007

Page 8 of 9

on or after 15th August, 1995 and we do not find any infirmity with
regard to this finding in the order passed by the Tribunal.
16.

Under these circumstances, no fault can be found with the

view taken by the Tribunal. Thus, the order of the Tribunal does not
give rise to a question of law, much less a substantial question of
law, to fall within the limited purview of Section 260-A of the Act,
which is confined to entertaining only such appeals against the
order which involves a substantial question of law.
17.

Accordingly, the present appeal filed by the Revenue is,

hereby, dismissed. .

(V. B. GUPTA)
JUDGE

10th March, 2008
rs

ITA No.516/2007

(MADAN B. LOKUR)
JUDGE

Page 9 of 9

