*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No.306 with 307/2002

%

Judgment reserved on: 24th January , 2007
Judgment delivered on: 14th February, 2007
SUDHA BURMAN,
HARSHA BHAWAN,
E-BLOCK, CONNAUGHT PLACE
NEW DELHI

..... Appellant

Through Mr.R.Chaudhary with
Mr.R.K.Chaudhan, Advs.
versus
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
NEW DELHI-110001
Through

..... Respondent
Mr.R.D.Jolly, Adv.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

V.B. GUPTA, J.
By this common judgment, two appeals bearing ITA Nos.
306 and 307/2002 filed by the Appellant against the impugned
order dated 3rd June, 2002 passed by the Income Tax Appellate

ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

Page 1 of 9

Tribunal (for short as 'Tribunal') are being disposed off as both
these appeals involve common question of law and fact.
2.

Common facts as emerge out from the record are that

Appellant is wife of Shri A.C. Burman, Chairman M/s Dabur India
Ltd. and has income from house property, business and other
sources. Husband of the Appellant has undertaken several trips
abroad

during

the

relevant

period

and

the

Appellant

accompanied him on these trips. The company had undertaken
the expenses on tickets for the Appellant's visit abroad.

The

Assessing Officer disallowed 50% of the expenses and treated
50% of the amount spent as income of the Assessee under the
provision of Section 2(24)(iv) of the Income Tax Act (for short as
'Act').
3.

The Appellant being not satisfied with the order of the

Assessing Officer filed an appeal before the Commissioner of
Income Tax (Appeal) who set aside the order of the Assessing
Officer.
4.

The Revenue filed an appeal before the Tribunal and vide

impugned order the matter was decided in favour of the
Revenue.
5.

It has been argued by learned counsel for the Appellant

that the expenses were incurred by the Assessee in relation to

ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

Page 2 of 9

the business of the company and as such these expenses have
been rightly allowed by the Commissioner of Income Tax
(Appeal).

Further, the expenses incurred by the company are

duly approved by the board of Directors in its meeting held on
20th June, 1998 through a resolution which reads as under:-

6.

“Resolved that the consent of the board
be and is hereby given for travelling of the
wife of the concerned Whole time or
Managing Director for the purpose of the
business of the company within India and
abroad thereon.”
For the years ending 31.3.1993 and 31.3.1994, the

husband of the Appellant made 15 and 13 tours respectively to
different places but it was only on seven occasions (for each
year) the Appellant travelled with her husband. Though all the
time the Chairman has travelled for the purpose of the business
and it is only in respect of these tours where it has been felt
necessary, the Appellant should accompany him looking into the
necessity of the business and social functions and the visits
required abroad and as such the Appellant did not derive any
personal benefit or perquisite or obligation from such visits and
in support of his contention, learned counsel for the Appellant
has relied upon case law reported as Commissioner of Income
Tax Vs. Shrimati Kamalani Gautam Sarabhai, (1994) 208
ITR 139.

ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

Page 3 of 9

7.

On the other hand, it has been argued by learned counsel

for the Revenue that the trips undertaken by the Appellant who
happens to be the wife of the Chairman of the company were not
in connection with the business and the onus of proof that these
trips were undertaken by the Appellant at the behest of the
company and in relation to the business of the company, was on
the Appellant which onus has not been discharged by her. It is
contended that the resolution dated 20th June, 1998 relied upon
by the Appellant is of general nature which authorises the wife of
the Managing Director to accompany him on his trips abroad, in
relation to the business. The justification of each trip has to be
given by the Appellant and where the Appellant is not in a
position to give justification in accordance with the provision of
Section 2(24)(iv) of the Act, the additions have to be made at the
hands of the Assessee with respect to the expenses incurred.
8.

The initial onus is on the Assessee to show that these trips

were required to be taken in connection with the business. Once
the Assessee discharges this onus by positive evidence then
onus would shift on the Revenue to contradict but unless and
until the Assessee discharges the onus by a positive evidence,
the Revenue cannot contradict the same.
9.

It is an admitted fact that certain trips were taken by the

ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

Page 4 of 9

Appellant along with her husband, who is the chairman of the
company but the dispute raised by the Revenue is that her trips
were not in relation to the business of the company. Apart from
the aforesaid resolution, there is no other material on record to
show that these trips were in relation to the business.

This

resolution indicates that the expenses in relation to the trips of
the wife of Managing Director or Chairman or Whole time
Director shall be borne by the company, that means, the
company has taken a policy to bear the expenses which covers
the area of the resolution. This resolution is of general nature. It
is nowhere stated that each and every trip undertaken by the
wife shall be borne by the company.

In 1988, when the

resolution was passed, the company could not anticipate how
many Directors with their wives shall be visiting abroad in the
near future and as such this resolution was general in nature.
There has to be justification for the wife of the person concerned
to accompany him and unless and until there is justification for
the

wife

of

concerned

Director

accompanying

him,

such

expenses cannot be allowed and there is nothing on record to
show that all these trips were taken by the Appellant with regard
to the promotion of the business of the company.
10.

In the case of the Commissioner of Income Tax Vs. Smt.

ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

Page 5 of 9

Kamalini Gautam Sarabhai (supra) the Assessee had undertaken
foreign tour at the instance of the company in which her husband
was Director and purpose of the tour as shown by company was
to obtain the best results for negotiation at top level with foreign
corporations, has to built up the relationship and as such
Assessee, therefore, was not getting any benefit by such tour
and further no obligation was incurred by the Assessee or her
husband for such foreign tour and foreign tour expenses,
therefore, not includible in the hands of the Assessee.

It was

held,
“There was no material to show that it was a
pleasure tour arranged by the company for the
assessee. It is difficult to appreciate how in view of
these facts and circumstances, it can be said that by
undertaking these foreign tours, she had derived any
advantage or personal gain or that she had benefited
in any other manner so that the whole expenditure
incurred for these tours can be regarded as her
income. We are of the opinion that the case of the
assessee was certainly not covered by the first part
of the said clause.
In the alternative, it was contended that the
case of the assessee would be covered by the second
part of the clause. In our opinion, this contention is
also misconceived.
As pointed out above, by
undertaking these foreign tours, the assessee had
not incurred any obligation. She had undertaken the
tours at the instance of the company and for the
purpose of the business of the company.
For
undertaking such foreign tours, neither had she
incurred any obligation nor was any obligation
incurred by her husband who was a director of the
company. For this reason, even the second was not
attracted in this case. The Tribunal was, therefore,
ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

Page 6 of 9

11.

right in holding that the expenditure of Rs. 39,753
incurred by Karamchand Premchand Pvt. Ltd. on the
foreign tours was not includible as income under
section 2(24)(iv) of the Act in the computation of the
total income of the assessee.”
There is no dispute to this proposition of law that the

expenses incurred on the foreign trips of the wives are to be
allowed provided, they are in relation to the business of the
company.

The question whether the Assessee can be said to

have received any benefit or not is a mixed question of law and
fact and what this Court has to decide is whether on the facts
found she can be said to have received benefit as contemplated
by Section 2(24) of the Act.
12.

Section 2(24) defines the term 'Income'. It is an inclusive

definition and clause (iv) of that definition reads as under:

13.

“The value of any benefit or perquisite,
whether convertible into money or not, obtained
from a company either by a director or by a person
who has a substantial interest in the company, or by
a relative of the director or such person, and any
sum paid by any such company in respect of any
obligation which, but for such payment, would have
been payable by the director or other person
aforesaid.”
Whether these foreign trips of the Appellant were in

relation to the business of company or not, for this purpose the
order dated 29.2.2006 passed by the Assessing Officer may be
referred to, relevant portion of which read as under:
“The Assessee is wife of Chairman of Dabur
India Ltd. Sh.A.C. Burman. During the year under
ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

Page 7 of 9

consideration the Assessee has travelled abroad
alongwith her husband. As the list furnished by the
Assessee, she has made seven visits to different
places, such as London, Paris, Kathmandu, Dubai,
Bangkok etc. The Assessee contends that these
visits to foreign countries were made alongwith her
husband, who was on foreign trip for the business
purposes.
She further adds that her visit was
essential to promote business interest of the
company in which her husband is Chairman.
She however has failed to bring any evidence
which may suggest that her visit was essential for
the business interest of the company which has
made payments for such visits.
In this situation it can not be said that she was
doing any service to the company.”
14.

As per order of the Assessing Officer, there is a clear

finding of fact that the Assessee has failed to bring any evidence
which may suggest that her visit was essential for the business
interest of the company for which the company has made
payment. In this situation it cannot be said that she was doing
any service to the company.
15.

Thus, in the present case, the business exigencies and

business circumstances in which the Appellant accompanied her
husband is missing and what benefit has accrued to the
company on account of her visit abroad has also not been
mentioned.
16.

Accordingly, we hold that there in no infirmity in the order

of the Tribunal and the order of the Tribunal does not give rise to
a question of law, much less a substantial question of law, to fall
ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

Page 8 of 9

within the limited purview of Section 260-A of the Act, which is
confined to entertaining only such appeals against the order
which involves a substantial question of law.
17.

Accordingly, present appeals are hereby dismissed.

(V. B. GUPTA)
JUDGE

FEBRUARY 14, 2007
rs

ITA Nos. 306 and 307/2002

(MADAN B. LOKUR)
JUDGE

Page 9 of 9

