*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
MAC APPEAL No.130 of 2004
Judgment reserved on: 21st May, 2008

%

Judgment delivered on:27th May, 2008
1. Smt. Ram Rati
W/o. Late Sh. Hukum Chand
2. Sh. Vinod Kumar
S/o. Late SH. Hukum Chand
3. Sh. Ashok Kumar
S/o. Late Sh. Hukum Chand
4. Sh. Rakesh Vijay
S/o. Late Sh. Hukum Chand
5. Ms. Asha
D/o. Late Sh. Hukum Chand
All R/o. Village-Ghummanhera, Delhi

....Appellants

Through: Mr. J.S. Kanwar, Adv.
Versus
1. Sh. Ram Kumar
S/o. Sh. Lakhan Lal
R/o. Village-Murkhapur,
District-Sitapur, U.P.
2. Mohd. Ayub, S/o. Sh. Putan,
R/o. Village-Biswa,
District-Sitapur, U.P.
3. United Insurance Company Ltd.
United India House,

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 1 of 11

24, White Road, Chennai

…..Respondents

Through: Mr. S.S. Panwar, Adv. for R-3.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

V.B.Gupta, J.
The present appeal under section 173 of the Motor
Vehicles act, 1988 (for short as the “Act”) has been filed
against the award dated 3.11.03 passed by Sh. Girish
Kathpalia, Judge, Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (for short
as the “Tribunal”), Delhi for seeking the enhancement of
the compensation.
2.

The brief facts leading to the dispute are that on

26.10.96, Sh. Hukum Chand, deceased was returning from
Dehradun in a bus. When the bus reached near police Post,
Siyani Gate, Ghaziabad (U.P.), a truck no. RSF 1692 which
was being driven by Respondent no. 2, came from the

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 2 of 11

opposite direction and after jumping the divider, the
offending truck came on wrong side of the road and hit the
bus head on, causing injuries to the deceased who died on
the spot. The offending truck is owned by Respondent no.1
and it is insured with Respondent no.3.
3.

Vide impugned judgment, the Tribunal awarded the

amount of compensation as Rs.3,07,664/- along with the
interest @ 12% per annum from the date of petition till
31.03.01 and thereafter @ 9% per annum till the date of
actual payment.
4.

It has been contended by Ld. Counsel for the

Appellant that the deceased was 50 years old at the time of
accident, which is evident from the statement of the
Appellant no.1 and corroborated by the salary certificate,
which was duly proved. The Tribunal has erred in relying
on the post mortem report for assessing the age of the
deceased in the light of other evidence and thus, applied
the multiplier of 11 instead of 15. It is further submitted
that the Tribunal fell in patent illegality in deducting
Dearness Allowance from the consolidated salary of the
deceased. Thus, the Tribunal ought to have considered

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 3 of 11

entire monthly salary without any deduction and making all
calculations on the basis of monthly salary of the deceased
as Rs.4,444/- per month at the relevant time.
5.

PW 1, the wife of the deceased deposed that at the

time of death, the deceased was about 50 years of age and
was working as a Lab Assistant in a Government School,
but she did not know his salary. Further, in cross
examination

she

stated

that

she

did

not

have

any

documentary evidence as regards the age of the deceased.
6.

On the other hand, it has been contended by learned

counsel for the respondent that Dearness Allowance has
been rightly deducted by the Tribunal and the total
monthly salary was rightly computed at Rs.2,202/- per
month. Further, there is no proof of age and the Tribunal
has rightly taken the age of deceased as 54 years as per
post-mortem report.
7.

In the claim petition, the age of deceased is

mentioned as 50 years. PW-1 in her statement, stated that
the age of her husband was 50 years but in crossexamination she has stated that she does not have any

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 4 of 11

document to prove age of her husband.

However, PW-3,

clerk from the Government Girls Secondary School where
the deceased was employed as a Lab Assistant, has brought
the service book and has proved the certificate as EXPW3/1 issued by Vice Principal of the school.

As per this

certificate, the deceased, Hukum Chand was to retire on
31st October, 2006 on attaining the age of Superannuation.
8.

In the present case, the accident has taken place on

26th October, 1996. Government servant employed in Delhi
Government, retires at the age of 60 years. So, in view of
the certificate EXPW-3/1, deceased was 50 years in
October, 1996 i.e. at the time of the accident in question.
Thus, I hold that the age of the deceased was 50 years at
the time of the accident.
9.

Now, the question to be seen is as what multiplier

should be adopted in this case, since the age of the
deceased at the relevant time was 50 years.

As per

structured formula of the Second Schedule of the Act, the
appropriate multiplier for the age of above 50 years but not
exceeding 55 years is 11. Thus, the multiplier of 11

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 5 of 11

adopted by the Tribunal is as per the Schedule and is fully
justified.
10.

As regards the contention that Tribunal has not taken

into consideration arrears of D.A. to compute the loss of
earnings, PW 3, Sh. R.P. Khurana, UDC proved on record
the salary certificate of deceased as Ex. PW 3/1, according
to which the deceased was drawing a monthly salary of
Rs.4,444/- in Oct.,1996. The salary certificate shows that it
includes a sum of Rs.2,242/- towards Additional Dearness
Allowance.
11.

In

State of Punjab v. Harbhajan Lal kochhar,

1980 Acc. C.J.437, the Himachal Pradesh high Court has
observed as under;
“One of the questions raised in the present appeal
is whether the dearness allowance, additional
dearness allowance and the interim relief, which
were being paid to the deceased, should be taken
into consideration while determining the earnings
of the deceased. It has been argued that all these
allowances are not only subject to variation from
time to time but could also be completely taken
away. Dearness allowances have been granted to
the employees in order to compensate them for the
increase in the prices. It is common knowledge that
dearness allowance depends on the price index.
Technically it is possible that if the price index goes
down there is a chance of the dearness allowance

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 6 of 11

and the additional dearness allowance becoming
zero. However, we cannot lose sight of the fact that
ever since the dearness allowance was first granted
it has continuously been paid and the chances of its
going down are extremely remote. The accident
took place in 1975 and in the last five years this
allowance has, instead of going down, been
increased.
Keeping in view the history of the
dearness allowance and the trend of rise in prices
we can take judicial notice of the fact that there is
no likelihood of the dearness allowance coming
down in the foreseeable future. In this view of the
matter we are of the opinion that this allowance
should be taken into consideration.”
12.

Andhra Pradesh High Court in S.Narayanamma and

Ors. v. Secretary to Government of India and Ors. [II
(2002) ACC 582], following Helen C. Rebello (Mrs.) and

others

v.

Maharashtra

State

Road

transport

Corporation and another, II (1998) ACC 512, held that;
“The contributions made by the deceased-employee

towards Employees' Provident Fund, Life Insurance
(LIC), Group Insurance and the deductions shown in the
salary certificate of the deceased-employee towards the
vehicle loan instalment, benefit fund, and also the
amounts received by the deceased-employee towards
interim Relief, Special Pay, Dearness Allownce, House
Rent Allowance, need not be deducted from the gross
salary of the deceased for ascertaining the income,
because the contributions/deductions made towards,
E.P.F., L.I.C., Group Insurance and Benefit Fund would
be beneficial to the family of the deceased-employee
and it would be the estate of the deceased.”

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 7 of 11

13.

In the light of the above decisions, it is to be seen as

to whether the Tribunal rightly made the deductions of
additional dearness allowance from the salary of the
deceased.

The Tribunal has not taken proper care while

deducting the amounts from the salary of the deceased, at
least the very nature of deductions from the salary of the
deceased. The deductions made by the tribunal from the
salary such as dearness allowance to the benefit of the
estate

of

the

deceased,

cannot

be

deducted

while

computing the net monthly earnings of the deceased.
14.

In view of the principles laid down in above cases, it

is clear that there cannot be any deductions of amount
received towards dearness allowance. Thus, I do not find
myself in agreement with the Tribunal in this regard and
the award of the Tribunal is modified to that extent. Taking
monthly income of deceased at Rs. 2,202 as net income, is
unsustainable, as the deductions made towards additional
dearness allowance are also taken into consideration while
fixing the monthly income of the deceased. The above
finding of the tribunal is contrary to the principle of 'just
compensation' enunciated by the Supreme Court in the

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 8 of 11

judgment in Divisional Controller, KSRTC v. Mahadeva
Shetty, AIR 2003 SC 4172 where the Apex Court has

observed as under;
“It has to be kept in view that the Tribunal constituted
under the Act as provided in Section 168 is required to
make an award determining the amount of compensation
which to it appears to be "just". It has to be borne in mind
that compensation for loss of limbs or life can hardly be
weighed in golden scales. Bodily injury is nothing but a
deprivation which entitles the claimant to damages. The
quantum of damages fixed should be in accordance with
the injury. An injury may bring about many consequences
like loss of earning capacity, loss of mental pleasure and
many such consequential losses. A person becomes
entitled to damages for mental and physical loss, his or
her life may have been shortened or that he or she cannot
enjoy life, which has been curtailed because of physical
handicap. The normal expectation of life is impaired. But
at the same time it has to be borne in mind that the
compensation is not expected to be a windfall for the
victim. Statutory provisions clearly indicate that the
compensation must be "just" and it cannot be a bonanza;
not a source of profit but the same should not be a
pittance. The courts and tribunals have a duty to weigh
the various factors and quantify the amount of
compensation, which should be just. What would be "just"
compensation is a vexed question. There can be no golden
rule applicable to all cases for measuring the value of
human life or a limb. Measure of damages cannot be
arrived at by precise mathematical calculations. It would
depend upon the particular facts and circumstances, and
attending peculiar or special features, if any. Every
method or mode adopted for assessing compensation has
to be considered in the background of "just" compensation
which is the pivotal consideration. Though by use of the
expression "which appears to it to be just", a wide
discretion is vested in the Tribunal, the determination has
to be rational, to be done by a judicious approach and not
the outcome of whims, wild guesses and arbitrariness. The
expression "just" denotes equitability, fairness and
reasonableness, and non-arbitrariness. If it is not so, it
cannot be just. (See Helen C. Rebello v. Maharashtra

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 9 of 11

State Road Transport Corporation & another, II (1998)
ACC 512.)”

15.

Thus, taking the monthly salary of deceased at

Rs.4,444/- per month and after deducting 1/3 amount for
personal expenses, the net salary comes to Rs.2,963/which is rounded off as Rs.3,000/- per month.

Thus,

applying the multiplier of 11, the total dependency comes
to Rs.3,000x12x11=3,96,000/-. Adding to it Rs.7,000/- on
account of funeral expenses and Rs.10,000/- towards loss
of consortium, as awarded by the Tribunal the total sum
comes to be Rs.4,13,000/-.
16.

Accordingly,

the

award

passed

by

the

learned

Tribunal is modified to the extent that appellants are
entitled to Rs.4,13,000/- as compensation, which is just and
fair.

Appellants are also entitled to interest @ 9% per

annum from the date of filing of the appeal till realization,
on the additional amount of compensation.
17.

Insurance Company/respondent No.3 is directed to

pay the additional compensation, within one month from
today.

MAC App. No.130/2004

Page 10 of 11

18.

Accordingly, the appeal stands allowed to the above

extent.
19.

No orders as to costs.

27th May, 2008
rs

MAC App. No.130/2004

V. B. GUPTA
(JUDGE)

Page 11 of 11

