*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
MAC. Appeal No. 250 OF 2008

%

Judgment reserved on: 22nd April, 2008
Judgment delivered on: 28th April, 2008

1.Smt. Promilla Jain
W/o late Sh.Rajesh Kumar Jain
2.Sh.Rajat Kumar
s/o late Sh.RajeshKumar Jain
3.Mrs.Shikha
w/o Sh.Saurav Kumar Aggarwal
4.Ms.Shivani Aggarwal
d/o late Sh.Rajesh Kumar Jain
5.Ms.Saloni
d/o late Sh.Rajesh Kumar Jain
All residents of 4785, Gali Mohar Singh Jat,
Ahata Kidar, Pahari Dheeraj, Delhi
…..Appellants
Through: Ms.Pooja Goel, Adv.
Versus
1.Ramesh
s/o Sh.Lala Ram
r/o B-241 A, Mange Ram Park,
Pooth Kalan, Delhi -110041.
2.Mrs. Krishna
w/o Sh.J.S.Chitola,
r/o L-469, J.J.Colony, Wazirpur,
Delhi-110052.

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 1 of 12

3.United India Insurance Company Ltd.
Kanchanjunga Building,
Barakhamba Road, New Delhi.

..…Respondents

Through: Nemo.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

V.B.Gupta, J.
The present appeal has been filed by the appellants
against the impugned order dated 21-11-07 passed by Ms.
Swarn

Kanta

Mehra,

Judge,

Motor

Accident

Claims

Tribunal (for short as “Tribunal”), Delhi in suit no. 398 of
2005, seeking enhancement of the compensation for the
untimely death of Sh. Rajesh Kumar Jain to Rs.15,00,000/with costs and interest.
2.

The brief facts of this case are that on 12.11.06 at

about 5.30 p.m., the deceased Rajesh Kumar Jain was
crossing Desh Bandhu Gupta Road, when the offending bus
bearing no. DL IPA 7498 being driven by the respondent
no. 1 in a rash and negligent manner came from the side of

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 2 of 12

Karol Bagh Terminal and hit the deceased, as a result, the
deceased fell on the road and was crushed by the said
offending vehicle and died at the spot. Respondent no. 1
was arrested by the police at the spot itself.
3.

Vide impugned judgment, the Tribunal awarded a

sum of Rs.5,18,000/- along with interest @ 6% p.a. as
compensation to the appellants from the date of filing of
the petition till the date of realization.
4.

Aggrieved thereby, the appellants filed the present

appeal before this Court.
5.

The principal question that arises for determination in

this appeal is as to “Whether the compensation awarded by
the learned Tribunal is just or not?”
6.

It has been contended by Learned Counsel for the

appellants

that

the

Tribunal

erred

in

applying

the

multiplier of 13 years and it ought to have adopted a
multiplier of 24 years for arriving at the economic loss
suffered by the appellants in the sudden death of the
deceased. The deceased was under regular employment
and his income tends to increase in near future. The
Tribunal has failed to consider the increase in earnings of

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 3 of 12

the deceased and the fact that the value of rupee
denunciating

due

compensation

was

to

high

allowed

rates
on

of

account

inflation.
of

loss

No
of

consortium. Further, the Tribunal has awarded the rate of
interest at very low rate. It ought to have been awarded the
interest @ 18% p.a. instead of 6%.
7.

It is well established before the tribunal by the

testimony of PW-3 considered along with the other
documents i.e. the charge sheet and FIR registered in this
case Ex.PW-4/A and the postmortem report, that deceased
Sh. Rajesh Kumar Jain died on 12-11-06

in roadside

accident due to rash and negligent driving of the vehicle
no. DL IPA 7498 by respondent no.1.
8.

As per statement of Petitioner no.3 who is wife of

deceased, the deceased was born on 05.05.60.

The

accident has taken place on 12.11.06. So, at that time
deceased was 46 years. Now coming to the monthly income
of the deceased, he was employed with Swami Ram Tirath
Mission, Delhi as Peon-cum-Dispensary Attendant and as
per last pay certificate, his salary was Rs. 4,500/- per
month.

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 4 of 12

9.

The Tribunal took the monthly salary of deceased as

Rs.4,500/- and considering the age of deceased as 46 years,
applied a multiplier of 13 and deducted 1/3 expenses of the
deceased and arrived at the figure of Rs. 4,68,000/- for the
loss of financial dependency. Besides this, learned Tribunal
also awarded Rs. 40,000/- towards loss of love and
affection, Rs. 5,000/- on account of funeral expenses and
Rs. 5,000/- on account of loss of estate to the appellants.
10.

The counsel for the appellants has relied upon the

following

decisions

in

support

of

his

claim

for

enhancement- Smt. Sarla Dixit & Anr. v. Balwant

Yadav, 1996 III SC 13, Abati Bezbaruah v. Deputy
Director General, Geological Survey of India, (2003) 3
SCC 148, Jyotsna Dev v. State of Assam reported as
1987 ACJ p.172.
11.

In Sarla Dixit (supra), it has been held that:“So far as the adoption of the proper multiplier
is concerned, it was observed that the future
prospects of advancement in life and career
should also be sounded in terms of money to
augment the multiplicand. While the chance of
the multiplicand is determined by two factors,
namely, the rate of interest appropriate to a
stable economy and the age of the deceased or
of the claimant whichever is higher, the
ascertainment of the multiplicand is a more

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 5 of 12

difficult exercise. Indeed, many factors have to
be put into the scales to evaluate the
contingencies of the future. All contingencies of
the future need not necessarily be baneful.”
12.

The Apex Court in the case of U.P. State Road

Transport Corpn. v. Krishna Bala & Ors., III (2006)
ACC 361 (SC), has highlighted the manner of fixing the
appropriate multiplier and computation of compensation
and has observed as under:
“6. Certain principles were highlighted by this
Court in the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi
v. Subhagwanti, 1966 (3) SCR 649 in the matter of
fixing the appropriate multiplier and computation of
compensation. In a fatal accident action, the
accepted measure of damages awarded to the
dependents is the pecuniary loss suffered by them
as a result of the death. “How much has the widow
and family lost by the father's death?” The answer
to this lies in the oft-quoted passage from the
opinion of Lord Wright in Davies v. Powell
Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd., All ER p.665
A-B, which says:“The starting point is the amount of wages
which the deceased was earning, the
ascertainment of which to some extent may
depend on the regularity of his employment.
Then there is an estimate of how much was
required or expended for his own personal and
living expenses. The balance will give a datum
or basic figure which will generally be turned
into a lump sum by taking a certain number of
years' purchase. That sum, however, has to be
taxed down by having due regard to
uncertainties, for instance, that the widow
might have again married and thus ceased to

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 6 of 12

be dependent, and other
speculation and doubt.”

like

matters of

7. There were two methods adopted to determine
and for calculation of compensation in fatal
accident actions, the first the multiplier mentioned
in Davies case (supra) and the second in Nance v.

British Columbia Electric Railway Co. Ltd.,
1951 (2) All ER 448.

8. The multiplier method involves the ascertainment
of the loss of dependency or the multiplicand
having regard to the circumstances of the case and
capitalizing the multiplicand by an appropriate
multiplier. The choice of the multiplier is
determined by the age of the deceased (or that of
the claimants whichever is higher) and by the
calculation as to what capital sum, if invested at a
rate of interest appropriate to a stable economy,
would yield the multiplicand by way of annual
interest. In, ascertaining this, regard should also be
had to the fact that ultimately the capital sum
should also be consumed-up over the period for
which the dependency is expected to last.”
Further Court held that;
“10. In regard to the choice of the multiplicand the
Halsbury's Laws of England in Vol. 34, Para 98
states the principle thus:
“98. Assessment of damages under the Fatal
Accidents Act 1976- The courts have evolved a
method for calculating the amount of
pecuniary benefit that dependants could
reasonably expect to have received from the
deceased in the future. First the annual value
to the dependants of those benefits (the
multiplicand) is assessed. In the ordinary case
of the death of a wage-earner that figure is
arrived at by deducting from the wages the

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 7 of 12

estimated amount of his own personal and
living expenses.
The assessment is split into two parts. The first
part comprises damages for the period
between death and trial. The multiplicand is
multiplied by the number of years which have
elapsed between those two dates. Interest at
one-half the short-term investment rate is also
awarded on that multiplicand. The second part
is damages for the period from the trial
onwards. For that period, the number of years
which have elapsed between the death and the
trial is deducted from a multiplier based on the
number of years that the expectancy would
probably have lasted; central to that
calculation is the probable length of the
deceased's working life at the date of death.”
11. As to the multiplier, Halsbury states:
“However,
the
multiplier
is
a
figure
considerably less than the number of years
taken as the duration of the expectancy. Since
the dependants can invest their damages, the
lump sum award in respect of future loss must
be discounted to reflect their receipt of interest
on invested funds, the intention being that the
dependants will each year draw interest and
some capital (the interest element decreasing
and the capital drawings increasing with the
passage of years), so that they are compensated
each year for their annual loss, and the fund
will be exhausted at the age which the court
assesses to be the correct age, having regard to
all contingencies. The contingencies of life such
as illness, disability and unemployment have to
be taken into account. Actuarial evidence is
admissible, but the courts do not encourage
such evidence. The calculation depends on
selecting an assumed rate of interest. In
practice about 4 or 5 per cent is selected, and

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 8 of 12

inflation is disregarded. It is assumed that the
return on fixed interest bearing securities is so
much higher than 4 to 5 per cent that rough
and ready allowance for inflation is thereby
made. The multiplier may be increased where
the plaintiff is a high tax payer. The
multiplicand is based on the rate of wages at
the date of trial. No interest is allowed on the
total figure.”
13.

The Apex Court in Tamil Nadu State Transport

Corporation Ltd. v. S. Rajapriya & Ors., III (2005) ACJ
1441 (SC), has observed as under;
“8. The assessment of damages to compensate the
dependants is beset with difficulties because from
the nature of things, it has to take into account
many imponderables, e.g., the life expectancy of
the deceased and the dependants, the amount that
the deceased would have earned during the
remainder of his life, the amount that he would
have contributed to the dependants during that
period, the chances that the deceased may not
have lived or the dependants may not live up to
the estimated remaining period of their life
expectancy, the chances that the deceased might
have got better employment or income or might
have lost his employment or income altogether.
9. The manner of arriving at the damages is to
ascertain the net income of the deceased available
for the support of himself and his dependants, and
to deduct there from such part of his income as
the deceased was accustomed to spend upon
himself, as regards both self-maintenance and
pleasure and to ascertain what part of his net
income the deceased was accustomed to spend for
the benefit of the dependants. Then that should be
capitalized by multiplying it by a figure

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 9 of 12

representing
purchase.

the

proper

number

of

years’

10. Much of the calculation necessarily remains in
the realm of hypothesis "and in that region
arithmetic is a good servant but a bad master"
since there are so often many imponderables. In
every case "it is the over-all picture that matters"
and the court must try to assess as best as it can
the loss suffered.”
14.

The sum and substances of the various decisions of

the Apex Court and this Court is that the compensation
paid to the dependent family members of the road victim
should be just and reasonable and in every case it is the
overall picture that matters and the Court must try to
assess as best as it can for the loss suffered.
15.

Considering

the

age

of

the

deceased

and

the

principles as set out above, the multiplier 13 as adopted by
the Tribunal is clearly defensible. Calculated on that basis
by taking monthly loss of dependency at Rs.3,000/- (after
adjusting for personal expenses and likelihood of increase
in salary) the compensation would be Rs.4,68,000/-. To the
aforesaid sum, Rs. 50,000/- would be added for loss of love
& affection, funeral expenses and loss of estate awarded by
the Tribunal and, therefore, entitlement of the claimants is

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 10 of 12

Rs. 5, 18,000/-.The learned Tribunal has rightly allowed
total compensation of Rs.5,18,000/-.
16.

As regards the award of interest @ 6% per annum by

the Tribunal, I do not find any justification for increasing
the same to 18% p.a. as there has been variation in the rate
of interest in various decisions given by the Supreme
Court.
In Abati Bezbaruah case (supra) cited by learned

17.

counsel for the appellant, the Apex Court has observed
that;
“The question as to what should be rate of interest,
in the opinion of this Court, would depend upon the
facts and circumstances of each case. Award of
interest would normally depend upon the bank rate
prevailing at the relevant time.”
18.

In view of the above decisions, I am of the opinion

that the award of interest @ 6% cannot be considered to be
lower side if not on higher side. Even otherwise Counsel for
the appellants has not given any justification for the award
of higher rate of interest except placing reliance on the
judgment passed by the higher Courts. There cannot be
any dispute that in many other judgments of the Supreme
Court it has granted lower rate of interest also at 6.5% and

MAC App.No.250/2008

Page 11 of 12

in some cases it has been 7.5% and in some other matters
it is 9% as well. I am, therefore, not inclined to interfere in
the discretion exercised by the Tribunal in awarding 6%
interest on the award amount.
19. Accordingly, no infirmity can be found with the order
of learned Tribunal and the compensation awarded by the
Tribunal is just, sufficient and reasonable.
20.

The present appeal is, therefore, dismissed.

April 28, 2008
Bisht

MAC App.No.250/2008

V. B. GUPTA, J.

Page 12 of 12

