*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
ITA No.522/2007

%

Judgment reserved on: 18th March, 2008
Judgment delivered on: 27th March, 2008
Commissioner of Income Tax
Delhi-XVII
Mayur Bhawan
Connaught Circus
New Delhi
Through:

..... Petitioner.
Mr. R.D. Jolly, Adv.

Vs.
Sara International Ltd.
A-31, Hauz Khaz,
Delhi
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. K. Sampath, Adv.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

ITA No.522/2007

Page 1 of 8

V.B.Gupta, J.
The Revenue has filed this appeal under Section 260A of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short as „Act‟) against the impugned order
dated 2nd December, 2005 passed by the Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Delhi Bench „A‟ in ITA T.D.S. No.212/Del/2003 for the
assessment year 2001-02 vide which the appeal filed by the Assessee
was allowed.
2.

Brief facts of this case are that the Assessee filed TDS return

on Form No.26-C and the same was selected for scrutiny by the
Assessing Officer. During the course of the proceedings, it was seen
as per the details and copies of Ledger Account that the Assessee
had shown expenses of Rs.87,27,705/- as commission under the
head “Salary Expenses”.

Out of these expenses, a sum of

Rs.62,60,705/- was paid to M/s. PEC Ltd, Rs.1,64,000/- to M/s.
Bhura Export Ltd. and Rs.23,03,000/- to M/s. Ayusa International.
The Assessee had submitted documents as far as M/s. Bhura Export
Ltd. and M/s. Ayusa International were concerned but no agency
ITA No.522/2007

Page 2 of 8

agreement with M/s. PEC Ltd. was filed. The Assessee explained
that commission was paid to M/s. PEC Ltd. for export of wheat.
The Assessing Officer asked the Assessee to furnish evidence in
support of its explanation. The Assessee filed copy of agreement
dated 10th February, 2001.

After examining the agreement,

Assessing Officer came to the conclusion that the payment made by
the Assessee was covered within the meaning of fee for technical
services and it was not a case of payment of commission and as such
Assessee was liable to deduct tax at source under Section 194-J of the
Act and since the Assessee has failed to make the deduction, it was
Assessee in default within the meaning of Section 201(1) of the Act
and also liable to pay interest.
3.

Against the order passed by the Assessing Officer, Assessee

filed an appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeal)
(for short as „CIT[A]‟) and the CIT(A) vide its order dated 6th
October, 2003 upheld the order of the Assessing Officer. Against the
order of the CIT(A), the Assessee filed an appeal before the Tribunal
and vide the impugned order the Tribunal accepted the appeal of
ITA No.522/2007

Page 3 of 8

the Assessee and set aside the orders of the lower authorities. Now,
the Revenue is before this Court.
4.

It has been contended by learned counsel for the Revenue that

the relevant clauses of the agreement clearly show that there was no
relationship of Principal and agent between the Assessee and M/s.
PEC Ltd. Further, no commission was received by M/s. PEC Ltd.
and the services rendered by it were professional and technical in
nature.
5.

On the other hand, it has been contended by learned counsel

for the Assessee that the Assessee had paid commission to M/s. PEC
Ltd. which was exempt from TDS deduction and M/s. PEC Ltd. had
transferred a simple contract of supplies to the Assessee against the
payment and M/s. PEC Ltd. was not rendering any kind of
professional/technical services.
6.

Relevant clauses of the agreement dated 10th January, 2001

entered between M/s. PEC Limited and the Assessee has been
reproduced by the Tribunal in the impugned order.

ITA No.522/2007

Page 4 of 8

7.

Sec. 194H of the Act defines the expression “commission”

which includes any payment received or receivable, directly or
indirectly, by a person acting on behalf of another person for
services rendered (not being professional services) or for any
services in the course of buying or selling of goods or in relation to
any transaction relating to any asset, valuable article or thing.
8.

Section 194J of the Act defines the expression „professional

services‟ which mean services rendered by a person in the course of
carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or
the profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior
decoration or advertising or such other profession as is notified by
the Board for the purposes of Sec. 44AA of this section.

The

expression „fees for technical services‟ means any consideration
(including any lump sum consideration) for the rendering of any
managerial, technical or consultancy services (including the
provision of services of technical or other personnel) but does not
include consideration for any construction, assembly, mining or like

ITA No.522/2007

Page 5 of 8

project undertaken by the recipient or consideration which would be
income of the recipient chargeable under the head „salaries‟.
9.

A careful reading of the terms of the agreement leaves no

doubt that the services rendered by M/s. PEC Ltd. does not include
any managerial, technical and consultancy services during the
course of procurement and supply of goods. Although nowhere it
mentions that the Assessee is liable to pay commission to M/s.PEC
but the Clause 6 of the agreement clearly shows that the payment
made to M/s. PEC is commission. A perusal of clauses clarifies that
during the financial year, the relationship between M/s. PEC and
Assessee was that of Principal and Agent. Clause 6 provides that
Foreign L/C shall be transferred in favour of SIL and M/s.PEC‟s
service charge shall be US$ 1/- PMT Nett of Bill of lading quantity.
It is clear from the said clause that M/s. PEC had transferred its
wheat export L/Cs in favour of the assessee for execution of the
wheat export and M/s. PEC charged commission for the export.
Therefore, it can be said that M/s. PEC Ltd. transferred foreign
buyers L/Cs in favour of the assessee against commission charges.
ITA No.522/2007

Page 6 of 8

10.

Further, perusal of the agreement dated 10.1.01 shows that

M/s. PEC Ltd. had signed a contract with foreign buyer for supply
of wheat and the assessee agreed to assist M/s. PEC in exporting
wheat and the M/s. PEC transferred foreign buyers‟ L/C in favour
of the Assessee against commission charges. As per clause 1 of
agreement, M/s. PEC was to request to M/s. FCI for release of
Cargo from the identified FCI godowns and the assessee was to
make direct payment to FCI towards the purchase price of wheat
and bear all other expenses relating to shipment of wheat and
managed the entire export.
11.

As per clause 4 of agreement, the assessee agreed that the

quantity of wheat delivered by FCI for the purpose of export against
the export contract shall be exported in full to the foreign buyer and
will not be sold in domestic market. All important works is being
done by the Assessee and M/s. PEC had transferred a simple
contract of supplies to the assessee against the payment of
commission and M/s. PEC was not rendering any kind of

ITA No.522/2007

Page 7 of 8

professional/technical services. Thus, the provision of section 194J
of the Act is not applicable.
12.

So it is clear that the amount paid by assessee to M/s. PEC

was not towards fee for professional or technical service. Therefore,
the provisions of Sec. 194J of the Act are not applicable to the facts of
the present case and the assessee is not liable to deduct tax at source
on this amount under Sec. 201 / 201(A) of the Act.
13.

Under these circumstances, we do not find any infirmity in

the impugned order passed by the Tribunal and thus in our opinion
no substantial question of law arises for consideration.
14.

The appeal filed by the Revenue is hereby dismissed.

V. B. GUPTA, J.

MADAN B. LOKUR, J.
March 27, 2008
rs

ITA No.522/2007

Page 8 of 8

