*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

FAO No. 222 of 1997

%
2007

Judgment reserved on:

February2007

Judgment

delivered

9th February,
on:

24th

United India Insurance Company Ltd.
Jeevan Vikas,
Asaf Ali Road,
New Delhi-110002.
And
Regional Office,
Kanchanjunga Building, 8th Floor,
18, Barakhamba Road,
New Delhi-110001
.....
Through
Vs.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Appellant

Mr. L.K. Tyagi, Advocate.

Smt. Kamla Behan, Wd/o late Sh. Javer Bahi
Miss Partima Behari, D/o late Sh. Javer Bhai
Shri Rakesh Bhai, S/o late Sh. Javer Bhai
Miss Sarita Behan, D/o late Sh. Javer Bhai
Shri Naresh Bhai, S/o late Sh. Javer Bhai
Shri Umesh Bhai, S/o late Sh. javer Bhai

All residents of WZ-853, Rani Bagh, Delhi.
7. Shri Ramhi Bhai S/o Shri Dubai Bhai
8. Smt. Jhumli Bai W/o Shri Ramji Bhai
Both residents of Village & Post Office Sumihai,
Tehsil Santrampur, Distt. Panch Mahal (Gujrat)
FAO 222/1997

Page 1 of 13

9. Shri Gurvinder Singh S/o Shri Darshan Singh,
R/o 858 Rani Bagh, Shakur Basti, Delhi.
10. Shri Umesh Kumar S/o Shri G.D. Sharma,
R/o40/22 Gautam Nagar, New Delhi .....Respondents.
Through

None.

Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

V.B. GUPTA, J.
Appellant/United India Insurance Company Limited
has filed the present appeal against the impugned order
dated 6.6.1997 passed by Shri. D.R. Singh, MACT, Delhi,
vide which learned Tribunal passed an award in the sum of
Rs.3,60,000/- along with interest @ 12% per annum from
the date of judgment till realisation.
2.

Brief facts of the case are that on 1.6.1988, at about

8.35 a.m., deceased Javer Bhai, aged about 41 years, was
travelling in Bus No. DEP-6028 (Route No. 930) which was

FAO 222/1997

Page 2 of 13

going from Rani Bagh to Tilak Nagar. When the Bus reach
near Punjabi Bagh, Gurvinder singh, driver of the Bus
( Respondent No. 9 herein 'Appeal') could not control the
Bus due to high speed and as the Bus was driven in a rash
and negligence manner, hit the pavement dividing the road
and turned with the result that deceased died in this
accident.

The Bus is owned by Shri Umesh Kumar

(Respondent No. 10 herein the 'Appeal') and was insured
with appellant/Insurance Company.
3.

After recording the evidence, learned Tribunal passed

the impugned award.

Being dissatisfied with the award,

the appellant had filed the present appeal.
4.

Notice

of

this

appeal

was

issued

to

all

the

Respondents.
5.

On 1.5.1998, counsel for respondents No. 1 to 7

appeared while respondents No. 8, 9 and 10
served.

were not

Fresh notices were ordered to be issued to

unserved respondents.

Respondent No. 8 was served for

21.8.98 but did not appear.

Respondents No. 9 and 10

were ordered to be served by publication in “Dainik
Jagran”. Thereafter, the matter was listed for arguments
FAO 222/1997

Page 3 of 13

and counsel for appellant appeared on various dates while,
none appeared on behalf of respondents.
6.

On 2.02.07, counsel for appellant was present while

none appeared for respondents and on 6.02.07, again only
counsel

for

appellant

was

present

while

none

for

respondents and part arguments were heard. The matter
was listed for further arguments for 9.2.07. On that date,
again only counsel for appellant was present while none
appeared for respondents and arguments were concluded.
7.

It has been argued by learned counsel for appellant

that the Motor Vehicle Act provides the liability of
appellant towards the passenger to the extent of Rs.
15,000/- only and the same can be increased by charging
extra premium. In the present case, the appellant company
had charged premium of Rs. 30/- per passenger and as per
tariff, the liability of appellant company per passenger is
only Rs. 30,000/- and on this point, he cited decisions of
Apex Court reported as New India Assurance Co. Ltd Vs.
Shanti Bai & Ors. I (1995) ACC 667 (SC) and New
India Assurance Company Limited Vs. C.M. Jaya &
Ors. I (2002) ACC 299 (SC).
FAO 222/1997

Page 4 of 13

8.

The other contention of learned counsel for the

appellant is that the Insurer/Owner failed to produce the
original insurance policy in spite of notice given by the
appellant company and as such the liability of the appellant
is restricted to the extent of Rs. 30,000/- per passenger
only and on this point, learned counsel for the appellant
cited the case report as Oriental Fire & General

Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Veena Pruthi & Ors. 1989 ACJ
1163.
9.

Lastly, it is contended by learned counsel for the

appellant that appellant has proved on record, tariff Exhibit
RW 1/6 according to which the liability of the Insurance
Company per passenger would be Rs. 30,000/- only, as the
premium charged in this case is Rs. 30/- per passenger.
10.

The short question which arises for consideration is as

to whether the liability of appellant-company per passenger
is limited to the extent of Rs. 30,000/- or not.
11.

The Tribunal in its order has held that the liability of

Insurance Company to pay compensation is “unlimited”.
The relevant findings are:“ In this case the respondent no. 3 has tried
FAO 222/1997

Page 5 of 13

12.

to show that the insurance policy Exhibit RW1/3 is the carbon copy of the original policy
issued to the owner respondent no. 2 but from
the cross examination of RW-1 it become clear
that RW-1/3 is not the complete and true copy
of the original insurance policy issued to
respondent no. 2 by the respondent no. 3 due
to following reasons;
RW-1 in his cross examination has admitted
that policy Exhibit RW-1/3 is subject to
endorsement no. 26 etc. marked at point 'Y' on
Exhibit RW-1/3 but the present carbon copy of
the policy RW-1/3 does not have the details of
those endorsements. Respondent no. 1 has
also admitted that he has not brought the
proposal form submitted by respondent no. 1
on the basis of which the foundation of the
contract of insurance was laid between the
respondent no. 3 and respondent no. 2.
Thus, I am of the opinion that respondent
no. 3 has failed in establishing that the
insurance policy Exhibit RW-1/3 was the true
and complete copy of the original insurance
policy issued by the respondent no. 3 to
respondent no. 2 and consequently the
respondent no. 3 have also failed in
establishing
that
its
liability
to
pay
compensation was limited to Rs. 30,000/- on
the basis of the policy and premium receipt
relied upon by respondent no. 3. Thus, it is
held that the liability of insurance company to
pay compensation to the petitioners was
unlimited.”
RW-1, is the Assistant Division Manager of appellant-

company.

He in his cross-examination he states that the

policy is subject to endorsement no. 26 etc. and this policy
Exhibit

RW-1/3

FAO 222/1997

does

not

have

details

of

these

Page 6 of 13

endorsements. He further states that he has not brought
the proposal form as the same was not traceable and
denied the suggestion that he had intentionally not brought
the proposal form because the insured had mentioned in
that form that the liability of the passengers to be insured
as “unlimited”.
13.

It is true that the insurance company has given notice

to the insured to produce the original policy but insured did
not produce the same and thus appellant has proved on
record copy of the policy as Exhibit RW-1/3.
14.

Exhibit RW-1/3 is a comprehensive policy and it is

nowhere mentioned in it that the liability per passenger, is
limited to the extent of Rs. 30,000/-. Further, the insurance
policy, Exhibit RW-1/3 is subject to the endorsements no.
26, 23, 22, 21, 13,16, and 57. However, the appellant has
not placed or proved on record these endorsements.

As

such insurance policy Exhibit RW-1/3 filed by appellant
appears to be incomplete.
15.

In Shanti Bai case (supra), the appellant issued a

comprehension policy in respect of a bus which was used
for carrying passengers for hire and it met with an accident
FAO 222/1997

Page 7 of 13

and one passenger died.

The Tribunal directed the

insurance company and Owner/Driver to pay compensation.
Aggrieved with the order, insurance company filed an
appeal. Held;
“ The short question that we have to consider
is whether the appellant is liable to pay
compensation to the tune of Rs. 1,10,000/together with interest thereon at the rate of
12% from the date of the presentation of the
petition to respondents 1 to 3. The appellant
contends that its liability in this regard is
limited to Rs. 15,000/-.
The insurance policy taken out by the owner
of the said bus i.e. respondent No. 4 herein,
and which was in force at the relevant time,
was a comprehensive policy. This policy has
been produced before us. It shows that the
insured estimated value of the vehicle is
Rs.2,50,000/-. In the schedule of Premium,
there is additional payment of Rs. 600/- in
respect of 50 passengers. The claim against
this amount states: “for L.L. to passengers as
per Ednt. No. I.M.T. 12”.
The appellantcompany has contended that it has charged
premium at the rate of Rs. 12/- per passenger
in respect of 50 passengers to cover its limited
liability under Section 95 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1939 which was then in force.
Section 95 forms part of Chapter VIII of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 which deals with
insurance of motor vehicles against third party
risks. Under Section 95, in order to comply
with the requirements of Chapter, a policy of
insurance must be a policy which, inter-alia,
insures the person or classes of persons
specified in the policy to the extent specified in
Sub-section (2). Under Section 95 (1)(b)(ii),
FAO 222/1997

Page 8 of 13

the insurance policy must cover the death or
bodily injury to any passenger of a public
service vehicle, caused by or arising out of the
use of the vehicle in a public place. Subsection (2)(b) provides as follows:“ Section 95(1):
x
x
x
x
x
x
(2) Subject to the proviso to Sub-section (1), a
policy of insurance shall cover any liability
incurred in respect of any one accident up to
the following limits, namely :(a)x
x
x
x
x
(b)Where the value is a vehicle in which
passengers are carried for hire or reward or by
reason of or in pursuance of a contract of
employment,
(i)
in respect of persons other than
passengers carried for hire or reward, a limit of
fifty thousand rupees in all;
(ii) in respect of passengers, a limit of
fifteen thousand rupees for each individual
passenger;”
These were the provisions at the relevant time.
These provisions were interpreted by this
Court in the case of National Insurance Co.
Ltd., New Delhi v. Jugal Kishore & Ors.,
(1988(1) SCC 626). This Court observed that
even though it is not permissible to use a
vehicle unless it is covered at least under an
'act only' policy, it is not obligatory for the
owner of a vehicle to get if comprehensively
insured.
In case, however, it is got
comprehensively insured, a higher premium is
payable depending on the estimated value of
the vehicle. Such insurance entitles the owner
to claim reimbursement of the entire amount of
loss or damage suffered up to the estimated
FAO 222/1997

Page 9 of 13

value of the vehicle calculated according to the
rules and regulations framed in this behalf. It
has further observed as under;“Comprehensive insurance of the vehicle
and payment of higher premium on this score,
however, does not mean that the limit of the
liability with regard to third party risk becomes
unlimited or higher than the statutory liability
fixed under Sub-section (2) of Section 95 of the
Act. For this purpose a specific agreement has
to be arrived at between the owner and the
insurance company and separate premium has
to be paid on the amount of liability undertaken
by the insurance company in this behalf.”
In the present case, therefore, a comprehensive
policy which has been issued on the basis of
the estimated value of the vehicle of Rs.
2,50,000/- does not automatically result in
covering the liability with regard to third party
risk for an amount higher than the statutory
limit.
In the present case, the premium which has
been paid is at the rate of Rs. 12/- per
passenger and is clearly referable to the
statutory liability of fifteen thousand rupees
per passenger under Section 95(2)(b)(ii) of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. In the present case,
there is no special contract between the
appellant-company and respondent No. 4 to
cover unlimited liability in respect of an
accident to a passenger. In the absence of
such an express agreement, the policy covers
only the statutory liability. The mere fact that
the insurance policy is a comprehensive policy
will not help the respondents in any manner.
As pointed out by this Court in the case of
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jugal
Kishore & Ors. (supra) comprehensive policy
only entitles the owner to claim reimbursement
of the entire amount of loss or damage suffered
up to the estimated value of the vehicle. It
FAO 222/1997

Page 10 of 13

16.

does not mean that the limit of liability with
regard to third party risk becomes unlimited or
higher than the statutory liability. For this
purpose, a specified agreement is necessary
which is absent in the present case. Reference
in this connection may also be made to the case
of
M.K.
Kunhimohammed
v.
P.A.
Ahmedkutty & Ors., (1987(3) SCR 1149).
The appellant-company is, therefore, entitled to
succeed to the extent that it has been directed
to pay to respondent 1 to 3 any amount in
excess of Rs. 15,000/-”
In C M Jaya & Ors. (supra), the insurance policy

was produced before the Court and liability was limited to
the extent of Rs. 50,000/-. It was held:-

17.

“that the insurance company not taking any
higher liability by accepting higher premium
for payment of compensation to third party,
would be liable to the extent limited under
Section 95(2) of the Act, and would not be
liable to pay the entire amount.”
In Veena Pruthi's case (supra), owner of offending

vehicle did not produce the original although he was
claiming that the entire liability was that of the insurance
company and insurance company produced office copy of
the last page of the policy showing the premium paid and
the risk covered as rest of the terms are standard terms.
The Tribunal held that the sheet produced by the insurance
company without the terms and conditions cannot be
accepted, the question was whether the office copy
FAO 222/1997

Page 11 of 13

produced is acceptable in evidence?
The Apex Court held that:“ The approach of the Tribunal was wholly
erroneous.
The Tribunal ought to have
weighed the circumstances and evidence
before it. When the owner had not produced
the original copy, it was erroneous on the part
of the Tribunal to hold the insurance company
also jointly and severally liable for the entire
amount. As stated above, the normal practice
of the insurance companies is to keep the
relevant page or pages on the file of each
insured, showing how much of the premium is
paid and risk of what amount is covered. The
Tribunal also overlooked the fact that it is
supposed to make a summary enquiry where it
cannot insist upon the technical rules of
evidence. I have, therefore, no hesitation to
accept the office copy of the policy produced
by the insurance company.”
18.

The above decisions of the Apex Court are not

applicable to the facts of the present case since, the
Appellant has not placed on record even the complete copy
of the insurance policy nor it has placed on record the
proposal form, on the basis of which the foundation of
contract of insurance was made between the appellant and
the insured. Admittedly, the proposal form would be in the
possession of Appellant-Insurance Company only.
19.

Since the appellant has failed to prove that insurance

FAO 222/1997

Page 12 of 13

policy Exhibit RW-1/3 is a true and complete copy of the
original insurance policy issued by it to the insured nor it
has proved on record the proposal form, which is the very
foundation of the contract between the Appellant and the
insured, under these circumstances, I have no hesitation in
holding that appellant has failed to establish that its
liability to pay compensation is limited to the extent of Rs.
30,000/- only.
20.

Accordingly, it is held that the liability of the

Appellant-Insurance Company to pay compensation is
“unlimited”.
21.

Hence, this appeal is hereby dismissed.

(V. B. GUPTA)
JUDGE
February 24, 2007
rs

FAO 222/1997

Page 13 of 13

