*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
MAC APPEAL No.248 of 2004

%

Judgment reserved on: 22nd April, 2008
Judgment delivered on: 29th April, 2008

Sh. Indersen Chhatwal
S/o Late Sh. Agya Ram
R/o. A-74, Second Floor,
Yojna Vihar, Delhi

..... Appellant.

Through: Mr. R.S. Juneja, Adv.
Vs.
1. M/s. National Insurance Co. Ltd.
32, Community Center,
Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-I,
New Delhi
2. Sh. Sukhdev Singh
S/o. Sh. Surat Singh
R/o. Vill. Chamyari, P.S. Ajnala,
Distt. Amritsar, Punjab
C/o. Smt. Surender Kaur
A-59, Tegor Garden Extn.
New Delhi.
3. Smt. Surinder Kaur
R/o. A-59, Tegor Garden Extn.
New Delhi

..... Respondents

Through: Ms. R.O. Bhutia, Adv.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

MAC App. No.248/2004

Page 1 of 8

V.B.Gupta, J.
The present appeal has been filed by the appellant
against the impugned judgment dated 19-02-04 passed by
Sh. M.C. Garg, Judge, Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (for
short as “Tribunal”), Karkardooma Court, Delhi in suit no.
448 of 2002, for the enhancement of the compensation
amount.
2.

In a nutshell, the facts relevant for the purpose of

dealing with this appeal are as follows:
3.

The appellant aged about 64 years has retired from

Delhi Administration as a lecturer. He sustained grievous
injuries in a road side accident which occurred on 11.04.01
when the appellant was riding his scooter bearing no.
DL3SH-0344 while coming from Pitam pura to Rohini and
had reached near Prashant Vihar Crossing. He was hit by a
truck bearing no. DL-1GB-1227 which at the relevant time
was being driven by respondent no.2 in a rash and
negligent manner and the said truck is owned by the
respondent no.3 and insured with the respondent no.1
(insurance company).
4.

Vide the impugned judgment, the learned Tribunal

awarded a sum of Rs.2,55,000/- towards pecuniary as well
MAC App. No.248/2004

Page 2 of 8

as non pecuniary damages along with interest @ 7% p.a. as
compensation to the appellant from the date of filing of the
petition i.e. 18.09.02 till the date of realization.
5. Aggrieved thereby, the appellant has filed the present
appeal before this Court.
6.

It has been contended by Learned Counsel for the

appellant that the Tribunal erred in multiplication of the
years and granting the benefit to the appellant. The
Tribunal has calculated the amount of Rs.60,000/- towards
the permanent disability suffered by him due to the injury
for the period of 1-1/2 year and has not given any reason
why the appellant was deprived for the benefit of 7 years
which is from the age of 64 to 70. The appellant is having
good health and expected to enjoy the fruit of life up to the
age of 75 years. Even now after the retirement from the
service, the appellant has joined the legal profession and is
in practice. The appellant was deprived the benefit of 5-1/2
years without any reason. Therefore, the appellant is
entitled for the amount of Rs.2,20,000/- for the period of 51/2 years along with the interest from the date of filing of
the petition till realization of the amount.
7.

On the other hand, it has been contended by learned

Counsel for the respondent that the case of appellant is full

MAC App. No.248/2004

Page 3 of 8

of contradiction as in column 11 of the claim petition, the
nature of the injuries are crush and grievous one, whereas
during the course of evidence, petitioner has stated that he
has suffered from permanent disability. The Permanent
disability

Certificate

Government

Hospital,

though
but

has

been

appellant

has

issued

by

undergone

treatment in Jaipur Golden Hospital, which is a private
hospital and as such no reliance can be put on Disability
Certificate. Moreover, it has been alleged by the appellant
that he has been imparting tuitions to 10th or 12th class
students and earning Rs.10,000/- per month, but no proof
with respect to income has placed on record nor any
student has been examined, who has taken the tuition from
the appellant.
8.

In a plethora of cases the Hon‟ble Apex Court and

various High Courts have held that the emphasis of the
courts in personal injury and fatal accidents cases should
be on awarding substantial, just and fair damages and not
mere token amount. In cases of personal injuries and fatal
accidents, the general principle is that such sum of
compensation should be awarded which puts the injured or
the claimants in case of the fatal accidents matter, in the
same position as he would have been, if accident had not
taken place.
MAC App. No.248/2004

Page 4 of 8

9.

In examining the question of damages for personal

injury, it is axiomatic that pecuniary and non-pecuniary
heads of damages are required to be taken in to account. In
this regard the Supreme Court in Divisional Controller,
KSRTC v. Mahadeva Shetty, AIR 2003 SC 4172, has
classified pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages and has
held that:
“Compensation must be „just‟ and it cannot
be a bonanza.”
10.

Further Apex Court in R.O. Hattangadi v. Pest Control

(India) Pvt. Ltd.; (AIR 1995 SC 755) laying the principles
posited:
“Broadly speaking, while fixing the
amount of compensation payable to a
victim of an accident the damages have to
be assessed separately as pecuniary
damages and special damages. Pecuniary
damages are those which the victim has
actually incurred and which are capable of
being calculated in terms of money;
whereas non-pecuniary damages are those
which are incapable of being assessed by
arithmetical calculations. In order to
appreciate
two
concepts
pecuniary
damages may include expenses incurred
by the claimant:(i) medical attendance; (ii )
loss of earning of profit up to the date of
trial; (iii) other material loss. So far as nonpecuniary damages are concerned, they
may include (i) damages for mental and
physical shock, pain and suffering already
suffered or likely to be suffered in future;
(ii) damages to compensate for the loss of
amenities of life which may include a
variety of matters, i.e. on account of injury
the claimant may not be able to walk, run
MAC App. No.248/2004

Page 5 of 8

or sit; (iii) damages for the loss of
expectation of life, i.e., on account of injury
the normal longevity of the person
concerned is shortened; (iv) inconvenience,
hardship,
discomfort,
disappointment,
frustration and mental stress in life.”
11.

The appellant has produced the Permanent Disability

certificate issued by the Government Hospital, Delhi, to
show that he sustained grievous injuries which resulted
into a permanent disability to the extent of 73% in his
lower limb.
12.

Coming to the injuries, the Tribunal has awarded a

sum of Rs.1,20,000/- towards the expenses; Rs.25,000/- for
special diet & conveyance; Rs. 10,000/- for mental pain and
sufferings; Rs.40,000/- for the loss of income for one year;
Rs.60,000/- on account of permanent disability to the
extent of 73% in respect of lower limb to the appellant,
which in my view, are just and proper.
13.

Appellant has not brought on record any evidence to

show that he was imparting tuitions to 10th and 12th class
students individually and in groups and was earning about
Rs.10,000/- p.m. Further, the accident has not effected the
earning capacity of the appellant, since he suffered injury
in right ankle and there is no medical evidence on record to
show that a person whose profession is to impart tuitions to
students would be unable to carry on tuition work due to

MAC App. No.248/2004

Page 6 of 8

injuries in ankle. Admittedly, now appellant is carrying on
his regular work in legal profession, so it cannot be said
that appellant has been unable to do any work or there is
any loss of earning for the future due to this accident.
Keeping in view all the facts and circumstances brought on
record, I am of the view that damages to the tune of
Rs.2,55,000/- as awarded by the learned tribunal are just
and adequate.
14.

As regards the award of interest @ 7% per annum by

the Tribunal, I do not find any justification for increasing
the same to 18% p.a., as there has been variation in the
rate of interest in various decisions given by the Supreme
Court.
15.

In Abati Bezbaruah v. Deputy Director General,

Geological Survey of India, (2003) 3 SCC 148, the Apex
Court has observed as under;
“The question as to what should be rate of
interest, in the opinion of this Court, would depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Award of interest would normally depend upon the
bank rate prevailing at the relevant time.”

16.

In view of the above decision, I am of the opinion that

the award of interest @ 7% cannot be considered to be
lower side. There cannot be any dispute that in many other
judgments of the Supreme Court it has granted lower rate
MAC App. No.248/2004

Page 7 of 8

of interest also at 6.5% and in some cases it has been 7.5%
and in some other matters it is 9% as well. I am, therefore,
not inclined to interfere in the discretion exercised by the
Tribunal in awarding 7% interest on the award amount.
17.

The Tribunal has rightly considered all the aspect and

awarded a total compensation of Rs.2,55,000/- with interest
@ 7% , under various heads. Therefore, there is no need to
interfere with the findings of the Tribunal.
18.

Accordingly, no infirmity can be found with the order

of learned Tribunal and the compensation awarded by the
Tribunal is just and adequate.
19.

The present appeal is, therefore, dismissed.

20.

No orders as to costs.

29th April, 2008
rs

MAC App. No.248/2004

V. B. GUPTA
(JUDGE)

Page 8 of 8

