*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

ITA No. 165 of 2007

%

Judgment reserved on:

19th March, 2007

Judgment delivered on: 26th March, 2007
AHLUWALIA CONTRACTS(I) LTD.
1102, PRAKASH DEEP,
7, TOLSTOY MARG,
NEW DELHI
..... Appellant
Through:Mr.K.Sampath, Adv.
Vs.
JT.COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
SPL. RANGE 10,
NEW DELHI.
..... Respondent
Through:Mr.Sanjeev Sabharwal,Adv.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

V.B. GUPTA, J.
Present appeal has been filed by the Appellant under
Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961(for short as Act)

ITA No.-165/2007

Page 1 of 9

challenging the order of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
(hereinafter referred to as Tribunal) dated 16th June, 2006
in ITA No.3134/Del/2001 for the assessment year 1991-92,
dismissing the appeal of the Assessee against the levy of
penalty of Rs.7,36,000/- for concealment of income under
Section 271(1)(c) of the Act.
2.

The brief facts of the case are that the Assessee-

company is engaged in the business of construction.

A

search under Section 132 of the Act in the Assessee's
premises was conducted on 12th March, 1994. During the
search,

several

documents

were

seized.

One

such

documents was a photostat copy of two pages of cash book.
One page showed the cash receipts from Balbir Singh and
other showed the receipt from Ramesh Sindhwani.

The

receipts from Balbir Singh were Rs.3,50,000/- in June,
1990, Rs.14 lacs also in June, 1990 and Rs.7 lacs on 3rd July,
1990. Thus, in all Rs.24,50,000/- were received in cash. In
case of Ramesh Sindhwani, cash of Rs.1 lac each on 23rd
June, 1990 and 22nd October, 1990 totalling to Rs.2 lacs
was shown.

These receipts, aggregating to Rs.16 lacs

were, however, not included in the regular books of
ITA No.-165/2007

Page 2 of 9

accounts of the Assessee. In the assessment proceedings,
the Assessee was confronted with the above position but he
denied having received the cash amount. Balbir Singh gave
statement on 22nd March, 1996 denying having made cash
payment of Rs.14 lacs to the Assessee. He stated that he
had entrusted the construction of a building to the
Assessee and when he could not make payments as insisted
by the Assessee, he had on a couple of occasions given
bearer cheques as confirmation of his liability.

These

cheques were subsequently returned to him after he had
issued account payee cheque to the Assessee. The alleged
payment of Rs.14 lacs might be one such amount and he
could produce evidence to substantiate it. It appears that
the Assessee made a request to the Assessing Officer to
summon Ramesh Sindhwani, but the said request was
apparently not acceded to.
3.

The Assessing Officer vide completing the assessment

refused to give any credence to the statement of Balbir
Singh on the ground that his statement that he gave bearer
cheque of Rs.14 lacs which was returned to him by the
Assessee on payment of the said amount through account
ITA No.-165/2007

Page 3 of 9

payee cheque was not substantiated by any evidence. The
Assessing Officer, thus, held that the entire amount of
Rs.16 lacs constituted the revenue receipts of the Assessee
and accordingly brought the same to assessment.
4.

The Assessee filed an appeal against the assessment

order before the Commissioner of Income Tax(Appeals) but
was not successful.

Thereafter, the Assessee further

appealed to the Tribunal vide ITA No.810/Del/97 and the
Tribunal confirmed the addition and dismissed the appeal
of the Assessee.
5

The Assessee challenged the order of the Tribunal in

this Court, vide ITA No.50/1999.
6

Vide judgment dated 29th August, 2000 passed by this

Court, the appeal of the Assessee was dismissed. It was
held:”So far as the reasons recorded for reopening of the assessment are concerned
the quoted portion goes to show that
reasons did exist for entertaining a belief
that income chargeable to tax had
escaped assessment.
Additionally the
conclusions of the Tribunal on the
question whether there was any receipt
beyond the books are essentially factual
and have been rendered after taking into
account relevant aspects. That being the
ITA No.-165/2007

Page 4 of 9

7.

position no question of law, much less a
substantial question of law is involved.”
In the meanwhile the Assessing Officer initiated

penalty proceedings by issue of notice on 25th March, 1996
under Section 271 read with Section 271(1)(c) of the Act.
The Assessee did not participate in the proceedings and
requested the Assessing Officer to keep the penalty
proceedings in abeyance till the disposal of its appeal
before the High Court against the order of the Tribunal.
The Assessing Officer refused to accept the Assessee's
request.

He held that the amount of Rs.16,00,000/- was

added to the income of the Assessee since it was not
recorded in the regular books of account. He observed that
it is a well-established fact that in the business of real
estate, taking money outside the books of account in cash is
not uncommon.

He further noted that in the Assessee's

case there was evidence unearthed during the search to
show that the aforesaid amounts constituted the income of
the Assessee.
guilty

of

He, therefore, held that the Assessee was

concealment

of

income.

He

also

invoked

Explanation 5(a) below Section 271(1)(c). He, thus, levied
a penalty of Rs.7,36,000/-.
ITA No.-165/2007

Page 5 of 9

8.

On

appeal,

the

Commissioner

of

Income

Tax

confirmed the levy of the penalty. Thereafter, the Assessee
filed appeal before the Tribunal and vide impugned order,
the appeal filed by the Assessee has been dismissed.
9.

We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and

gone through the record.
10.

The Tribunal in its impugned order has quoted the

observations made by the Tribunal in quantum appeal filed
by the Assessee, i.e., ITA No.810/Del/97 and the relevant
portion of the same reads as under:“In factual and legal conspectus of the
case, it is evident that the seized document
bearing page no.4 as Annexure A-14 was
found and seized from the appellant's
premises. It is a photo copy of cash book
which contain on left hand side the
account of Shri Balbir Singh and on the
right hand side the account is in the name
of Shri Ramesh Sindhwani. The date wise
entries have been made and against each
date narration have been given. Mode of
payment has been mentioned against each
entry which is either by cheque or cash.
The entries which are the subject matter of
impugned additions are for Rs.14 lakhs by
cash in the account of Shri Balbir Singh
and Rs.2 lakhs in the account of Shri
Ramesh Sindhwani.
Two entries of
Rs.50,000/- and Rs.3,00,000/- which are by
cheque and have been made before and
after the cash entry of Rs.14 lakhs have
ITA No.-165/2007

Page 6 of 9

been accepted by the assessee. The last
entry in this account for Rs.7 lakhs by
cheque has also been admittedly entered in
the book of account maintained by the
assessee. The totals of all the entries on
the paper have also been striked at
Rs.24,50,000/- by the assessee. It is thus
cannot be said that the impugned amount
of Rs.14 lakhs included in the addition of
Rs.16 lakhs is not a part of the receipt from
Shri Balbir Singh. The transaction of sale
of flat with Mr.Sindhwani has also been
accepted by the assessee. Both the entries
of Rs.14 lakhs and Rs.2 lakhs in the
account of Shri Balbir singh and Shri
Ramesh Sindhwani made in cash have not
been found recorded in the books
maintained by the assessee. The AO has
also given an adequate opportunity to the
assessee to explain his case. He was also
confronted with the seized document. The
assessee has not been able to explain as to
why the cash payments were not recorded
in the books of accounts maintained by
him. The statement of Shri Balbir singh is
also not supported by any material. No
debit entry has been found recorded for
return of any cheques as claimed by Shri
Balbir Singh in his statement recorded
under Section 131 of the Act. Shri Balbir
Singh has also specifically not denied the
payment of Rs.14 lakhs made to the
appellant. In his statement he replied that
“the alleged payment of Rs.14 lakhs may
be one of the such occasions”.
The
occasion in his statement is stated to be
making of payment through bearer cheque
in case of financial crisis and difficulties
for due payment. No supporting evidence
or material has been brought on record to
support this claim. In the absence of any
ITA No.-165/2007

Page 7 of 9

11.

supportive material, the only presumption
that can be drawn is that unaccounted
receipt in the hands of the assessee is
nothing but an unaccounted payment by
Shri Balbir Singh. It is thus natural that
Balbir Singh is not likely to admit such an
unaccounted payment straightly. Despite
having given proper opportunity to the
assessee, no material has been brought on
record by the appellant to show that the
cash entries recorded in the account of
Shri Balbir Singh and Shri Sindhwani do
not establish a direct nexus with the
receipts made by the appellant or that
these could not be treated as income of the
assessee from undisclosed sources. The
CIT(A) has also dealt with the issue in
detail at para 6 of his order. Keeping in
view all these facts into consideration, we
do not find any ground to interfere with
the decision taken by the CIT(A) and
accordingly
uphold
his
decision
in
confirming the addition of Rs.16 lakhs
made by the A.O. In the result, the ground
raised by the assessee is dismissed.”
Since the quantum appeal filed by the Assessee has

been dismissed by this very Court, the Income Tax
Authorities were right in holding that the Assessee
concealed its income

to the extent of Rs.16 lacs and as

such penalty of Rs.7,36,000/- has been rightly levied on the
Assessee

for

concealment

of

income

under

Section

271(1)(c) of the Act and there are concurrent findings of
facts to this effect by these statutory authorities.

ITA No.-165/2007

Page 8 of 9

12.

The above being the position, no fault can be found

with the view taken by the Tribunal. Thus, the order of the
Tribunal does not give rise to a question of law, much less a
substantial question of law, to fall within the limited
purview of Section 260-A of the Act, which is confined to
entertaining only such appeals against the order which
involves a substantial question of law.
13.

Accordingly, the present appeal filed by the Assessee

is, hereby, dismissed.

(V. B. GUPTA)
JUDGE

March
bisht

26, 2007

ITA No.-165/2007

(MADAN B. LOKUR)
JUDGE

Page 9 of 9

