*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

RSA No. 89 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: 23rd March, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on:30th March, 2007
Shri Hardam Singh
S/o Shri Munshi Ram,
R/o Village Ratan Garh,
Tehsil Sapla, District Rohtak
Haryana
Through

..... Appellant
Mr. K.S. Singh with
Ms. Tripta, Advocates.

Vs.
1.

Shri Rakesh Kumar
S/o Late Shri Tej Pal Sharma

2.

Shrimati Daya
W/o Shri Ram Avtar Sharma
D/o Late Shri Tej Pal Sharma

3.

Smt. Kiran
W/o Shri Ved Prakash Shrama
D/o Late Shri Tej Pal Sharma

4.

Kumari Sunita Sharma
D/o Late Shri Tej Pal Sharma

5.

Smt. Savitri Devi,
W/o Shri Tej Pal Sharma
All R/o H. No. 370, Mohalla Doonger,
Shahdara, Delhi – 32
...... Respondents
Through

None.

Coram:
RSA 89/2007

Page 1 of 8

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.B. GUPTA
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

V.B. GUPTA, J.

The present appeal has been filed by the Appellant

against the judgment dated 27th September, 2006 of Sh.
Atul Kumar Garg, Additional District Judge, Delhi in RCA
No. 06/06/05 vide which the judgment and decree dated
14th October, 2005 passed by Ms. Smita Garg, Learned Civil
Judge, Delhi in suit No. 88/02/01 was up held.
2.

The brief facts of the present case are that the

respondents filed a suit for possession and damages against
the present appellant claiming that they had become the
owners of house No. 370, Mohalla Doonger, Shahdara,
Delhi – 110032, after the death of Shri Tej Pal Sharma.
Earlier a will was executed in favour of Shri Tej Pal Sharma
by Smt. Munni Devi and they were granted a probate by
the Court of District Judge, Delhi vide order dated 7th

RSA 89/2007

Page 2 of 8

September, 1970.

The appellant filed an application for

revocation of the said probate before the District Judge
under Section 263 of Indian Succession Act, 1925 alleging
therein that he (appellant) is related to the deceased Smt.
Munni Devi but his objection was dismissed by District
Judge, Delhi, vide order dated 27th November, 1975 in
miscellaneous case No. 3/1971 holding therein that the
present appellant and other claimant Shri Manohar Lal
were not related to the deceased Smt. Munni Devi.
According to respondents, the appellant had occupied one
room and a portion of verandah in front of that room
illegally as a trespasser and has been living with his family
therein without any right, interest and title in the said
property, simply with a view to snatch the property from
the respondents by harassing them in one way or the other.
The appellant in pursuance of his malafide designs and
with a view to further harass the respondents and to
compel them for giving up their rightful claim in respect of
portion illegally occupied by him, filed a suit for seeking
declaration to the effect that he (appellant) is nephew and
legal heir of the deceased Smt. Munni Devi and also for
RSA 89/2007

Page 3 of 8

cancellation of her will in favour of Late Shri Tej Pal
Sharma. That suit was also dismissed by the Court of Shri
Satnam Singh, Sub Judge, Delhi vide the judgment and
decree dated 4th November, 1978 holding that the suit was
not maintainable being barred by time and in view of order
dated 27th November, 1975 passed by the Probate court.
The appellant herein, filed an appeal against order dated
4th November, 1978 and that was also dismissed and as
such the respondents had filed the present suit for vacating
and handing over the possession of the portion occupied by
the appellant unauthorisedly and unlawfully to the rightful
owners of the property.
3.

The appellant contested the suit before the trial court

on the ground that the deceased Shri Tej Pal Sharma was
merely a tenant under the deceased Smt. Munni Devi. The
appellant denied of any alleged will executed by Smt.
Munni Devi and took the plea that the same is forged one.
He further claimed that he is occupying the property for
the last 15 years in his own right, and even since the period
when Late Smt. Munni Devi was alive, she used to live with
the appellant in the same room and having common
RSA 89/2007

Page 4 of 8

kitchen.
Following issues were framed by the trial court:“1. Whether the suit has been properly
valued for the purposes of court fee and
jurisdiction? OPP
2.
Whether the
limitation? OPD

suit

is

barred

by

3.
Whether the suit is barred by
principles
of
estoppel,
waiver
and
acquiescence? OPD
4.
Whether the plaintiff is not the owner
of the property in suit? OPD
5.
Whether the defendant has been in
uninterrupted adverse possession of the
portion mentioned in the plaint as alleged?
OPD
6.
Whether the defendant is the owner of
the portion in question? OPD
7.
Whether plaintiff is entitled to recover
the possession of the portion in question?
OPD
8.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to
recover damages/further damages? If so,
at what rate and how much? OPP
9.
Relief.”
4.

The trial court decreed the suit filed by the present

respondents.
5.

The appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the

RSA 89/2007

Page 5 of 8

First Appellate Court, which confirmed the findings of the
trial court.
6.

It has been contended by learned counsel for the

appellant that the present suit filed by the respondents is
barred by limitation.

The litigation has been pending

between the parties since 1968 whereas, the present suit
was filed only in 1981 and no finding on this issue has been
given by the trial court and the appellant is the owner by
virtue of being in adverse possession.
7.

The case of the appellant before the trial court is that

he being the nephew and the only relative of Late Smt.
Munni Devi, inherited the house in question after her death
and thus became the owner thereof and in the same breath
the appellant has also taken the plea that he has become
the owner of the property by way of adverse possession as
he has been residing therein for the last 15 years.
8.

The appellant has not placed any document on record

to show that he is in possession of property since 1967.
Moreover, there has been litigation between the parties
since 1970 when the respondents filed the probate petition
before the District Judge.
RSA 89/2007

It is well settled that to
Page 6 of 8

constitute the plea of adverse possession, the appellant has
to plead that it must be actual, open, notorious, hostile,
under claim or right, continuous and exclusive and
maintained for the statutory period i.e. 12 years as
prescribed under Article 65 of the Limitation Act. Mere
possession of the suit property is not enough to take the
plea that the possession is adverse, it must be hostile.
9.

It were the respondents who filed the probate petition

before the District Judge, Delhi in the year 1970 to which
the objections were filed by the present appellant under
Section 263 of the Indian Succession Act and the same
were dismissed.
10.

With regard to the contention of the learned counsel

for the appellant, that the present suit is barred by
limitation, the case of the appellant is that he is in
continuous possession since long but there is no specific
plea of disclaiming the titles of the respondents from a
particular date, hostile assertion thereof and of setting
adverse possession from a particular date to the knowledge
of the respondents and their acquiescence.
11.

The trial court has given a finding to this effect that

RSA 89/2007

Page 7 of 8

no evidence has been adduced by the appellant in support
of his plea raised with regard to the adverse possession and
in fact the appellant has miserably failed to place on record
any documents to show that he had actually been in
possession of the suit premises for 15 years prior to the
institution of the suit, in the year 1981.
12.

In view of the concurrent finding of facts given by the

trial court and the First Appellate Court, I do not find any
reason to differ with the finding given by the courts below
and no substantial question of law arises for consideration.
13.

Hence, the present appeal is not maintainable and the

same is hereby dismissed in limine.

V.B. GUPTA, J
March 30, 2007
rs

RSA 89/2007

Page 8 of 8

