*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(CRL) 294/2008
DEEPAK AGNIHOTRI
..... Petitioner
Through Mr. V.M. Issar with Mr. Vishesh
Issar, Advs.
versus
THE COMMISSIONER OF POLICE &ORS. ..... Respondent
Through Mr. Saleem Ahmed with
Mr. Ehtesham Hashmi, Advs. for State
ASI Jai Singh, P.S. Paschim Vihar
Date of Decision : March 03, 2008
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K. BHASIN
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment ?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No
Yes
Yes

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J. (Oral)
1.

This Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India

prays for the issuance of a Writ of Habeas Corpus directing the
Respondents, mother of baby girl Sanandana, for production of
the baby girl. The Petition discloses that the Petitioner, Deepak
Agnihotri, was married to Respondent No.3, Namita Agnihotri,
on

29.1.2005

according

to

Hindu

rites

and

ceremonies.

Sanandana was born from this wedlock on 3.9.2006. It has been

WP(Crl.)294/2008

Page 1 of 7

asseverated in the writ petition itself that as far back as on
30.11.2006 Namita set up residence with her younger married
sister. It has been pleaded that she had earlier made a demand
to her husband to arrange for a separate residence for
themselves. The Petition discloses that to celebrate New Year
day Namita, along with Sanandana, visited Deepak's house for
the first time. There is an allegation that Namita left Sanandana
in the matrimonial home in the third week of January, 2007 and
thereafter did not care to meet the child for about seven
months. It appears that on 25.8.2007 Namita took custody of
Sanandana from her husband's home. On the occasion of the
first birthday of Sanandana Namita is stated to have returned to
her

matrimonial

home.

However,

on

4.11.2007,

Namita

allegedly took Sanandana away and left her in the care of her
matrimonial grand-parents in Aligarh. There are allegations to
the

effect

that

Sanandana

was

being

neglected

by

her

matrimonial grand-parents, whilst Namita has been attending
her job and living with her sister in Geeta Colony, Delhi.
According to the Petitioner, with great difficulty and a lot of
persuasion,

Sanandana

was

brought

back

to

Delhi;

unfortunately the date is not given. The Petition further narrates
that in December, 2007 Deepak Agnihotri, along with his family

WP(Crl.)294/2008

Page 2 of 7

members as well as Sanandana, were grievously hurt in an
accident which occurred on their visit to Jaipur. While they were
under treatment, Namita is stated to have left the matrimonial
home on 27.12.2007. According to the Petitioner Sanandana
remained in his care from 22.11.2007 to 15.2.2008.

On the

latter day the local police allegedly forced Deepak to handover
the custody of Sanandana to Namita. The Petition also states
that Sanandana has now been kept in “some unknown place”.
The gravamen of the argument of Mr. Issar, learned counsel for
the Petitioner, from the very beginning, is that the Petition is for
the custody of the child.

2.

At the very threshold we had conveyed to learned counsel

for the Petitioner our view that it would not be appropriate to
exercise the extraordinary powers reposed on the Writ Court in
the circumstances of this case. Mr. Issar, however, relies on

Smt. Nandita Virmani -vs- Raman Virmani, 1983 Crl. L. J. 794.
We have carefully perused the Judgment but in our view it is of
no assistance to the Petitioner. So far as the factual matrix was
concerned, an understanding had been reached between the
mother and the father in that case pertaining to visitation and
custody of their minor son.

WP(Crl.)294/2008

It appears that the father had

Page 3 of 7

reneged on that understanding. The petition for Habeas Corpus
was filed in those circumstances. The Division Bench, inter alia,
underscored the fact that Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, 1956 (Minority Act for short) postulated that
the custody of a minor who has not completed the age of five
years shall ordinarily be with the mother. While drawing a
distinction between guardianship and custody of a minor, the
Division Bench clarified that Section 6 does not stipulate that
custody of a child above the age of five years would invariably
lie with the father. The Division Bench further elaborated that
in custody matters it is the welfare of the child which is of preeminence; it would prevail over perceived individual rights of
the parents. At no stage did the Division Bench opine that the
jurisdiction of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (Guardians
Act for short) or of any matrimonial court exercising jurisdiction
under respective Sections dealing with custody rights, must give
way to Habeas Corpus proceedings.

It is trite that wherever

alternate or equally efficacious proceedings are available under
statute a writ court should direct the parties to avail of such
remedies.

WP(Crl.)294/2008

Page 4 of 7

3.

The interplay between a Habeas Corpus Petition and a

custody action under a statute, essentially seeking a decision on
which of the parents has the right to the custody of an infant,
has been considered in detail by the Supreme Court in Sumedha

Nagpal -vs- State of Delhi, IV (2000) CCR 48(SC) = JT 2000(7)
SC 450. The mother had filed a writ of Habeas Corpus on the
allegation that she had been deprived, through deceit, of the
care and custody of her two year old child. The contention on
behalf of the mother was that since it was the petitioner who
was statutorily entitled to the custody of the child, the writ court
should not “shirk” its task in ordering restoration of the custody
of the minor to the mother. Their Lordships clarified that the
rights of the parties would always be subservient to the welfare
of the minor.

The writ was dismissed with leave to file

appropriate proceedings under Section 25 of the Guardians Act
read with Section 6 of the Minority Act. In Saihba Ali -vs- State

of Maharashtra, 2003 SCC(Cri) 1675 the Supreme Court
reiterated the position that a petition under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India was not maintainable. In similar vein, in

Sarita Sharma -vs- Sushil Sharma, (2000) 3 SCC 14, their
Lordships held that the High Court should direct the parties to
initiate proceedings for a full-fledged inquiry under Section 6 of

WP(Crl.)294/2008

Page 5 of 7

the Minority Act, although in the interregnum it ought to have
restored the status quo ante. Their Lordships reiterated that “a
female child should be allowed to remain with the mother so
that she can be properly looked after”.

4.

There may be cases where one of the parents forcibly or

deceitfully “snatches” a child from the lawful custody of one of
the other estranged parents.

If the writ court is immediately

petitioned by means of a Habeas Corpus writ for restoration of
status quo ante, such an order should usually be passed. There
may also be instances where it is palpably obvious to the Court
that the custody of one of the parents is obviously illegal and in
such an event the Writ Court should not hesitate to interfere.
Even in these cases it should be a temporary or interim
arrangement, leaving the parties to approach the competent
Guardian Court to determine which of the two adversarial sides
is better placed or suited or equipped for bringing-up a child.

5.

Returning to the facts of the present case it is clear that

differences between Deepak and Namita have been festering for
several months. If the Petition is to be believed Sanandana has
been shuttling back and forth from her father and his family on

WP(Crl.)294/2008

Page 6 of 7

the one hand and her mother and her family on the other. The
infant girl, however, is only 1½ years of age and, prima facie,
should be in the custody of her mother. Whether such custody is
congenial for her welfare is a matter which cannot be decided
without a thorough probe by the Court. Habeas Corpus
proceedings are not suited for such scrutiny. The writ petition
is accordingly rejected at the very threshold. Liberty is granted
to the Petitioner to initiate appropriate proceedings, which, if
commenced, shall be decided without being swayed by any of
the observations made by us hereinabove.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

MARCH 03, 2008
tp

WP(Crl.)294/2008

( P.K. BHASIN )
JUDGE

Page 7 of 7

