IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 4393/2007
Major General B.P.S. Mander

...Petitioner through
Mr. N.K. Kaul, Sr.
Adv. with Mr. Viraj R.
Datar, Mr. Amit
Kumar Singh,
Ms. Shikha Sarin and
Mr. Karun Mehta,
Advs.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Mr. Sanjeev Sachdeva,
Adv.

Date of Hearing : August 30, 2007
Date of Decision : September 03, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA

:

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported Yes
in the Digest?
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
JUDGMENT

1.

The Petitioner, who is presently holding the substantive

rank of Major General in the Indian Army, has filed this writ
petition praying for the quashing of the Order dated 26.9.2005
(revised on 10.10.2005) convening a Court of Inquiry; setting
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 1 of 21

aside the Recommendations of the said Court of Inquiry;
quashing the decision for taking administrative action against
the Petitioner; and for directing the Respondents to promote the
Petitioner to the rank of Lt. General with effect from 1.10.2006
in accordance with the Recommendations of the Special
Selection Board (SSB) held in April, 2006 as approved by the
Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC).

2.

The Petitioner was commissioned in the Indian Army in

the Army Service Corps (ASC) on 15.6.1969, had been promoted
to the rank of Major General, and is posted as Additional
Director General (Supply and Transport) since April, 2005. He
was detailed to appear in a Court of Inquiry as a witness. The
Respondents have admitted that the Petitioner was considered
by the SSB held on 7.4.2006 for promotion to the rank of Lt.
General in respect of the vacancy which was to arise on
1.10.2006.

It has further been asseverated in the Counter

Affidavit that “due to the involvement of the Petitioner in a case
the Competent Authority gave directions on 24.6.2006 for
initiation of administrative action against the Petitioner for
various lapses committed by him in procurement of dry rations.
Consequently, a Discipline Vigilance (DV) Ban was imposed
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 2 of 21

against the Petitioner owing to said involvement. Therefore, the
SSB result which had been approved earlier by the Competent
Authority was rescinded and Respondent No1 has directed that
the result of the petitioner shall be subject to outcome of DV
Ban case. Thus the result has not been finalised and notified as
per DV Ban confidential policy dated 04 July 2000”. On an
analysis of the statement of the witnesses and the documents
produced at the Court of Inquiry thirteen (13) Army personnel
including the Petitioner were found prima facie blameworthy for
their improprieties.

The senior-most officer was Lt. General

S.K. Sahni, who has since retired. The Respondents have
themselves also pleaded in their Counter Affidavit that the case
of the Petitioner is different from that of Lt. General Sahni in
that no complaint was filed against the Petitioner by any person.

3.

Lt. General Sahni had approached this Court by way of

WP(C) 11839/2006 which was decided in his favour by a
detailed Judgment dated 11.1.2007 (in Lt. General Surinder
Kumar Sahni -vs- Chief of Army Staff, MANU/DE/0613/2007,
hereinafter referred to as SAHNI. Admittedly, an Appeal has
not been filed against the said Judgment and it attained finality.
The operative part of the Judgment of the Division Bench
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 3 of 21

comprising Justice Swatanter Kumar (as the Chief Justice of
Bombay then was) and Justice G.S. Sistani, observed that the
Respondents had not complied with the provisions of Rule 180
of the Army Rules, 1954 and for this reason they could not take
any further proceedings against Lt. General Sahni on the basis
of that Court of Inquiry. Our learned Brothers, however, had
ordered that the Respondents are at liberty to continue with the
proceedings under Rule 180 after giving notice to the Petitioner,
or in the alternative, take recourse to Rule 22, or exercise any
other power available to them under the Act provided they do
not rely upon the proceedings of the said Court of Inquiry. We
shall avoid making our Judgment prolix by referring to the
reasoning in the SAHNI with which we are in respectful and
complete agreement. We may succinctly record that our learned
Brothers had concluded that the Respondents had transgressed
the mandates of Rule 180. It is trite that SAHNI can be relied
upon by the Petitioner only so long as the facts pertaining to his
case are similar thereto in essential features. Learned counsel
for the Petitioner has contended that SAHNI would a fortiori
apply in favour of the Petitioner as his case is even on a higher
pedestal since the Respondents have admitted in their Counter
Affidavit that no witness had deposed against him.
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 4 of 21

4.

Rule 180 is reproduced for facility of reference:
180.

Procedure

when

character

of

a

person

subject to the Act is involved.-- Save in the case of
a prisoner of war who is still absent whenever any
inquiry affects the character or military reputation of a
person subject to the Act, full opportunity must be
afforded to such person of being present throughout
the inquiry and of making any statement, and of giving
any evidence he may wish to make or give, and of
cross-examining any witness whose evidence in his
opinion, affects his character or military reputation
and producing any witness in defence of his character
or military reputation.

The presiding officer of the

court shall take such steps as maybe necessary to
ensure that any such person so affected and not
previously

notified

receives

notice

of

and

fully

understands his rights, under this rule.

5.

In addition to the analysis of the law already made by the

Division Bench in SAHNI it would be advantageous and
informative to refer to the celebrated decision of Ernesto A.

Miranda v. State of Arizona, 16 L.Ed. 2d 694(1966) in which
the Supreme Court of the United States of America reiterated
the settled position that “... the prosecution may not use
statements, whether exculpatory or inculpatory, stemming from
custodial interrogation of the defendant unless it demonstrates
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 5 of 21

the use of procedural safeguards effective to secure the
privilege against self-incrimination ....”. Justice Warren had
further opined that “As a constitutional prerequisite to any
questioning, an individual held for interrogation by a law
enforcement officer must be warned, in clear and unequivocal
terms, that he has a right to remain silent, that any statement
he does make may be used as evidence against him.” We are
fully mindful that the factual matrix in Miranda is not identical
with that before us. However, the ratio decidendi would apply
invariably to all interrogations. It is to be appreciated that the
Order convening the Court of Inquiry rightly records in
paragraph 8 that Army Rule 180 must be complied with
whenever applicable. It appears to us to be unexceptional that a
person

cannot

be

surprised,

tricked

or

induced

into

participating in an Inquiry without being informed that its
findings may be against him or be critical

to his future.

Criminal jurisprudence in all common law systems prohibit
compelling an accused to depose against himself; an accused
can choose to remain silent without any adverse inference being
drawn against him because of his reticence. As has already
been noted the Petitioner was one of the last witnesses to
be examined

in

WP(C) 4393/2007

the Court

of

Inquiry constituted

to

page 6 of 21

investigate into the complaints pertaining to the quality of dry
rations purchased for the consumption in the Indian Army.

6.

We

can

conceive

of

a

situation

where

at

the

commencement of a Commission of Inquiry no culprits may have
been identifiable. In the course of the Inquiry, the deposition of
witnesses and/or document and material on record may provide
the foundation on which the case of complicity of some of the
officers could prima facie be made out. As has been opined by
our learned Brothers in SAHNI at the very first instance when
the needle of suspicion was perceived to point at a particular
person, such as the petitioner in the present case, this situation
should have been immediately brought to his specific notice. He
should have thereupon been cautioned, in the Miranda mould,
that any statement made by him thereafter may be used to his
disadvantage or detriment. Similarly, if on the basis of any
document or material in the possession of the Court of Inquiry
an adverse conclusion had been drawn against the Petitioner,
this material and documentation should have been placed before
the person concerned. He should be given an opportunity of
responding to the accusation, if he had so chosen, and only
thereafter could a prima facie view be taken which could form
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 7 of 21

the foundation for separate criminal or administrative action.
Rule 180 partakes the proportions of a grundnorm of natural
justice which commands compliance and brooks no deviation or
departure. It is yet another manifestation of audi alteram

partem rule, namely, that no man should be condemned
unheard. One of the greatest conceivable condemnations is for
a person to be denied the privileges and pleasures of reaching
the pinnacle of his career which in the present case has been
arrived at after over 35(thirty five)years of service.

7.

Returning to the facts of the present case we are of the

view that the Petitioner is avowedly better placed than Lt.
General Sahni against whom, as Respondents have pleaded,
some complaint had been received. So far as the the Petitioner
is concerned he had participated in the Court of Inquiry only as
a witness, never suspecting or apprehending that the findings of
the Court of Inquiry would be damning to his promotional
prospects. We cannot, therefore, appreciate the argument of
learned counsel for the Respondents that Rule 180 did not apply
in the Petitioner's case. Whereas Lt. General Sahni may have
had some inkling into the possible consequences of the
Commission of Inquiry, and therefore, would have been alert to
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 8 of 21

claim the protection of Rule 180, such thoughts would not have
even entered the mind of the Petitioner. We should not be
understood to mean that it is for the accused to claim protection
of Rule 180 nor can we attempt to do so. The Supreme Court
has unequivocally enunciated that the law casts an inalienable
obligation on the Respondents to adhere to the mandate of Rule
180. Our general experience indicates that in far too many cases
a confession is recorded in Courts-Martial with the simultaneous
notings that the accused has refused to append his signatures to
the records. The two positions are essentially not compatible,
leading to the suspicion that the confession may not have been
volunteered

at

all.

We

can

only

recommend

that

the

Respondents should take care to collect evidence corroborating
a confession so that Courts do not view such admissions of guilt
as convenient coincidences.

Pains should always be taken to

inform the person concerned of the consequences of his
confession.

8.

Personnel of the Armed Forces are entitled as much as any

other citizen to the protection of the Constitution of India. The
Supreme Court had observed over thirty years ago and
reiterated regularly thereafter (yet regretfully unheeded by the
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 9 of 21

Respondents) that service in the Armed Forces can no longer be
viewed as a support or adjunct of the Rulers.

We cannot do

better than to reproduce the following extract from the decision
in Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi -vs- Union of India, (1982) 3
SCC 140:
44. Reluctance of the apex court more concerned with
civil law to interfere with the internal affairs of the
Army is likely to create a distorted picture in the minds
of the military personnel that persons subject to Army
Act are not citizens of India. It is one of the cardinal
features of our Constitution that a person by enlisting
in or entering Armed Forces does not cease to be a
citizen so as to wholly deprive him of his rights under
the Constitution. More so when this Court held in Sunil
Batra v. Delhi Administration, that even prisoners
deprived of personal liberty are not wholly denuded of
their fundamental rights.

In the larger interest of

national security and military discipline Parliament in
its wisdom may restrict or abrogate such rights in their
application to the Armed Forces but this process should
not be carried so far as to create a class of citizens not
entitled to the benefits of the liberal spirit of the
Constitution.

Persons subject to Army Act are citizens

of this ancient land having a feeling of belonging to the
civilised community governed by the liberty-oriented
constitution.

Personal liberty makes for the worth of

human being and is a cherished and prized right.
Deprivation thereof must be preceded by an enquiry
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 10 of 21

ensuring fair, just and reasonable procedure and trial
by a judge of unquestioned integrity and wholly
unbiased.

A marked difference in the procedure for

trial of an offence by the criminal court and the court
martial is apt to generate dissatisfaction arising out of
this differential treatment.

Even though it is pointed

out that the procedure of trial by court martial is
almost analogous to the procedure of trial in the
ordinary criminal courts, we must recall what Justice
William O'Douglas observed : “[T]hat civil trial is held
in an atmosphere conducive to the protection of
individual rights while a military trial is market by the
age-old manifest destiny of retributive justice.

Very

expression 'court martial' generally strikes terror in the
heart of the person to be tried by it. And somehow or
the other the trial is looked upon with disfavour.” In
Reid v. Covert, Justice Black observed at page 1174 as
under:
Courts martial are typically ad hoc bodies
appointed by a military officer from among his
subordinates. They have always been subject to
varying degrees of “command influence”.
essence,

these

tribunals

are

simply

In

executive

tribunals whose personnel are in the executive chain
of command. Frequently, the members of the court
martial must look to the appointing officer for
promotions,

advantageous

assignments

and

efficiency ratings – in short, for their future progress
in the service. Conceding to military personnel that

WP(C) 4393/2007

page 11 of 21

high degree of honesty and sense of justice which
nearly all of them undoubtedly have, the members of
a court martial, in the nature of things, do not and
cannot have the independence of jurors drawn from
the general public or of civilian judges.
Absence of even one appeal with power to review
evidence, legal formulation, conclusion and adequacy
or otherwise of punishment is a glaring lacuna in a
country where a counterpart civilian convict can prefer
appeal after appeal to hierarchy of courts. Submission
that

full

review

of

finding

and/or

sentence

in

confirmation proceeding under Section 153 is provided
for is poor solace. A hierarchy of courts with appellate
powers each having its own power of judicial review
has of course been found to be counter-productive but
the converse is equally distressing in that there is not
even a single judicial review.

With the expanding

horizons of fair play in action even in administrative
decision, the universal declaration of human rights and
retributive justice being relegated to the uncivilised
days, a time has come when a step is required to be
taken for at least one review and it must truly be a
judicial review as and by way of appeal to a body
composed of non-military personnel or civil personnel.
Army

is

always

on

alert

for

repelling

external

aggression and suppressing internal disorder so that
the peace-loving citizens enjoy a social order based on
rule of law; the same cannot be denied to the
protectors of this order. And it must be realised that

WP(C) 4393/2007

page 12 of 21

an appeal from Ceaser to Ceaser's wife – confirmation
proceeding under Section 153 – has been condemned
as injudicious and merely a lip sympathy to form. The
core question is whether at least there should be one
appeal to a body composed of non-military personnel
and who would enjoy the right of judicial review both
on law and facts as also determine the adequacy of
punishment being commensurate with the gravity of
the offence charged. Judicial approach by people wellversed in objective analysis of evidence trained by
experience to look at facts and law objectively, fair
play and justice cannot always be sacrificed at the
altar of military discipline. Unjust decision would be
subversive of discipline. There must be a judicious
admixture of both.

9.

It is legally impermissible to obliquely or indirectly come

to a conclusion from statements of the accused that they are
willing to forfeit their valuable rights under Rule 180. The
decision to depart from compliance of Rule 180 should not be
opaque, but should be transparent and crystal clear. The
Authorities should invariably offer the protection of Rule 180 to
the accused or delinquent and only after the passage of a
reasonable time, so as to obviate a charge of coercion, should
they accept his statement that he does not want adherence of
his legal rights enshrined in Rule 180. We say this because
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 13 of 21

learned counsel for the Respondent has made a futile attempt to
read a letter written by the Petitioner to Lt. General Sahni as
evidencing the voluntary relinquishment of protection of Rule
180.

The Petitioner had recorded some event that had

transpired in these words - “I was contacted initially by Lt Gen
VC Jain, who said they wished to apply AR 180. I told him that
it would not be appropriate at this stage since the recording of
all Statements was over.

He then handed me over to Lt Gen

Mohinder Puri, who said that this was a routine procedure and
that he would send the Staff Officer with all the Statements and
I could go through them.

I told him that I could read the

Statements but would not be privy to the discussions that had
taken place during the recording of the Statements. I also asked
him about what were the changed circumstances that now
warranted application of AR 180 since all Statements had been
recorded and AR 180 applied on all those considered necessary.
He said that it was only a routine. I did not hear anything from
him after that”.

10.

In September 2005 the Petitioner had been detailed to

appear as a witness in the Court of Inquiry, which was not
directed against any misdemeanours attributable to him. It is of
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 14 of 21

significance that the option to avail of Rule 180 was specifically
given to as many as nine (9) witnesses who deposed in the Court
of Inquiry. On 9.3.2006, that the Petitioner was promoted to the
rank of Major General. The Petitioner asserts without challenge
that in June, 2006 the Selection Board had approved his
promotion to the rank of Lt. General, which in that very month
also received the clearance of the ACC. In October, 2006 a
vacancy had arisen to which the Petitioner was eligible. The
Division Bench held in favour of Lt. General Sahni in January,
2007. Since the results of the Selection Board had not been declassified,

the

Petitioner

submitted

a

Representation

on

21.2.2007, which remains unanswered. On 19.3.2007 the
Petitioner filed another Representation on learning that a fresh
Selection Board had been convened. The first communication
from the Respondents to the Petitioner is in terms of Show
Cause Notice dated 15.6.2007 issued by the Headquarters
Western Command. It inter alia states that a perusal of the
Court of Inquiry proceedings reveals that the Petitioner while
being responsible for provisioning centrally procured dry
supplies for the Defence Forces had omitted to process the case
for getting the samples of Masur Whole; had failed to ensure
timely materialisation in respect of Kabli Chana; had omitted to
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 15 of 21

include crucial quality aspects in the terms of reference, etc.
etc.

We find it noteworthy that the procurement was not from

private

parties

Undertakings

but
(PSUs).

admittedly
However,

from
we

the

Public

should

Sector
not

be

misunderstood to even obliquely indicate that there was any
legal impropriety in the issuance of the Show Cause Notice
dated 15.6.2007, or any follow-up proceedings predicated
thereon.

11.

What must be determined in the present case is whether

there was sufficient material available with the Respondents to
render nugatory the approval of the Selection Board as well as
the clearance of the ACC in June 2006. The unqualified answer
is that there was none at all.

By January, 2007 the decision of

the Division Bench in SAHNI had made it unequivocally clear
that the Respondents had violated the dictates of Rule 180 and
hence the Court of Inquiry could not be relied upon at all. It is
true that this decision was rendered in relation to Lt. General
Sahni; if that was not so there would have been no alternative
but to initiate Contempt of Courts proceedings against the
Respondents. The Respondents' stand is that even on the
commencement of the proceedings of the Court of Inquiry Lt.
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 16 of 21

General Sahni was under suspicion. As we have already
observed compliance with Rule 180 was even more critical so
far as the Petitioner was concerned since he was not under any
suspicion. We find no valid explanation forthcoming for the
inordinate delay of six months from the SAHNI Judgment for
the issuance of the Show Cause Notice to the Petitioner
assuming that the Respondents were in possession of reliable
information or evidence or documents or other material showing
complicity of the Petitioner. The Respondents should already
have been aware that reliance only on the Court of Inquiry
proceedings was insufficient to take any punitive action against
the Petitioner who was much more soundly placed than Lt.
General Sahni. The Respondents should have kept in mind the
fact that implementation of the approval of the Petitioner's
promotion to the rank of Lt. General was long overdue and in
the normal course should have effected in October, 2006 when a
vacancy had arisen.

12.

It has become an odious practice, to which Authorities

routinely succumb, to initiate anonymous or pseudonymous
complaints against the person who is in the reckoning for
promotion. It is axiomatic that there must be sound and legally
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 17 of 21

admissible evidence available with the Authority before any
officer or employee is denied his promotion. In the present case
we reiterate and reaffirm that there was none at the time by
which

the

Petitioner's

promotion

was

rescinded.

The

Respondents state that in the course of his statement the
Petitioner had incriminated himself. If this were so a Show
Cause Notice should have been issued forthwith and an Inquiry
or Court-martial should have been commenced against the
Petitioner. The outcome of such proceedings could then have led
to the Petitioner being charged for specific offences. Only then
would Rule 180 have been legally satiated. It appears to us that
a DV Ban should not also be imposed without sufficient cause.
We find it futile for learned counsel for the Respondents to rely
on Union of India -vs- R.S. Sharma, (2000) 4 SCC 394 since in
that case a First Information Report (FIR) with serious
allegations of financial misdemeanours was already registered.
Respondents' reliance on the Division Bench Judgment in J.P.S.

Malha (Col.) -vs- Union of India, 110(2004) DLT 372 is of no
avail. In that case, the DV Ban had been imposed even prior to
the empanelment of the officer concerned.

Moreover, the

Malha did not consider the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Union of India -vs- K. V. Jankiraman, (1991) 4 SCC
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 18 of 21

109,Union of India -vs- Dr Sudha Salhan, (1998) 3 SCC 394,

Bank of India -vs- Degala Suryanarayana, (1999) 5 SCC 762
and The State of Madhya Pradesh -vs- Bani Singh, AIR 1990
SC 1308. Sharma's case cannot be equated with Jankiraman
where it was observed that Sealed Cover Procedure can be
resorted to only after a charge-memo is received or a chargesheet is filed. Otherwise, the Government employee cannot be
denied his promotion. This exposition of the law had been
reiterated in Dr Sudha Salhan and Degala Suryanarayana .
In Bani Singh the Apex Court held it to be illegal to defer
consideration of an officer for promotion by a Screening
Committee in circumstances where some complaints about his
integrity had been received but in respect of which not even a
Preliminary Inquiry had been completed. In the case before us
the DV Ban appears to have been imposed on 13.7.2006 which
is subsequent to the approval of the promotion of the Petitioner
to the rank of Lt. General. Such Bans should not be recklessly
imposed on unsubstantiated grounds, else the morale and
efficiency of the Army or the Administration would be dealt a
fatal blow.

WP(C) 4393/2007

page 19 of 21

13.

In this analysis we are of the view that the Petition is well-

founded and its merits are unassailable. We are not required to
make any observations on the findings of the Court of Inquiry
for the reason that its proceedings are totally vitiated because
of non-adherence to Army Rule 180. We are of the same opinion
and conclusion as our esteemed Brothers of the Division Bench
in SAHNI were, viz. that the Respondents cannot take any
action against the Petitioner on the basis of the subject Court of
Inquiry. The Respondents are, however, within their rights to
proceed on the basis of the Show Cause Notice dated 15.6.2007,
with the clarification that until conclusive findings are available
against the Petitioner neither punitive nor administrative action
can be taken against him. Recourse to the provision of Rule 22
is available to the Respondents. Since there was no evidence
available for revoking the favourable selection of the Petitioner
by the SSB, approved by the ACC, the Revocation Order is
quashed.

The Respondents are directed to give effect to the

approval of the SSB, held in April, 2006 and duly approved
thereafter by the ACC.

14.

Keeping in perspective the pronouncement in SAHNI case

we are of the view that there is no substance or merit in the
WP(C) 4393/2007

page 20 of 21

defence or opposition presented by the Respondents. Any
reasonable person would have realised that the Petitioner is
better placed than Lt. General Sahni and that the conclusion of
the Division Bench in SAHNI would apply a fortiori in favour of
the Petitioner.

15.

The Writ Petition is allowed in the above terms. All

applications

stand

disposed

of.

The

Respondents

shall,

therefore, be liable to pay costs of the Petition which we
quantify at Rs.25,000/-.
( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

September 03, 2007
tp

WP(C) 4393/2007

(S.L. BHAYANA )
JUDGE

page 21 of 21

