IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
I

W.P.(C) 24105/2005

STAR INDIA P. LTD.

..... Petitioner through
Mr.Kailash Vasdev, Mr.A.S.Chandihok,
Sr. Advocates with Mr.Amar Gupta,
Mr.Dheeraj Nair, Mr.Karan Bharihoke,
Ms.Ananya Kumar and

versus
THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY
OF INDIA & ORS.
..... Respondents through
Mr.Rakesh Dwivedi, Sr.Adv. with
Mr.Meet Malhotra & Mr. Ravi Chauhan,
Advocates for TRAI
Mr. P.P.Malhotra, ASG with Mr.Rajeeve
Mehra, Mr.Chetan Chawla, Mr. Gaurav
Duggal and Mr.Suresh Kait, Advocates
for UOI
WITH
II

W.P.(C) 5332/2006

STAR INDIA P. LTD.

.... Petitioner through
Mr.Kailash Vasdev, Mr.A.S.Chandihok,
Sr. Advocates with Mr.Amar Gupta,
Mr.Dheeraj Nair, Mr.Karan Bharihoke,
and Ms.Ananya Kumar

versus
THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY
OF INDIA & ORS.
..... Respondents through
Mr.Rakesh Dwivedi, Sr.Adv. with
Mr.Meet Malhotra & Mr. Ravi Chauhan,
Advocates for TRAI
Mr.Sudhakar V. Velankar, President,
Grahak Hitvardhini Sarvajanik Sanstha

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 1 of 79

WITH
III

W.P.(C) 14877-78/2006

STAR INDIA P. LTD.

..... Petitioner through
Mr.Kailash Vasdev, Mr.A.S.Chandihok,
Sr.Advocates with Mr.Amar Gupta,
Mr.Dheeraj Nair,Mr.Karan Bharioke
and Mr.Shankhsengupta,

versus
THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY
OF INDIA & ORS.
..... Respondents through
Mr.Rakesh Dwivedi, Sr.Adv. with
Mr.Meet Malhotra & Mr. Ravi Chauhan,
Advocates for TRAI
Mr.P.P.Malhotra, ASG with
Mr. Gaurav Duggal and Mr.Rajeev
Mehra, Mr.Rakesh Gosain and
Mr.Suresh Kait, Advocates for UOI
Dr.A.M.Singhvi, Mr. Aryama Sundaram,
Sr.Advocates with Mr.Manjul Bajpai,
Ms.Payal and Mr.Aditya Awasthi,
Advocates for Indus India MediaIntervenor
Mr.Arun Jaitley, Sr.Advocate with
Ms.Indu Malhotra, Mr.Vikas Mehta,
Mr.Vibhav Srivastava, Ms.Sunita Ojha
and Mr.Kunal Tandon,Advocates for
Hathway Cable & Datacom Pvt. Ltd.Intervenor
WITH
IV

W.P.(C) 16913/2006, W.P.(C) 16914/2006

SET DISCOVERY P.LTD. .... Petitioner through
Mr. Soli J. Sorabjee, Sr. Advocate &
Mr. A.S.P.I Chinoy, Sr. Advocate with
Mr.Shankhsengupta, Mr.Gopal
Jain,Ms.Mridul Sharma, Mr.Anup
Bhambani and Ms. Kanika Agnihotri,
Advocates
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 2 of 79

versus
THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY
OF INDIA & ORS.
..... Respondents through
Mr.Rakesh Dwivedi, Sr.Adv. with
Mr.Meet Malhotra & Mr. Ravi Chauhan,
Advocates for TRAI
Mr.P.P.Malhotra, ASG with
Mr. Gaurav Duggal and Mr.Rajeev
Mehra, Mr.Rakesh Gosain and
Mr.Suresh Kait, Advocates for UOI
Dr.A.M.Singhvi, Mr. Aryama Sundaram,
Sr.Advocates with Mr.Manjul Bajpai,
Ms.Payal and Mr.Aditya Awasthi,
Advocates for Indus India MediaIntervenor
Mr.Arun Jaitley, Sr.Advocate with
Ms.Indu Malhotra, Mr.Vikas Mehta,
Mr.Vibhav Srivastava, Ms.Sunita Ojha
and Mr.Kunal Tandon,Advocates for
Hathway Cable & Datacom Pvt. Ltd.Intervenor
Judgment Reserved on : May 7, 2007
Judgment Delivered on : July 9, 2007
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE J.P. SINGH
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
In the Digest?

Yes
Yes
Yes

JUDGMENT
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
1.

In Petition No.I (CW 24105/2005) Star India Pvt. Ltd. has

prayed for a certiorari quashing the proviso to Section 2 (1) (k) of
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 3 of 79

the TRAI Act; a certiorari for quashing Tariff Orders dated
15.1.2004,

1.10.2004,

Telecommunication

1.12.2004

and

(Broadcasting

Interconnection Regulation, 2004.

29.11.2005

and

Cable

and

the

Services)

It has further been prayed

that the Court should declare that TRAI is not competent to
regulate broadcasting services as also another declaration to the
effect that these impugned Orders and impugned Interconnect
Regulations are violative of Articles 14 and 19 (1) (a) and (g) as
also Articles 301 to 307 of the Constitution. In Petition No.II (CW
5332/2006) Star India Private Limited has prayed for the setting
aside an order of the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
Tribunal in Appeal No.12(C) of 2005 titled Grahak Hitvardhani
Sarvajanik Sanstha -vs- TRAI and (b) issuance of a writ of
certiorari quashing the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and
Cable) Services (Second) Tariff (Fourth Amendment) Order 2006
notified on 7.3.2006. In Petition No.III (CW 14877-78/2006) Star
India Private Limited has prayed that the Telecommunication
(Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Third) (CAS Area) Tariff
Order

2006

and

(Broadcasting

and

further
Cable

that
Services)

the

Telecommunication

(Second

Amendment)

Regulation, 2006 dated 24.8.2006 be struck down being violative
of Articles 14, 19, 301 to 307 of the Constitution. In Petition No.IV
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 4 of 79

(CW 16913-14/2006) filed by Set Discovery Private Limited the
following prayers have been made:
a) Issue writ, order or direction to declare that the TRAI
has no jurisdiction or power under Section 11(2) of the
TRAI Act to fix tariffs for Broadcasters;
b) Issue writ, order or direction to declare that the TRAI
has no jurisdiction or power under Section 11(2) of the
TRAI Act to strike down S. 11(2) of the TRAI Act;
c) Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to quash
the Notification dated 31.07.06 (F.No. 9/16/2004-BP&L
[Vol.

IV]

issued

by

Ministry

of

Information

and

Broadcasting;
d) Strike down clauses 3.3 and 9 to 12 of the
Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable Service)
Interconnection (Third Amendment) Regulation, 2006 (10
of 2006) dated 04.09.2006 (No. 6-4/2006-B&CS) as
amended by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.

2.

So far as Petition No.1 is concerned the prayer for quashing

Tariff Orders was correctly not pressed before us.

So far as

Petition No.2 is concerned the Order in Appeal No.12(C) of 2005
was not pressed. Since the Respondents have asserted that the
Petitions are not maintainable, we shall immediately deal with
that point.

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 5 of 79

MAINTAINABILITY OF PETITION SEEKING
ENFORCEMENT OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
BY A COMPANY
3.

Mr. P.P. Malhotra, learned Additional Solicitor General and

Mr. Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel for Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India(TRAI), have laid a threshold
challenge to the very maintainability of the present Petitions
seeking the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights enshrined in
Article 19 of the Constitution of India. They contend that the very
least expected of the Petitioners was to plead facts establishing
that they are Indian citizens.
Petitioners

Their argument is that the

have deliberately refrained from doing so since they

are in fact foreign companies transacting business in India.
Indubitably the burden to clarify their status as citizens of India
reposed entirely on the Petitioners and they have miserably failed
to plead facts and figures establishing their eligibility.

The

nature of the shareholding of the Petitioners has been provided to
us by the Respondents in terms of the affidavits dated 21.2.2007
filed on behalf of TRAI. So far as Star India Private Limited is
concerned it appears that it is completely (98.85899 per cent)
held by a foreign company

named Buzzer Investments Ltd.

registered in Mauritius, which in turn is owned by The News
Corporation Ltd. which is registered in Australia.
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Star India

Page 6 of 79

Private Limited is the sole petitioner in WP(C) Nos.24105/2005
and 5332/2006. Learned ASG has also emphasized the fact that
these petitions have been signed and verified by Mr. Himavat
Chaudhuri, in the capacity of its Associate General Counsel and
Vice-President(Legal). The status in the context of Article 19 has
not been elucidated upon in the Petitions. WP(C) No.1487778/2005 has also been filed by Star India Private Limited through
its General Counsel Head of Legal Affairs who has verified the
Petition and is also Petitioner No.2. Remarkably, the Petition has
not been signed by him.

In the Petition it has been vaguely

averred that Star India Private Limited is a company incorporated
under the Companies Act, 1956, engaged in the business of
distributing television channels and that Mr. Ajay K. Sharma is its
shareholder. The details of the extended shareholding have not
been furnished to the Court.

Learned counsel

for

the

Respondents have justifiably also underscored the fact that the
petitions do not disclose the manner in which the Fundamental
Rights of Mr. Sharma have been infringed.

4.

Set Discovery Pvt. Ltd., Petitioner No.1 in WP(C) No.16913-

14/2006 is in essence a foreign Company. It has been deposed
that - “so far as Set Discovery Pvt. Ltd. is concerned it is a Joint
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 7 of 79

Venture of Set India Pvt. Ltd. and Discovery Communications
India Pvt. Ltd. As regards Set India Pvt. Ltd., 60.57% shares are
held by foreign companies and 7.80% shares are held by Foreign
Institutional Investors. Thus the foreign shareholding is to the
tune of over 68%, 31.63% shares are held by Indian companies
and no share are held by individuals. As regards Discovery
Communications India Pvt. Ltd., 100% shares are owned by
foreign companies namely, Discovery Channel (Mauritius) Pvt.
Ltd., Discovery Production Inc. and Discovery Communications
Ltd., LLC. The first Company is based in Mauritius & the other
two are based in Maryland, USA”. It is worth highlighting the
fact that there are no individuals, NRIs or foreigners who are
shareholders of Set India Pvt. Ltd.. Even though a labyrinth has
been created by the Petitioners it is evident that Petitioner No.1
is essentially a foreign company. WP(C) No.2744/2005 has also
been filed by Set Discovery Pvt. Ltd. through Mr. Amit Arora, its
Regional Manager and Authorised Signatory. It is wholly
inexplicable that the Petition has been verified by Mr. Kunal
Dasgupta as Director of Set Discovery Pvt. Ltd., whereas in the
array of Petitioners he is described as the CEO of Set India Pvt.
Ltd..
5.

In

this

regard

the

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

following

observations

found

Page 8 of 79

in

Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Govt. of India,
-vs- Cricket Association of Bengal, (1995) 2 SCC 161 (abbreviated
hereunder as 'CAB') have been relied upon on behalf of the
Petitioners.
73.

It is also contended that the exercise of right

claimed in the present case is by BCCI/CAB and its
office bearers who are citizens of India. Merely
because

foreign

equipment

and

technical

and

personnel are used as collaborators to exercise the
said right more effectively, it does not dilute the
content of Article 19(1)(a) nor does it become an
exercise of right by non-citizens. In this connection, it
is emphasized that the Doordarshan is also using
Worldtel, a foreign agency. Most of the newspapers
in India are printed on machines imported from
abroad. A newspaper may also have a foreigner as its
manager. However, that does not take away the right
of the newspaper under Article 19 (1) (a). They are
only instances of technical collaboration. Apart from
it, every citizen has a right to information as the same
cannot be taken away on grounds urged by the MIB.

6.

On the other hand, the learned counsel for the Respondents

have taken us through a catena of cases containing reflections on
the legal position of whether a company can file a petition
seeking enforcement of Fundamental Rights. In The State

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 9 of 79

Trading Corporation of India -vs- The Commercial Tax Officer,
Visakhapatnam, AIR 1963 SC 1811 : 1964 (4) SCR 99 (STC case
in short), the nine-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court clarified
that the Constitution deliberately and advisedly makes a clear
distinction between Fundamental Rights available to 'any person'
and those guaranteed to 'all citizens'. Article 19 inter alia
guarantees citizens of India (a) the freedom of speech and
expression and (g) the right to carry on any occupation, trade or
business. Their Lordships thereafter observed that the provisions
of the Constitution of India in Part II relating to 'citizenship' are
clearly inapplicable to juristic persons; and that neither the
provisions of Constitution Part II nor of the Citizenship Act confer
the right of citizenship on recognized citizens, any person other
than a natural person; that they do not contemplate a corporation
as a citizen. Their Lordships poignantly opined that Part-III of the
Constitution, which proclaims Fundamental Rights, was very
accurately drafted, delimiting rights like freedom of speech and
expression, right to practice any profession etc. as belonging to
citizens only and the

more general rights like the right to

equality before the law, as belonging to all persons; that
corporations may have nationality in accordance with the country
of their incorporation but that does not necessarily confer
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 10 of 79

citizenship on them.

7.

This is also the view expressed in Dharam Dutt -vs- Union

of India, (2004) 1 SCC 712. We are of the opinion that where
companies approach the Court complaining of violation of
Fundamental Rights the pleadings must, in the nature of basics,
clearly spell out the manner in which individuals or natural
persons are affected. In all the writ petitions before us this aspect
has been glossed over, and in our considered opinion obviously
for the reason that when the corporate veil is lifted the alleged
infraction of these rights pertain to a negligible number of
citizens. The gravamen of the assault is predicated on the
infringement of the right

to

freedom

of

speech

and

expression. The Petitioner must disclose the manner in which
Fundamental Rights of a citizen have been violated. It may be
possible, in an exceptional case, that although the Petitioner is
an incorporated entity, further compounded by the fact that it is
not an Indian citizen, the views of

reputed Indian journalists

have been silenced. In such cases, the siege may eventually
turn out to be successful.

This does not detract from the

necessity to carefully plead necessary details and circumstances
showing that the plaintive cry is of an Indian citizen and not of a
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 11 of 79

foreigner.

8.

Indo-China Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. -vs- Jasjit Singh,

Additional Collector of Customs, 1964 (6) SCR 594 was decided
by a Constitution Bench comprising five members of the larger

STC Case. The facts were that a vessel had contravened the
provisions of Section 52-A of the Sea Customs Act when it
entered the Calcutta Port. Learned counsel for the Petitioner had
sought to argue that if mens rea was not an essential element of
Section 52-A that provision would be ultra vires Articles 14, 19
and 31(1) and as such unconstitutional and invalid. The
Constitution Bench observed that the Appellant was “not only a
company, but also a foreign company, and as such is not entitled
to claim the benefits of Article 19. It is only citizens of India who
have been guaranteed right to freedom enshrined in the said
Article. ..... The plain truth is that certain rights guaranteed to
citizens of India under Article 19 are not available to foreigners
and pleas which may successfully be raised by the citizens on the
strength of the said rights guaranteed under Article 19 would,
therefore, not be available to foreigners”. This very question
thereafter arose before another Constitution Bench in Tata

Engineering and Locomotive Co. Ltd. (Telco) -vs- State of Bihar,
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 12 of 79

1964(6) SCR 885 and yet again was rejected. Following the STC

case the Constitution Bench opined that the “Petitioners cannot
be heard to say that their shareholders should be allowed to file
the

present

petitions

on

the

ground

that,

in

substance,

corporations and companies are nothing more than association of
share-holders and members thereof. In our opinion, therefore, the
argument that in the present petition we would be justified in
lifting the veil cannot be sustained”. Thereafter the decision of
the Bench of eleven Judges in Rustom Cavasjee Cooper -vs-

Union of India, 1970 (1) SCC 248 reiterated the same legal
position. It opined that a company registered under the
Companies Act is a legal person, separate and distinct from its
individual members. All its shareholders may not be entitled to
move a petition for infringement of the rights of the company
unless by the impugned action his right had also been infringed.
On facts it was found that the Petitioner had challenged the
alleged infringement of his own rights and hence he had the legal
capacity to file and pursue the writ petition.

The challenge

concerned the commercial interests of the Petitioner as

a

shareholder and not for safeguarding his freedom of speech and
expression.
9.

The Constitution Bench thereafter encountered this very

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 13 of 79

legal nodus in Benett Coleman & Co. -vs- Union of India, (1972)
2 SCC 788. Their Lordships noted that neither in Express

Newspapers (P) Ltd. -vs- Union of India, 1959 SCR 12 : AIR 1958
SC 578 nor in Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. -vs- Union of India, (1962) 3
SCR 842 : AIR 1962 SC 305 had any plea been raised about the
maintainability of the writ petition. It bears highlighting that so
far as Sakal was concerned it had only two shareholders who
had joined the litigations as petitioners. Furthermore, the case
projected by Sakal was that owing to its comparatively wide
circulation, it was instrumental in playing a leading part in the
dissemination of news and views and in moulding public opinion
in matters of public interest. Sakal had also asseverated that it
was not aligned with any

political party and that the public

referred to and replied upon the opinions articulated in it on
controversial issues. We wish to emphasize that this role, which
is quite distinct to simple entertainment, has always been
considered so vital to nation building and social awareness that it
has in almost all legal systems been accorded preeminence.
Hence it has been viewed as a freedom and not a mere right. To
put entertainment on parity with freedom of speech and
expression seems to us to trivialize the function of the press and
therefore to be logically and legally incongruent. After discussing
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 14 of 79

the cases already mentioned by us above, their Lordships spoke
as follows:
22. In the Bank Nationalization case (supra) this Court
held the statute to be void for infringing the rights under
Articles 19(1)(f) and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. In the
Bank Nationalization case (supra) the petitioner was a
shareholder and a director of the company which was
acquired under the statute. As a result of the Bank
Nationalization case (supra) it follows that the Court
finds out whether the legislative measure directly
touches the company of which the petitioner is a
shareholder. A shareholder is entitled to protection of
Article 19. That individual right is not lost by reason of
the fact that he is a shareholder of the company. The
Bank Nationalization case (supra) has established the
view that the fundamental rights of shareholders as
citizens are not lost when they associate to form a
company. When their fundamental rights as shareholders
are impaired by State action their rights as shareholders
are protected. The reason is that the shareholders' rights
are equally and necessarily affected if the rights of the
company are affected. The rights of shareholders with
regard to Article 19(1)(a) are projected and manifested
by the newspapers owned and controlled by the
shareholders through the medium of the corporation. In
the present case, the individual rights of freedom of
speech

and

expression

of

editors,

Directors

and

shareholders are all exercised through their newspaper
through which they speak. The press reaches the public
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 15 of 79

through

the

newspapers.

The

shareholders

speak

through their editors. The fact that the companies are
the petitioners does not prevent this Court from giving
relief to the shareholders, editors, printers who have
asked for protection of their fundamental rights by
reason of the effect of the law and of the action upon
their rights. The locus standi of the shareholder
petitioners is beyond challenge after the ruling of the
Supreme Court in the Bank Nationalization case (supra).
The presence of the company is on the same ruling not a
bar to the grant of relief.

10.

A couple of years thereafter, another Constitution Bench in

the case reported as The State of Gujarat -vs- The Ambica Mills

Ltd., Ahmedabad, (1974) 4 SCC 656 recorded that in view of
Telco, Cooper and Benett Coleman it had been settled “that a
corporation is not a citizen for the purposes of Article 19 and has,
therefore, no Fundamental Right under that Article”. This
conundrum has also been considered by H.M. Seervai in the
treatise “Constitutional Law of India” IVth Edn. where the
learned author and distinguished advocate had expressed the
view that this state of the law is unsatisfactory. However, after
culling out and expressing the view in paragraph 10.26 on page
708, the opinion has been expressed that a corporation seeking
to enforce Fundamental Rights must fulfill two conditions - (a) the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 16 of 79

majority of its shareholders must be Indian citizens and (b) its
management and control must in the hands of Indian citizens.
This discussion discloses the undisputed view that foreigners and
foreign corporations cannot enforce the Fundamental Rights
enshrined in Part III of the Constitution.

11.

We have already analyzed the respective shareholding of

the Petitioners, brushing aside the skein of holding companies,
and the minuscule and infinitesimal number of shares in Indian
hands. Mr. Shenoy has forcefully posited that the Indian
Constitution, as explained in Benett Coleman, does not consider
it essential that a `class action' should be initiated in order to
successfully withstand an assault on the Fundamental Right of a
citizen; nay, even

a single citizen has the inviolable right

to

enforce compliance and respect to his Fundamental Rights. In
our opinion whilst there is no scope for applying a quantitative
test a qualitative test is essential in such matters. As has
specifically been observed in Benett Coleman the rights of a
writer or Editor of freedom of speech and expression must be
protected. But these rights cannot be confusedly and incorrectly
enforced in favour of

persons not falling in this category.

A

single shareholder may have sufficient locus standi to fight the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 17 of 79

cause of a company whose commercial interests are common to
his, as had happened in the Bank Nationalization cases. The
employment of the word `citizen' should not be washed away or
watered down. Bennet Coleman was not a foreign company.
The right of speech and expression, being zenithal in nature, is a
freedom incomparable to any other Fundamental Right. Whilst its
amplitude ought not to be circumscribed, curtailed or restricted
its immense impact on the population requires its availability
only to citizens. EcoSOC in terms acknowledges and advocates
the wisdom in preserving all existing cultures and customs. If
freedom of speech and expression is made available to foreign
entities it would directly result in imposing their foreign cultural
values on our society. In fact

they are

already

doing

this

unabashedly without any check or restraint through their socalled family-life and other so-called entertainment serials. They
are displaying naked vulgarity starting with innocent kids to
above 60 years old women.

They are teaching bad manners,

adultery, rapes, innovative methods of murders, illegitimacy and
all sorts of indecencies and crimes to the Indian families which
were hitherto foreign to Indian culture. They have hijacked and
monopolized the media from 24 X 7 hours.

They are

unashamedly indulging in cultural sabotage from within the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 18 of 79

country and their role is like the role of Anti National people and
Public Enemies and is akin to the role of terrorists but under the
cover of media and in the name of freedom of speech and
expression. We cannot comprehend a more belligerent use of
these freedoms. The Respondents and their associates have
apparently shut their eyes, may be for ulterior motives.

The

economic strength of Western countries has an irresistible effect
on changing the mindset of developing nations and these
societies

tend

to

ape,

copy,

imitate

and

replicate

the

economically advanced nations. Courts should be loath to permit
such an assault and invasion by indiscriminately extending
freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) to
persons who are not Indian citizens.

It would be relevant to

recall that in CAB the Supreme Court had observed that -- “what
distinguishes the electronic media like the television from the
print media or other media is that it has both audio and visual
appeal and has a more pervasive presence.

It has a

greater

impact on the minds of the viewers and is also more readily
accessible to all including children at home.” In that very case
the Apex Court had noted the absence of any suggestion before it
that acknowledgment of a foreign agency by the BCCI/CAB is
violative of the provisions of Article 19(2) of the Constitution.
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 19 of 79

(emphasis added)

12.

On behalf of Star India Pvt. Ltd. in the Written Argument a

submission has been advanced that its petition is not restricted to
or predicated upon Article 19 (1) (a) “but primarily seeks to
challenge the amendment made to Section 2 (1) (k) of the TRAI
Act which gives untrammeled powers to the Central Government
being totally contrary to the intention of the framework of the
TRAI Act. As explained above the TRAI Act is not designed to
regulate or deal with broadcasting services as broadcasting
industry is significantly different from the telecom industry. The
amendment is also challenged on the ground that the proviso is
ultra vires the TRAI Act and amounts to excessive delegation.
Such a challenge is capable of being maintained on its own by a
Company without any shareholder/s being arrayed as Petitioner
(s). It is submitted that remedy available under Article 226 of the
Constitution are wide and not restricted to violations of
fundamental

rights”.

This

is

obviously

an

argument

in

desperation because the bulwark and fulcrum of the Petitioners'
case is what they receive as a flouting of the freedoms of speech
and expression guaranteed in Article 19 of the Constitution. In
fact, the gravamen of the argument on behalf of the Petitioners
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 20 of 79

relates to 19 (1) (a) and not merely 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution.
If this argument is to be accepted, we must not permit the
Petitioners' to proceed any further once the discussion of the
statutory provisions is completed.

We must not permit the

Petitioners' to approbate and reprobate.

13.

The inescapable conclusion is that the present petitions are

not maintainable. We had considered the option to dismiss these
petitions on

this short

ground.

However, we

consider

it

unconscionable to traverse this path since we have heard
extensive arguments on the myriad aspects of law that have been
revealed in these cases. We, therefore, now proceed to consider
those questions, even though we are unequivocally of the opinion
that the petitions are not maintainable.
INTERPRETATION OF DEFINITION OF
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE
14.

The primary attack of the Petitioners is that broadcasting

activity has decidedly been kept beyond the purview of the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, 1997 (TRAI Act). The
principal argument in this context is that the present proviso to
Section 2 (k) is ultra vires the main provision and must therefore
be struck down. In order to holistically interpret the phrase
“telecommunication service” we have juxtaposed the definition in
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 21 of 79

Section 2(1)(k) along with 3(1AA) of the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885 (Telegraph Act):
2(1)(k)

3(1AA)

'telecommunication
service'
means
service
of
any
description
(including
electronic mail, voice mail,
data
services,
audio
tex
services, video tex services,
radio paging and cellular
mobile telephone services)
which is made available to
users by means of any
transmission or reception
of signs, signals, writing,
images and sounds or
intelligence of any nature,
by wire, radio, visual or
other electronic-magnetic
mean but shall not include
broadcasting services:

'telegraph'
means
any
appliance,
instrument,
material or apparatus used
or capable of use for
transmission or reception
of signs, signals, writing,
images and sounds or
intelligence of any nature
by wire, visual or other
electro-magnetic emissions,
radio waves or Hertzian
waves, galvanic, electric or
magnetic means.

Explanation.--'Radio waves'
or 'Hertzian waves' means
electro-magnetic waves of
frequencies lower than 3,000
giga-cycles
per
second
Provided that the Central propagated in space without
Government may notify other artificial guide
service
to
be
telecommunication
service
including
broadcasting
services
(emphasis added)
The contention on behalf of the Respondents is that even a
cursory reading of these definitions will reveal that 'telegraph'
and 'telecommunication services' have similar definitions and
thus fall within the sweep of the Telegraph Act as well as the
TRAI Act.

They further contend that `broadcasting' also falls

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 22 of 79

within the same definition. Mr. Shenoy, however, seeks to clarify
that the definition in the Telegraph Act refers to machinery
whereas Broadcasting concerns the content carried on these
machines. Without going into minute detail, it seems to us that
Broadcasting is covered under both the statutory definitions. This
is of importance for the simple reason that, but for the
exclusionary words underlined by us, broadcasting activities
would automatically be regulated and governed by the TRAI Act
also. In the analysis made hereinafter, this could not have been
the intention of Parliament.

15.

We need to briefly traverse through the annals of this

legislation along with some others covering concerns cognate to
it. It has now come to be accepted that this exercise is
permissible, nay recommended, wherever and

whenever the

Court is confronted with a conundrum in the troublesome task
of statutory interpretation. In Kesavananda Bharati -vs- State of

Kerala, (1973) 4 SCC 225: AIR 1973 SC 1461, the Supreme Court
did not hesitate to refer to the Constituent Assembly Debates to
glean the intention of the framers of the Constitution in the
context of the Articles attracted for their Lordships' cogitation. In

Election Commission, In Re: Special Reference No. 1 of 2002,
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 23 of 79

(2002) 8 SCC 237 the Constitution Bench again acknowledged
that one of the “known methods to discern the intention behind
enacting a provision of the Constitution and also to interpret the
same is to look into the historical legislative documents.
Constituent Assembly Debates or any enactment proceeding the
enactment of the constitutional provision.” These decisions have,
very recently, been favourably referred to by the Constitution
Bench in Kuldeep Nayyar -vs- Union of India, (2006) 7 SCC 1.

16.

The Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR for short) of

the TRAI Act refers to the National Telecom Policy, 1994 which
apart from attempting to attain universalisation of services,
strove to provide world-class telecom services at a reasonable
price to the customers. The effort was to devise a method of
protecting and promoting consumer interests by ensuring fair
competition within service providers. The TRAI Act came into
force on 25.1.1997. Its Preamble specifically mentions the
protection of the interests of service providers and consumers of
the telecom sector, and the promotion of its orderly growth.

17.

The proviso to Section 2(1)(k) [reproduced above] was

inserted vide Telecom Regulatory Appellate Authority of India
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 24 of 79

(Amendment) Act, 2000 which came into operation on 24.1.2000.
Its SOR speaks of the pressing need to strengthen and increase
the investor's confidence in the telecom sector and the endeavour
to create a level playing field between public and private
operators.

This Amendment Act established TDSAT for the

purpose of adjudicating disputes between a licensor and a
licensee, between two or more service providers, between a
service provider and a group of consumers, and also to hear and
dispose of any appeals from the direction, decision or order of
TRAI. The salient features of TRAI, inter alia, is
distinction

demarcated

by

it

the

clear

between

recommendatory/advisory functions of TRAI and its

the

regulatory

functions; enlargement of the functions of TRAI to include terms
of interconnectivity between service providers, laying down of
standards of service, making recommendations of efficient
management of available spectrum. Of special significance to the
problem that has been presented before us is that the SOR
specifically states that the tariff setting function of the Authority
has been brought under the purview of sub-section (3) of Section
11. However, it is indeed noteworthy that the SOR fails to make
any mention of the circumstances necessitating the introduction
of the Proviso to Section 2(1)(k), which facet of the amendment
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 25 of 79

is at the fulcrum of the dispute before us. For that matter, even
the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India

(Amendment)

Ordinance, 2000, promulgated by the President on January 24,
2000 is also remarkably reticent on this point.

18.

Section 3(1AA) of the Telegraph Act being the definition of

`telegraph' had already been introduced into that statute with
effect from 2.5.1961. It is in this context that it has been
emphasized that the definitions in the TRAI Act has palpably been
substantially lifted from the Telegraph Act. Therefore, even if the
TRAI Act is ignored, telecom services as well as broadcasting
services would be regulated by the Telegraph Act. The umbilical
connection is

also

apparent from

manifold

and

repeated

references in TRAI Act to the Telegraph Act. The definition of
licensee and licensor in the former statute refers back to Section
4 of the latter Act. The Broadcasting Bill which was intended to
be contemporaneous legislation to the TRAI Act, was introduced
in

Parliament in

1997

and

was

referred

to

the

Joint

Parliamentary Committee for detailed consideration. The Bill,
however, lapsed consequent upon the premature and precipitate
dissolution of Parliament in December 1997. The intention of
Parliament was already manifestly clear, namely, that although
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 26 of 79

broadcasting is inherently covered under the TRAI Act and the
Telegraph Act, its galloping growth has warranted that it should
be governed by a separate statutory structure.

It was for this

reason that although broadcasting services would fall within the
umbra of the definition of telecommunication services as
available in Section 2(k) of the TRAI Act, it was from the very
inception

intentionally excluded therefrom, in the sanguine

expectancy that the Broadcasting Bill would very soon receive
statutory standing alongside the TRAI Act. In the event, however,
the planning proved presumptuous. The Proviso is the penumbra
which will persist only till the passing of the Broadcasting Bill or
the Convergence Bill, as the case may be. It appears to us that
this is the intention of Parliament.

19.

The galloping and geometric growth in the telecom sector

meanwhile continued to engross the Executive as well as
Parliament which devised the new Telecom Policy in 1999.

In

January,

on

2000

Parliament

constituted

the

Sub-Group

Convergence under the Convenorship of Mr. Fali Nariman. The
following extract from its Report dated 11.8.2000 commends its
reproduction - “The
common

authority

Subgroup (1) discussed the issue of
for

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

broadcasting

and

telecom.

a

While

Page 27 of 79

appreciating the need of a single regulatory authority to regulate
both telecom and broadcasting rather than create separate
authorities for regulating broadcasting, IT, etc. the Subgroup felt
that the nature of disputes in the broadcasting industry were
quite different and the number of players too large.

It would,

therefore, not be prudent to burden the TRAI with this additional
responsibility. However, keeping in view the fact that integration
of the two sectors was taking place very rapidly in the wake of
technological convergence, the Subgroup felt that there was a
need to have an enabling provision in the TRAI Act by amending
the definition of Telecommunication Service under Section 2(1)
(k) so as to include broadcasting services.”

20.

In December, 2003 a Division Bench of this Court in CWP

8993-4/2003 titled Consumer Coordination Council -vs- Union of
India, permitted the Conditional Access System (commonly called
CAS) to be introduced in Delhi. Poignantly for the present
purposes, the Government was directed to “look into the question
of framing a policy with regard to those channels which generate
a lot of money by advertisements, as to why those channels where
money is received by advertisements, should not be notified as
FTA channels. Respondents to also consider in regard to the time
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 28 of 79

allotted in a slot of 30 minutes to advertise whether a limit needs
to be put in respect of time for advertisements.” These Orders
are

obviously

subsequently.

the

precursors

of

those

passed

by

TRAI

Notification S.O. 39(E) dated 14.1.2003 made it

obligatory for every Cable Operator in Chennai, Mumbai, Kolkata
and Delhi to transmit programmes of every pay channel through
CAS. It is common knowledge that the date of implementation of
the Notification was extended several times,

largely owing to

pressures that were brought to bear on the Government by vested
interests and lobbies.

21.

With this background in mind we shall now examine the

manner in which provisos are to be interpreted, as analyzed and
explained in a plethora of precedents. In this regard the primary
principle of interpretation is that the Court's first endeavour must
be to harmoniously construe all provisions allowing each one to
play its logical role. Conflict between them should be avoided.
Various methods and devices are employed to achieve this
objective including a course of construction in which a general
provision gives way to a specific one.

Differently stated,

Parliament would ordinarily not give with one hand anything
which it takes away with the other. In the present case it should
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 29 of 79

be assumed that Parliament intended that a Proviso should play
its part rather than be jurally amputated as a statutory appendix.
Case law is so legion that reference to them will needlessly make
our judgment prolix. We shall restrict our reference, therefore, to
the case cited before us, namely, K.M. Nanavati -vs- The State of

Bombay, AIR 1961 SC 112

where the

issue concerned the

interplay between Articles 142 and 161 of the Constitution. The
Supreme Court was empowered under Article 142 “to make such
order as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or
matter pending before it, whereas Article 161 reposed power in
the Governor of the State to suspend, remit or commute
sentences.” The Supreme Court observed that judicial power as
well as executive power would, therefore, be exercisable in the
same field, and that what is more confounding is that neither of
the provisions are subject to or limited by the other. In these
circumstances it was observed that “if there is any field which is
common to both, the principle of harmonious construction will
have to be adopted in order to avoid conflict between the two
powers. It will be seen that the ambit of Article 161 is very much
wider and it is only in a very narrow field that the power
contained in Article 161 is also contained in Article 142, namely,
the power of suspension of sentence during the period when the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 30 of 79

matter is sub judice in this Court. Therefore on the principle of
harmonious construction and to avoid a conflict between the two
powers it must be held that Article 161 does not deal with the
suspension of sentence during

the time that Article 142 is in

operation and the matter is sub judice in this Court. ....
Therefore, if there is any field where the two powers can be
exercised

simultaneously

the

principle

of

harmonious

construction has to be resorted to in order that there may not be
any conflict between them”.

22.

Of equal importance is the principle that requires that a

later or subsequent provision, textually or chronologically, should
prevail upon an earlier one. In

Engineering Co.

The King -vs- Dominion

Ltd., AIR 1947 Privy Council 94 it has been

opined that where a section or enactment contains two provisos
and the second proviso is repugnant to the first, the second
proviso must prevail

for it stands last in the enactment and

speaks the last intention of the makers.

In similar vein it has

been observed in Govt. of T.N. -vs- Park View Enterprises, (2001)
1 SCC 742 that the later section will carry effectiveness in the
event of a contra intention expressed in an earlier provision of
the statute.

This is really in consonance with the maxim leges

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 31 of 79

posteriores priores contrarias abrogant.

23.

It will also be useful to refer to Municipal Corporation of

Delhi -vs- Shiv Shanker, 1971 (1) SCC 442 where it has been
observed that Parliament “which may generally be presumed
to know the existing law, is not expected to intend to create
confusion by its omission to express its intent to repeal in clear
terms. The Courts, therefore, as a rule, lean against implying a
repeal unless the two provisions are so plainly repugnant to each
other that they cannot stand together and it is not possible on
any reasonable hypothesis to give effect to both at the same
time. The repeal must, if not express, flow from necessary
implication as the only intendment. ... Statutes in pari materia
although in apparent conflict should also so far as reasonably
possible, be construed to be in harmony with each other and it
is only when there is an irreconcilable conflict between the new
provision and the prior statute relating to the same subjectmatter, that the former being the later expression

of

the

Legislature, may be held to prevail, the prior law yielding to
the extent of the conflict.”

Again, in Jasbir Singh -vs- Vipin

Kumar Jaggi, (2001) 8 SCC 289 it

has been held

that

later

enactments prevail over earlier ones.
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 32 of 79

24.

The next aspect is whether a proviso partakes of a

character akin to the main provision itself or can it stand
independently? It would be appropriate to commence the
discussion with the decision of the Constitution Bench in Shah

Bhojraj Kuverji Oil Mills and Ginning Factory -vs- Subbash
Chandra Yograj Sinha, (1962) 2 SCR 159. After referring to a
number of English decisions their Lordships observed that
generally “a proviso is added to an enactment to qualify or
create an exception to what is in the enactment, and ordinarily, a
proviso is not interpreted as stating a general rule. But, provisos
are often added not as exceptions or qualifications to the main
enactment but as savings clauses, in which cases they will not be
constructed as controlled by the section.” These observations
were applied in S. Sundaram Pillai

-vs- V.R. Pattabiraman,

(1985) 1 SCC 591 as well as Motiram Ghelabhai

Nagar, (1985) 2 SCC 279.

-vs- Jagan

In Pillai it was observed that “the

well established rule of interpretation of a proviso is that a
proviso may have three separate functions. Normally, a proviso
is meant to be

an exception to something within the main

enactment or to qualify something enacted therein which but for
the proviso would be within the purview of the enactment.
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 33 of 79

In

other words, a proviso cannot be torn apart from the main
enactment nor can it be used to nullify or set at naught the real
object of the main enactment.”

25.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners have laid great store

on the following passages from J.K. Industries Ltd. -vs- Chief

Inspector of Factories and Boilers, (1996) 6 SCC 665:
33.

A proviso to a provision in a statute has

several

functions

and

while

interpreting

a

provision of the statute, the court is required to
carefully scrutinise and find out the real object of
the proviso appended to that provision. It is not a
proper rule of interpretation of a proviso that the
enacting part or the main part of the section be
construed first without reference to the proviso
and if the same is found to be ambiguous only then
recourse may be had to examine the proviso as has
been canvassed before us. On the other hand an
accepted rule of interpretation is that a section
and the proviso thereto must be construed as a
whole, each portion throwing light, if need be, on
the rest. A proviso is normally used to remove
special cases from the general enactment and
provide for them specially.
34.

A proviso qualifies the generality of the main

enactment by providing an exception and taking
out from the main provision, a portion, which, but
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 34 of 79

for the proviso would be a part of the main
provision. A proviso must, therefore, be considered
in relation to the principal matter to which it
stands as a proviso. A proviso should not be read
as if providing something by way of addition to the
main provision which is foreign

to the main

provision itself.
35. Indeed, in some cases, a proviso, may be an
exception to the main provision though it cannot
be inconsistent with what is expressed in the main
provision and if it is so, it would be ultra vires of
the main provision and struck down. As a general
rule in construing an enactment containing a
proviso, it is proper to construe the provisions
together without making either of them redundant
or otiose. Even where the enacting part is clear, it
is desirable to make an effort to give meaning to
the proviso with a view to justify its necessity.
36. While dealing with proper function of a
proviso, this Court in CIT v. Indo Mercantile Bank
Ltd. opined:
“The proper function of a proviso is that it
qualifies the generality of the main enactment
by providing an exception and taking out as it
were, from the main enactment, a portion
which, but for the proviso would fall within the
main enactment. Ordinarily it is foreign to the
proper function of a proviso to read it as
providing something by way of an addendum or

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 35 of 79

dealing with a subject which is foreign to the
main enactment.”
The argument that is advanced on the strength of this authority is
that a Proviso is almost always disjunctive in nature and should
not subsume the main provision to which it is appended; that the
subordinate must perforce give way to the primary.

If this

principle is to be strictly applied we would have no option but
to strike down the Proviso as ultra vires to the main section.
Certainly we should not render the words “but shall not include
broadcasting services” in the main provision otiose; of that we
have no doubt whatsoever.

26.

Per contra to J.K. Industries, after analysing several

precedents the Supreme Court has, in Board of Revenue, Madras

-vs- R.S. Jhaver, AIR 1968 SC 59, opined that in exceptional
circumstances a proviso may not be a proviso in the accepted
sense but may be a substantive provision itself. In UPSRTC -vs-

Mohd. Ismail (1991) 3 SCC 239, their Lordships have similarly
opined that “sometimes the insertion of a proviso by the
draftsman is not strictly adhered to its legitimate use and it may
be in substance a substantive provision adding to and not merely
excepting something out of or qualifying what goes before it.”

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 36 of 79

Thereafter, in Laxminarayan R Bhattad -vs- State of Maharashtra,
(2003) 5 SCC 413, their Lordships have reiterated, substantially
on the lines of paragraph 43 of Pillai, the principles of statutory
interpretation in this articulation:55. A proviso, as is well known, may serve
different purposes:
(i) qualifying or excepting certain provisions
from the main enactment;
(ii) it may entirely change the very concept
or the intendment of the enactment by insisting on
certain mandatory conditions to be fulfilled

in

order to make the enactment workable;
(iii) it may be so embedded in the Act itself
as to become an integral part of the enactment
and thus acquire the tenor and colour of the
substantive enactment itself; and
(iv) it may be used merely to act as an
optional addendum to the enactment with the sole
object of explaining the real intendment of the
statutory provision.

27.

Mr. Shenoy, the learned counsel for the Petitioner has

contended that a proviso may exist as an independent provision
provided it does not make any reference to the main body of the
Section to which it stands attached. He has further argued that
such independent provisions may derogate from the other
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 37 of 79

provisions and if they are of subsequent vintage, then even on the
application of the maxim 'leges posteriores priores contrarias

abrogant' they would remain impervious or impregnable to
attacks of being struck down being ultra vires. His submission is
that since the substantive part of Section 2 (1) (k) of TRAI Act
clearly contemplates broadcasting services the proviso cannot be
construed as an independent legislation and hence must be
struck down. In the Rejoinder he has relied on the decision of the
Privy Council in James Winter -vs- Attorney General of Victoria,
(1874-75) L.R.6 P.C. 378 and to the extracted paragraph from

Dwarka Prasad -vs- Dwarka Das Saraf, (1976) 1 SCC 128:
“We may mention in fairness to Counsel that
the following, among other decisions, were cited at
the Bar bearing on the uses of provisos in statutes:

C.I.T. v. Indo-Mercantile Bank Ltd., 1959 Supp. 2
SCR 256; M/s. Ram Narain Sons Ltd. v. Asstt. C.S.T.,
(1955) 2 SCR 483; Thompson v. Dibdin, 1912 AC 533;

Rex v. Dibdin, 1910 Pro Div 57 and Tahsildar Singh
v. State of U.P., 1959 Supp 2 SCR 875.

The law is

trite. A proviso must be limited to the subject-matter
of the enacting clause.

It is a settled rule of

construction that a proviso must prima facie be read
and considered in relation to the principal matter to
which it is a proviso.

It is not a separate or

independent enactment.

'Words are dependent on

the principal enacting words, to which they are
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 38 of 79

tacked as a proviso. They cannot be read as divorced
from their context' (1912 AC 544).

If the rule of

construction is that prima facie a proviso should be
limited in its operation to the subject-matter of the
enacting clause, the stand we have taken is sound.

To expand the enacting clause, inflated by the
proviso,

sins

against

the

fundamental

rule

of

construction that a proviso must be considered in
relation to the principal matter to which it stands as
a proviso.

A proviso

ordinarily is but a

proviso,

although the golden rule is to read the whole section,
inclusive of the proviso, in such manner that they
mutually throw light on each other and result in a
harmonious construction.
The proper course

is to apply the broad

general rule of construction which is that a section
or enactment must be construed as a whole, each
portion throwing light if need be on the rest.
The true principle undoubtedly is,

that the

sound interpretation and meaning of the statute, on a
view of the enacting clause, saving clause, and
proviso, taken and construed together is to prevail.

28.

It is also a firmly entrenched principle of interpretation of

statutes that the Court is obliged to correct obvious drafting
errors and adopt the constructive role of 'finding the intention of
Parliament... not only from the language of the statute, but also

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 39 of 79

from a consideration of the social conditions which gave rise to it'
as enunciated in State of Bihar -vs- Bihar Distillery Ltd. (1997) 2
SCC 453.

The Court should also endeavour to

harmoniously

construe a statute so that provisions which appear to be
irreconcilable can be given effect to, rather than strike down one
or the other. It must also not be forgotten that jural presumption
is in favour of the constitutionality of a statute.

29.

Reverting back to the statutory provisions before us,

assuming that the Proviso is repugnant to the main provision it is
the Proviso, being contextually and chronologically posterior,
which has to prevail. However, it is our understanding that there
is no repugnancy in the two provisions and that the intention of
Parliament is palpably plain that both must co-exist possibly until
such time as the Broadcasting Act is brought onto the statute
book, or a Convergence Bill is enacted dealing with all three
aspects of this activity viz. telegraph, telecommunication and
broadcasting. Keeping this enunciation of law in perspective, we
are of the opinion that far from being clumsy or awkward
drafting, as contended by learned counsel for the Petitioners, the
definition in Section 2(1)(k) of the TRAI Act has perforce to be in
its current conformation.
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

The words “but shall not include
Page 40 of 79

broadcasting services” must essentially stand alongside the
Proviso, which empowers the Central Government to notify other
services

along

with

telecommunication

Broadcasting

services

parameters of the TRAI Act.

and

to

thereby

be

treated

as

fall

within

the

Learned Senior Counsel for the

Petitioners had drawn our attention to Entry 31 of List I Of the 7th
Schedule of the Constitution of India which mentions - “Posts and
Telegraph : Telephones, Wireless, Broadcasting and other forms
of communications”.
fellow,

Evidently, far from being a strangebed-

broadcasting

falls

in

the

same

category

as

telecommunications. This is also clear from the fact that
broadcasting has specifically been mentioned in 2(k) as not being
included in the definition of telecommunication services, which
would have been unworthy of mention unless it was seen as
inherently similar. We do not think it relevant that while costing
of

telecommunication

services

can

be

easily

computed

broadcasting present problems.

30.

The abiding and enduring intention of the legislature is that

Broadcasting should be monitored by a distinct statute and till
such time as that does not happen the TRAI Act would regulate
this activity, if the Government so desires. Broadcasting as also
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 41 of 79

any other services could, by taking resort to a Notification, fall
within the purview of the statute; and with equal ease be taken
out of it. It is indeed significant to note that although the Proviso
was added via an amendment on January 24, 2000 the
Notification was promulgated a considerable time thereafter, as
late as on 9-1-2004. So far as we are concerned, this indicates
that the Government has acted in a responsible and thoughtful
manner. It should not be overlooked that there is much to be said
in favour of bringing about changes into a statute through the
device of Notifications especially where advances in technology
and science lead to rapid obsolescence and equally exponential
inventions and innovations. In Laxmi Video Threatres -vs- State of

Haryana, (1993) 3 SCC 715 and State -vs- S.J. Choudhary, (1996)
2 SCC 428 their Lordships have recommended that statutes
should be so construed by Courts as to ensure that changes in
science and technology are given full effect. It seems to us that
by the introduction of the Proviso implementation of this salutary
principle has been ensured. On the strength of these judgments,
however, had there been any repugnancy it would have been the
Proviso which would have been given effect to by us.

31.

Before proceeding to consider other arguments articulated

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 42 of 79

by learned Senior counsel

for the Petitioners

we should

mention the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court of
Judicature, Andhra Pradesh in Messrs J.K. Communications -vsThe TRAI and others, (W.P. No.12781 of 2006), sought to be
relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel for TRAI. It is clear
to us that the vires of Section 2 (1) (k) of the TRAI Act had not
been assailed in that case. However, the contention that since
“Section 2(k) of TRAI Act excluded the term 'broadcaster' from
the definition of 'telecommunication

service', the inclusion of

“broadcaster” in the definition of

'service provider' under

Regulation 2(n)” of The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and
Cable Services) Interconnection Regulation 2004 is ultra vires
the powers of TRAI was summarily rejected.

32.

We shall now shift focus to Section 11 of the TRAI Act

which has been substantially altered by the Amending Act of 2000
inasmuch as its first subsection has been completely substituted
by the extant one. However, the provision with which we are
presently concerned, viz. sub-section (2), has not been touched.
It empowers TRAI to determine and prescribe “the rates at which
the telecommunication services within and outside India shall be
provided.”

Its Proviso bestows discretion on TRAI “to

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

notify

Page 43 of 79

different rates for different persons or class of persons for similar
telecommunication services and where different rates are fixed
as aforesaid the Authority shall record the reasons therefor. The
fact that different treatment can be meted out to similarly placed
persons is indeed far-reaching.

The contention of the

Petitioners is that the power of TRAI to fix rates infringes Article
19 of the Constitution beyond the contours of its infrangibility.
Their argument is that rate or price fixation is not one of the
exceptions contemplated by Article 19(2) and hence
struck down being ultra vires to the Constitution.

must be

Reasonable

restrictions upon the freedom of speech and expressions can be
imposed by the State (i) in the interests of the sovereignty and
integrity of India; (ii) the security of the State; (iii) friendly
relations with Foreign States; (iv) public order, decency or
morality; (v) in relation to contempt of Court; (vi) defamation and
(vii)incitement to an offence.

With regard

to the

powers of

price fixation, emphasis has been laid by learned Senior Counsel
for the Petitioners on the decisions of the Supreme Court
reported as (1) Romesh Thapar -vs- The State of Madras, [1950] 1
SCR 594, (2) Sakal, (3) Benett Coleman, (4) Indian Express

Newspapers (Bombay) Private Ltd. -vs- Union of India, (1985) 1
SCC 641 (5) and CAB wherein the following enunciation of the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 44 of 79

law is to be found:
71.

Merely because an organisation may earn

profit

from

an

activity

whose

character

is

predominantly covered under Article 19(1)(a), it
would not convert the activity into one involving
Article 19(1)(g). The test of predominant character
of the activity has to be applied.

It has also to be

ascertained as to who is the person who is utilizing
the activity. If a

businessman were to put in an

advertisement for simpliciter commercial activity, it
may render the activity, the one covered by Article 19
(1)(g).

But even newspapers or

a film telecast or

sports event telecast will be protected by Article 19
(1)(a) and will not become an activity under Article
19(1)(g)

merely

because

it

earns

money

advertisements in the process. Similarly,

from
if the

cricket match is telecast and profit is earned by the
licensing of telecasting right and receipts from
advertisements, it will be an essential
utilization and fulfilment of its object.

element for
The said

object cannot be achieved without such revenue.
....
74.

It will

be apparent from the contentions

advanced on behalf of MIB that their main thrust is
that the right claimed by the BCCI/CAB is not the
right of freedom of speech under Article 19(1)(a), but
a commercial right

or the right to trade under

Article 19(1)(g). The contention is based mainly on

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 45 of 79

two grounds, viz., there is no free-speech element in
the telecast of sports and secondly, the primary
object of the BCCI/CAB in seeking to telecast the
cricket matches is not to educate and entertain the
viewer but to make money.
75.

It can hardly be denied that sport is an

expression of self. In an athletic or individual event,
the

individual

expresses

himself

through

his

individual feat. In a team event such as cricket,
football, hockey etc., there is both individual and
collective expression. It may be true that what is
protected by Article 19 (1) (a) is an expression of
thought and feeling and not of the physical or
intellectual prowess or skill. It is also true that a
person desiring to telecast sports events when he is
not himself a participant in the game, does not seek
to exercise his right of self expression. However, the
right to freedom of speech and expression also
includes the right to educate, to inform and to
entertain and also the right to be educated, informed
and entertained. The former is the right of the
telecaster and the latter that of the viewers. The right
to telecast sporting event will therefore also include
the right to educate and inform the present and the
prospective sportsmen interested in the particular
game and also to inform and entertain the lovers of
the game. Hence, when a telecaster desires to
telecast a sporting event, it is incorrect to say that
the free-speech element is absent from his right. The
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 46 of 79

degree of the element will depend upon the character
of the telecaster who claims the right. An organizer
such as the BCCI or CAB in the present case which
are indisputably devoted to the promotion of the
game of cricket, cannot be placed in the same scale
as the business organizations whose only intention is
to make as large a profit as can be made by
telecasting the game. Whereas it can be said that
there is hardly any free-speech element in the right
to telecast when it is asserted by the latter, it will be
a warped and cussed view to take when the former
claim the same right and contend that in claiming the
right to telecast the cricket matches organized by
them, they are asserting the right to make business
out of

it. The

sporting organizations such as

BCCI/CAB which are interested in promoting the
sport or sports are under an obligation to organize
the sports events and can legitimately be accused of
failing in their duty to do so. The promotion of sports
also includes its popularization through all legitimate
means. For this purpose, they are duty bound to
select the best means and methods to reach the
maximum number of listeners and viewers. Since at
present, radio and TV are the most efficacious
methods, thanks to the technological development,
the sports organizations like BCCI/CAB will be
neglecting their duty in not exploring the said media
and in not employing the best means available to
them to popularize the game. That while pursuing

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 47 of 79

their objective of popularizing the sports by selecting
the

best

available

means

of

doing

so,

they

incidentally earn some revenue, will not convert
either them into commercial organizations or the
right claimed by them to explore the said means, into
a commercial right or interest. It must further be
remembered that sporting organizations such as
BCCI/CAB in the present case, have not been
established only to organize the sports events or to
broadcast or telecast them. The organization of
sporting events is only a part of their various objects,
as pointed out earlier and even when they organize
the events, they are primarily to educate the
sportsmen, to promote and popularize the sports and
also to inform and entertain the viewers. The
organization of such events involves huge costs.
Whether surplus is left after defraying all the
expenses,

is

ploughed

back

by

them

in

the

organization itself. It will be taking a deliberately
distorted

view

of

the

right

claimed

by

such

organizations to telecast the sporting event to call it
an assertion of a commercial right. Yet the MIB has
chosen to advance such contention which can only be
described as most unfortunate. It is needless to state
that we are, in the circumstances, unable to accept
the ill-advised argument. It does no credit to the
Ministry or to the Government as a whole to
denigrate

the

sporting

organizations

such

as

BCCI/CAB by placing them on a par with business

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 48 of 79

organizations sponsoring sporting events for profit
and the access claimed by them to telecasting as
assertion of commercial interest.
.....
77.

In the first instance, it must be remembered

that all the decisions of the US Supreme Court relied
upon in support of this contention, are on the right of
the private broadcasters to establish their own
broadcasting stations by claiming a share in or
access to the airwaves or frequencies. In the United
States, there is no Central Government-owned or
controlled broadcasting centre. There is only a
Federal

Commission

to

regulate

broadcasting

stations which are all owned by private broadcasters.
Secondly,

the

American

Constitution

does

not

explicitly state the restrictions on the right of
freedom of speech and expression as our Constitution
does. Hence, the decisions in question have done no
more than impliedly reading such restrictions. The
decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court, therefore, in the
context

of

the

right

claimed

by

the

private

broadcasters are irrelevant for our present purpose.
In the present case what is claimed is a right to an
access to telecasting specific events for a limited
duration and during limited hours of the day. There is
no demand for owning or controlling a frequency.
Secondly, unlike in the cases in the US which came
for consideration before the US Supreme Court, the
right to share in the frequency is not claimed without
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 49 of 79

a license. Thirdly, the right to use a frequency for a
limited duration is not claimed by a business
organization to make profit, and lastly - and this is an
important aspect of the present case, to which no
reply has been given by the MIB - there is no claim to
any

frequency

owned

and

controlled

by

the

Government. What is claimed is permission to uplink
the signal created by the organizer of the events to a
foreign satellite.
78.

There

is

no

doubt

that

since

the

airwaves/frequencies are a public property and are
also limited, they have to be used in the best interest
of the society and this can be done either by a central
authority

by

establishing

its

own

broadcasting

network or regulating the grant of licences to other
agencies, including the private agencies. What is
further, the electronic media is the most powerful
media both because of its audio-visual impact, and its
widest reach covering the section of the society
where the print media does not reach. The right to
use the airwaves and the content of the programmes,
therefore, needs regulation for balancing it and as
well as to prevent monopoly of information and views
relayed, which is a potential danger flowing from the
concentration of the right to broadcast/telecast in the
hands either of a central agency or of few private
affluent broadcasters. That is why the need to have a
central agency representative of all sections of the
society free from control both of the Government and

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 50 of 79

the dominant influential sections of the society. This
is not disputed. But to contend that on that account
the restrictions to be imposed on the right under
Article 19(1)(a) should be in addition to those
permissible under Article 19(2) and dictated by the
use of public resources in the best interests of the
society at large, is to misconceive both the content of
the freedom of speech and expression and the
problems posed by the element of public property in,
and the alleged scarcity of, the frequencies as well as
by the wider reach of the media. If the right to
freedom of speech and expression includes the right
to disseminate information to as wide a section of the
population as is possible, the access which enables
the right to be so exercised is also an integral part of
the said right. The wider range of circulation of
information or its greater impact cannot restrict the
content of the right nor can it justify its denial. The
virtues of the electronic media cannot become its
enemies. It may warrant a greater regulation over
licensing and control and vigilance on the content of
the programme telecast. However, this control can
only be exercised within the framework of Article 19
(2) and the dictates of public interests. To plead for
other grounds is

to plead

for

unconstitutional

measures. It is further difficult to appreciate such
contention on the part of the Government in this
country when they have a complete control over the
frequencies and the content of the programme to be

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 51 of 79

telecast. They control the sole agency of telecasting.
They are also armed with the provisions of Article 19
(2) and the powers of pre-censorship under the
Cinematograph Act and Rules. The only limitation on
the said right is, therefore, the limitation of resources
and the need to use them for the benefit of all. When,
however, there are surplus or unlimited resources
and the public interests so demand or in any case do
not prevent telecasting, the validity of the argument
based on limitation of resources disappears. It is true
that to own a frequency for the purposes of
broadcasting is a costly affair and even when there
are surplus or unlimited frequencies, only the
affluent few will own them and will be in a position to
use it to subserve their own interest by manipulating
news and views. That also poses a danger to the
freedom of speech and expression of the have-nots by
denying them the truthful information on all sides of
an issue which is so necessary to form a sound view
on any subject. That is why the doctrine of fairness
has been evolved in the U.S. in the context of the
private broadcasters licensed to share the limited
frequencies with the central agency like the FCC to
regulate the programming. But this phenomenon
occurs even in the case of the print media of all the
countries. Hence the body like the Press Council of
India which is empowered to enforce, however
imperfectly, the right to reply. The print media
further enjoys as in our country, freedom from pre-

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 52 of 79

censorship unlike the electronic media.

33.

Since so much emphasis has been laid on the CBA

observations that are to be found in CBA decision how far we
need to reflect upon the extent to which it can be applied to the
facts of the present case.

In other words we need to explore

what the principle of stare decisis actually dictates.

34.

In Director of Settlement, A.P. and Others Vs. M.R. Apparao

and Another, (2002) 4 Supreme Court Cases 638, a Three Judge
Bench

has

opined

that

“Article

141

of

the

Constitution

unequivocally indicates that the law declared by the Supreme
Court shall be binding on all courts within the territory of India.
The aforesaid Article empowers the Supreme Court to declare the
law.

It is, therefore, an essential function of the Court to

interpret a legislation. The statements of the Court on matters
other than law like facts may have no binding force as the facts of
two cases may not be similar. But what is binding is the ratio of
the decision and not any finding of facts. It is the principle found
out upon a reading of a judgment as a whole, in the light of the
questions before the Court that forms the ratio and not any
particular word or sentence. To determine whether a decision has

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 53 of 79

“declared law” it cannot be said to be a law when a point is
disposed of on concession and what is binding is the principle
underlying a decision. A judgment of the Court has to be read in
the context of questions which arose for consideration in the case
in which the judgment was delivered.

An “obiter dictum” as

distinguished from a ratio decidendi is an observation by the
Court on a legal question suggested in a case before it but not
arising in such manner as to require a decision. Such an obiter
may not have a binding precedent as the observation was
unnecessary for the decision pronounced, but even though an
obiter may not have a binding effect as a precedent, but it cannot
be denied that it is of considerable weight. The law which will be
binding under Article 141 would, therefore, extend to all
observations of points raised and decided by the Court in a given
case”.

The Constitution Bench has also reiterated the view in

Islamic Academy of Education and Another vs. State of Karnataka
and Others, (2003) 6 SCC 697 = 2003(6) Scale 325, that the ratio
decidendi of a judgment can be obtained only from a reading of
its entirety.

This is also the opinion of the Court in Punjab

National Bank Vs.

R.L.Vaid, (2004) 7 SCC 698.

In State of

Gujarat Vs. Akhil Gujarat Pravasi, AIR 2004 SCC 3894, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that “any observation made
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 54 of 79

during the course of reasoning in a judgment should not be read
divorced from the context in which they were used.”

Most

recently, in Zee Tele Films Vs. Union of India, AIR SCW 2005
2985, the Court has unequivocally declared that “a decision is not
an authority for the proposition which did not fall for its
consideration.”

In M/s A-One Granites Vs. State of U.P. and

others, AIR 2001 SC 1203: (2001) 3 SCC 537 it had been
contended that the controversy was covered on all fours by a
previous decision of the Court. The contention was rejected in
these words11. This question was considered by the
Court of Appeal in Lancaster Motor Co.
(London) Ltd. v. Bremith Ltd., (1941) 1 KB 675,
and it was laid down that when no
consideration was given to the question, the
decision cannot be said to be binding and
precedents sub silentio and without arguments
are of no moment. Following the said decision,
this Court in the case of Municipal Corporation
of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur, (1989) 1 SCC 101:
(AIR 1989 SC 38) observed thus (at p. 43 of
AIR):
“In Gerard v. Worth of Paris Ltd. (K),
(1936) 2 All ER 905 (CA), the only
point argued was on the question of
priority of the claimant's debt, and on
this argument being heard, the Court
granted the order. No consideration
was given to the question whether a
garnishee order could properly be
made on an account standing in the
name of the liquidator.
When,
therefore, this very point was argued
in a subsequent case before the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 55 of 79

Court of Appeal in Lancester Motor
Co. (London) Ltd. v. Bremith Ltd.,
(1941) 1 KB 675, the Court held itself
not bound by its previous decisions.
Sir Wilfrid Greene, M.R., said that he
could not help thinking that the point
now raised had been deliberately
passed sub silentio by counsel in
order that the point of substance
might be decided. He went on to say
that the point had to be decided by
the earlier Court before it could
make the order which it did;
nevertheless, since it was decided
“without
argument,
without
reference to the crucial words of the
rule, and without any citation of
authority”, it was not binding and
would not be followed. Precedents
sub silentio and without argument
are of no moment. This rule has ever
since been followed.”
In State of U.P. v. Synthetics and Chemicals
Ltd., (1991) 4 SCC 139, reiterating the same
view, this Court laid down that such a decision
cannot be deemed to be a law declared to have
binding effect as is contemplated by Article 141
of the Constitution of India and observed thus:
“A decision which is not
express and is not founded on
reasons
nor
it
proceeds
on
consideration of issue cannot be
deemed to be a law declared to have
a binding effect as is contemplated
by Article 141.”
In the case of Arnit Das v. State of Bihar,
2000 (5) SCC 488 : (2000 AIR SCW 2037 : AIR
2000 SC 2264 : 2000 Cri LJ 2971), while
examining the binding effect of such a decision,
this Court observed thus (Para20):
“A decision not expressed, not
accompanied by reasons and not
proceeding
on
a
conscious
consideration of an issue cannot be
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 56 of 79

deemed to be a law declared to have
a binding effect as is contemplated
by Article 141.
That which has
escaped in the judgment is not the
ratio decidendi. This is the rule of
sub silentio, in the technical sense
when a particular point of law was
not consciously determined.”
12. Thus we have no difficulty in holding that
as the question regarding applicability of Rule
72 of the Rules having not been even referred
to, much less considered by this Court in the
earlier appeals, it cannot be said that the point
is concluded by the same and no longer res
integra and accordingly this Court is called
upon to decide the same.

35.

We are also reminded of the frequently quoted opinion of

the House of Lords in Quinn v. Leathem, 1901 AC 495 : (1900-3)
All ER Rep 1 is that of Lord Halsbury, namely, that “every
judgment must be read as applicable to the particular facts
proved or assumed to be proved .... The other is that a case is
only an authority for what is actually decides”. These quotations
have been reiterated in Goodyear India Ltd. -vs- State of Haryana,
(1990) 2 SCC 71 and State of Orissa -vs- Sudhansu Sekhar Misra,
AIR 1968 SC 647. In the latter case, the Court explicitly opined
that “a decision on a question which has not been argued cannot
be treated as a precedent”.

Their Lordships, in turn, referred

back to the previous opinion in Rajput Ruda Meha -vs- State of

Gujarat, 1980 SC 1707 in which it had similarly been stated that
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 57 of 79

where an issue has neither been raised nor argued any decision
by the Court, even after 'pondering over the issue in depth',
would not be a binding precedent.

Similar observations have

been made by the Constitution Bench in Padma Sundara Rao -vs-

State of T.N., 2002(3) SCC 533, as is evident from the following
extract:
9.

Courts should not place reliance on decisions

without discussing as to how the factual situation fits in
with the fact situation of the decision on which reliance
is placed. There is always peril in treating the words of
a speech or judgment as though they are words in a
legislative enactment, and it is to be remembered that
judicial utterances are made in the setting of the facts of
a particular case, said Lord Morris in Herrington v.

British

Railways

Board,

(1972)

2

WLR

537.

Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact
may make a world of difference between conclusions in
two cases.

36.

We have gone into the parameters of the principle of stare

decisis for the reason that some of the observations made by the
Supreme Court vis a vis the telecasting/broadcasting of cricket
matches and other supporting events may not be contextually
apposite today.

So far as the CBA or the BCCI is concerned

public perception is that today they are primarily concerned
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 58 of 79

with reaping rich harvest from their broadcasts, and the rights of
the citizenry is the least of their concerns.

Matches are

repeatedly broadcast so often that it has plainly evident that
their objective

is not to

disseminate the sporting prowess,

acumen and attributes of the players but more

for earning

revenue. We cannot also ignore the fact that sports other than
cricket receive only nominal coverage, because advertisers are
not attracted and because viewership is low.

Indeed, the

Supreme Court has observed that earning profits per se does not
change the character of broadcasted programmes.

Their

Lordships have also pithily opined that the objective in the mind
of the broadcaster has to be determined in order to arrive at an
assessment of whether a broadcast should be

seen as

an

activity envisaged by Article 19(1)(a) and accordingly protected
to the extent

set out in Article 19(2).

The number of

broadcasters has increased to such a manifold extent that
sharing of airwaves, which constitute national wealth, has
become an ever expanding

problem. This paucity perforce

demands profound consideration of the nature of broadcasted
programmes, namely, whether they will fall within the genre of
freedom of speech and expression or whether

they are but

another trade or business. It is trite that whereas the extent of
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 59 of 79

the freedom of speech and expression is almost untrammeled, as
it should be, reasonable restrictions can be placed on the right to
practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or
business.

It is, therefore, only to be expected that

Petitioners should prefer that their

the

activities are seen as

manifestations of the freedom of speech and expression rather
than trade and commerce thereby minimizing State control or
interference.

37.

There is much substance in the Interim Report dated

January 13, 2000 inasmuch as it advocates “separate treatment
of transport and content aspects of telecommunication”. The
segregation

and

differentiation

between

“the

carriage

of

information through a variety of technological drivers and the
content of that information“ is indeed relevant and noteworthy.
It appears to us, however that even in case of programmes which
may indubitably encompass freedom of speech and expression
and accordingly be regulatable only within
Article

19(2),

their

carriage

or

the

transport

confines of
through

telecommunication may adorn the trappings of trade or business.
In the latter case the activity would be subject to reasonable
restrictions that are in the interests of the general public. We
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 60 of 79

have queried learned Senior counsel

for their opinion

as to

whether pure entertainment, even raunchy and salacious, could
legitimately claim categorization within Article 19(1)(a). Their
reply was that generally speaking

it would not be proper to

place programmes in different categories on the basis of
subjective appreciation and that across the spectrum all
broadcasters should be eligible to claim the fundamental rights
enshrined in Article 19(1)(a). If censorship is called for, it can
be resorted to by the appropriate authority. Indeed, none of the
learned counsel invited or provoked us to enter upon this
conundrum, and so we desist from doing so.

38.

The Petitioners reliance on SAKAL and other decisions is

self contradictory. The Supreme Court had opined that “the
fixation of a minimum price for the number of pages which a
newspaper is entitled to publish is obviously not for ensuring the
reasonable price to the buyer of the newspaper but for expressly
cutting down volume of circulation to some newspapers making
the price so indirectly high or a class of its readers as is likely to
deter it from purchasing such newspapers”. Assuming that each
and every broadcaster is entitled to avail of the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

freedom of

Page 61 of 79

speech and expression that freedom is not restricted only to the
broadcaster but more importantly
programme. Indeed this is so.

to the
Only

viewer of the

a mentally deranged

person would want to exercise his freedom of speech and
expression without any audience; is impossible for the State to
interfere in any manner whatsoever
State restrictions or

with personal thoughts.

regulations come into play only when a

person intends to convey and

transmit his thoughts and

expressions to the public. Therefore there can be no gainsaying
that the individual recipient has the

greatest and most

significant and meaningful right under Article 19(1)(a).

This

aspect of free speech is at the fulcrum of every decision of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court. In SAKAL their Lordships were of the
view that

the existing readership of the newspaper would be

adversely affected. We are unable to agree with learned Senior
counsel for the Petitioners that if the tariff of pay channels is
regulated by the Authority the inexorable and inevitable effect
would be that the Petitioners will be run out of business. The
Petitioners have not been forthright in presenting even the
break-up between advertisement earnings and collection from
subscriptions.

In this respect they are playing fast and loose by

alternating stating in different proceedings that 70 per cent of
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 62 of 79

their receipts are from subscriptions and 30 per cent from
advertisements

and

vice

versa.

We

would

believe

that

advertisement revenue constitutes 70 per cent of broadcasters
earning with the logical consequence that
viewership
rates.

leads to

any increase in

a corresponding increase in advertising

As has already been observed by the Supreme Court,

measures of the Governments or Authorities should not result
in diminution of readership or viewership, as the case may be,
since this will be a classic and obvious infraction of the
fundamental freedom guaranteed and preserved by Article 19
(1)(a). The Petitioners have not placed before us their Accounts
or Balance-sheets or for that matter any material which would
illustrate and disclose that the fixation of a top limit of tariff for
a pay channel

has resulted in unremunerative

earnings and

collections by the Petitioners. Learned counsel for the Petitioners
were in fact candid enough to state that they did not have
sufficient time to collect material and data in this regard. If this
is so it only lends credence to the contention of learned counsel
for the Respondents that the Petitioners have rushed to this
Court in an irresponsible manner without really assessing the
actual repercussions of the fixation of impugned tariffs by the
Authority.

In Indian Express Newspapers as well as in A

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 63 of 79

Suresh -vs- State of Tamil Nadu, (1997) 1 SCC 319, the Supreme
Court has opined that only if the restrictions are onerous and
confiscatory would a violation of Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution occur. We are ever mindful that every person
exercising his freedom of speech and expression is entitled to
make profits from his efforts. If an author of fiction or literature
can earn handsome profits so can a broadcaster.
stigma attached to

profits.

There is no

The fundamental question is the

extent of profits which can be earned by a person claiming
freedom of speech and expression as his fundamental right. In
our view, the moment the interests of the viewer or recipient
becomes

irrelevant

or

even

incidental

the

activity

metamorphoses into a trade or business which is always subject
to

restrictions that are

Authority

perceived by

the

State

or

any

to be in the interest of the general public. In the

present petitions beyond a bare ipse dixit that no material has
been placed before us by way of substantiation of Petitioners
plea

that the impugned tariff

has illegally impacted their

freedom of speech and expression. The position is in fact to the
contrary since the lower the subscription rates the larger will be
the viewership. We cannot

appreciate the argument made on

behalf of the Petitioners that
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

free

market

forces

must

Page 64 of 79

be

allowed so that ultimately the market can express itself.

39.

In conclusion, therefore, the fixation of tariffs by the

Authority is within their competence even in regard to
broadcasters. The devising of an upper limit of pay channels
will have the effect of a wider dissemination and viewership
thereby safeguarding the pre-eminent right of the citizenry in
the context of freedom of speech and expression. No material
has been made available to us to indicate that because of
the impugned

tariff

the

Petitioners are unable to make

reasonable profits. We are steadfast in this verdict even on the
touchstone of Articles 14, 19(1)(a) or 19(1)(g) and/or 301 to
307 of the Constitution.
DOES THE TRAI ACT SUFFER FROM VICE
OF EXCESSIVE DELEGATION
40.

Section 11(2) of TRAI Act states that notwithstanding

anything contained in the Indian Telegraph Act, the Authority
may notify the rates at which telecommunication services shall be
provided; the Authority may notify different rates for different
persons or class of person for reason to be recorded; the
Authority shall not act against the sovereign and integrity of
India; or the security of the State; or friendly relations with
foreign States; or public order, decency or morality.
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Learned

Page 65 of 79

Senior Counsel for the Petitioners contend that this Section
bestows unchannelised, unguided, undefined and untrammeled
powers on the delegate namely the Authority, and hence should
be struck down. What has to be ascertained in every case where
such a submission has been put forward is whether the legislative
policy has been delineated before the delegation is made, and
also whether a correctional system of superintendence and
supervision of the delegate's actions has been put in place.
Courts should also consider the degree to which delegation is
inevitable or necessary or expedient. The frontiers within which
the Delegate/Authority must function is further identifiable from
indicia available in the Act itself. The Preamble enjoins that the
Authority

should

endeavour

to

(a)

regulate

the

telecommunication services, (b) protect the interests of service
providers and consumers of the telecom sector, (c) to promote
and

ensure

orderly

growth of

the

telecom

experience would vouch that fees or rates

sector.

Jural

prescribed in the

statute invariably become unrealistic aeons before they receive
corrective attention. Where fees, tariffs and rates are dependent
on market forces it is expedient to leave their determination and
change to the Executive or the Authority or the Regulators, as
the case may be. Where redressal machinery is provided for such
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 66 of 79

delegation should be impervious to objection. Inasmuch as the
TRAI Act provides for the establishment of the Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) with jurisdiction inter
alia to hear and dispose of appeals against any direction, decision
or order of the Authority, this important safeguard against any
possible abuse or arbitrary exercise of power is duly in place. A
second Appeal to the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India is also
provided for.

41.

We also think that if a section or provision of any statute is

read in

isolation of

other parts of

propositions are bound to arise.

that statute, absurd

The Central Government is

empowered to make Rules and the Authority to make Regulation
by virtue of Section 35. These provisions are immediately
followed by Section 37 which mandates that the Rules and the
Regulations shall be laid before Parliament.

42.

This very question had arisen for consideration in Quarry

Owners' Association -vs- State of Bihar, (2000) 8 SCC 655. The
challenge in that case was also targeted against the fixation of
rates of royalty for minor minerals under Section 15 of the Mines
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 67 of 79

and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 which, no
doubt, itemized some of the subjects which could be dealt with by
the delegate. The Supreme Court noted that by virtue of Section
28 the State Government was obligated to place such Rules
before each House of the State Legislature. It was held that “requirement of mere placement of the rules or the provisions
before the State Legislature is also one of the forms of check on
the State Government to exercise its power as a delegatee”.

A

perusal of Section 37 makes it clear that a docile and perfunctory
placement of the Rules and Regulations is not what is envisaged
in the TRAI Act. The decision is a direct authority in favour of the
validity of the TRAI Act making it impregnable to the vice of
excessive and unbridled delegation of powers.

43.

We are satisfied that the TRAI Act adequately articulates

the parameters and ethos within which the Authority must
function. The assailed provisions do not suffer from the vice of
excessive delegation of powers.
VIRES OF RULES 9 AND 10 OF CABLE TELEVISION
NETWORKS (REGULATION) ACT, 1995
44.

Section 22 of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation)

Act, 1995 [CTN Act] empowers the Central Government, by
Notification in the Official Gazette, to make rules to carry out the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 68 of 79

provisions of the Act. In exercise of these powers the Central
Government has notified the Cable Television Networks Rules,
1994 [CTN Rules] as amended from time to time. Rule 9 thereof
has

undergone

changes

via

GSR 459(E)

dated

6.6.2003.

Thereafter, the Rules 9 and 10 were replaced by the existing
Rules by virtue of GSR 452(E) dated 31.7.2006. Rule 9(a), which
is causing considerable concern to the Petitioners, authorises the
Authority to notify standard interconnection agreements to be
used for entering into commercial agreements for distribution in
the notified areas, all pay or free-to-air channels among (i)
broadcasters and multi-system operators; and (ii) multi-system
operators and local cable operators. Rule 10 obliges the
broadcasters to indicate which of its channels are pay channels
or free-to-air channels as also the maximum retail price of each
of its pay channels to be charged by the multi-system operators
or local cable operators from the subscriber in each of the
notified areas.

This Notification also introduces into the CTN

Rules the definition of broadcasters, multi-system operators
(MSO). The Petitioners challenge to the vires of these Rules is
that they travel beyond the parameters of CTN Act, 1995,
which

does

not deal with broadcasters and does not even

contain a definition of who are broadcasters.
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Learned Senior
Page 69 of 79

Counsel for the Petitioners have emphasized on the fact that
Rule 4A(4) of the Act empowers the Central Government to
specify the maximum amount which a cable operator may
demand from the subscriber for receiving the programmes
transmitted in the basic service tier provided by such cable
operator.

In response to these arguments learned counsel for

the Respondents have contended that the power to prescribe
rates and tariffs flows from the TRAI Act and hence it is not
essential for the Authority to resort to Rules 9 and 10 of the
CTN Act and Rules. It has further been contended that it is
not correct that the CTN Act and CTN Rules do not postulate
regulation of the activities of the broadcasters.(emphasis added)

45.

In this regard we have noted that by Section 2(b) 'cable

service' has

been

defined

to

mean

the

transmission

by

cables of programmes including retransmission by cables of
any

broadcast

television

signals;

Section

2(g)

defines

'programme' as any television broadcast. The CTN Rules repeat
these

definitions of 'cable services'

cannot be

and 'programme'. It

predicated that broadcasting was never within the

contemplation of these provisions.

Learned

counsel for the

Respondents have also submitted that the question of vires of
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 70 of 79

the CTN Rules vis-a-vis the CTN Act has not been specifically
raised in the writ petitions and therefore we should not enter
upon this controversy.

We

have

contained in the petitions and
merit.

perused

the

prayers

find that the Objection has

So far as CW 16913-14/2006 filed by Set Discovery

Private Limited is concerned prayer (d) reads as follows:
d) Strike down clauses 3.3 and 9 to 12 of the
Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable Service)
Interconnection (Third Amendment) Regulation, 2006
(10 of 2006) dated 04.09.2006 (No.6-4/2006-B&CS) as
amended by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India;
being ultra vires.

The underlined words have been added by hand by the
Petitioners in the Petition, making it palpably clear that it was an
afterthought. Keeping the nebulosity of the prayer in perspective
we are satisfied that the Petitioners ought not to be permitted to
mount a challenge to the vires to the Regulations without laying
the foundation for it in their pleadings. This is especially so since
the challenge to the

vires to the Interconnection Regulations

with reference to Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution has been
specifically pleaded. On a perfunctory and prima facie level we
may reiterate that it is not correct to contend that the CTN Act

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 71 of 79

does not contemplate broadcasting activity at all. We also draw
support from the decision of the Division Bench of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in WP No.12781 of 2006 between Messrs J.K.
Communications and The TRAI and others.

46.

Furthermore, the TRAI is clearly competent to prescribe

the conditions and tariff impugned before us by virtue of the
TRAI Act itself. We have already upheld the legality of Section 2
(1) (k), the consequence of which is that broadcasting is
undeniably and unassailably covered by that statute.

TRAI

accordingly is expected to make recommendation inter alia in
respect of “measures to facilitate competition and promote
efficiency in the operation of telecommunication services so as to
facilitate growth in services (see Section 11 (1) (a) (iv))”. TRAI
must regulate arrangements amongst service providers of
sharing their revenue derived from providing telecommunication
services (see Section 11 (1) (b) (iv)) and generally to perform
such other function including such administrative and financial
functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the Act (see
Section 11 (1) (d). However, on a perusal of Section 11(2) there is
no scope for any controversy concerning the competence of the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 72 of 79

TRAI

to

prescribe

the

impugned

rates

telecommunication services are to be provided.

at

which

Therefore, de

hors the CTN Act and the CTN Rules TRAI is otherwise
competent to fix tariffs, as also to prescribe the Standard
Interconnection Agreements.

DISCONNECTION OF TV CHANNEL SIGNALS
47.

The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable Services)

Interconnection

Regulation,

2004

has

been

amended

by

Notification No.6-4/2006-B & CS dated 4-9-2006, in exercise of
powers of Section 2 (k) and Section 11 of the TRAI Act.

Our

attention has been directed towards Regulation 4 thereof which
deals with Disconnection of TV Channel Signals and reads as
follows4.1.

No broadcaster or multi system operator shall

disconnect the TV channel signals to a distributor of TV
channels without giving three weeks notice to the
distributor clearly giving the reasons for the proposed
action.
Provided that a notice would also be required before
disconnection of signals to a distributor of TV channels if
there was an agreement, written or oral, permitting the
distribution of the broadcasting service, which has

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 73 of 79

expired due to efflux of time.
Provided further that no notice would be required if
there is no agreement, written or oral, permitting the
distribution of the signals.
4.2 No distributor of TV channels shall disconnect the retransmission of any TV channel without giving three
weeks notice to the broadcaster or multi system operator
clearly giving the reasons for the proposed action.
4.3 A broadcaster/multi

system operator/distributor of

TV channels shall inform the consumers about such
dispute to enable them to protect their interests.
Accordingly, the notice to disconnect signals shall also
be given in two local newspapers out of which at least
one notice shall be given in local language in a
newspaper which is published in the local language, in
case the distributor of TV channels is operating in one
district and in two national newspapers in case the
distributor of TV channels is providing services in more
than one district. The period of three weeks mentioned
in sub-clauses 4.1and 4.2 of this regulation shall start
from

the date

of

publication of

the

notice in

the

newspapers or the date of service of the notice on the
service provider, which is later.
Explanation
1. In case the notice is published in two newspapers on
different dates then the period of three weeks shall start
from the latter of the two dates.
2. Broadcaster/multi system operator/distributor of TV
channels may also inform the consumers through scrolls

WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 74 of 79

on the concerned channel (s). However, issue of notice
in newspapers shall be compulsory.
4.4 The notice in the newspapers must give the reasons
in brief for the disconnection.

48.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners have relied on the

decision of the Division Bench in Mahanagar Telephone

Nigam Ltd. -vs- Telecom Regulatory Authority of Delhi, AIR 2000
Delhi 208 in which it has inter alia been observed that “when the
legislature intends to confer on a body the power to vary
contracts or existing private rights, it has to do so specifically. In
the absence of any provision authorising the authority to vary
private rights under existing contracts or licenses, no such power
can be presumed or assumed. This is the law laid down reported
in Indian Aluminium Co. -vs- Kerala State Electricity Board, AIR
1975 SC 1967”.

In our opinion, however, reliance on these

observations would lead to an anachronism. Prior to making
these observations our learned Brothers had noted that under
Section 11 (1) (b) the Authority merely has a power to
recommend terms and conditions of a licence and cannot
override the provisions in a contract between the parties. Our
learned Brothers had also observed that the Authority has, in
purported exercise of powers under Section 11 (1) (d), converted
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 75 of 79

a recommendatory function into a directory one. It held that it
was for the government to decide what are the terms and
conditions of a licence to a service provider. What must be borne
in mind, however, is that Section 11 has been amended
subsequent to the pronouncement of that decision vide the
Telecom Regulatory Appellate Authority of India (Amendment)
Act, 2000 with effect from 25-3-2000. The amending Act has
bifurcated the functions of the Authority. It must now make
recommendations under Section 11 (1) (a) and by virtue of
Section 11 (1) (b) must discharge several functions, including
fixing the terms and conditions of interconnectivity between
service providers, maintain interconnect agreements etc., as we
have already adumbrated above.

49.

Moreover, the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable

Services), Interconnection Regulation, 2004 had been issued
after Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd..

Regulation 4 has

been substituted by the extant provision.

In view of these

subsequent events it is not open to the Petitioners to contend that
the said decision continues to hold the field.

A perusal of the

Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India (Amendment) Ordinance, 2000 will disclose
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 76 of 79

that the President had stated in October, 1999 that the TRAI
requires to be strengthened by making suitable amendments to
the Act.

A Group on Telecom and IT Convergence had been

constituted

for

this

purpose,

which

submitted

its

Recommendations to the Central Government leading to the
promulgation of the Telecom

Regulatory Authority of India

(Amendment) Ordinance dated 24.1.2000. The salient features of
the Amendment were (a) to bring into being a clear distinction
between

the

recommendatory/advisory

and

the

regulatory

functions of the Authority as envisaged under sub-section (1) of
Section 11 of the Act, (b) empowering the TRAI to fix terms and
conditions of interconnectivity between service providers, (c)
tariff setting function of TRAI has been brought under the
purview of sub-section (3) of Section 11. By means of this very
amendment the TDSAT had also been established which by
Section 14 has the power to adjudicate any disputes between a
licensor and a licencee between two or more service providers or
between a service provider and a group of consumers and to hear
and dispose of appeals against any direction, decision or order of
the Authority under the Act. We cannot accept the argument
that

the

law

does

not

empower

TRAI

to

fix

terms

interconnection.
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 77 of 79

of

RESTRICTIONS ON DISCONNECTION
50.

The contention on behalf of the Petitioners is that the

extant Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable Services)
Interconnection Regulation 2004 deserve to be struck down since
it stipulates that no broadcaster shall disconnect TV signals to
distributor without giving three weeks notice even though the
distributor may be in default. Reliance has been placed by them
on the first proviso of Regulation 3.2 which states that in the
event that a distributor of TV channels has defaulted in payment
to the broadcaster, the latter shall not be obliged to provide
signals on non-discriminatory terms. However, the legal maxim
that a person cannot be a judge in his own cause persuades us to
prefer the view that the broadcaster should not be permitted to
arrogate to himself the unilateral power of determining whether
one of

his distributors has defaulted in payment.

The

requirement for issuance of a three weeks notice in which the
reasons for proposed disconnection are spelt out, is not
unreasonable. It enables the raising of a dispute by the parties
before an independent forum. What must not be overlooked is
that the subscriber has a fundamental right of viewership which
has preeminence over that of the broadcasters' fundamental
rights. The impugned Regulations are calculated to protect the
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

Page 78 of 79

viewers' interest. The second proviso to Regulation 4.1 clarifies
that no notice would be required if there is no agreement, written
or oral, permitting the distribution of the signals.

There is no

incongruity between these Regulations once it is understood that
the second proviso to Regulation 3.2 would come into play only
when the dispute has been adjudicated upon by the appropriate
forum. This proviso has the effect of not only imparting
reasonableness to the impugned Regulation but it also protects
the copyright of the broadcaster. It is for these reasons that we
reject the contention put forward on behalf of the Petitioners that
Regulation 4, introduced by means of the amendment dated
4.9.2006, suffers from any legal vice.

51.

We do not find any merit in the writ petitions which we

hereby dismiss. The parties shall, however, bear their respective
costs. A copy of this Judgment be placed by the Registry in all the
connected matters.

(VIKRAMAJIT SEN)
JUDGE

July 09, 2007
n/tp/nvn
WP(C) No.14877-78/2005

( J.P. SINGH )
JUDGE
Page 79 of 79

