IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C)6517/03 & WP(C) Nos.14691-16927/05 
THE FEDERATION OF HOTELS &
....Petitioner
RESTAURANTS ASSOCIATION
OF INDIA & ORS.
through Mr. Lalit Bhasin with
Ms. Bhavna Kohli, Mr. Mudit
Sharma & Mr. Abhishek
Dimri, Advs.
Versus
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

...Respondent
through Mr. Jayant Nath, Sr.
Adv. with Mr. R.K. Jha, Adv.
for UOI
Mr. Sandeep Gupta, Adv. for
Respondent No.2

WITH
WP(C) No.9528/03 & WP(C) Nos.13775-14072/2005
NATIONAL RESTAURANT
ASSOCIATION OF INDIA

.... Petitioner
through Mr. Anip Sachthey
with Mr. Sanjeev Rajpal &
Mr. Mohit Paul, Advs.

Versus
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.

.... Respondent
through Mr. Jayant Nath, Sr.
Adv. with Mr. R.K. Jha, Adv.
for UOI
Mr. J.R. Midha with Mr.
Maneesh K. Shukla, Advs. for
Respondent No.2

Date of Hearing : January 17, 2007
Date of Decision : March 05, 2007
CW 6517/2003

Page 1 of 26

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
JUDGMENT
1.

The question that arises in these petitions is whether it is

impermissible

for

the

Petitioners

to

charge

their

customers/guests the any price above the maximum retail price
(MRP) mentioned on mineral-water

packaged and bottled by

third parties. This conundrum is common both to hotels and
restaurants. The character and nature of the service provided by
hotels has already received jural scrutiny in State of H.P. -vs-

Associated Hotels of India, AIR 1972 SC 1131 [also reported as
The State of Punjab -vs- Associated Hotels of India Ltd, (1972) 1
SCC 472 : (1972) 2 SCR 937]. The Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court made the following enunciation of the law which
in my view conclude the debate and is better extracted than
paraphrased by us:13. What precisely then is the nature of the transaction
and the intention of the parties when a hotelier receives
a guest in his hotel? Is there in that transaction an
CW 6517/2003

Page 2 of 26

intention to sell him food contained in the meals served
to him during his stay in the hotel? It stands to reason
that during such stay a well equipped hotel would have
to furnish a number of amenities to render the
customer's stay comfortable. In the supply of such
amenities do the hotelier and his customer enter into
several contracts every time an amenity is furnished?
When a traveller, by plane or by steam-ship, purchases
his passage-ticket, the transaction is one for his passage
from one place to another. If, in the course of carrying
out that transaction, the traveller is supplied with drinks
or meals or cigarettes, no one would think that the
transaction involves separate sales each time any of
those things is supplied. The transaction is essentially
one of carrying the passenger to his destination and if in
performance of the contract of carriage something is
supplied to him, such supply is only incidental to that
service, no changing either the pattern or the nature of
the contract. Similarly, when clothes are given for
washing to a laundry, there is a transaction which
essentially

involves

work

or

service,

and

if

the

laundryman stitches a button to a garment which has
fallen off, there is no sale of the button or the thread. A
number of such cases involving incidental uses of
materials can be cited, none of which can be said to
involve a sale as part of the main transaction.
14. The transaction in question is essentially one and
indivisible, namely, one of receiving a customer in the
hotel to stay. Even if

CW 6517/2003

the transaction is

to be

Page 3 of 26

disintegrated, there is no question of the supply of
meals during such stay constituting a separate contract
of sale, since no intention on the part of the parties to
sell and purchase food stuff supplied during meal times
can be realistically spelt out. No doubt, the customer,
during his stay, consumes a number of food stuffs. It
may be possible to say that the property in those food
stuffs passes from the hotelier to the customer at least
to the extent of the food stuffs consumed by him. Even if
that be so, mere transfer of property, as aforesaid, is not
conclusive and does not render the event of such supply
and consumption a sale, since there is no intention to
sell and purchase. The transaction essentially is one of
service by the hotelier in the performance of which
meals are served as part of and incidental to that
service, such amenities being regarded as essential in
all well conducted modern hotels. The bill prepared by
the hotelier is one and indivisible, not being capable by
approximation of being split up into one for residence
and the other for meals. No doubt, such a bill would be
prepared after consideration of the costs of meals, but
that would be so for all the other amenities given to the
customer. For example, when the customer uses a fan in
the room allotted to him, there is surely no sale of
electricity, nor a hire of the fan. Such amenities,
including that of meals, are part and parcel of service
which is in reality the transaction between the parties.
15. Even in the case of restaurants and other such
places where customers go to be served with food and

CW 6517/2003

Page 4 of 26

drink for immediate consumption at the premises, two
conflicting views appear to prevail in the American
courts. According to one view, an implied warranty of
wholesomeness and fitness for human consumption
arises in the case of food served by a public eating
place. The transaction, in this view, constitutes a sale
within the rules giving rise to such a warranty.

The

nature of the contract in the sale of food by a restaurant
to customers implies a reliance, it is said, on the skill
and judgment of the restaurant-keeper to furnish food
fit for human consumption. The other view is that such
an implied warranty does not arise in such transactions.
This view is based on the theory that the transaction
does not constitute a sale inasmuch as the proprietor of
an eating place does not sell but “utters” provisions, and
that it is the service that is predominant, the passing of
title being merely incidental (Corpus Juris Secundum,
Vol. 77, 1215-1216). The two conflicting views present a
choice between liability arising from a contract of
implied warranty and for negligence in tort, a choice
indicative of a conflict, in the words of Dean Pound,
between social interest in the safety of an individual and
the individual interest of the supplier of food.

The

principle accepted in cases where warranty has been
spelt out was that even though the transaction is not a
sale, the basis for an implied warranty is the justifiable
reliance on the judgment or skill of the warrantor and
that a sale is not the only transaction in which such a
warranty can be implied. The relationship between the

CW 6517/2003

Page 5 of 26

dispenser of food and one who consumes it on the
premises

is

one

of

contractual

relationship,

a

relationship of such a nature that an implied warranty
of wholesomeness reflects the reality of the transaction
involved and an express obligation understood by the
parties in the sense that the customer does, in fact, rely
upon such dispenser of food for more than the use of
due care. (See Cushing v. Rodman, 104 American L.R.
1023 = 62 F.R. 2nd Srs. 864, 868). A representative case
propounding the opposite view is the case of P.W.
Woolworth Co. v. Wilson, 74 F.R. 2nd Srs. 439 citing
Nisky v. Childs Co. 103 N.J. Law 464 wherein the
principle accepted was that such cases involved no sales
but only service and that the dispenser of food, such as
a restaurant or a drug store keeper serving food for
consumption at the premises did not sell and warrant
food but uttered and served it and was liable in
negligence, the rule in such cases being caveat emptor.
16. In England, a hotel under the Hotel Proprietors Act,
1956 is an establishment held out by the proprietor as
offering food, drink, and if so, required, sleeping
accommodation,

without

special

contract,

to

any

traveller presenting himself and who appears able and
willing to pay a reasonable sum for the services and
facilities provided. This definition, which is also the
definition of an inn, still excludes, as formerly, boarding
houses, lodging houses and public houses which are
merely alehouses and in none of which there is the
obligation

CW 6517/2003

to

receive

and

entertain

guests.

An

Page 6 of 26

innkeeper, that is to say, in the present days a hotel
proprietor, in his capacity as an innkeeper is, on the
other hand, bound by the common law or the custom of
the realm to receive and lodge in his inn all comers who
are travellers and to entertain them at reasonable prices
without any special or previous contract unless he has
some reasonable ground of refusal. (Halsbury's Laws of
England, 3rd Ed., Vol. 21, 445-446). The rights and
obligations of hotel proprietors are governed by statute
which has more or less incorporated the common law.
The contract between such a hotel proprietor and a
traveller presenting himself to him for lodging is one
which is essentially a contract of service and facilities
provided at reasonable price.
17. The transaction between a hotelier and a visitor to
his hotel is thus one essentially of service in the
performance of which and as part of the amenities
incidental to that service, the hotelier serves meals at
stated hours. The Revenue, therefore, was not entitled
to split up the transaction into two parts, one of service
and the other of sale of food stuffs and to split up also
the bill charged by the hotelier as consisting of charges
for lodging and charges for food stuffs served to him
with a view to bring the latter under the Act.

2.

In Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. -vs- Lt. Governor

of Delhi, [1979] 1 SCR 557 the Bench comprising

their

Lordships P.N. Bhagwati, V.D. Tulzapurkar and R.S. Pathak, JJ.

CW 6517/2003

Page 7 of 26

extended the above ratio even to restaurants, in these words:Like the hotelier, a restaurateur provides many services,
in addition to the supply of food. He provides furniture
and furnishings, linen, crockery and cutlery, and in the
eating places of today he may add music and a specially
provided area for floor dancing and in some cases a floor
show. The view taken by the English law found
acceptance on American soil, and after some desultroy
dissent initially in certain states it very soon became
firmly established as the general view of the law. The
first edition of American Jurisprudence sets forth the
statement of the law in that regard, but we may go to the
case itself, Electa B. Merrill v. James W. Hodson, from
which the statement has been derived. Holding that the
supply of food or drink to customers did not partake of
the character of a sale of goods, the Court commented:The essence of it is not an agreement for the
transfer of the general property of the food or drink
placed at the command of the customer for the
satisfaction of his desires, or actually appropriated by
him in the process of appeasing his appetite or thirst.
The customer does not become the owner of the food
set before him, or of that portion which is cared for his
use, or of that which finds a place upon his plate, or in
side dishes set about it. No designated portion
becomes his. He is privileged to eat, and that is all.
The uneaten food is not his. He cannot do what he
pleases with it. That which is set before him or placed
at his command is provided to enable him to satisfy his
CW 6517/2003

Page 8 of 26

immediate wants, and for no other purpose. He may
satisfy those wants; but there he must stop. He may
not turn over unconsumed portions to others at his
pleasure, or carry away such portions. The true
essence of the transaction is service in the satisfaction
of a human need or desire – ministry to a bodily want.
A necessary incident of this service or ministry is the
consumption of the food required. This consumption
involves destruction, and nothing remains of what is
consumed to which the right of property can be said to
attach. Before consumption title does not pass; after
consumption there remains nothings to become the
subject of title. What the customer pays for is a right
to satisfy his appetite by the process of destruction.
What he thus pays for includes more than the price of
the food as such. It includes all that enters into the
conception of service, and with it no small factor of
direct personal service. It does not contemplate the
transfer of the general property in the food supplied as
a factor in the service rendered.

3.

This very question again came up for the consideration of

the Constitution Bench in K. Damodarasamy Naidu & Bros. -vs-

State of T.N., (2000) 1 SCC 521 and the following extract thereof
is instructively topical:4. A review petition was filed in respect of the judgment
in Northern India Caterers and all three Judges found
CW 6517/2003

Page 9 of 26

that it should be dismissed. The order of the majority
noted that it appeared from the submissions that were
made in the review petition that the States were
apprehensive that the judgment in Northern India
Caterers would be invoked by restaurant-owners in
those cases also where there was sale of food and title
passed to the customers. It seemed to the two learned
Judges who constituted the majority, having regard to
the facts on which that judgment rested, undisputed as
they had remained throughout the different stages of
the litigation, and the considerations which they
attracted, that no such apprehension could reasonably
be entertained. Where food was supplied in a restaurant
and it was established upon the facts that the substance
of the transaction, evidenced by its dominant, object,
was the sale of food and the rendering of service was
merely incidental, the transaction would undoubtedly be
exigible to sales tax. In every case it would be for the
taxing authority to ascertain the facts when making an
assessment under the relevant sales tax law and to
determine upon those facts whether a sale of the food
supplied was intended. Krishna Iyer, J., concurring with
the majority, said that the judgment under review
squarely applied to the cases of high-style restaurants
or residential hotels which rendered a bundle of special
services for a consolidated sum.

CW 6517/2003

Page 10 of 26

4.

The first two decisions partly prompted the Constitution

Forty-sixth Amendment Act, 1982 which inter alia amended
Article 366

of

the Constitution by inserting clause (29-A)

therein. By a deeming fiction

the supply, by way of or as

part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever of goods
being food or any other article for human consumption or
any drink (whether or not intoxicating), where such supply or
service, is

for

consideration,
purchase of

cash,
was

goods.

deferred
subject

to

payment or
tax

This analysis

on

other

the

inexorably

valuable

sale

of

leads

the

to the

conclusion that consumption of articles of food or drink in
hotels and restaurants do not constitute a sale, otherwise the
constitutional amendment would not have been necessitated.
The contention of Mr. Lalit Bhasin, learned counsel for the
Hotels, that the supply of food-stuff and drinks in hotels and
restaurants are not
irresistible

and

consideration

is

in

the

nature of sale is, therefore,

unquestionable.
whether

Therefore,

there

is

what

any

calls

for

other regime

established by statute which governs or restricts the prices
that can be charged for

food-stuffs and drinks supplied to

customers in hotels or restaurants.

According

to

learned

counsel for the Respondent this regime has been established
CW 6517/2003

Page 11 of 26

by The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and the
Rules framed thereunder( SWM Act in brief).

5.

The Gazette of India, Ext., Pt.II, S.1, dated 8.4.1976

contains a concise statement of the Objects and Reasons of the
SWM Act. It recounts that India is a signatory to the Metre
Convention in the context of which unanimous recommendation
came to be made suggesting the replacement of the Standards of
Weights and Measures Act, 1956 by a more comprehensive
legislation on the subject. The intendment of the Bill was to
provide

for

consumer

protection

in

respect

of

packaged

commodities by providing for the proper indication on the
package of net quantity by weight, measures or number, the
identity of the commodity contained therein, name of the
manufacturer as well as the price of the package. The Preamble
to the SWM Act is “to establish standards of weights and
measures, to regulate inter-State trade or commerce in weights,
measures and the other goods which are sold or distributed by
weight, measure or number. ......”.

In terms of Section 2(v)

“sale” means - ”the transfer of property in any weight, measure
or other goods by one person to another for cash or for deferred
payment or for any other valuable consideration”. It seems to me
CW 6517/2003

Page 12 of 26

that a perusal of the Objects and Reasons of the Bill and the
Preamble of the Act cannot but lead to the conclusion that the
SWM Act is concerned only with the packaging of articles, as
much as the size, number, weight and even the recommended
price is required to be clearly stated.

As has already been

pointed out the Legislature could have borrowed the definition
contained in clause 29-A of Article 366 of the Constitution, but
has not considered it expedient to do so.

6.

This is also evident on a reading of Section 39 of the SWM

Act, which is the fasciculous dealing with commodities in
packaged form intended to be sold or distributed in the course of
inter-state trade or commerce. It prohibits a person to make,
manufacture, pack, sell, or cause to be packed or sold; or to
distribute, deliver, or cause to be distributed or delivered; or to
offer, expose or possess for sale any commodity in packaged form
unless such package bears thereon a definite, plain and
conspicuous declaration (i) of the identity of the commodity, (ii)
the net quantity, (iii) accurate number, (iv) unit sale price, (v)
sale price of the commodity. This Section does not permit any
person to sell, distribute or deliver for sale a package containing
a commodity which is filled less than the prescribed capacity of
CW 6517/2003

Page 13 of 26

such package. Mr. Bhasin was at pains to point out that no
prohibition has been imposed by the statute to sell any
commodity in excess of the price stated on its package.

7.

Section 83 of the SWM Act empowers the Central

Government to 'make rules for carrying out the provision' of the
Act.

In exercise of these powers the Central Government has

promulgated “The Standards of Weights and Measures (Packaged
Commodities) Rules, 1977 [ hereinafter referred to SWM Rules]”.
Mr. Jayant Nath, learned Senior Counsel for the Union of India
and Mr. Midha, learned Standing Counsel for the Government of
NCT of Delhi, have drawn attention to sundry definitions
contained in the SWM Rules and to Rule 23, all of which are
reproduced for ease of reference:2 (d)“dealer”, in relation to any commodity in packaged
form, means a person who, or a firm or a Hindu
undivided family which, carries on directly or otherwise,
the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing
any such commodity, whether for cash or for deferred
payment or for commission, remuneration or other
valuable consideration, and includes a commission agent
who carries on such business on behalf of any principal,
but does not include a manufacturer who manufactures
any commodity which is sold or distributed in a
packaged form except where such commodity is sold by
CW 6517/2003

Page 14 of 26

such manufacturer to any other person other than a
dealer.
2 (o) “retail dealer”, in relation to any commodity in
packaged form, means a dealer who directly sells such
packages to the consumer and includes, in relation to
such packages as are sold directly to the consumer, a
wholesale dealer who makes such direct sale.
2 (q) “retail sale”, in relation to a commodity, means the
sale, distribution or delivery of such commodity through
retail sales agencies or other instrumentalities for
consumption by an individual or a group of individuals or
any other consumer.
2(r) “retail sale price” means the maximum price at
which the commodity in packaged form may be sold to
the

ultimate

consumer

and

where

such

price

is

mentioned on the package, there shall be printed on the
packages the words[Maximum or Max. retail price]....
inclusive of all taxes [or in the form MRP Rs..... inclusive
of all taxes.]]
Explanation.--For the purpose of this clause “maximum
price” in relation to any commodity in packaged form
shall include all taxes local or otherwise, freight,
transport charges, commission payable to dealers, and
all charges towards advertisement, delivery, packing
forwarding and the like, as the case may be]
2 (w) “wholesale dealer”, in relation to any commodity in
packaged form, means a dealer who does not directly sell
such commodity to any consumer but distributes or sells
such commodity through one or more intermediaries.

CW 6517/2003

Page 15 of 26

Explanation.--Nothing in this clause shall be construed as
preventing a wholesale dealer from functioning as a
retail dealer in relation to any commodity, but where he
functions in relation to any commodity as a retail dealer,
he shall comply with all the provisions of these rules
which a retail dealer is required by these rules to
comply.
23. Provisions relating to whole sale dealer and retail
dealers.--(1) No whole sale dealer or retail dealer shall
sell, distribute, deliver, display or store for sale any
commodity in the packaged form unless the package
complies with, in all respects, the provisions of the Act
and these rules.
(2)

No

retail

dealer

or

other

person

including

manufacturer, packer and wholesale dealer shall make
any sale of any commodity in packaged form at a price
exceeding the retail sale price thereof.]
Explanation.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that a sale, distribution or delivery by a
wholesale dealer to a retail dealer or other person is a
“retail sale” within the meaning of this sub-rule.]
(4) Where, after any commodity has been pre-packed for
sale, any tax payable in relation to such commodity is
revised, the retail dealer or any other person shall not
make any retail sale of such commodity at a price
exceeding the revised retail sale price, communicated to
him by the manufacturer, or where the manufacturer is
not the packer, the packer and it shall be the duty of the
manufacturer or packer, as the case may be, to indicate

CW 6517/2003

Page 16 of 26

by not less than two advertisements in one or more
newspapers and also by circulation of notices to the
dealers and to the Director in the Central Government
and Controllers of Legal Metrology in the States and
Union Territories, the revised prices of such packages
but the difference between the price marked on the
package and the revised price shall not, in any case, be
higher than the extent of increase in the tax or in the
case of imposition of fresh tax higher than the fresh tax
so imposed:
Provided that publication in any newspaper, of such
revised price shall not be necessary where such revision
is due to any increase in, or in imposition of, any tax
payable under any law made by the State Legislatures:
Provided further that the retail dealer or other person
shall not charge such revised prices in relation to any
packages except those packages which bear marking
indicating that they were pre-packed in the month in
which such tax has been revised or fresh tax has been
imposed or in the month immediately following he month
aforesaid:
Provided also that where the revised prices are lower
than the price marked on the package the retail dealer or
other person shall not charge any price in excess of the
revised price, irrespective of the month in which the
commodity was pre-packed.]
(5) Nothing in sub-rule (4) shall apply to a package which
is not required under these rules to indicate the month
and the year in which it was pre-packed.

CW 6517/2003

Page 17 of 26

(6) No retail dealer or other person shall obliterate,
smudge or alter the [retail sale price], indicated by the
manufacturer or the packer, as the case may be, on the
package or on the label affixed thereto.
(7) The manufacturer or packer shall not alter the price
on the wrapper once printed and used for packing.]

8.

In view of the decisions rendered in Associated Hotels

and Northern India Caterers the SWM Act should necessarily
have contained a deeming definition calculated to bring within its
statutory sweep services and supplies offered even in hotels and
restaurants in the context of the catering or lodging services
offered on their premises to its customers. However, it does not
do so. Nevertheless, Rule 23 of the SWM Rules proceeds to
proscribe retail dealers, manufacturers, packers and wholesale
dealers from making any sale of a commodity in packaged form at
a price exceeding the retail sale price thereof. Significantly, an
Explanation has been subsequently inserted in Rule 23(2)
declaring that the sale, distribution or delivery by a wholesale
dealer to a retail dealer or other person is a retail sale within the
meaning of that sub-rule. However, even at this stage the
Legislature did not consider it expedient to specifically include
supplies made in hotels and restaurants. It is, therefore, logical

CW 6517/2003

Page 18 of 26

as well as reasonable to conclude that the Competent Authority
refrained from doing so fully mindful of the law laid down by the
Supreme Court in Associated Hotels and Northern India

Caterers. It is equally logical to assume that the Competent
Authority did not do so since it was alive to the fact that no sane
man would walk into an expensive and exclusive hotel or
restaurant only to purchase food-stuff or drinks otherwise readily
available in the market. No doubt, a simple sale may transpire in
shops and hotels or in 'Take-Aways' with which the petitions are
not concerned.

It is in this context that Mr. Bhasin has

vehemently argued that the Rules are ultra vires the Act. Since
the latter only mandates that prices be mentioned on the package
whereas the former travels impermissibly further by stipulating
that prices higher than those displayed on the package cannot be
charged therefore, Rule 23(2), if it seeks to regulate the supply
of food-stuff and drinks in hotels and restaurants, must be struck
down.

9.

There

is

a

plethora

of

precedents

prescribing

the

parameters of delegated legislation, such as the Rules before us,
which precedents unequivocally state that the frontiers of Rules
cannot be wider further or broader than those established by the
CW 6517/2003

Page 19 of 26

statute or Act under whose umbrella the Rules have been
created. Attention has rightly been drawn by Mr. Bhasin to

Bharathidasan University -vs- All-India Council for Technical
Education, (2001) 8 SCC 767 in which the Supreme Court has
opined that where powers to make rules and regulations are
confined by the statute to certain limits, rules and regulations
which are not within those limits must be ignored by the Court.

10.

Mr. Jayant Nath has relied on the definitions and provisions

of the SWM Act to contend that the supply of mineral water in
hotels and restaurants is fully covered by the said Act and Rules.
He has placed reliance on paragraphs 36 to 41 of ITC Ltd. -vs-

Commissioner of Central Excise, New Delhi, (2004) 7 SCC 591.
The Apex Court has observed that the “SWM Act as well as the
Packaged Commodities Rules have been enacted to protect the
consumers who are entitled to pay only such price as has been
printed thereon. The purpose of printing the MRP on cigarette
packages is to achieve a standardisation of prices throughout the
country and to inform consumers of the appropriate price of the
product. There is no scope for “underdeclaration” because the
consumer can insist on the retailer abiding by the printed MRP.
Provisions for penalties under the Act on the retailer ensure this.
CW 6517/2003

Page 20 of 26

It is not open to the retailer who may be proceeded against for
selling above the printed MRP to contend that it was incorrect or
false, nor can the retailer defend any violation of the printed MRP
by asking for an enquiry into its reasonableness”.

The Apex

Court had also noted that in the event that the retailer or
manufacturer violates Rule 23(2) of SWM Rules “he is liable to be
proceeded against and may be fined upto an extent of Rs.2000/per package under Rule 39 of the Packaged Commodities Rules
and Section 67 of the SWM Act”. These observations were made
without any reference to Associated Hotels and Northern

India Caterers; the assumption was that the transaction was a
'sale of goods'. The question before the Court centred around the
rate at which excise duty was chargeable on packaged cigarettes.
It was not controverted that the engagement was in the nature of
a sale between a customer and a dealer defined under the SWM
Act.

Most importantly, the vires of the Rules had not been

assailed on the grounds that they travelled beyond the Act and
were, therefore, ultra vires to it. This decision is, therefore, of no
avail to the Respondents.

11.

Mr. Nath further contended that even if the Sale of Goods

Act was not applicable to the transactions in question, they fall
CW 6517/2003

Page 21 of 26

within the concept of distribution and delivery as defined in
Section 2 of the Act.

This argument flies in the face of the ratio

of Associated Hotels and Northern India Caterers. For this
very reason a decision in Mumbai Bidi Tambaku Vyapari

Sangh -vs- Union of India, 2003(4) Bom. C. R 300 : AIR 2003
Bombay 153 and T.T. Pvt. Ltd. -vs- Union of India, AIR 1991
Karnataka 79 are of no avail.

12.

In India Photographic Co. Ltd. -vs- H.D. Shourie, (1999) 6

SCC 428 the company was selling Kodak films without the price
being printed on the packages containing the films. The
contention was that Rule 6(2) of SWM Rules were applicable as
the photographic films were being sold by the distributor and not
by the manufacturer. It was in these circumstances that the
Supreme Court observed that acceptance of “such a plea would
result in frustrating the provisions of the 1986 Act and thereby
encourage the retailers or distributors of foreign-made goods to
charge prices according to their convenience without letting the
consumer know the actual price of the commodity”. In all
humility their Lordships have articulated a summation of the
SWM Act; it enjoins a declaration of weight, measure, number
and price. It imposes punishment where a declaration has not
CW 6517/2003

Page 22 of 26

been made or has been incorrectly made.

13.

Mr. Midha has supported the contention of Mr. Nath and

has also taken me through the provisions of the SWM Act and the
Rules. He emphasised, in particular, on the definition of sale
contained in the SWM Act which, as has already been seen,
envisages a transfer of property. This is conspicuously absent in
the case of service or supply of eatables and drinks by hotels and
restaurants. Mr. Midha has also laboured on Rule 5 of the SWM
Rules and the fact that the commodities mentioned in the Third
Schedule included aerated soft drinks, mineral water and
drinking water. This may be so but the sweep and intendment of
the SWM Act and Rules are palpably obvious from the fact that in
respect of these commodities it is the packaging thereof which
has been specifically dealt with.

A reading of Section 33, to

which my attention was invited by Mr. Midha, fortifies the
conclusion that the Act is primarily concerned with the display
of weight, measure, number, MRP etc. on the packaging and does
not travel further to punish the charging of a price in excess of
the stated MRP. Mr. Midha further adverted to the practice
adopted in hotels and restaurants including the opening of the
bottle before its service and availability of other drinking water at
CW 6517/2003

Page 23 of 26

no charge. These factors are irrelevant to the exercise of
interpretation of a statute. Similarly, Mumbai Bidi Tambaku

Vyapari Sangh, on which reliance has been placed by Mr.
Midha, does not further the cause of the Respondents since this
Judgment would be applicable if there was an ambiguity in the
statutory provisions.

If that were so, an interpretation which

would

cause

further

the

of

consumer

protection

would

indubitably be preferred by the Court.

14.

It is also relevant to note that Entry-50 of the Union List

in the Constitution of India covers “establishment of standard of
weight and measure” whereas price control is explicitly covered
by Entry-34 of the Concurrent List. Packaging and pricing must,
therefore, not be treated as legal synonym, which is, in fact, the
essence of the Respondents arguments.

15.

This discussion would not be complete without some

reference to the decisions of the State Commission : Delhi under
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 ('CP Act' in brief) where the
charging of prices beyond the MRP have been held to violate the
statute. I had renotified these petitions for arguments on
2.3.2007. Mr. Bhasin, Mr. Sachtey and Mr. Midha have, however,
CW 6517/2003

Page 24 of 26

stated that for the decision in these petitions the CP Act would
not have to be considered. Prima facie, however, it appears to me
that learned counsel for the parties had obviously not brought to
the notice of the Commission the decisions of the Supreme Court
in Associated Hotels and Northern India Caterers which
leave no room for argument that supply or service of eatables and
drinks in hotels and restaurants does not partake of the nature of
a 'sale' in common legal parlance. Hence, when a person goes to
a hotel or restaurant and while he is there orders and consumes
such commodities this does not fall within the definition of
consumption as contained in Section 2(d) of the CP Act. Forcing
the provisions of CP Act in such circumstances would run counter
to the law lay down in Associated Hotels and Northern India

Caterers. These observations are obviously made en passant.

16.

In the above analysis I hold that charging prices for mineral

water in excess of MRP printed on the packaging, during the
service of customers in hotels and restaurants does not violate
any of the provisions of the SWM Act as this does not constitute a
sale or transfer of these commodities by the hotelier or
Restaurateur to its customers.

The customer does not enter a

hotel or a restaurant to make a simple purchase of these
CW 6517/2003

Page 25 of 26

commodities. It may well be that a client would order nothing
beyond a bottle of water or a beverage, but his direct purpose in
doing so would clearly travel to enjoying the ambience available
therein and incidentally to the ordering of any article for
consumption. Can there by any justifiable reason for the Court or
Commission to interdict the sale of bottled mineral water other
than at a certain price, and ignore the relatively exorbitant
charge for a cup of tea or coffee. The response to this rhetorical
query cannot but be in the negative. Although the vires of Rule
23 have been assailed, I do not find it necessary to answer that
challenge since the provision relates to sales between dealers
and neither the hotels and restaurants of the one part and
customers of the other falls within this categorisation.

17.

The argument addressed by Mr. Bhasin would also enure to

the benefit of Petitioner/Restaurateur in WP(C) No.9528/2003
and WP(C) Nos.13775-14072/2005.

18.

These Petitions are allowed in the above terms. There shall,

however, be no orders as to costs. All pending applications also
stand disposed of.
MARCH 05, 2007
'tp'
CW 6517/2003

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE
Page 26 of 26

