*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(CRL) 3062/2006 & Crl. M.As. 14690/2006, 924/2008
Israt Jahan Tabassum
..... Petitioner
Through Ms. Meenakshi Lekhi, Adv.
versus
Union of India & Ors.
..... Respondent
Through Mr. Kailash Vasudev, Sr. Adv.
with Mr. D.S. Chauhan, Adv. for
Respondent No.4
Mr. Baldev Malik, Adv. for UOI
Date of Hearing : March 04, 2008
Date of Decision : March 07, 2008
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K. BHASIN
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment ?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes
Yes
Yes

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
JUDGMENT
1.

Israt

Jahan

Tabassum

Petitioner/Mother) has
against her

(hereinafter

referred

to

as

filed this Habeas Corpus Petition

ex husband, Vijay Alreja (hereinafter referred

to as the Respondent/Father)

praying

for the production of

their minor daughter, Avantika and thereafter for restoring
the custody of Avantika to her mother.
wp(crl.)3062.2006

Avantika was born
Page 1 of 12

on 24.1.2002 at Dhaka, Bangladesh. She is presently about six
years old.

It has been asseverated in the Petition that the

Respondent/Father had

converted to Islam faith and that they

had got married under Muslim rites on 14.10.1997.

2.
2005

In paragraph 4 of the Petition it has been pleaded that in
the

Respondent/Father

“fraudulently

and

by

misrepresenting the petitioner procured an Indian Passport for
the minor child”. The case of the Respondent/Father is that the
Petitioner/Mother herself wanted an Indian Passport for the
child. The Petition thereafter discloses that Avantika was
removed by the Respondent/Father from the care and custody of
the Petitioner/Mother and brought to India on 17.7.2006 which
resulted in the Petitioner/Mother following them to Delhi on
25.8.2006.

The Petitioner/Mother alleges that Avantika “was

sent to a Boarding School and the petitioner is not allowed to
have the custody and care of the minor child which is against
the interest and welfare of the child. The minor child is in a
pathetic condition and the petitioner, a helpless mother, not
allowed to have custody and care of the minor child.

The

interest and welfare of the minor child is best served in the
custody and the care of the mother and not at the Boarding

wp(crl.)3062.2006

Page 2 of 12

School”. The Petition was filed in December, 2006 when
Avantika

was

in

Delhi

for

her

Winter

Vacations.

It

is

stated in the Petition that the Petitioner/Mother is “entitled
to have the custody

of her female child upto

the

child's

puberty according to Muslim Sharia and Family Laws and
enforceable in Bangladesh. Even according to Indian Muslim
Law the Muslim Women is entitled for the custody of the
minor child upto

the
this

age

contravention

of

rule

Child Rights

recognized

of

child's

puberty.

constitutes

gross

in Convention

on

violation

Any
of

Child Rights

(CRC)”.

3.

We shall briefly refer to some of the documents filed

by the parties. A Document dated 10.7.2006 signed by the
parties records

the

factum of

Avantika

being an Indian

citizen holding Indian Passport No.F-0801181. This document
speaks of the resolve of the parents to formally separate
from each other.

A letter of even date, again signed by

both parties, seeks admission to Pathways World School,
Gurgaon, G.D. Goenka World School, Sohna and St. Helen's
Secondary School, Kurseong.
address

of

In the first two requests the

the parties is of Bangladesh, whereas in the

wp(crl.)3062.2006

Page 3 of 12

application of St. Helen's Secondary School the address

if

of B-72, Lajpat Nagar-II, New Delhi.

4.

The first question that arises before us is whether a writ of

Habeas Corpus is maintainable in the factual matrix of the case.
In this context our attention has been drawn by Ms. Lekhi,
learned counsel for the Petitioner, to Gohar Begum -vs- Suggi,
AIR 1960 SC 93. The Judgment is of no avail to the
Petitioner/Mother for the reasons that the custody battle was
between the natural mother and the maternal grand aunt of a
five year old Muslim girl.

It was in this context that their

Lordships observed that according to Mohammedan Law “the
appellant is entitled to the custody of Anjum who is her
illegitimate daughter, no matter who the father of Anjum is.
The respondent has no legal right whatsoever to the custody of
the child. Her refusal to make over the child to the appellant
therefore resulted in an illegal detention of the child within the
meaning of S.491”. It would be useful to clarify that the legal
framework which had existed in Gohar Begum does not endure
any longer since Section 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898 has been omitted and finds no place in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. The dispute before us is between the

wp(crl.)3062.2006

Page 4 of 12

Petitioner/Mother and the Respondent/Father. It is nebulous
and obscure as to whether the Mother did not consent for the
admission of her daughter, Avantika in St. Helen's Secondary
School,

Kurseong.

So far

as

the

Respondent/Father

is

concerned, he has pleaded that the admission was with the
consent of the Petitioner/Mother, thereby indicating that her
custody was shared equally between the two parents.

5.

We recall the law enunciated by the Apex Court in Mrs.

Elizabeth Dinshaw -vs- Arvand M. Dinshaw, AIR 1987 SC 3
where their Lordships yet again reiterated that in disputes
pertaining to the custody of a minor child “the matter is to be
decided not on considerations of the legal rights of parties but
on the sole and predominant criterion of what would serve the
interest and welfare of the minor”. The writ petition filed by the
mother, who had been granted the custody of the minor in the
course of divorce proceedings before a competent court in the
United States, was allowed. It was also observed that it was the
bounden duty of courts in all countries to ensure that the
parent, who had illegally violated custody orders, did not gain
any advantage from his wrong doing.

wp(crl.)3062.2006

Page 5 of 12

6.

In Sumedha Nagpal -vs- State of Delhi, IV (2000) CCR

48(SC) = JT 2000(7) SC 450 the mother had filed a writ of
Habeas Corpus alleging that she had been deceitfully deprived
of the custody of her two year old child and that since she was
statutorily entitled to the custody of the child, therefore the writ
court ought not to “shirk” its task in ensuring status quo ante.
Their Lordships clarified that the rights of the parties would
always be subservient to the welfare of the minor. The writ was
dismissed with leave to initiate proceedings under Section 25 of
the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 read with Section 6 of the
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956. In Saihba Ali -vs-

State of Maharashtra, 2003 SCC(Cri) 1675 the Supreme Court
reiterated the position that a petition under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India was not maintainable. In similar vein, in

Sarita Sharma -vs- Sushil Sharma, (2000) 3 SCC 14, their
Lordships held that the High Court should direct the parties to
initiate proceedings for a full-fledged inquiry under Section 6 of
the Minority Act, although in the interregnum it ought to have
restored the status quo ante. Their Lordships reiterated that “a
female child should be allowed to remain with the mother so
that she can be properly looked after”.

wp(crl.)3062.2006

Page 6 of 12

7.

There may be cases where one of the parents forcibly or

deceitfully “snatches” a child from the lawful custody of one of
the other estranged parents.

If the writ court is immediately

petitioned by means of a Habeas Corpus writ for restoration of
status quo ante, such an order should usually be passed. There
may also be instances where it is palpably clear to the Court
that the custody of one of the parents is obviously illegal and in
such an event the Writ Court should not hesitate to exercise its
extraordinary powers. Even in these cases it would be expedient
to ordain a temporary or interim arrangement, leaving the
parties to approach the competent Guardian Court to determine
which of the two adversarial sides is better placed or suited or
equipped for bringing-up a child.

8.

So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, we

are unable, at this stage and in these proceedings, to accept the
Petitioner/Mother's allegation that she was tricked into signing
the document seeking admission of Avantika to

St. Helen's

Secondary School, Kurseong; or that Avantika's Indian Passport
had been made under false pretences. Such highly contentious
facts can properly be decided only after the reception of
evidence. In our opinion, however, these disputes ought not to

wp(crl.)3062.2006

Page 7 of 12

engage our attention since the case of the Respondent/Father is
that admission of Avantika had been obtained in St. Helen's
Secondary School, Kurseong by consent of both parents. As we
have already observed the only inference that can be drawn is
that

the

child

is

not

in

the

exclusive

custody

of

her

Father/Respondent. It may also be useful to refer to the decision
of the Division Bench in Smt. Nandita Virmani -vs- Raman

Virmani, 1983 Crl. L. J. 794.

The Division Bench had

highlighted the distinction between the Guardianship and the
custody of a minor clarifying that whilst the guardianship may
remain with the father, custody could be that of the mother.

9.

We are fully mindful of the tenets of Muslim Law on the

aspect of the custody of a female child.

Where there is no

friction between parents, the question of who has their custody
is wholly superfluous. Custody becomes relevant only where a
dispute arises between the parents; even in such cases they may
jointly agree that their children should receive education in a
residential school. Wherever such a decision is taken the only
question then arises how the vacations of the children are to be
shared. Custody, therefore, does not become a contentious or
debatable issue.

wp(crl.)3062.2006

The dispute would arise in the event that

Page 8 of 12

either of the parents decides to novate upon the arrangement
in such a way as to give one of the parents exclusive custody of
the children. It seems to us that this is what has happened in
the case before us. Prima facie, admission had been done with
the consent of both parties, leading to the inference that both
parties share custody of Avantika. This arrangement does not
violate Muslim Law.

Therefore, issuance of a writ of Habeas

Corpus would not be an appropriate course of action.

10.

We must note that the Petitioner/Mother had expressed

her decision to remain in India and care for Avantika personally.
She had stated that if the Respondent/Father contributes a sum
of money equal to the School Fee being paid by him at St.
Helen's Secondary School, Kurseong, together with travelling
expenses, she would meet the rest of the expenses through her
own sources. We had roughly quantified these expenses to be
approximately Rupees Ten Thousand per month. However, there
is yet another imponderable inasmuch as the Petitioner/Mother
is a citizen of Bangladesh and her continued residence in India
cannot be presumed.

The personal care of a parent has no

substitute. Loving and congenial surroundings in a home would
usually be preferred to life in a residential school. The statute

wp(crl.)3062.2006

Page 9 of 12

also recognizes that the solicitude of the Petitioner/Mother is
incomparable with any other.

There is nothing on record,

however, to indicate that Avantika is unhappy in the residential
school where she is presently receiving her education.

As we

have already observed, on a prima facie view we cannot at once
come to the conclusion that the joint custody of Avantika is
contrary to Muslim Law.

If circumstances now exist, such as

make it preferable to change the existing arrangement, there
may be no alternative but to handover custody of Avantika to
her Mother. These circumstances would, however, have to be
proved before the proper legal Forum under the applicable law.
We are not convinced that the situation has changed so
appreciably and drastically that the orders in writ proceedings
have become essential.

11.

We are concerned by the fact that due to the present

hearings Avantika has not returned to St. Helen's Secondary
School, Kurseong. The present Academic Year comes to an end
very shortly and any further delay in her rejoining St. Helen's
Secondary School, Kurseong is bound to have a deleterious
effect on her education. We, therefore, direct both the parents,
namely, Israt Jahan Tabassum and Vijay Alreja to ensure that

wp(crl.)3062.2006

Page 10 of 12

Avantika is returned to St. Helen's Secondary School, Kurseong
within seven days from today.

The Respondent/Father shall

make necessary arrangements and meet the expenses of
the Mother if the latter is desirous of accompanying them to
Kurseong. Failure to do so may leave no room but to conclude
that the offending parent is

motivated by selfish and

egoistically reasons rather than for the welfare of Avantika.
Having said so,

we

vehemently

that we have steered clear, in

and

unequivocally

the present

Habeas

clarify
Corpus

proceedings, from taking a final and definitive decision on this
delicate

dispute.

If either

of

the

parents

should

feel

compelled by their concern for Avantika to seek a change in
her

custody

and

schooling

arrangement,

proper

legal

proceedings may be initiated. In such an event, the Court
will not be influenced by any observations that have been
made

by

us

hereinabove. Next Academic Year

commence at least a couple
rendering

a

of

months

judicial decision in

the

from
matter

shall

now, thereby
within

that

period just and convenient.

12.

We would request the Principal, St. Helen's Secondary

School, Kurseong, Darjeeling West Bengal

wp(crl.)3062.2006

to

condone the

Page 11 of 12

delay that has been caused in Avantika's rejoining the School
for the present term.

13.

Learned counsel for the Respondent has prayed for orders

with regard to the continued stay of the Petitioner/Mother in
Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi. The Orders passed on 14.2.2007 are
relevant. However, thereafter the Respondent has divorced the
Petitioner.

The situation has changed drastically.

We do not

think it expedient to pass any orders in these Habeas Corpus
proceedings, granting leave to the parties to initiate appropriate
proceedings, if so advised.

14.

Petition is disposed of in these terms.

15.

A copy of this Judgment be given DASTI under the

signature of the Court Master.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

MARCH 07, 2008
tp

wp(crl.)3062.2006

( P.K. BHASIN )
JUDGE

Page 12 of 12

