IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO(OS) 127/2007
North Eastern Handloom
& Handicraft

...Petitioner
through Mr. R.K. Singh with
Mr.Nikhilesh Krishan, Advs.

Versus
Sports Station India Pvt. Ltd. ...Respondent
through Mr. Viplav Sharma
with Mr. Alishan Naquee &
Mr. Prashant Narain, Advs.
WITH
FAO(OS) 148/2007
Amitava Mookerjee

...Petitioner
through Mr. Gourab Banerji,
Sr. Adv. with Mr. Saurav
Aggarwal, Mr. Arjun Krishan,
Mr. T.M. Singh & Mr. Dinesh
Kumar, Advs.

Versus
Sports Station (India) Pvt. Ltd... Respondent
through Mr. R.K. Singh with
Mr.Nikhilesh Krishan, Advs.
for Respondent No.2
Date of Hearing : May 24, 2007
Date of Decision : July 09, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.P. SINGH
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 1 of 15

allowed to see the Judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

JUDGMENT
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
1.

We have heard learned counsel for the parties in great

detail and, therefore, proceed to decide the Appeals on merits.

2.

A neat question of law has arisen before us in these

two Appeals. It pertains to the proper forum for adjudication
of disputes, through arbitration, in respect

of

immovable

property at 17, Shakespeare Sarani, Theatre Road, Kolkata-71.
The landlady of this property is Mrs. Lila Mookerjee who has
constituted her son, Mr. Amitava Mookerjee as her general
attorney having allowed him the
'super area'

on the

short).

this capacity Shri Mookerjee had, in May 2000,

In

ground

use of 2200 square feet of

and first floor (“shop space” for

entered into a Joint Venture Retail Agreement (JVRA) with Sports
Station India Pvt. Ltd. (in brief Sports Station) the Respondent in
both

Appeals,

the

salient

clauses/terms

for

the

present

controversy are that possession of the shop space was handed
over to Sports Station and that the latter could further appoint
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 2 of 15

its franchisee for “Nike” products. For this arrangement the
consideration

was

Rs.1,70,000/-

or

8%(5%

in

respect

of

reduction/clearance sales) payable by Sports Station to Mr.
Mookerjee. The JVRA is for a period of nine years with renewal
options, but is terminable by Mr. Mookerjee if Sports Station
commits a material breach of its terms.

Clause 38 is the

Arbitration Agreement which specifies, inter alia, that arbitration
proceedings would be held in Calcutta, and that Calcutta Courts
would have jurisdiction. In fact, considerable litigation between
these two parties has already commenced and is pending.

3.

The second Agreement dated 29-4-2003 is between Sports

Station

and

North

Eastern

Handloom

and

Handicrafts

(hereinafter 'North Eastern'). By its terms Sports Station is liable
to pay the rent of the premises, the Ground Floor (showroom) of
which are to be used for as a showroom and the First Floor
(stockroom) for storage of stock. North Eastern has contracted to
act as the Management Agent of Sports Station on commission
basis; sales would be effected at prices determinable by Sports
Station. This Agreement was to be co-terminus with the 'Lease
Agreement' [reference obviously being to the JVRA]. Clause 17 is
the Arbitration Agreement between Sports Station and North
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 3 of 15

Eastern, inter alia stipulating that arbitration proceedings shall
be held in New Delhi and nowhere else and that Courts in Delhi
shall have exclusive jurisdiction over disputes between these two
parties.

4.

Sports Station filed a Petition under Section 9 of the

Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (A & C Act for short)
seeking a restraint against North Eastern from interfering with
the peaceful possession and functioning of the Sports Station and
its Representatives from the showroom and also for restraining
North Eastern from stocking or selling its own merchandise from
the showroom; and for restraint order against North Eastern from
removing and selling the stocks lying at the First Floor.

Yet

another application has been filed by Sports Station inter alia
praying for injuncting North Eastern from selling any products
from the shop space. Neither Mr. A. Mookerjee nor Mrs.
L.Mookerjee have been impleaded in the proceedings initiated by
the Respondent Sports Station in this Court. Consequently,
neither of the Mookerjees have been granted a hearing by the
learned Single Judge and therefore their interests have been
ignored. North Eastern has filed FAO(OS) No.127/2007 since the
learned Single Judge has restrained it “from interfering with the
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 4 of 15

peaceful possession and functioning of Sports Station and its
representatives from the showroom situated at 17, Shakespeare
Sarani, Theatre Road, Calcutta .... (and) from stocking any of its
products at the said premises or carrying on sale of any goods
from the said showroom with immediate effect”.

The Appellant,

North Eastern, has also been directed to remove himself and his
stocks and goods lying in the said premises within two weeks. By
the impugned Order the learned Single Judge had also directed
the Commissioner of Police, Lal Bazaar, Kolkata to ensure strict
compliance of this order.

The learned Single Judge had also

appointed Shri R.C. Chopra, retired Judge of this Court as the
Sole Arbitrator obviously in respect of disputes pending between
Sports Station and North Eastern. We understand that arbitration
proceedings have already commenced.

5.

Mr. Mookerjee has filed FAO(OS) 148/2007 impleading

both Sports Station and North Eastern and praying that the said
impugned Orders dated 22.3.2007 passed by the learned Single
Judge be set aside to the extent that they adversely affect his
rights.

Locus standi of the Appellant, Mr. Mukherjee, has not

been challenged before us.

However, had this been done by

Sports Station, it would have brought to the fore the significance
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 5 of 15

of passing an order which impinges upon the rights of a party
which is not before the Court, and in the circumstances of the
present case, which is also not a signatory to the arbitration
clause which predicates the jurisdiction under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. Mr. Mookerjee has
emphasised that Sports Station has willfully suppressed any
mention of litigation pending in the High Court of Calcutta as
well as in the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India even in the face of
adverse observations by the Single Bench and the Appeal Bench
of the Calcutta High Court.

Sports Station has also failed to

disclose that it had terminated the contract between North
Eastern and itself as far back as on 24-12-2004. Had this fact
been disclosed the learned Single Judge would indubitably have
considered the appropriateness or necessity of passing injunctive
orders in a stale matter. From documents filed it appears that on
28.7.2005 a Receiver had been appointed by the Calcutta High
Court at the instance of Sports Station which, by a detailed Order
dated 23.8.2005, came to be recalled; the application itself was
dismissed. Indira Banerjee, J., inter alia, applied the dictum of

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. -vs- Amritsar Gas Service, 1991(1)
ALR 97 = 1991(1) SCC 533 viz. that if a contract is determinable
the remedy for its breach would lie in a claim for damages, and
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 6 of 15

for this reason an injunction cannot be issued. The application
was also dismissed for the reason that material facts had been
suppressed by Sports Station. The Single Bench noted that the
contract had been entered into with Mr. Amitava Mookerjee who
had not been impleaded before that Court. Sports Station
unsuccessfully filed an Appeal which was rejected by Orders
dated 20.1.2006. As already mentioned above, an Appeal has
been preferred by Sports Station to the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
which notice has been issued but no interim Orders have been
passed.

6.

Sports Station has made no mention whatsoever of

the

legal proceedings before the Single Bench, Division Bench of the
Calcutta High Court,

as

also before

the

Hon'ble

Supreme

Court of India. Sports Station has not impleaded either Mrs.
Lila Mookerjee or Mr. Amitava Mookerjee, even though the
gravamen and effect of

the

injunction prayed for directly

impacts

two

persons. A

upon

these

T.No.182/2007 in A.P. No.137 of 2007 f iled
Mookerjee

against Sports

Mr.A.Mookerjee along with
knowledge

of

the

FAO(OS)127/2007

Station
the

impugned

copy
by Mr.

has been
Appeal.

Orders

and

of

the

Amitava
filed

by

Upon gaining
suffering

its

page 7 of 15

consequences

Mr.A.Mookerjee

filed

a

fresh

action in the

Calcutta High Court, and filed the present Appeal.

7.

Indira Banerjee, J., by Order dated 30.3.2007, directed that

the “ pad locks at the show room in question should forthwith be
removed and the petitioner be given access for the limited
purpose of operating the pump,the switch of which is located at
the show room in question. The show room shall remain in the
possession of a Special Officer of this Court.

Mr Saugata

Bhattacharya, Advocate of this Court is appointed Special Officer.
The Special Officer shall make an inventory of the show room in
question and submit a report to this Court. The Special Officer
shall allow the petitioner to operate the pumps as directed
above”. Thereafter, Sanjib Banerjee, J., on 25.4.2007, observed
that - “In these proceedings, arising out of the alleged tenancy
agreement between the parties herein, there can be no issue
arising as to the right of the applicant in respect of any goods.
Even if this application were to be treated as an application in the
nature of pro inter esse suo as suggested by the applicant, the
applicant's title in respect of the stocks that he seeks to remove
must first be established before the order that he seeks in terms
of prayer (b) can be passed. Since the disputes which can form
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 8 of 15

the subject matter of the reference will not cover the disputes
sought to be raised by the applicant herein, this application
cannot be entertained and the same is dismissed. However, the
Special Officer will be at liberty to take such steps that he deems
fit and if, according to the Special Officer , he is required to act in
terms of any order passed by any Court, it will be open for him to
do so.”

8.

As we have already narrated the JVRA between Mr.

Mookerjee and Sports Station contains an arbitration clause
stipulating inter alia that Courts in Calcutta would have
jurisdiction and the arbitration proceedings would also be held in
Calcutta. This Clause has been acted upon by the Respondent
Sports Station in Calcutta. There is also an Agreement entered
into between Sports Station and North Eastern which inter alia
stipulates to the contrary, i.e., that Courts in New Delhi would
have jurisdiction and the venue of arbitration between these two
parties would also be in New Delhi.

The impugned injunction

Order, however, has been passed in respect of immovable
property situated in Calcutta, without adverting to or granting a
hearing to the owners thereof or to the persons that would be
directly affected by the injunction. These impugned Orders have
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 9 of 15

been passed against persons who are
arbitration

clause

which

clothes

not party

Courts

in

to

Delhi

the
with

jurisdiction. In the present situation a number of disputes that
can

arise

between

the

contracted with

each

Sports Station

are

two sets of parties

other. So

far

who

have

as Mr. Mookerjee and

concerned they may have commercial

disputes as well as disputes pertaining to the occupation of
the shop space.
in

any

Obviously these disputes cannot be ventilated

Court other than those situated in Calcutta, either

keeping in view the express terms of the Agreement between
them, or

by

the

general principles

of

law

universally

accepted that disputes relating to immovable property must
be brought within the Courts holding territorial sway over them.
This principle is so well entrenched in jurisprudence that
one does not necessarily

have

to advert to Section 16 of the

Code of Civil Procedure (CPC). We also note that Section 20 of
the CPC opens with the words “Subject to the limitations
aforesaid” [i.e. Section 16] which enjoins the institution of suits
for the recovery, partition, foreclosure, sale or redemption or
determination of any other right or interest in immovable
for

compensation

Court

within

the

FAO(OS)127/2007

for

wrong

local

or

to immovable property in the

limits

of whose jurisdiction

the

page 10 of 15

property

is situate, or the defendant actually and voluntarily

resides.

9.

Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for Sports Station, argues that

even if the CPC is applied, Section 20 would enable the Sports
Station to institute proceedings in Delhi. This submission,
however, is not correct for the reason that Section 20 cannot be
applied contrary to the terms of Section 16. We may also record
the argument of Mr. Sharma that the CPC does not apply to the
(A & C Act). No doubt, Section 19 of the A & C Act states that the
arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by the CPC or the Evidence
Act, but that strictly applies to the conduct of

arbitral

proceedings. Since the CPC has been excluded only to this limited
extent, it would be fair to conclude that it has not been excluded
in other spheres. In any event, we would favour the view that the
principle incorporated in Section 16 has assumed the nature of a
grundnorm which has universal application even so far as the
passing of interim Orders by Courts in arbitration proceedings.
Same approach has been articulated by the Division Bench of the
Karnataka High Court in Globe Cogeneration Power Ltd. -vs- Sri

Hiranyakeshi Sahakari Sakkere Karkhane Niyamit, Sankeshwar,
Karnataka, 2004(4) R.A.J. 263(Kar). The Hon'ble Supreme Court
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 11 of 15

has recently clarified in Begum Sahiba Sultan -vs- Nawab Mohd.

Mansur Ali Khan, Manu/SC/1970/2007 that suits relating to
immovable property must be entertained in strict conformity with
Section 16 of the CPC, the only exception being orders which
have efficacy because they demand the personal obedience by the
Defendant to the Suit.

10.

With due respect to the views and orders of the learned

Single Judge we are of the opinion that the impugned Order
cannot be sustained and must be set aside so far as it pertains to
the immovable property situated at Calcutta. First and foremost,
Courts in Delhi must decline to exercise jurisdiction over
immovable property situate beyond its territorial boundaries.
Secondly, Orders passed under Section 9 of the A & C Act are
equitable in nature, and if a party approaches the Court with
unclean hands by suppressing material facts which ought to have
been pleaded and specifically brought to the notice of the Court,
such a party would be disentitled to any relief. Sports Station
ought to have disclosed all details of litigation pending between
Mr. Mookerjee and itself in the High Court of Calcutta leading to
the Appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. We find no
warrant whatsoever for the failure to do so and on this ground set
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 12 of 15

aside the directions passed by the learned Single Judge in respect
of the property at 17, Shakespeare Sarani, Theatre Road,
Kolkata-71. Thirdly, Section 9 of the A & C Act empowers a Court
to pass interim measures of protection in respect of the
preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the
subject matter of the arbitration agreement or securing the
amount in dispute in the arbitration or detention, preservation or
inspection of any property which is the subject matter of the
disputes in arbitration. There is an arbitration clause between
Sports Station and North Eastern and disputes have arisen
between them emanating from and in connection with the said
Management Agreement. So far as the shop space is concerned
Sports Station had already invoked the jurisdiction of the
Calcutta Courts, prior to its jural foray in this High Court.
Section 42 of the A & C Act cannot be ignored. It demands that
with respect to an arbitration agreement an application has to be
made in that court, and in no other Court, where the first action
has been instituted.

Any dispute pertaining to the immovable

property in Calcutta would, therefore, even on the application of
Section 42 of the A & C Act be maintainable only in Calcutta.
Fourthly, the principles of constructed res judicata would come
into play so far as the immovable property is concerned because
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 13 of 15

of prior litigation pending between Sports Station and Mr. A.
Mookerjee.

Fifthly, Orders under Section 9 of the A & C Act

would ordinarily issue in respect of persons who are party to the
arbitration clause. It would bear repetition that Mr.A.Mookerjee
is not a party to the Management Agreement between Sports
Station and North Eastern. We clarify that the Arbitration
Agreement between Sports Station and North Eastern has to be
honoured.

Prima facie, it concerns the sale and stocking of

merchandise directed to be sold at Calcutta. This essentially is a
mercantile dispute, distinct from a dispute relating to immovable
property. Sixthly, the Agreement between Sports Station and Mr.
Mookerjee on the one hand and Sports Station and North Eastern
on the other are inherently and intrinsically terminable in nature.
As already noticed above Amritsar Gas is high authority for the
proposition that a remedy for a breach of termination of contract
is not by way of its specific or continued enforcement but by an
action for damages.

11.

In this analysis the impugned Order dated 22.3.2007 is set

aside insofar as it restrains Mr.A.Mookerjee from interfering with
the alleged possession of Sports Station at 17, Shakespeare
Sarani, Theatre Road, Kolkata-71. We clarify that the Orders
FAO(OS)127/2007

page 14 of 15

appointing the Sole Arbitrator to decide all other disputes
between Sports Station and North Eastern

shall continue in

terms of the impugned Order. We make no observations or
reflections on the disputes inter se Sports Station and Mr.
Mookerjee since in our opinion this Court does not possess
territorial jurisdiction in that regard.

These disputes would

perforce be decided by the High Court of Calcutta.

12.

We impose costs of Rs.20,000/- on Sports Station for

suppression of material facts. Both Appeals are decided in these
terms.

(VIKRAMAJIT SEN)
JUDGE

(J.P. SINGH)
JUDGE
July 09, 2007
`tp'

FAO(OS)127/2007

page 15 of 15

