IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 17025/2006
Lt. Col. Mukul Dev

...Petitioner through
Major (Retd.) K.
Ramesh, Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Mr. Rajeeve Mehra,
Adv. for UOI
Mr. Sanjeev Sachdeva
with Mr. Preet Pal
Singh, Advs. for BCI

Date of Hearing : August 09, 2007
Date of Decision : August 16, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

JUDGMENT
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
1.

The President of India is the Supreme Commander of

the Defence Forces of the Union. By letter dated 27.9.2006
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 1 of 12

the Chief of Army Staff was informed that “the President is
pleased to decide that notwithstanding anything contained
in Paragraph 82 of the Regulations for the Army the Inter
Arm Transfer of IC-46298N Lt Col Mukul Dev is sanctioned
as a one time measure from Artillery to the JAG's
Department

provided the officer is in possession of

Bachelor's Degree in Law from any recognised University”.
It is indeed extraordinary that the Respondents have
flagrantly failed to honour the decision of the Commanderin-Chief of the Indian Army, who is the President of our
Republic. On the contrary, the Petitioner, Lt. Col. Mukul
Dev, Assistant Judge Advocate General, HQ CIF-Counter
Insurgency Force (U) was posted to HQ 11 Corps Artillery
as per Telegraphic Order dated 30.10.2006. It is this
Posting Order, which is irreconcilably in variance with the
decision of the President of India that has been assailed
before us.

2.

The Petition discloses that the Petitioner had sought

and obtained a transfer to the JAG Department in March,
2003. He has conducted several Court Martials; by letter
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 2 of 12

dated 19.1.2005 the Military Secretary suggested to the
Petitioner that he should apply for Inter Army/Service
Transfer (IAST for short) to the JAG Department through
proper

channels;

and

to

pass

JAG

Departmental

Examination which would be mandatory for a permanent
transfer to JAG. His application for IAST was recommended
by his Officer Commanding as well as General-OfficerCommanding.

Respondent No.3 (JAG Department) vide

DTG : 132003 Srl No 145031 informed the relevant
Command that the Petitioner had qualified the JAG's
Departmental Exam October 2005.

After exchange of

sundry communications, and despite the directions of the
President of India, the Respondents have not transferred
the Petitioner to Respondent No.3. It should be noted that
the Petitioner has stated that due to an injury sustained by
him, his career progression in the regiment of Artillery had
been jeopardised and it was for this reason that he had
worked towards a transfer to the JAG Branch.

3.

The Chaudhary Charan Singh University, Meerut has

awarded the Petitioner “the Degree of BACHELOR OF
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 3 of 12

LAWS of this University in the Examination of 1996 after
pursuing three years professional course” in the Second
Division (underlining has been added). The Petitioner has
candidly admitted that he has not fulfilled the essential
attendance criteria, i.e. 2/3rd of the total number of lectures
delivered, set down by the Bar Council of India and for this
reason he may not be eligible to pursue a career as an
Advocate.

4.

The stand that has been taken by the Respondents in

the Counter Affidavit is that the Law Course undertaken by
the Petitioner cannot be equated with any normal academic
course as attendance of lectures, tutorials and seminars are
essential aspects to train law students. It has been averred
that the existing Policy being followed in the Army for
commissioning into JAG Department is eligibility of the
incumbent for enrollment as an Advocate. A copy of an
Advertisement to this effect had been filed at the time of
Final Arguments. The submission is that “it is yet to be
established by the Petitioner as to how and when he
cleared minimum attendance as prescribed by the Rules for
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 4 of 12

LLB Degree Course”.

The Respondents have highlighted

the admission and acknowledgment of the Petitioner to the
effect that he was posted in Faridkot (Punjab), Dinjan
(Assam) and NC Hills (Assam) during 1993-96. The
Respondents have also denied the Petitioner's assertion
that he did well in the Court Martials and other related
legal tasks assigned to him; that his posting as AJAG HQ C1
Force (K) “was only due to turnover of officers, exigencies
of service etc.”; that the post of AJAG was not an
independent assignment and that merely qualifying the LLB
Degree will not automatically entitle officers from other
Arms

and

Services

to

be

transferred

to

the

JAG

Department.

5.

It will be recalled that the President of India had,

notwithstanding Paragraph 82 of the Regulations, been
pleased to transfer the Petitioner to the JAG Branch.
Paragraph

82

of

the

Regulations

stipulates

that

-

“Permanent commissioned officers of all Arms and Services
of the rank of major and below, who hold a Bachelor's
degree in law professional from a recognised university are
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 5 of 12

eligible for transfer to the Judge Advocate General's
Department”. The Degree awarded to the Petitioner by the
Chaudhary Charan Singh University specifically records
that it is an LLB Professional Degree. We had the
advantage of hearing Mr. Sachdeva, learned counsel for the
Bar Council of India, who had brought out the distinction
between professional and other (academic) LLB Degrees. It
appears that certain Universities offer a Degree after
pursuing only a two year course. Attendance requirements
vary from one University to another but so far as the Bar
Councils are concerned, unless a University prescribes a
minimum attendance of 2/3rd of the lectures delivered, and
insists on student's compliance with this requirement, a
person would not be granted a licence by the Bar Council to
practice the profession of law as an Advocate. Mr. Sachdev
had clarified that apart from this stringent stipulation, the
Bar Council is not concerned with the award of the LLB
Degree to any student.

6.

Mr. Mehra, learned counsel for the Respondent, has

drawn support from the submissions of Mr. Sachdev to
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 6 of 12

submit that if the Petitioner stands disentitled to the grant
of a licence to practice as an Advocate by any Bar Council
he is per se not eligible for a transfer to the JAG Branch.
He has attracted our attention to the decision in Bar

Council of India -vs- Aparna Basu Mallick, (1994) 2 SCC
102 where the Supreme Court, following their earlier
decision in Baldev Raj Sharma -vs- Bar Council of India,
1989 Supp (2) SCC 91, ruled that in order to be eligible to
practice as an Advocate the person concerned should
mandatorily have attended three year study as a regular
student, by complying with the criteria of attending of a
minimum of two-thirds of the lectures delivered. We are of
the view that these decisions are not topical or relevant for
the answer to the conundrum before us since the prayer of
the Petitioner is not his enrollment as an Advocate by the
bestowal of a licence by a Bar Council.

The Petitioner's

relief is in his permanent transfer to the JAG Branch.

7.

Major Ramesh, learned counsel for the Petitioner, has

argued that once a candidate is allowed to appear in the
Law examination he cannot be deprived and denied the
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 7 of 12

fruits of his passing that Examination. Reliance has been
placed on Shri Krishan -vs- The Kurukshetra University,

Kurukshetra, AIR 1976 SC 376. Their Lordships observed
that

-“Once

the

candidate

is

allowed

to

take

the

examination, rightly or wrongly, then the statute which
empowers the University to withdraw the candidature of
the applicant has worked itself out and the candidate
cannot be refused admission subsequently for any infirmity
which should have been looked into before giving the
candidate

permission

to

appear”.

In

other

words,

promissory estoppel prohibits placing the Petitioner in a
position of disadvantage. Major Ramesh has distinguished

Central Airmen Selection Board -vs- Surender Kumar Das,
AIR 2003 SC 240 where their Lordships declined to press
the principle of promissory estoppel in favour of the
Petitioner, manifestly because the person had misled the
Authorities to take the decision to select him. He contends
that the Petitioner has at no stage stated that he had
fulfilled the criteria of attendance of a minimum of 2/3rd of
the lectures delivered. He has highlighted the fact that the
Degree received by the Petitioner explicitly states that it is
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 8 of 12

a Professional

Degree. Accordingly, the

Petitioner is

entirely eligible as far as Paragraph 82 of the Regulations is
concerned. It is an altogether different case that the
Petitioner would not be entitled to practice as an Advocate.

8.

Having considered the rival cases we are of the

opinion that the Respondents are not justified in insisting
that the Petitioner “should meet the eligibility criteria for
enrollment

as

an

Advocate”.

This

requirement

can

legitimately be insisted upon at the threshold, but if it has
to be applied at any stage thereafter Paragraph 82 of the
Regulation would have to be amended.

The Regulation

would have to stipulate that in addition to having attended
a three year Professional LLB Course, [which the Petitioner
has successfully undergone as evidenced by his Degree]
every officer in the JAG Branch could also be additionally
eligible for enrollment as an Advocate. We may observe, en

passant, that the natural consequence of such a Regulation
may be that only such officers who are eligible to be
enrolled as Advocates can be transferred to the JAG
Branch. Thereupon the initial transfer of the Petitioner into
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 9 of 12

the JAG Branch would be irregular and illegal. The
ramifications of such an interpretation would be highly
deleterious to the interests of the Indian Army as persons
such as the Petitioner have played pivotal roles and
responsibilities in sundry Court Martials. Be that as it may,
we are of the unequivocal view that the Regulation, as it
presently stands, does not envisage that only those officers
can be considered for service in the JAG Branch who are
eligible for enrollment as Advocates.

9.

We commenced this Judgment with a reference to

Article 53 of the Constitution of India which reposes and
vests in the President of India the Supreme Command of
the Defence Forces of the Union. We have also underscored
the fact that the decision of the President to allow the
transfer

of

the

Petitioner

to

the

JAG

Branch

was

notwithstanding Paragraph 82 of the Regulations. The
Respondents have glossed over this aspect of the case. In
doing so, they have not advanced the interests of the
discipline of the Indian Army. Once the decision of the
President is ignored, this indiscipline would inexorably
WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 10 of 12

percolate to lesser commands. In case the Respondents
were dissatisfied with the decision of the President of India
they ought to have taken necessary steps to reverse the
decision. It does not behove the Respondents to ignore the
decision of the President of India and act contrary to its
expressed intent.

10.

In these circumstances the Writ Petition is allowed.

The Respondents are directed to forthwith comply with the
decision of the President of India sanctioning the Inter
Army/Service Transfer of the Petitioner to Respondent
No.3. We reiterate that the Petitioner is in possession of a
Bachelor Degree in Law from a recognised University, i.e.
Chaudhary Charan Singh University, Meerut, which is also
a professional Degree.

We, however, clarify that our

decision shall not entitle the Petitioner to enrollment as an
Advocate or to any other appointment which prescribes
that an incumbent should be eligible for enrollment as an
Advocate in order to be considered for appointment in that
employment. All pending applications stand disposed of.

WP(C) 17025/2006

Page 11 of 12

11.

The Petitioner shall be entitled to costs of Rs.10,000/-.

A copy of this Judgment be dispatched by the Registry
directly to the Chief of Army Staff.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

August 16, 2007
tp

WP(C) 17025/2006

( S.L. BHAYANA)
JUDGE

Page 12 of 12

