IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Crl. Appeal 169/1990
State

...Appellant through
Mr. M.P. Singh, Adv.
Versus

Satbir Singh & Ors.

...Respondent through
Mr. Javed Ahmed, Adv. for
Respondent Nos.2,4,6 & 9

Date of Hearing : January 09, 2008
Date of Decision : January 18, 2008
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K. BHASIN
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?

No

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
No
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
JUDGMENT
1.

This Appeal has been filed by the State against the

acquittal of the Respondents in terms of the Judgment dated
19.7.1986 of the Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi.

Succinctly

stated, the case of the prosecution is that the deceased,
Ramesh, was proceeding towards the jhuggi/quarter of his
Crl. Appeal 169/1990

page 1 of 5

mother at about 10:30 P.M. on 11.6.1984 accompanied by his
widow, Smt.Raj Bala. He was allegedly assaulted with lathis by
Respondents 1-9. His wife, Smt. Raj Bala, raised an alarm and
ran towards the house of her mother-in-law, Smt. Rajo. These
two persons returned to the spot to find Ramesh lying in a pool
of blood with his face towards the ground. On the complaint of
Smt. Raj Bala a case under Sections 147/148/149/307 IPC was
registered and upon the death of Ramesh same day the case
was converted into one under Section 302 IPC. Upon completion
of investigation nine persons were charge-sheeted and then
tried by the Sessions Court under Section 147 IPC and 302/149
IPC. After a detailed consideration of the entire evidence
adduced by the prosecution the Trial Court had taken note of
the fact that admittedly there was enmity between the deceased
and the accused persons. The Trial Court observed that while
enmity is a motivation for inflicting injuries, it would also be a
motive for false implication.

The Trial Court thereafter

observed that the police machinery had come into motion on the
Daily Diary Report No.82-B recorded on the statement of Surje,
Respondent/Accused No.9. The Additional Sessions Judge was of
the view that this was unlikely to have happened if Surje was
one of the assailants of the deceased. The Trial Court has then

Crl. Appeal 169/1990

page 2 of 5

highlighted the fact that the Investigating Officer had found the
Respondents in their respective jhuggis, and had they actually
been the assailants of the deceased, it would have been natural
for them to have absconded.

Poignantly, the Trial Court has

also emphasised the fact that Smt. Raj Bala

had

given

the

names of all the nine Respondents in the FIR, whereas in her
statement

in Court she had

categorically admitted

that she

did not know the names of five accused. The inference drawn
by the learned Judge was that this, on its own, indubitably
indicates that the names of these persons were recorded in the
FIR at the instance of someone else other than Smt. Raj Bala.
The Additional Sessions Judge has also taken found it 'strange'
that both the mother, the wife, the sister's husband, wife's
brother and two other persons, namely, Mohinder Pal and Sat
Pal had allegedly witnessed the occurrence, but none of them
removed Ramesh to the hospital. It was also noticed that the
name

and

parentage

of

Ramesh

had

been

recorded

as

“unknown” in the hospital records. Since his family members
were present at the site, the identity of the deceased was fully
known and so writing of the word “unknown” by the doctor in
the MLC showed that none of the eye witnesses had actually
witnessed the incident.

Crl. Appeal 169/1990

page 3 of 5

2.

So far as recovery of the lathis is concerned the Trial

Court has noted that they did not have any blood thereon.

3.

Apart from inconsistencies in the statements of the widow

and the mother of the deceased the learned Trial Court has also
noted the contradictions in the statements of PW-17, Mohinder
Pal and his younger brother, PW-18, Sat Pal and considering all
these deficiencies in the prosecution case gave the benefit of
doubt to all the nine accused and acquitted them.

4.

In the State Appeal learned APP for the State could not

convince us as to how the findings of the Trial Court can be said
to be perverse justifying interference by this Court in appeal.
We do not see any perversity in the conclusion arrived at by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge to the effect that the
prosecution has not succeeded in bringing home the guilt of the
accused person beyond reasonable doubt. We are also of the
opinion that the inconsistencies and facts as mentioned above,
which were noticed by the Trial Court while acquitting the
accused, make it impossible to conclude that the prosecution
has proved the guilt of the Respondents beyond reasonable
doubt.

Crl. Appeal 169/1990

page 4 of 5

5.

In these circumstances we find no reason to reverse the

impugned

Judgment.

The

State's

Appeal

is

accordingly

dismissed but there shall be no order as to costs.

January 18, 2008
tp

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

( P.K. BHASIN )
JUDGE

Crl. Appeal 169/1990

page 5 of 5

