IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C)14164/2006
SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC INDIA
.... Petitioner through
PRIVATE LIMITED
Mr. V. Lakshmi Kumaran with
Mr. M.P. Devnath, Advs.
Versus
GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI
...Respondent
through Mr. H.L. Taneja, Adv.

Date of Hearing : January 18, 2007
Date of Decision : February 15, 2007

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.P. SINGH
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

JUDGMENT
1.

In this Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of

India the prayer is for the issuance of an appropriate writ,
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 1 of 24

direction or order staying the recovery of the entire demand of
the impugned tax till the disposal of the Petitioner's Appeal
pending before the Additional Commissioner-IV, Department of
Trade and Taxes, Government of Delhi.

2.

The facts in brief are that for Assessment Year (AY) 2003-

04, vide Assessment Order dated 30.3.2005 a Demand of
Rs.5,80,09,272/- under the Local Act and Rs.9,88,41,922/- under
the Central Act stood assessed. After a Review, the Demand was
reduced

to

Rs.4,30,19,815/-

under

the

Local

Act

and

Rs.2,79,43,711/- under the Central Act. The Review Order was
appealed against before the First Appellate Authority who passed
an Order under Section 43(5) of the repealed Delhi Sales Tax Act,
1975

(for

the

sake

of

brevity

'DST

Act')

directing

the

Appellant/Petitioner to deposit a sum of Rs.4.20 crores under the
DST Act and Rs.14.78 lacs under the Central Act; only the latter
amount was deposited. So far as direction to deposit Rs.4.20
crores is concerned the Appellant/Petitioner had approached the
Appellate Tribunal, Value Added Tax, Delhi for relief. It was inter
alia

contended

that

the

financial

condition

of

the

Petitioner/Appellant was very poor and payment of such a huge
amount would mean virtually throwing the Petitioner out of trade.
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 2 of 24

In the present Petition it has been submitted “that the financial
condition of the petitioner is not very strong. Pre-deposit of such
a huge amount shall put the Petitioner into financial hardship”.
The Tribunal noted that although learned counsel for the parties
had addressed arguments on the merits of the Appeal, the only
question before the Tribunal pertained to the deposit of tax as a
pre-condition for maintaining the Appeal before the First
Appellate Authority:Additional Commissioner-IV.

The Tribunal

took the view that keeping the financial position of the Petitioner
in perspective the Order dated 2.2.2006 by the First Appellate
Authority should be modified to the extent that it shall entertain
the Appeal if the Appellant deposits Rs.2 crores within a period of
thirty days, i.e., on or before 16.9.2006. It is this direction that
has been assailed before us by means of this writ petition.

3.

At the hearing Mr. Lakshmi Kumaran, learned counsel for

the Petitioner, had asserted that even if it is assumed that the
Petitioner

has sufficient

liquidity to make the deposit of

the

Rs.2 crores as per the direction of the Tribunal, this direction was
not in consonance with the law and hence ought to be set aside
by this Court. He has further contended that the entire Demand
pertaining to of Rs.4,30,19,815/- under the DST Act was
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 3 of 24

unsustainable under the statute and was, therefore, disputed in
toto. This being the position the said sum, or Rs.4.20 crores, or
Rs.2 crores, could not be set-down as a pre-condition for
entertaining the Appeal. Mr. Lakshmi Kumaran has vociferously
argued that financial hardship is not a consideration under the
Sales Tax laws as it indubitably is under the Excise and Customs
statutes.

His contention is that if a sum is disputed then its

deposit cannot be made a pre-condition for

entertaining

the

Appeal.

4.

On behalf of the Revenue Shri H.L. Taneja has fervently

argued that we should abjure from going into the merits of the
case; that as against the Demand of Rs.4,13,19,815/- under the
DST Act the Petitioner is now required to deposit Rs.2 crores
only, which is most reasonable. Reliance has been placed by Mr.
Taneja on State of Punjab -vs- Punjab Fibres Ltd., [2005] 139 STC
200 where it has been observed that if the language is clear and
unambiguous Courts ought not to grant relief solely on
sympathetic considerations. This decision, however, militates
against the Revenue for the reasons that there is a distinction,
difference and divergence between the provisions of the Sales
Tax Act and Delhi Value Added Tax Act, 2004 (for the sake of
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 4 of 24

brevity 'DVAT Act') on the one hand, and the Customs and Excise
Acts on the other. In the latter financial hardship is a
consideration, whereas in the former the only pre-condition is the
deposit of amounts in dispute, by the Appellant. Mr. Taneja has
thereafter

drawn

our

attention

to

Novopan

India

Ltd.,

Hyderabad -vs- Collector of Central Excise and Customs, 1994
Supp(3) SCC 606 which, in our opinion, has not been properly
understood.

The general rule is that while interpreting fiscal

statutes benefit of doubt or ambiguity must be given to the
assessee. In Novopan the Court had encountered an exception
or exemption provision and it is in this context that it had been
enunciated that the advantage of ambiguity or doubt must go to
the State.

In other words, any exception to the general rule

would be available only if it is clearly and unequivocally in favour
of the assessee. In order to counter the argument Mr. Taneja has
also made a futile effort to garner support from Balvant N.

Viswamitra -vs- Yadav Sadashiv Mule (Dead) through LRs, (2004)
8 SCC 706. However, in that case it was found that the decree
which was at the fulcrum of the dispute could not be described as
a nullity by any stretch of the imagination. In order to arrive at
such a conclusion the Court must perforce weigh every facet of
the merits of the case and it is this very exercise that Mr. Taneja
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 5 of 24

would like us to avoid.

5.

The decision of this Court in Vijay Power Generators Ltd.

-vs- Commissioner of Sales Tax, [2000] 120 STC 377 has been
relied upon by the learned counsel for both the parties. The
Bench comprising Arijit Pasayat and D.K. Jain, J., as their
Lordships then were, reiterated the well-entrenched legal
principle that there is no inherent or constitutional right to file an
appeal bestowed on any person; it is the creation of a statute and
must be construed strictly. Therefore, it is open to the Legislature
to circumscribe and curtail the right to prefer an appeal by
imposing whichever fetters are considered appropriate by it.
Accordingly, the requirement for the discharge of a liability as a
pre-condition of the hearing of the appeal is validly imposable. In

Prince Plastics & Chemical Industries -vs- Commissioner of
Sales Tax, [2003] 131 STR 372 the Bench presided over by
Justice Dalveer Bhandari, as his Lordship then was, had also
articulated this very position in the following words:25. Despite having a good case a party may receive an
unfavourable order/judgment. It may then not only suffer
the discomfort of taking steps to have the order
corrected in appeal, but may additionally have to comply
with onerous pre-conditions for the hearing of the
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 6 of 24

appeal. In Shyam Kishore -vs- Municipal Corporation of
Delhi, (1993) 1 SCC 22, somewhat, similar pre-conditions
for the disposal of an appeal against an assessment order
had come up for consideration before the honourable
Supreme Court. Under the MCD Act an appeal against
the assessment cannot be heard without pre-deposit of
the tax. It was held that the appellate authority has no
jurisdiction to waive the condition of deposit or stay the
collection of tax pending disposal of the appeal. The Apex
Court

also

held

that

despite

these

stringent

requirements, the remedy of an appeal was nonetheless
an

alternative

remedy

thereby

discouraging

the

invocation of extraordinary powers of the High Court
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution. As we
have already mentioned, the impugned Rules merely
implement this settled principle of law. In Shyam

Kishore the plea that the provision for deposit of duty or
penalty pending appeal whittles down the appellant's
right of appeal and is, therefore, ultra vires did not find
favour with the honourable Supreme Court. The Court
relied on its previous observations in Vijay Prakash D.
Mehta -vs- Collector of Customs (Preventive), Bombay
[1989] 72 STC 324(SC) : (1988) 4 SCC 402, viz., “right to
appeal is neither an absolute right nor an ingredient of
natural justice the principles of which must be followed
in all judicial and quasi-judicial adjudications. The right
to appeal is a statutory right and it can be circumscribed
by the conditions in the grant”. This position was once
again reiterated in Gujarat Agro Industries Co. Ltd. -vsWP(C) 14164/2006

Page 7 of 24

Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad, AIR
1999 SC 1818. It was again articulated in State of

Haryana -vs- Maruti Udyog Ltd., [2001] 124 STC 285(SC)
: AIR 2000 SC 2941 in the context of sales tax legislation,
in these words:
“There cannot be any dispute that right of
appeal is the creature of the statute and has to be
exercised within the limits and according to the
procedure provided by law. It is filed for invoking the
powers of a superior court to redress the error of the
court below, if any. No right of appeal can be
conferred except by express words. An appeal, for its
maintainability, must have a clear authority of law.
Sub-section (5) of section 39 of the Act vests a
discretion in the appellate authority to entertain the
appeal if it is filed within sixty days and the amount of
tax assessed along with penalty and interest, if any,
recoverable from the persons has been paid. The
aforesaid

restriction

is

subject

to

the

proviso

conferring discretion upon the appellate authority to
dispense with the deposit of the amount only on proof
of the fact that the appellant was unable to pay the
amount. Before deciding the appeal, the appellate
authority

affords

an

opportunity

to

the

party

concerned to either pay the amount or make out a
case for the stay in terms of proviso to sub-section (5)
of section 39 of the Act. Once the conditions specified
under sub-section (5) of section 39 are complied with,
the appeal is born for being disposed of on merits

WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 8 of 24

after hearing both the sides”.
This dicta is not confined only to taxation
matters and applies with equal force even to civil
appeals, as would be obvious on a reading of the
decision in Kondiba Dagadu Kadam -vs- Savitribai

Sopan Gujar, AIR 1999 SC 2213.

6.

Thereafter in the context of Section 43(5) of the DST Act

Vijay Power specifically held that in exercising the discretion
contained in the said provision the concerned authority has only
to consider (a) the existence of a prima facie case in favour of the
assessee, (b) balance of convenience qua the deposit or
otherwise, (c) irreparable loss, if any, to be caused in case stay is
not granted and (d) safeguard of public interest. This discretion
has to be exercised according to law, reason and justice and not
as a result

of private opinion or humour or arbitrariness.

Moreover, all these factors should co-exist as they are of equal
importance.

In Mehsana Dist. Co-op Milk P.U.Ltd. -vs-

Union of India,

2003 (154) ELT 347, the Apex Court had

remanded the matter back for reconsideration to the Appellate
Authority since the prima facie merits had not been satisfactorily
addressed whereas the prima facie balance of convenience had
apparently been concentrated upon.

WP(C) 14164/2006

Vijay Power had been

Page 9 of 24

assessed to extra demands of Rs.2,34,93,150 and Rs.1,43,44,384/under the DST Act and the Central Act respectively. In appellate
proceedings

a

direction

had

been

made

for

deposit

of

Rs.20,00,000/- and Rs.5,00,000/- respectively and in Revision this
was reduced to Rs.15,00,000/- and Rs.3,00,000/- respectively.
After articulating the above enunciation of the law the Division
Bench stated that no modifications to the Order were called for.
In Jagannath Dudadhar -vs- Commissioner of Sales Tax, 2004
136 STC 235 the Division Bench presided over by Justice D.K.
Jain, as his Lordship then was, reiterated that while exercising
powers under the proviso to Section 43(5) what is required to be
seen is whether (a) there is a prima facie case involving grant of
full stay; (b) the balance of convenience qua deposit or other wise
and (c) irreparable loss, if any, would be caused to the appellant
in case stay is not granted. It was further observed that the
Appellate Authority must be mindful that the condition of predeposit should not be so stringent as to be incapable of being
complied with. The Appellate Tribunal, Sales Tax, Delhi had
directed the Petitioner to make a pre-deposit of Rs.3,21,00,000/in cash and for the furnishing of a surety for Rs.1,87,40,000/-,
thus aggregating to Rs.5,08,40,000/-. The Bench did not reduce
the amount, but permitted credits of Rs.46,50,000/- lacs which
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 10 of 24

had been deposited in the Court and Rs.80,00,000/- which was
indisputably due as refunds, to be deducted from the quantum of
the amount directed as the pre-deposit. In J.N.Chemicals Pvt

Ltd. -vs- CEGAT, 1991 (53) ELT 543, the Division Bench of the
Calcutta High Court opined that since a judgment existed in
favour of the appellant on all fours, the power to dispense with
the pre-deposit requirement ought to have been exercised. This
was also the approach taken by the Division Bench of this Court
in Keramos -vs- CEGAT, New Delhi,

2003 (153) ELT 301.

In

similar vein another Division Bench of this Court had found it
unreasonable to require pre-deposit of the tax where the liability
was initiated and founded on a palpably time-barred show-cause
notice. The same Division Bench ordered complete waiver of predeposit in CW(P) 4949/1997 titled Monika Electronics Ltd. -vs-

Union of India, decided on 23-2-2000, keeping the existence of a
judgment favourable to the Appellant in perspective, which
judgment was not applied by the Tribunal. In ITC Ltd. -vs-

Commissioner (Appeals), CUS. & C. EX. MEERUT-I, 2005 (184)
ELT 347 the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court has
opined that as soon as the existence of a strong prima facie case
on merits is disclosed,

it would cause undue hardship to the

appellant to require it to make the pre-deposit, regardless of the
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 11 of 24

fact that the appellant enjoyed a good financial condition.

7.

In CW Nos. 17214/2006, 17513/2006 and 17616/2006

titled Kuber Tobacco Products (P) Ltd. -vs- Commissioner of

Value Added Tax decided on 27.11.2006 vires of Section 43(5) of
the DST Act had been challenged. The Division Bench repulsed
this assault. It held that the extraordinary powers contained in
Article 226 of the Constitution of India ought not to be employed
to circumvent the making of the pre-deposit. The decisions in

State of Bombay -vs- Supreme General Films Exchange Ltd., AIR
1960 SC 980, Anant Mills Co. Ltd. -vs- State of Gujarat, AIR 1975
SC 1234 and M/s. Shanti Fragrances -vs- Union of India, [2006]
144 STC 529(Delhi) were noted.

8.

It would be improper for us to ignore the fact that the

Legislature has considered it appropriate to make a departure
from the system established under the Customs and Excise and
Municipal statutes, all of which require that the amount assessed
as tax must be deposited as a pre-condition for the consideration
and hearing of an appeal. So far as the Sales Tax or the DVAT
statutes are concerned an appellant must deposit the amount of
tax which is not disputed by the dealer/appellant. The Appellate
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 12 of 24

Authority may thereafter reduce or waive the amounts in
controversy and may at best require the furnishing of a security
by the applicant/dealer.

9.

While exercising discretion to waive or reduce the tax and

penalty challenged by the appellant the Appellate Authority must
satisfy itself of the existence or absence of a prima facie case setup by the appellant, in whose favour the balance of convenience
must lie, and who would be visited with irreparable loss unless
interim orders are passed; it should always be mindful that
public interest or interests of the Revenue are not endangered.
So far as the Sales Tax and DVAT Acts are concerned it appears
to us that safeguarding the interests of the Revenue is adequately
achieved through the requirement of the furnishing of security or
a surety. It is in this context that Mr. Taneja has drawn attention
to the oft-quoted decision in Assistant Collector of Central Excise,

Chandan Nagar, West Bengal -vs- Dunlop India Ltd., AIR 1985
SC 330, the relevant portion of which reads as follows:7. Now coming to the facts
case,the

respondent,

Dunlop

India

of the present
Limited

is

a

manufacturer of tyres tubes and various other rubber
products. By a notification dated April 6, 1984 issued
by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 13 of 24

(Department of Revenue) in exercise of the powers
conferred by R.8(1) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944,
tyres, falling under Item No.16 of the First Schedule to
the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944, were exempt
from certain percentage of excise duty to the extent
that the manufacturers had not availed themselves of
the exemption granted under certain other earlier
notifications. The Department was of the view that the
Company was not entitled to the exemption as it has
cleared the goods earlier without paying central excise
duty, but on furnishing Bank Guarantees under various
interim orders of courts. The Company claimed the
benefit of the exemption to the tune of Rs.6.05 crores
and filed a writ petition in the Calcutta High Court and
sought an interim order restraining the central excise
authorities from the levy and collection of excise duty.
The learned Single Judge took the view that a prima
facie case had been made out in favour of the Company
and by an interim order allowed the benefit of the
exemption to the tune of Rs.two crores ninety three
lakhs and eighty five thousand for which amount the
company was directed to furnish a Bank Guarantee,
that is to say, the goods were directed to be released
on the Bank Guarantee being furnished. An appeal was
preferred by the Assistant Collector of Central Excise
under clause 10 of the Letters Patent and a Division
Bench of the Calcutta High Court confirmed the order
of the learned single judge, but made a slight
modification in that the Collector of Central Excise was

WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 14 of 24

given the liberty to encash 30% of the Bank Guarantee.
The Assistant Collector of Central Excise has preferred
this appeal by special leave. By our interim order dated
Nov.15, 1984, we vacated the orders granted by the
learned single judge as well as by the Division Bench.
We gave two weeks' time to the respondent Company
to file a counter. No counter has, however, been filed.
Shri F.S. Nariman, learned counsel, however appeared
for the respondent. We do not have the slightest doubt
that the orders of the learned single judge as well as
Division Bench are wholly unsustainable and should
never have been made. Even assuming that the
company had established a prima facie case, about
which we do not express any opinion, we do not think
that it was sufficient justification for granting the
interim orders as was done by the High Court. There
was no question of any balance of convenience being in
favour of the respondent-Company. The balance of
convenience was certainly in favour of the Government
of India. Governments are not run on mere Bank
Guarantees. We notice that very often some courts act
as if furnishing a Bank Guarantee would meet the ends
of justice. No governmental business or for that matter
no business of any kind can be run on mere Bank
Guarantees. Liquid cash is necessary for the running
of a Government as indeed any other enterprise. We
consider that where matters of public revenue are
concerned, it is of utmost importance to realise that
interim orders ought not to be granted merely because

WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 15 of 24

a prima facie case has been shown. More is required.
The balance of convenience must be clearly in favour
of the making of an interim order and there should not
be the slightest indication of a likelihood of prejudice
to the public interest. We are very sorry to remark that
these considerations have not been borne in mind by
the High Court and interim order of this magnitude had
been granted for the mere asking. The appeal is
allowed with costs.
These views are also to be found in Siliguri Municipality -vsAmalendu Das, AIR 1984 SC 653; State of Madhya Pradesh -vs-

M/s. M. Vyavsaya & Co., AIR 1997 SC 993 and Upadhyay & Co.
-vs- State of U.P., (1999) 1 SCC 81.

10.

Caution must, however, be sounded that the decision was

rendered in respect of Central Excise, the regime of which is
vitally different to that of Sales Tax or DVAT statutes. However,
the principle that is beyond controversy is that merely because
sums of money have to be deposited as a pre-condition for
entertaining an appeal the balance of convenience or irreparable
loss would not automatically or per se be shifted in favour of the
assessee. Accordingly, in all fiscal statutes even in the absence of
an overt expression or articulation, the twin considerations of
balance of convenience and irreparable loss are manifest in the
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 16 of 24

concept of undue financial hardship. Without this synthesising,
the decisions in Vijay Power and Jagannath would run aground
as this would

be per incuriam of Dunlop

India being

irreconcilable therewith. Before venturing on we must recall that
in Dunlop India the Apex Court had observed poignantly that “in
the case of indirect taxation where the burden has already been
passed on to the consumer no interim relief should be given to
the manufacturer dealer or the like.”

11.

In Vijay Prakash D. Mehta -vs- Collector of Customs

(Preventive), Bombay, 1989(72) STC 324 : AIR 1988 SC 2010
Section 129E of the Customs Act was in consideration. The Apex
Court observed that the right to appeal is neither an absolute
right nor an ingredient of natural justice and these principles
must be followed in all judicial and quasi-judicial adjudications.
Since all relevant factors had been kept in perspective by the
Tribunal, the Apex Court found no merit in the appeal before it.

12.

Mr. Lakshmi Kumaran has contended that the existence of

a prima facie case is so evident in the Petitioner's favour as to
render all other considerations superfluous. This argument is
predicated on Rule 11 of the DST Rules, 1975 which prescribes
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 17 of 24

that in calculating its taxable turnover, a registered dealer may
deduct from his turnover sales made to any undertaking
supplying electrical energy to the public in Delhi under a licence
or sanction granted or deemed to have been granted under the
Indian Electricity Act, 1910 in respect of goods for use in Delhi by
it directly in the generation or distribution of electrical energy in
Delhi. He has drawn assistance from the decision in Suresh Jindal
-vs- BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. in LPA No.256/2006 decided on
20.2.2006. The Division Bench presided over by Chief Justice
Markandeya Katju, as his Lordship then was, had ruled that since
the respondent had applied for a licence under Rule 10(2) of the
Delhi Electricity Reforms (Transfer Scheme) Rules 2001 within
sixty days of 1.7.2002, it was clothed with all the powers of a
licensee under the Indian Electricity Act, 1910. It is Mr. Lakshmi
Kumaran's contention that this observation has palpably escaped
the attention of the Commissioner. On the other hand Mr. Taneja
has retorted by submitting that the factual matrix in that case
was altogether different to the present case. In our view this
argument of Mr. Lakshmi Kumaran is not so irresistible as would
brook no further consideration. It touches upon the merits of the
case. It is not one which must be accepted no sooner it is stated.
This question will, no doubt, be considered at the time when the
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 18 of 24

Appeal is heard for final disposal. This, however, can happen only
if orders of pre-deposit are complied with. It is in these
circumstances that we do not consider it appropriate, at this
stage of the proceedings, to go into the intricate question of of
which of the statutes, i.e., DST Act or DVAT Act apply. The Order
in Original was passed on 31.3.2005 and the Appeal/Objections
were filed in May, 2005 after the coming into force of the DVAT
Act on 1.4.2005.

13.

Section 43(5) of the DST Act prescribes that no appeal

against an Assessment Order shall be entertained by the
Appellate Authority unless such appeal is accompanied by
satisfactory proof of the payment of the tax or penalty, provided
that such Appellate Authority may entertain the Appeal without
such payment on the appellant providing a security for such
payment or for any lesser amount. The appellant must, however,
pay the amount of admitted tax. The DST Act stands repealed by
virtue of Section 106 of the DVAT Act with effect from 1.4.2005.
In the present regime, as established by the DVAT Act,
'Objections' under Section 74(1) can be filed by a person who is
dissatisfied with an assessment made under the Act, provided
that such action cannot be entertained unless the amount of tax,
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 19 of 24

interest of penalty assessed that is not in dispute has been paid,
failing which the 'Objections' shall be deemed to have not been
filed (The language is lifted from the statute). The discretion to
waive pre-deposit amount of tax, interest or penalty that is not in
dispute has not been reposed in the Commissioner. This will be
evident on a reading of Section 76 of the DVAT Act which governs
the functioning of the Appellate Tribunal. Section 76(1)(4)
prescribes that no appeal against an assessment shall be
entertained by the Appellate Tribunal unless the appeal is
accompanied by satisfactory proof of the payment of the amount
in dispute and any other amount assessed as due from the
person; provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, if it thinks fit,
entertain an appeal without payment of some or all of the amount
in dispute, on the appellant furnishing in the prescribed manner
security for such amount as it may direct; provided further that
no appeal shall be entertained by the Appellate Tribunal unless it
is satisfied that such amount as the appellant admits to be due
from him has been paid. This creates an anomalous position in
that at the second tier of appeal, i.e., before the Appellate
Tribunal, whilst the amount admitted to be due by the appellant
must be deposited, [similar to the 'Objections' stage] the
Appellate Tribunal may waive 'the amount in dispute'. The
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 20 of 24

repeated use of the word 'dispute' in both situations is confusing
and ought to have been avoided by the Legislature. However, it
can have no meaning other than the total or entire amount found
payable by the dealer who had filed 'Objections' under Section 74
(1) of the DVAT Act.

14.

The Customs Act, 1962 provides for filing of an appeal to

the Commissioner (Appeals) under Section 128. Thereafter,
Section 129 is the fasciculous concerning the functioning of the
next authority, namely, Custom, Excise and Service Tax Appellate
Tribunal. Section 129E of the Customs Act mandates that the
person desirous of appealing against an order demanding duty,
interest or penalty as the case may be shall, pending the Appeal
deposit any or all such amount. Thereafter, the proviso dedicates
discretion with the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate
Tribunal as the case may be hearing the Appeal to dispense with
such deposit as it may deem fit mindful always that the interest of
the Revenue are adequately safeguarded. The discretion is
severely and pointedly circumscribed by and dependent upon the
formation of the opinion by the Commissioner (Appeals) or the
Appellate Tribunal that the pre-deposit of duty, interest or
penalty levied would cause undue hardship to the appellant and
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 21 of 24

thereby render the remedy illusory. The provisions of Section 35F
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 are in pari materia with Section
129 E of the Customs Act. This important factor, i.e., likelihood
of undue hardship being visited on the appellant, is absent in the
Sales Tax Act. Does this inexorably lead to the conclusion that
since this feature is conspicuously absent from the Sales Tax
statutes the aspect of the financial health of the appellant is
altogether irrelevant. If the answer is in the affirmative, then Mr.
Lakshmi Kumaran is correct in contending that even though the
Appellant may presently be enjoying financial well being and
possesses sufficient liquidity to deposit the entire sales tax
demand, this would not be a relevant consideration. In fact, since
financial hardship is deliberately not one of the concomitants
necessary for the grant of interim relief in appeals, the statutory
indication is that sales-tax demands must be deposited as the rule
or

norm,

and

their

interdictment

is

the

exception.

The

observations in Dunlop are of great relevance in Sales Tax
disputes.

15. It appears to us that the answer is to be found in Vijay

Power, Jagannath and Prince Plastics dictums. It would not be
sanguine to assume that the fortunes of a litigant diminish as it
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 22 of 24

unsuccessfully progresses through the tiers and ladders of
appeals. Certainly the balance of convenience normally should
shift in favour of the respondent in the appeal, which in this case
is the Sales Tax Department. Courts should not falter from
safeguarding public interests. When stay orders are readily given
the direct result is that appeals are filed even in cases where the
likelihood of success is slender. Irreparable loss, akin to balance
of convenience of which it is an important and integral facet, also
veers in favour of the respondent as a litigant ascends the jural
hierarchy. This is especially so where moneys have to be paid to
the State since refunds or adjustments are easy to effectuate.
The reverse position in fact offends the Dunlop dictum. What
remains to be cogitated upon is the existence of a prima facie
case, and in this regard it seems to us that the assailed Order
must be devoid of jurisdiction or be so palpably incorrect as to
demand and dictate interference. It must be perverse, which
means that the vital question brooks no two opinions. Perversity
cannot cohabit with dialectic debate. If the merits of a case call
for careful consideration, as it does in the matter in hand,

a

prima facie case cannot exist. Keeping these factors in mind, as
also the absence of any requirement for consideration of financial
hardship, we find no reason to interfere in the operation of the
WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 23 of 24

impugned Orders. The Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed but
we refrain from imposing costs.
C.M. 11118/2006
16.

Interim

Orders

dated

8.9.2006

are

recalled.

The

application is dismissed.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

( J.P. SINGH )
JUDGE
February 15, 2007
tp

WP(C) 14164/2006

Page 24 of 24

