IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO(OS) No.47/2005
NATIONAL PROJECTS CONSTRUCTIONS
CORPORATON LIMITED
.... APPELLANT
Through Mr. Santosh Kumar, Adv.
versus
M/S. BUNDELA BANDHU
CONSTRUCTIONS COMPANY
..... RESPONDENT
Through Ms. Seema Bengani with
Ms. Anshul Singh, Advs.
WITH
EFA(OS) No.9/2005
NATIONAL PROJECTS CONSTRUCTIONS
CORPORATON LIMITED
.... APPELLANT
Through Mr. Santosh Kumar, Adv.
versus
M/S. BUNDELA BANDHU
CONSTRUCTIONS COMPANY
..... RESPONDENT
Through Ms. Seema Bengani
with Ms. Anshul Singh, Advs.

Date of Hearing : 02nd April, 2007
Date of Decision: 18th April, 2007

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 1 of 26

*

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.P. SINGH

1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.
:
1.

Whether the judgment should be reported in
the Digest?

Yes
Yes

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
This Appeal assails the Order of the learned Single Judge

passed on 9.12.2004 dismissing the Appellant's Objections under
Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short
'A & C Act') on the grounds that they had been filed beyond the
period stipulated by the statute. The Application for condoning
the delay in filing these Objections has been dismissed holding
that the Court did not possess any power to condone the delay.
The learned Single Judge has applied the Judgment of the
Supreme Court in Union of India -vs- Popular Construction Co.,
(2001) 8 SCC 470 = 2001(6) Scale 657, and in particular
paragraph 12 thereof. Having dismissed the Objections the
learned Single Judge had also directed that the Bank Guarantees
retained by the Respondent/Judgment Debtor should also be
returned on or before 15.1.2005.

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 2 of 26

2.

The assailed Award purports to have been signed on

20.1.1997.

Execution

Proceedings

have

inexplicably

been

initiated by the Respondent after the passage of seven years
thereafter. The Appellant/Objector categorically contends that a
copy of the Award was not delivered to it at any time, even
though this was statutorily required to be done. Section 31(5) of
the A & C Act states that – “After the arbitral award is made, a
signed copy shall be delivered to each party”.

The further

argument on behalf of the Appellant is that it learnt of the
passing of this Award only on 23.3.2004 when it received notice
in the Execution Proceedings (Ex. P. 4/2004).
thereafter states that “files of

The Appellant

the Execution Case were

subsequently inspected, a copy of the award obtained from the
Respondent/Claimant and now the objections under section 34 of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 are being filed”. The
Objections under Section 34 of the A & C Act challenging the
Award are dated 31.7.2004 of which the supporting Affidavit is
dated 30.7.2004. They came to be eventually filed in the Registry
of this Court on 7.8.2004. An application under Section 34 of the
A & C Act read with Section 5 of the Limitation Act for
condonation of delay, which ought to have accompanied the
Objections, appears to have been filed on 4.10.2004. It is obvious,
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 3 of 26

therefore, that even though the Award visited the Appellant with
a liability running into several lacs of rupees which after interest
would run into crores of rupees, the conduct of the Appellant
manifests repeated and reckless carelessness.

Even in such

cases the request that is repeatedly made to the Court is that the
delay and inept handling by Government organisations should at
the most be looked upon askance, and the Court should bail out
and rescue a slothful party from the legal grave that it has dug
for itself. We should not overlook the fact that Parliament has
made no distinction between Government and private persons so
far as the law of limitation is concerned. Experience has shown
that latitude given by the Courts has only come to be misused;
delay of some days of yore, has been replaced by delay of months
and years.

3.

It is in these circumstances that we have to decide whether

the application seeking condonation of delay in filing Objections
to an Award is maintainable and could be granted by the Court.
The learned Single Judge has applied paragraph 12 of Popular

Construction, which reads as follows:
12. As far as the language of Section 34 of the 1996 Act
is concerned, the crucial words are “but not thereafter”
used in the proviso to sub-section (3). In our opinion, this
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 4 of 26

phrase would amount to an express exclusion within the
meaning of Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act, and
would therefore bar the application of Section 5 of that
Act. Parliament did not need to go further. To hold that
the court could entertain an application to set aside the
award

beyond

the

extended

period

under

the

proviso,would render the phrase “but not thereafter”
wholly otiose. No principle of interpretation would justify
such a result.

4.

The regime of the repealed Arbitration Act, 1940, was that

an Award had to metamorphose itself into being the 'rule of
Court' before it attained executable efficacy. In the scheme of
the A & C Act an Award can be enforced subject to the disposal of
any Objections that may be filed. Civil Courts have a limited role
to play. Even in the comparatively fluid format of the repealed
statute, Courts had ruled that there was no scope for enlarging
time or condoning delay in approaching the Court by way of
Objections to an Award, which position would a fortiori continue
in the prevailing statutory scheme.

The conclusion reached in

M/s. Enkay Construction Company-vs- The Vice Chairman, DDA,
2000(86) DLT 748 = 2000(6) AD (Delhi) 530 was that the uniform
view is that if Objections are filed beyond the period of 30 days as
laid down in the Arbitration Act, 1940, they cannot be looked into
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 5 of 26

since the Court does not possess power to entertain Applications
under Section 5 of the Limitation Act.

The opinion of various

High Courts had been considered. Reliance had been garnered
from these paragraphs of Madan Lal v. Sunder Lal, AIR 1967 SC
1233:(7)

This analysis of the relevant provisions of the Act

contained in Chap. II which apply mutatis mutandis
to arbitrations of the other two types shows that the
Court has to pronounce judgment in accordance with the
award if it sees no cause to remit the award or any of
the matters referred to arbitration for reconsideration, or
if it sees no cause to set aside the award. The Court has
to wait for the time given to a party to make an
application for setting aside the award and where such
an application has been made the Court has to decide it
first and if it rejects it the Court proceeds to pronounce
judgment according to the award. It is clear, therefore,
from S.17 that an application to set aside the award is
contemplated therein and it is only when no such
application has been made within the time allowed or if
such an application has been filed and has been rejected
that the Court proceeds to pronounce judgment in terms
of

the

award.

The

Act,

therefore,

contemplates the making of an application to set aside
an

award

and

the

grounds

on

which

such

an

application can be made are to be found in S.30. The
grounds on which an application can be made for setting

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 6 of 26

aside the award are-(a) that an arbitrator or umpire has
misconducted himself or the proceedings, (b) that
an award has been made after the issue of an order by
the

Court

superseding

the

arbitration

or

after

arbitration proceedings have become invalid under
S.35,

or

(c)

that

an

award

has

been

improperly procured or is otherwise invalid. These are
the only grounds on which an award can be set aside
under S.30 and it will be seen that if a party wants an
award to be set aside on any of these grounds it has to
make an application. Thus any party wishing to have an
award set aside on the ground that it was improperly
procured

or

otherwise

invalid

has

to

make

an

application. We may also refer to S.32 which lays down
that

"notwithstanding

any

law

for

the

time

being in force, no suit shall lie on any ground whatsoever
for a decision upon the existence, effect or validity
of an arbitration agreement or award, nor shall any
arbitration agreement or award be set aside, amended,
modified

or

in

any

way

affected

otherwise

than

as provided in this Act.
(8) It is clear, therefore, from the scheme of the Act that
if a party wants an award to be set aside on any of the
grounds mentioned in S.30 it must apply within 30 days
of the date of service of notice of filing of the award as
provided in Art.158 of the Limitation Act. If no such
application is made the award cannot be set aside on any
of the grounds specified in S.30 of the Act. It may
be conceded that there is no special form prescribed for

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 7 of 26

making such an application and in an appropriate case
an objection of the type made in this case may be
treated as such an application, if it is filed within the
period of limitation.

But if an objection like this has

been

the

filed

after

period

of

limitation

it

cannot be treated as an application to set aside the
award, for if it is so treated it will be barred by
limitation.
(9)

It is not in dispute in the present case that the

objections

raised

by

the

appellant

were

covered

by S.30 of the Act, and though the appellant did not pray
for setting aside the award in his objection that
was what he really wanted the Court to do after hearing
his objection. As in the present case the objection was
filed more than 30 days after the notice it could not be
treated as an application for setting the award, for
it would then be barred by limitation. The position thus
is that in the present case there was no application
to set aside the award on grounds mentioned in S.30
within the period of limitation and, therefore, the Court
could

not

grounds.

set
There

aside
can

the
be

award
no

doubt

on
on

those
the

scheme of the Act that any objection even in the nature
of a written-statement which falls under S.30 cannot be
considered by the Court unless such an objection is
made within the period of limitation (namely, 30 days),
though if such an objection is made within limitation
that objection may in appropriate cases be treated as an
application for setting aside the award.

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 8 of 26

(10) Learned counsel for the appellant, however, urges
that S.17 gives power to the Court to set aside
the

award

and

that

such

power

can

be

exercised even where an objection in the form of a
written-statement has been made more than 30 days
after

the

service

of

the

notice

of

the

filing

of

the award as the Court can do so suo motu. He relies in
this

connection

on

Hastimal

Dalichand

V.

Hiralal

Motichand, AIR 1954 Bom 243 and Saha and Co. V.
Isharsingh

Kripalsingh,

AIR

1956

Cal

321

(FB).

Assuming that the Court has power to set aside the
award suo motu, we are of opinion that that power
cannot be exercised to set aside an award on grounds
which fall under S.30 of the Act, if taken in an
objection petition filed more than 30 days after service of
notice of filing of the award, for if that were so the
limitation provided under Art.158 of the Limitation Act
would be completely negatived. The two cases on which
the

appellant

relies

do

not

in

our

opinion

support him. In Hastimal's case, AIR 1954 Bom 243, it
was observed that "if the award directs a party to do an
act

which

is

prohibited

by

law

or

if

it

is

otherwise patently illegal or void it would be open to the
Court to consider this patent defect in the award suo
motu, and when the Court acts suo motu no question of
limitation prescribed by Art.158 can arise." These
observations only show that the Court can act suo motu
in certain circumstances which do not fall within S.30 of
the Act. Saha and Co.'s case, AIR 1956 Cal 321(FB), was

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 9 of 26

a decision of five Judges by a majority of 3:2 and the
majority judgment is against the appellant. The minority
judgment certainly takes the view that the non-existence
or invalidity of an arbitration agreement and an order of
reference to arbitration may be raised after the period of
limitation for the purpose of setting aside an award
because they are not grounds for setting aside the award
under S.30. It is not necessary in the present case to
resolve the conflict between the majority and the
minority Judges in Saha and Co.'s case, AIR 1956 Cal 321
(FB), for even the minority judgment shows that it is only
where the grounds are not those falling within S.30, that
the award may be set aside on an objection made beyond
the period of limitation, even though no application has
been made for setting aside the award within the period
of limitation. Clearly, therefore, where an objection as in
the present case raises grounds which fall squarely
within S.30 of the Act that objection cannot be heard by
the

Court

and

cannot

be

treated

as

an

application for setting aside the award unless it is made
within

the

period

of

limitation.

Saha

and

Co.'s

case, AIR 1956 Cal 321 (FB), therefore, also does not
help the appellant.

5.

Reliance has been placed by Mr. Santosh Kumar, learned

counsel for the Appellant, on Union of India -vs- Tecco Trichy
Engineers & Contractors, (2005) 4 SCC 239 which has been
decided without reference to Popular Construction.
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Their

Page 10 of 26

Lordships observed as follows:8. The delivery of an arbitral award under sub-section (5)
of Section 31 is not a matter of mere formality. It is a
matter of substance.

It is only after the stage under

Section 31 has passed that the stage of termination of
arbitral proceedings within the meaning of Section 32 of
the Act arises.

The delivery of arbitral award to the

party, to be effective, has to be “received” by the party.
This delivery by the Arbitral Tribunal and receipt by the
party of the award sets in motion several periods of
limitation such as an application for correction and
interpretation of an award within 30 days under Section
33(1), an application for making an additional award
under Section 33(4) and an application for setting aside
an award under Section 34(3) and so on. As this delivery
of the copy of award has the effect of conferring certain
rights on the party as also bringing to an end the right to
exercise those rights on expiry of the prescribed period
of limitation which would be calculated from that date,
the delivery of the copy of award by the Tribunal and the
receipt thereof by each party constitutes an important
stage in the arbitral proceedings.
9. ...
10. In the present case, the Chief Engineer had signed
the agreement on behalf of the Union of India entered
into with the respondent. In the arbitral proceedings the
Chief Engineer represented the Union of India and the
notices, during proceedings of the arbitration, were
served on the Chief Engineer. Even the arbitral award
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 11 of 26

clearly mentions that the Union of India is represented
by

the

Deputy

Chief

Engineer/Gauge

Conversion,

Chennai. The Chief Engineer is directly concerned with
the arbitration, as the subject-matter of arbitration
relates to the department of the Chief Engineer and he
has direct knowledge of the arbitral proceedings and the
question involved before the arbitrator. The General
Manager of the Railways has only referred the matter for
arbitration as required under the contract. He cannot be
said to be aware of the question involved in the
arbitration nor the factual aspect in detail, on the basis of
which the Arbitral Tribunal had decided the issue before
it, unless they are all brought to his notice by the officer
dealing with that arbitration and who is in charge of
those proceedings. Therefore, in our opinion, service of
the arbitral award on the General Manager by way of
receipt in his inwards office cannot be taken to be
sufficient notice so as to activate the department to take
appropriate steps in respect of and in regard to the
award passed by the arbitrators to constitute the starting
point of limitation for the purposes of Section 34(3) of the
Act. The service of notice on the Chief Engineer on 19-32001 would be the starting point of limitation to
challenge the award in the Court.
11. We cannot be oblivious of the fact of impersonal
approach

in

the

government

organisations like Railways.

departments

and

In the very nature of the

working of government departments a decision is not
taken unless the papers have reached the person

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 12 of 26

concerned and then an approval, if required, of the
competent authority or official above has been obtained.
All this could not have taken place unless the Chief
Engineer had received the copy of the award when only
the delivery of the award within the meaning of subsection (5) of Section 31 shall be deemed to have taken
place.
12. The learned Single Judge of the High Court as also
the Division Bench have erred in holding the application
under Section 34 filed on behalf of the appellant as
having been filed beyond a period of 3 months and 30
days within the meaning of sub-section (3) of Section 34.
There was a delay of 27days only and not of 34 days as
held by the High Court. In the facts and circumstances
of the case, the delay in filing the application deserves to
be condoned and the application under sub-section (1) of
Section 34 of the Act filed on behalf of the appellant
deserves to be heard and decided on merits.
13. The appeal is allowed. The application under Section
34(1) filed on behalf of the appellant shall stand restored
in the High Court, to be heard and decided in accordance
with law by the learned Single Judge.

No order as to

costs.

6.

A proper perusal of this Judgment will disclose that their

Lordships were primarily influenced by the fact that a copy of the
Award had not been served on the officer concerned with the
dispute. The question of there being 24 days delay only was
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 13 of 26

obviously made en passant since otherwise it may have become
irreconcilable with the Popular Construction. The ratio of

Tecco Trichy is that Award should be delivered to the officer
concerned and to this extent it is of invaluable assistance to the
Appellant.

7.

Learned counsel for the Appellant has next drawn our

attention to the decision of the Apex Court in State of Goa -vs-

M/s. Western Builders, (2006) (6) Scale 574, which has also been
relied upon by learned counsel for the Respondent. Popular

Construction was brought to their Lordships notice along with
National Aluminum Co. Ltd. -vs- Pressteel and Fabrication (P)
Ltd., [(2004) 1 SCC 540 = 2003(10) Scale 1062]. Tecco Trichy,
however, was not cited and hence not considered. Their
Lordships took note of the fact that Section 43 of the A & C Act
envisaged the application of the Limitation Act, 1963 but in view
of Section 34 of the A & C Act read with Section 29(2) of the
Limitation Act, “the applicability of Section 5 of Limitation will
stand excluded

and

the

application for condonation of delay

upto a period of 30 days can be made to

the Court and not

beyond that”. Their Lordships thereafter took note of the fact
that there was no provision in the A & C Act dealing with the
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 14 of 26

bonafide filing of an action in a wrong forum. In our view, in this
context it is certainly arguable that principles of prescription
may have no role to play if Objections have been filed within the
prescribed period regardless of the fact that the filing is in a
Court not properly possessing jurisdiction. In such cases
principles analogous to Rules 10 and 10-A of Order VII of the
Code

of

Civil Procedure would require the return of the

Objections with liberty granted to the Objector to file them in
the proper forum within the period granted by the Court. In
these circumstances either of the Courts would not actually have
to condone the delay in filing the Objections. On the contrary,
the return would facilitate and ensure that the Objections are
dealt with and decided by the competent Court of jurisdiction. It
was on that reasoning that their Lordships pronounced in Tecco

Trichy that Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963 is applicable to
the A & C Act, 1996. This Judgment, therefore, is not a precedent
for the proposition that delay in filing Objections even beyond the
period of 120 days from the date on which the Award had been
delivered/served on the concerned party can be condoned.

8.

Mr. Santosh Kumar, learned counsel for the Appellant, has

sought to rely on M/s. Transparent Packers -vs- The ArbitratorEFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 15 of 26

cum-Managing Director, JT 2000(7) SC 574, in our understanding
which has scarce relevancy. All that was observed was that a
deponent need not invariably enter the witness box for his
affidavit to attract evidentiary value. The dismissal of the
application seeking condonation of delay only on this ground was
reversed. Thereafter reference has been made to State of

Haryana -vs- Chandra Mani, (1996) 3 SCC 132 placing special
emphasis on the observations to the effect that the State cannot
be put on the same footing as an individual. Their Lordships had
condoned a delay of 109 days in filing of the LPA before the High
Court. This decision is of no assistance to the Appellant since the
proviso to Section 34(3) of the A & C Act vests power and
discretion in the Court to entertain application for setting aside
an Award filed after three months of the delivery of the arbitral
Award on the concerned party, only for another thirty days but
not thereafter.

While condoning delay may be possible in

Appeals, discretion so far as Objections to an Award is concerned,
stands extinguished after thirty days post three months of
delivery of the Award.

9.

In this analysis we are of the opinion that there is no scope

to submit that the Court possesses powers to condone delay
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 16 of 26

beyond thirty days reckoned from the expiry of three months from
the date on which a signed copy of the Award is delivered to the
parties. Learned counsel for the Respondent has drawn attention
to the observations found in Indian Rayon Corporation Ltd. -vsRaunaq and Company Pvt. Ltd., (1988) 4 SCC 31, made in the
context of the Arbitration Act, 1940. The Court was called upon
to rule on Section 14(2) of the erstwhile Arbitration Act, the
provisions

of

which

are

materially

different.

Briefly,

the

observations to the effect that it is the service of the notice and
not the mode or method of the service that is important would
stand appreciably diluted in view of the statutory obligation
contained in Section 32(5) of the A & C Act.

10.

We have already mentioned that liability in terms of the

Award runs into lakhs of rupees. The Appellant has consistently
taken the stand that a copy of the Award has not been served on
them. The hiatus of almost seven years between the signing of
the Award on 20.1.1997 by the learned Arbitrator and initiation of
Execution Proceedings on 7.1.2004 can be ignored only at the
peril and expense of justice. The Court needs to be fully satisfied
of events that transpired within this period.

No explanation is

forthcoming as to why Execution Proceedings were initiated after
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 17 of 26

seven long years. The observations in Phonographic Performance

Ltd. -vs- Department of Trade and Industry, [2004] EWHC 1795
(Ch) 369 are apposite and read as follows:Whilst in the past, it would not be appropriate to
look at delay of a party commencing proceedings other
than by judicial review within the limitation period in
deciding whether the proceedings are abusive, this is no
longer the position. Whilst to commence proceedings
within a limitation period is not in itself an abuse, delay
in commencing proceedings is a factor which can be
taken into account in deciding whether the proceeding
are abusive. If proceedings of a type which would
normally be brought by judicial review are instead
brought by means of an ordinary claim, the court in
deciding whether the commencement of the proceedings
is an abuse of process, can taken into account whether
there has been unjustified delay in initiating the
proceedings.

11.

The Award has been filed in Execution Proceedings bearing

Ex. 4/2004 by the Decree Holder, along with EA 39/2004 dated
27.1.2004. It has not been received directly from the Arbitral
Tribunal. The Registry has reported that the son of the deceased
Arbitrator has stated that the arbitration files had been handed
over to the concerned parties/Advocates.

Material details are

conspicuously missing. The Award, which has been purportedly
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 18 of 26

signed by the Sole Arbitrator only on the last page, has not been
engrossed on adequate/proper stamp paper. The Sole Arbitrator
died on 14.3.2002.

Learned counsel for the Appellant has

submitted that several questions have been raised in the
Objections, which have not received jural attention since the
learned Single Judge has held that the subject Objections are
time-barred and hence do not require adjudication.

12.

While the Court does not possess power to condone delay

or enlarge time beyond 120 days (3 months plus thirty days) from
the date on which the arbitral Award was delivered to the party
desirous of filing Objections to the Award, the stringency and
rigidity of this provision makes it essential that the contemplated
delivery/service must be meticulously and properly effected. In
saying so we do not intend to impart a punctilious or fastidiously
formal connotation to the word 'delivered' employed in Section 31
(5) of the A & C Act but nevertheless there must be substantial
and authentic compliance thereunder obviously at the instance of
the Arbitral Tribunal itself. However, as has happened in the
present case, it would be of no legal consequence if, while
inspecting Court records, the advocate of the party learns of the
existence of a 113 page Award. What if the Advocate thereafter
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 19 of 26

slumbered over the matter. Would that foreclose the defence of
the party concerned, in respect of whom there is a statutory
obligation that a copy of the Award should directly be delivered
upon it. The answer cannot but be in the negative. In Union of

India -vs- Surendra Kumar, 61(1996) DLT 42(DB) in the context of
Arbitration Act, 1940, the Division Bench of this Court observed
as follows:
We

have

Counsel

for

considered
the

the

submission

respondent

but

we

of
are

learned
of

the

opinion that there was no proper service of the notice of
the filing of the award on the appellant. The object of
giving notice under Section 14(2) of the Act is to provide
an opportunity to a party to submit objections to the
award filed by an Arbitrator within a period of 30 days
of the receipt of a notice in respect

of filing of the

award as per Article 119 of the Limitation Act. What is
essential is that notice should post him with the
knowledge of the award filed by the Arbitrator in a
particular matter. Notice should therefore, specify such
details as would enable a party to identify the arbitration
case, otherwise the notice will not serve the purpose for
which it was given and will not meet the requirements of
law. In the instant case the notice does not specify the
name of the work, the division or department to which
the matter pertained or even the contract number. It is
needless

to

point

out

that

Ministry

of

Urban

Development has a very large area of operation covering
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 20 of 26

several

departments

of

the

Government

including

C.P.W.D., which itself has several divisions spread all
over the country.

Therefore, unless the notice of filing

of the award gives the details of the arbitration matter in
which award is given, it cannot be considered as a
proper notice in accordance with law.

Besides, it was

not enough to direct notice of the filing of the award to
the Secretary to the Govt. of India, Ministry of Urban
Development particularly when the notice failed to
disclose the material particulars of the matter. In the
circumstances, the notice ought to have been sent to the
Executive Engineer, who was Engineer-in-charge of the
work, and was the person who had signed the contract
on behalf of the Union of India and was dealing with the
matter. Therefore, it was necessary that he should also
have been arrayed as a party respondent in the matter.
Merely arraying Union of India and sending the notice to
the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development would
not be effective service as the Secretary to the Govt. of
India was not aware of the case nor he was furnished
with the particulars thereof.
of

the

proceedings

culminated
present

in

case

the
as

He would also be ignorant

before
award.
already

the

Arbitrator

Moreover
noted

it

which

in
would

the
be

difficult for the Secretary to the Govt. of India to link up
the notice of the filing of the award to the matter which
was subject matter of the Arbitration proceedings as the
notice does not give any details except that the award
was rendered by Mr. S.S. Juneja. Since no particulars of

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 21 of 26

the case were given, the office of the Secretary, Govt. of
India,

Ministry

of

Urban

Development

made

an

endorsement on the notice itself to the effect that full
particulars of the case were not given and the notice was
received without enclosures. Even a letter was written to
the Registrar by the office of the Secretary, Ministry of
Urban

Development,

Govt.

of

India

for

seeking

particulars of the matter. In these circumstances,
therefore, failure to serve a notice of the filing of the
award on the Executive Engineer amounts to violation of
the principles of natural justice. It is well settled that
where the principles of natural justice have been violated
in passing an order by the Court, the same can be set
aside under the inherent powers. It is also well settled
that no person can be prejudiced by the act of the Court.
Therefore, when the notice of the filing of the award was
not given to the Executive Engineer and no proper notice
was given to the Secretary to the Government of
India. Ministry of Urban Development, the time for filing
the objections did not commence and could not have
therefore, expired. In such an event the Court will have
inherent jurisdiction to set aside the ex-parte decree.

13.

In R.P. Arora -vs- Union of India, 1999(6) AD (Delhi) 679 :

1999(82) (Delhi) 686 one of us had declined to accept that notice
of the filing of the Award had been correctly effected since it had
not been served on the concerned official, that is, the Executive

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 22 of 26

Engineer, Construction Division-II, CPWD, New Delhi. In those
circumstances the officer concerned was held to have notice of
the filing of the Award effective from the date of

the

pronouncement of the Judgment. In Hi-Rise Builders (Pvt.) Ltd.

-vs- Alpha Woven Labels (India) Pvt. Ltd., AIR 2000 Delhi 126 a
Single Judge held that failure to mention the number of the Suit
would result in the service being irregular. The same approach
commends itself to us in the present case also, namely, that the
Appellant must be deemed to have been delivered a copy of the
Award today. If this is so, the Objections, being already on the
record, cannot be held to be time-barred.

14.

It is in the above analysis that we record the following

conclusions : Firstly, that the Court does not possess any power
to condone delay after the lapse of thirty days from the expiry of
three months from date of the delivery of a copy of the Award on
the parties. It would be absurd to contend that service of the
Award on one party would be legally efficacious on the opposite
contestant. Precedents exhorting a liberal approach especially
where the State is concerned do not apply to the A & C Act which
has not only taken care to generally restrict interference by a
Civil Court, but after laying down a period of 30 days in the
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 23 of 26

proviso to Section 34(3) has taken pains to state that thereafter
no scope of enlargement is possible. Secondly, we hold that
Section 32(5) of the A & C Act must be strictly complied with and
the Award must actually be served on the officer concerned by
the Arbitrator. In the case of companies, Order XXIX of the CPC
would come into operation.
indeed singular.

The facts of the case in hand are

The Award purports to have been signed on

20.1.1997. The Award has been filed in Court by the Claimant.
The records of the Arbitral Proceedings have not seen the light of
day. There is not even an iota of evidence that the Arbitrator had
dispatched a copy of the Award to the Appellant.

15.

Since the Appellant is incorporated under the Companies

Act, it must be unequivocally and categorically clear from the
record that a copy of the Award was either served on the
Secretary or Director or Principal Officer or delivered at the
Registered Office of the Appellant in consonance with Orders
XXXIX Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. No documents exist
in this context

16.

It is our understanding that wherever a time-bound

schedule is laid down by a statute its terms should be strictly
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 24 of 26

complied with before adverse orders can be passed. Under Order
XXXVII of the CPC 'Leave to Defend' is to be applied for within a
specified time.

Keeping this in mind

in KLG Systel Ltd. -vs-

Fujitsu ICIM Ltd., 84(2000) DLT 54 this Court had declined to
accept the contention of the Plaintiff that Summons had been
properly served on the Defendant under Order XXXVII Rule 3(2)
as the Process Server had not made any attempt to personally
serve the party concerned. Hence, it was opined that the question
of condonation of delay in filing the 'Leave to Defend' had not
arisen at all. A similar approach was pursued in Pleasant

Securities & Finance Ltd. -vs- NRI Financial Services Limited,
2000(4) AD (Delhi) 768.

17.

For these reasons the Appeal succeeds. The Order of the

learned Single Judge is set aside on the grounds that the
provisions of A & C Act pertaining to service of the Award on the
party has not been complied with.

The result is that time for

filing of the Objections has not commenced to run. Therefore, the
question of delay had not arisen, so as to warrant the application
of Popular Construction.

The effect will be that

OMP

261/2004 shall now be decided on its merits in accordance with
law. IA 8040/1004 shall stand disposed of as infructuous. EFA
EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 25 of 26

(OS) 9/2005 also stands allowed.

Impugned Order dated 9-12-

2004 is set aside. Ex. P. 4/2004 would be decided simultaneously
with or alongwith OMP 261/2004.

18.

The parties shall bear their respective costs.

(VIKRAMAJIT SEN)
JUDGE

( J.P. SINGH )
JUDGE
April 18, 2007
tp

EFA(OS) No.9/2005

Page 26 of 26

