IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 13236/2006
S.K. INDUSTRIES (P) LTD.

...Petitioner through
Mr. O.S. Bajpai with
Mr. Ram Avtar Bansal &
Mr.Mukesh Gupta, Advs.

Versus
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF
INCOME-TAX(INV.)

...Respondent through
Mr. R.D. Jolly, Sr.
Standing Counsel with
Mr.Vishnu Sharma, Adv.

WITH
W.P.(C) 15824/2006
S.K. JAIN

...Petitioner through
Mr. O.S. Bajpai with
Mr. Ram Avtar Bansal &
Mr.Mukesh Gupta, Advs.
Versus

DIRECTOR GENERAL OF
INCOME-TAX(INV.)

...Respondent through
Mr. R.D. Jolly, Sr.
Standing Counsel with
Mr.Vishnu Sharma, Adv.

Date of Hearing : December 06, 2006
Date of Decision : January 19, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
CW 13236/2006

Yes
1 of 21

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

JUDGMENT
1.

Writ Petition CWP 13236/2006 was filed on 22.8.2006

challenging the legal propriety of the Search conducted sixteen
months earlier, on 16.2.2005, on the ground (a) for the nonexistent reasons to believe on the lines stated in clauses (a), (b)
and (c) of Section 132(1) of the Act; (b) that the assessment
proceedings initiated under Section 153-A of the Income Tax Act
('the Act' for short) pursuant to the Search are illegal. The
Petitioner has prayed for the issuance of a writ of Certiorari
quashing the Warrant of Authorisation and the said Search and
for the quashing of Notice dated 10.7.2006 issued under Section
153-A of the Act. The Petition has been signed and verified by an
affidavit of one of its Directors, Shri G.L. Jain, son of Late G.D.
Jain, resident of 11/2A, Pusa Road, New Delhi-110 005. However,
the shareholding of the Petitioner company has not been
disclosed in the Petition.

CWP 15824/2006 was filed on

5.10.2006 by Shri S.K. Jain (brother of Shri G.L. Jain and resident
at the same address) as an individual, having also been served
with the impugned Notice under Section 153-A of the Act dated
10.7.2006 praying, in substance, for the same reliefs.
CW 13236/2006

2 of 21

2.

It has been asseverated that S.K. Industries (P) Ltd. was

incorporated on 5.1.1991, and is carrying on the business of
manufacture of confectionery; that it has regularly filed its
Return of Income and has been assessed to tax each year. It has
been pleaded that the Company has paid its Tax dues. This is
also the stand of Shri S.K. Jain.

In the Counter Affidavit the

Revenue has disclosed that the Petitioners are part of the Group
companies owned and managed by S/Shri Suresh Jain, Sajal Jain,
son of Shri S.K. Jain, Ganeshi Jain and Yogesh Jain. This Group
comprises S.K. Industries (P) Ltd., Harsh International (P) Ltd. at
11/2A, Pusa Road, New Delhi-110005, Mansarover Promoters (P)
Ltd. at 1/1B, Pusa Road, New Delhi, H.B. Industries (P) Ltd. and
Mahak Food (P) Ltd. These facts have not been traversed in the
Rejoinder and hence stand admitted. On a perusal of the
Rejoinder it is evident that the shareholding in New Generation
Promoters P. Ltd. was transferred in favour of “Shri G.L. Jain and
his family members”. The Petitioners have evaded giving details
of the original shareholders in New Generation (P) Ltd.

They

have stated that prior to 2002 it had given the “complexes at
Pusa Road” on rent to Millennium Hospital and Diagnostic Centre
P. Ltd.

There is a bald statement that the Shareholders,

Directors, Managers and Administrators of New Generation(P)
CW 13236/2006

3 of 21

Ltd. and

Millennium Hospital

and

Diagnostic Centre are

completely different. In the Rejoinder it has also not been
controverted that Shri Sajal Jain is the son of Shri S.K. Jain [one
of the Directors of the Petitioner company]; or members of his
family own 1/8B, Pusa Road, New Delhi and/or 12, Pusa Road,
Motor Market, New Delhi.

In order to dispel all doubts

pertaining to the common family ownership or Group ownership
of these properties their holding ought to have been clearly and
categorically stated. In respect of properties bearing Municipal
No.6013/1 and 6013/3, Dev Nagar, Arya Samaj Road, New Delhi
and 7/A1, W.E.A. Karol Bagh, New Delhi as well as the property
at Karol Bagh the Petitioner has made a correction that these
properties were not sold by Shri Sajal Jain but by his father, Shri
S.K. Jain [Director of the Petitioner Company]. These pleadings
and facts have been mentioned by us with a view to highlighting
the nebulous nature of the dealings and ownership of properties
within the Group companies. This will indubitably have a bearing
on the action of the Respondents that has been assailed in these
proceedings. The product that is at the fulcrum of the factual
matrix is Chaini Khaini which is manufactured by Harsh
International P. Ltd. which is stated to have commenced business
from 1.2.2003. It is indeed remarkable that the shareholding of
CW 13236/2006

4 of 21

Harsh has not been disclosed by the Petitioners. However, the
records disclose that Shri G.L. Jain [64 years] is the elder brother
of of Shri S.K. Jain [54 years], being the sons of late G.D. Jain,
both of whom are residing at the same house i.e. 11/2A, Pusa
Road,

New

Delhi-110005.

Shri

S.K.

Jain

has

filed

CW

No.15824/2006 in his individual capacity and has not impleaded
any of the other Group companies. It appears plain to us that if
credence is to be given to the Petitioners' submission that facts
pertaining to the manufacture of Chaini Khaini are irrelevant so
far as S.K. Industries or S.K. Jain are concerned, the Petitioners
ought to have clearly spelt out the shareholding in Harsh. A
reading of the Rejoinder leads only to the confusion being worseconfounded; it does not set-down any foundation for the ipse dixit
that neither of the Petitioners have any direct or indirect
connection with the affairs of Harsh. It is, therefore, not possible
even for us to cull out any meaningful distinction between the
business interest and activities of the Petitioner on the one hand
and the shareholders of Harsh. Since the Petitioners were in the
best position to remove and dispel doubts and unravel the skein
of common and obscure dealings, an adverse inference would
have to be drawn against them.

CW 13236/2006

5 of 21

3.

On behalf of the Revenue it has been emphasised that there

is no valid explanation as to why the challenge to the Warrant of
Authorisation and the Search conducted thereon in February,
2005 should have been raised after sixteen long months. We are
not impressed with the argument that these writ Petitions
became necessary only upon the issuance of the impugned Notice
dated 10.7.2006 under Section 153-A of the Income-Tax Act
since the gravamen of this legal action is predicated on the
Search. This would have been sufficient reason for us to dismiss
the Writ Petitions as being barred by laches but since we have
heard arguments in detail, we refrain from doing so. Briefly
stated, the argument of learned counsel for the Petitioners is that
a

mere suspicion, in

contradistinction to the belief

that

circumstances envisaged under Section 132 of the Act exist,
should not be the motivation for authorising and conducting a
Search. The argument is that there must be objective criteria or
information having a direct nexus or live link to the persons
subjected to a Search in order to justify such action being carried
out by the Revenue, which action invariably has a socially
deleterious impact on the persons subjected to it. This is indeed
trite and the Court would always be quick to castigate the
Department if it proceeds to conduct searches and/or seizures for
CW 13236/2006

6 of 21

fishing or flippant reasons. One of the facets of the fundamental
right to life is that no person shall be permitted to jeopardise or
harm the honour and social standing of an innocent person.

4.

On behalf of the Revenue it has been contended that the

Search was initiated and completed in consonance with the law;
that there was sufficient information in the hands of the
Department to entertain a reasonable belief that circumstances
envisaged under Section 132 in fact existed. It is the Revenue's
case that the Commissioner properly possessed requisite belief,
reasons whereof were duly recorded for initiating proceedings
under the Act; and that the Writ Court ought not to substitute its
own opinion on the subject for the one pursued by the
Department. Reliance has been placed on Income-Tax Officer,

Special Investigation Circle “B”, Meerut -vs- Seth Brothers,
[1969] 74 ITR 836.

Mr. Jolly, learned Senior Standing Counsel,

has justifiably underscored the fact that malafides have not been
alleged against any of the officers. Drawing strength from the
observations made in the context of Sections 147/148 of the Act
in Income-Tax Officer -vs- Selected Dalurband Coal Co. Pvt. Ltd.,
[1996] 217 ITR 597 it has been contended that the veracity and
correctness of the facts which persuaded the authorisation of the
CW 13236/2006

7 of 21

Search should not be called into question in writ proceedings, at
least at the present stage. A decision of this Court in Balwant

Singh -vs- R.D. Shah, Director of Inspection, Income-Tax, New
Delhi, [1969] 71 ITR 550 is more directly relevant in this regard.

5.

Mr. Bajpai, learned counsel for the Petitioners, has relied

very heavily on the ratio of L.R. Gupta -vs- Union of India, [1992]
194 ITR 32.

The Division Bench of this Court was confronted

with the question of what would constitute tangible material to
justify the authorisation of a Search or Seizure. It was observed
that information must be more than mere gossip, or rumour or a
hunch. Mere failure to file Returns of net wealth and income
would not justify such an action as it may not invariably disclose
the rational connection for concluding that the assessee did not
want the Department to gain knowledge of the existence of his
assets or income. It was also observed that a Search conducted
under Section 132 of the Act is a serious invasion into the privacy
of a citizen and, therefore, must stoutly be construed in a manner
conducive for the protection of the citizen. The opinion must be
apparent from the Note recorded by the Officer and it must
clearly manifest that the belief falls under clause (a), or (b) or (c)
of Section 132(1). In that case the Petitioner, who is a Senior
CW 13236/2006

8 of 21

Advocate of this Court, had received compensation in respect of
the acquisition of his property and this money was utilised by him
for the purchase of Bonds and for buying immovable property.
This compensation had become payable in 1987 pursuant to a
decision of the Division Bench of this Court and hence could not
possibly have partaken of the character of unaccounted income.
This, in our opinion, constitutes the watershed between this case
and others. The Department had sought information regarding
the expenses incurred on the marriage of the Petitioner's son,
which had been duly and sufficiently supplied. Nevertheless, two
Inspectors of the Income-Tax Department visited the premises on
March 21, 1991 and asked the Petitioner to supply documents in
the Office of the Income-Tax Officer on the following day.
However, on that day itself a Search took place in the presence
of a large police contingent. It was in those circumstances that
the Division Bench opined that merely because the person does
not file a Return or does not disclose true income and wealth, an
authorisation under Section 132(1) of the Act cannot be issued. It
was noted that no satisfaction had been indicated in the Note that
the petitioner would not produce or cause to be produced any
books of accounts, documents etc. Unlike in these cases before
us,

no

convert

CW 13236/2006

dealings

had

been

unearthed

that

were
9 of 21

attributable to Shri L.R. Gupta.

6.

An earlier case, in which another Senior Advocate had to

suffer the scourge of a senseless Search, namely H.L. Sibal -vs-

Commissioner of Income-Tax, Punjab, [1975] 101 ITR 112, has
also been cited by Mr. Bajpai. What impressed, or rather
disturbed, the Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High
Court were the pleadings of the Department disclosing the
reasons for the Search. So far as the Department was concerned
it was obvious

that its

actions were

predicated on the

unsubstantiated belief, or rather suspicion, that advocates in
Chandigarh were not disclosing their true income and wealth;
the Petitioner being one of them.

In other words no concrete

'information' particular or personal to the Petitioner, was
available with the Department; the Search was a consequence of
a policy decision, and “the dominant object of the Respondents
was to pass an order under section 132(5) of the Act regardless of
whether such an order could or could not have been passed in
the eyes of the law”. The Court extracted the following passage
from the landmark judgment of the Supreme Court in Pooran Mal

-vs- Director of Inspection(Investigation), Income-Tax, New Delhi,
[1974] 93 ITR 505(SC) in which the constitutionality of Section
CW 13236/2006

10 of 21

132 of the Act was unsuccessfully called into question:We are, therefore, to see what are the inbuilt
safeguards in section 132 of the Income-tax Act. In the
first place, it must be noted that the power to order
search and seizure is vested in the highest officers of the
department.

Secondly, the exercise of this power can

only follow a reasonable belief entertained by such
officer that any of the three conditions mentioned in
section 132(1) (a), (b) and (c) exists. In this connection it
may be further pointed out that under sub-rule(2) of rule
112, the Director of Inspection or the Commissioner, as
the case may be, has to record his reasons before the
authorisation is issued to the officers mentioned in subsection(1). Thirdly, the authorisation for the search
cannot be in favour of any officer below the rank of an
Income-tax Officer. Fourthly, the authorisation is for
specific purposes enumerated in (i) to (v) in sub-section
(1), all of which are strictly limited to the object of the
search. Fifthly, when money, bullion, etc. is seized the
Income-tax Officer is to make a summary enquiry with a
view to determine how much of what is seized will be
retained by him to cover the estimated tax liability and
how much will have to be returned forthwith. The object
of the enquiry under sub-section (5) is to reduce the
inconvenience to the assessee as much as possible so
that within a reasonable time what is estimated due to
the Government may be retained and what should be
returned to the assessee may be immediately returned to
him. Even with regard to the books of account and
CW 13236/2006

11 of 21

documents seized, their return is guaranteed after a
reasonable time. In the meantime the person from whose
custody they are seized is permitted to make copies and
take extracts. Sixthly, where money, bullion, etc., is
seized, it can also be immediately returned to the person
concerned after he makes appropriate provision for the
payment of the estimated tax dues under sub-section (5),
and, lastly, and this is most important, the provisions of
the Criminal Procedure Code relating to search and
seizure apply, as far as they may be, to all searches and
seizures under section 132. Rule 112 provides for the
actual search and seizure being made after observing
normal decencies of behaviour. The person in charge of
the premises searched is immediately given a copy of the
list of articles seized. One copy is forwarded to the
authorising officer. Provision for the safe custody of the
articles after seizure is also made in rule 112.

In our

opinion, the safeguards are adequate to render the
provisions of search and seizure as less onerous and
restrictive as is possible under the circumstances. The
provisions, therefore, relating to search and seizure in
section 132 and rule 112 cannot be regarded as violative
of articles 19(1)(f)and (g).

7.

The Sibal case also observes that there is parity between

the provisions of Sections 132 and 147 of the Act. Founded
thereon, Mr. Bajpai contends that the extracted opinion of the
Apex Court in Income-Tax Officer, I Ward, Distt. VI, Calcutta -vsCW 13236/2006

12 of 21

Lakhmani Mewal Das, [1976] 103 ITR 437 with regard to Section
147 is applicable in full force to Section 132 proceedings:As stated earlier, the reasons for the formation of
the belief must have a rational connection with or
relevant bearing on the formation of the belief. Rational
connection postulates that there must be a direct nexus
or live link between the material coming to the notice of
the Income-tax Officer and the formation of his belief
that there has been escapement of the income of the
assessee from assessment in the particular year because
of his failure to disclose fully and truly all material facts.
It is no doubt true that the court cannot go into the
sufficiency or adequacy of the material and substitute its
own opinion for that of the Income-tax Officer on the
point as to whether action should be initiated for
reopening assessment. At the same time we have to bear
in mind that it is not any and every material, howsoever
vague and indefinite or distant, remote and far-fetched,
which would warrant the formation of the belief relating
to escapement of the income of the assessee from
assessment.

The

fact

that

the

words

“definite

information” which were there in section 34 of the Act of
1922, at one time before its amendment in 1948, are not
there in section 147 of the Act of 1961, would not lead to
the conclusion that action can now be taken for
reopening assessment even if the information is wholly
vague, indefinite, far-fetched and remote. The reason for
the formation of the belief must be held in good faith and
should not be a mere pretence.
CW 13236/2006

13 of 21

Predicated on this passage it is argued that since the Search had
its causation in the Chaini Khaini manufacture, it had no
connection with the Petitioner's business which is preparation of
fruit jelly.

We cannot accept this argument since it is obvious

that the commonality is not in the nature of the business but in
their ownership. As already noticed, at this stage, the operation
of

the

various

Jain

businesses

are

so

intermingled

and

intertwined as to render them almost undistinguishable. The facts
in Sardar Parduman Singh -vs- Union of India, [1987] 166 ITR
115 were that the Department had received information that two
other persons had amassed huge undisclosed wealth which had
been invested in acquiring on pugree premises No.235, Lajpat
Rai Market, Delhi. It was held that the sealing of this property
which was in the possession of the Petitioner was totally
unjustified and unsustainable. Reliance on this Judgment is again
futile since it has not been adequately clarified that there are no
common business dealings or joint ownership of property
between the Petitioners and other members of the Jain family.
For the very same reasons Kusum Lata -vs- Commissioner of

Income-Tax, [1989] 180 ITR 365 in no way advances the
Petitioners case.

Sunil Kumar Jain -vs- Income Tax Officer,

[2006] 284 ITR 626 contains an analysis of the plethora of
CW 13236/2006

14 of 21

precedents on these provisions of the Act and reiterates that the
“reasons” for action under Section 147 must be based on relevant
material which must not be sustained simply on the subjective
satisfaction of the concerned officer.

8.

In

Commissioner

of

Income-Tax

-vs-

Vindhya

Metal

Corporation, [1997] 224 ITR 614(SC) their Lordships were
concerned with the impounding of Rs.4,63,000/- from the
possession of the Munim of a firm while travelling to Calcutta,
assuming the money to be stolen property. The Railway Police
thereafter informed the Commissioner of Income-Tax who
forthwith issued a Warrant of Authorisation under Section 132(1)
of the Act authorising the Income-Tax Officer concerned to
receive the money from the Railway Police. Upon a Search being
conducted on the premises of the company the fact that the
Munim was in possession of moneys of the firm that were duly
accounted for came to be affirmed.

It was held that in this

factual matrix no reasonable person could have entertained the
belief that the money represented income which would not have
been disclosed had details been asked for. These facts palpably
have no relevance to the case before us. The Gauhati High Court
in M.S. Associates -vs-Union of India, [2005] 275 ITR 502 has
CW 13236/2006

15 of 21

gone to the extent of holding that if information is received from
proceedings of the legislature that a Member of the House is
involved in evasion of money, if the authorities concerned have
reason to believe the information so received is true, it is their
bounden duty to act thereupon. It has been further held that if
the authorities are not in a position to know whether the
information/accusation is true or not, they are not barred from
making investigations to find out the truth or veracity of the
information received by them. Therefore, the expression “reason
to believe” under Section 132 is subjective and objective. The
dicta in Seth Brothers, that the power exercised by the
Commissioner under Section 132 is not a judicial or quasi-judicial
power and the Court cannot substitute its own opinion for that of
the Commissioner, was applied. It was also noted that no
malafides or malicious intent attributable to the Department had
been made out. The challenge to the issue of Warrants of
Authorisation for Search and Seizure was found to be baseless.

9.

The decision in Lajpat Rai -vs- Commissioner of Income

Tax, [1995] 215 ITR 608, is indeed apposite. The Writ Petition
was filed by Lajpat Rai, and his wife and mother as Petitioners
No.2 and 3.

It appears that the Search was primarily directed

CW 13236/2006

16 of 21

towards the business and residential premises of Shri Subhash
Chandra Varshani at Kandra, Calcutta, Madras and Baroda and at
his other sales and business premises in different parts of the
country. It was in that regard that the residential premises of the
Petitioners were also raided.

However, no “appreciable”

properties or documents were found so far as the Petitioners
were concerned, but the key of a locker of Petitioners No.2 and 3
was impounded. The case of the Department was that Petitioner
No.1 was supplying silica to Shri Subhash Chandra Varshani.
Mrs. Varshani was a Director in the Petitioner/Lajpat Rai's
Company and they had mutual business transactions. The Court
concluded that the close relationship between Lajpat Rai and
Varshani who was the focus of the Search “would certainly lead
one to believe that, in the ordinary course, petitioner no.1 [Lajpat
Rai] would not comply with the notice under the Income-Tax Act
and produce the material in his possession which would be
adverse to the company and the said relatives”.

The Search

which had already been simultaneously conducted was found to
be legal and impervious to quashing.

However, so far as the

Locker was concerned, the Court came to the conclusion that it
did not bear direct nexus to the Varshani businesses and hence
could not be searched. This decision obviously supports the
CW 13236/2006

17 of 21

action of the Revenue.

10.

Our attention has been drawn by Mr. Jolly to Harvest Gold

Foods (India) P. Ltd. -vs- Union of India, [2006] 282 ITR 83 where
the Court returned the finding that the Department was in
possession of reasonable and credible information to justify a
Search. The entire case law was set down by the learned Judge
and thereafter applied. Significantly, reference has been made by
the Petitioners to the Guidelines laid down by the Central Board
of Direct Taxes that a Search should be carried out only where
there is credible evidence to indicate substantial unaccounted
income/assets in relation to the tax normally paid by the assessee
where the expected concealment is more than one crore. So far
as the Department was concerned it had stated that the Search
and Seizure had been authorised by the Director General of
Income-Tax

[Investigations]

after

careful

examination

of

information, evidence and material.

11.

It is in the backdrop of this exposition of the law that we

have to decide the rule whether the Search that has been
conducted was legal. As has already been indicated above, the
maze of commercial dealings between various companies owned
CW 13236/2006

18 of 21

by the Jain Group, of which the Petitioners presently appear to be
an integral and inseparable part , was sufficient justification for a
simultaneous Search being conducted on all the businesses. In
our considered opinion it is not possible to conclude that the
Department had initiated a roving enquiry to allay or satiate their
suspicions. It has been sufficiently pleaded that as a consequence
of the surveillance carefully carried out over a period of time it
had been noted that the Returns filed in the Chaini Khaini
business did not match either the output capacity of the
packaging machinery or the numerous assets built-up and
acquired by the Jain family. In these circumstances it would be
unreasonable to expect that a Search would have been restricted
only to the family concerns dealing in the Chaini Khaini business
since income or profits or assets could well have been spread, or
for that matter concealed, throughout the family concerns. It is
conceivable that if all the group companies and shareholders had
not been simultaneously searched the exercise would have
remained stillborn and futile. There was, in our opinion, sufficient
material to come to an objective as well as subjective reasonable
belief that a Search under Section 132 was justified and
necessary. The information available with the Department need
not have been disclosed as has been held in Dr. Pratap Singh -vsCW 13236/2006

19 of 21

Director of Enforcement, AIR 1985 SC 989=[1985] 155 ITR 166
SC. The Search was not in the nature of a roving or fishing
enquiry.

12.

Writ proceedings cannot be employed as a surrogate or

indirect challenge to the existence or the adequacy of reasons to
believe that action under Section 132 was called for.

It has not

been controverted that in the Notice issued under Section 153-A
of the Act all materials and particulars relied upon by the
Department have been disclosed.

We also find the delay in

approaching this Court to be significant. We cannot ignore the
fact that the Petitioners have not challenged the Summons issued
under Section 131 of the Act which were issued subsequent to the
Search. Instead of approaching this Court the Petitioners should
fully participate in the proceedings under Section 153-A and
vindicate its stand that it has no appreciable connection with the
other business family concerns. We find no reasons to exercise
the extraordinary powers vested in this Court under Article 226
of the Constitution of India.

13.

The

writ

proceedings

were

filed

on

22.8.2006[CWP

No.13236/2006] and on 5.10.2006[CWP No.15824/2006]. During
CW 13236/2006

20 of 21

the pendency of these proceedings the Assessing Officer, in our
opinion, would not have been able to conduct and complete the
original proceedings. Hence the period of limitation set-down in
the statute stands extended by four months.

14.

Writ Petitions are dismissed.

This is a fit case for the

imposition of exemplary costs against the Petitioners, but we
order the Petitioners to pay nominal costs of Rs.15,000/- to the
Respondents within six weeks.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

January 19, 2007
tp

CW 13236/2006

( S. MURALIDHAR)
JUDGE

21 of 21

