IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO(OS) 124-25/2005
QRG Enterprises & Anr.

...Plaintiff through
Mr. N.K. Kaul, Sr.
Adv. with Ms. Pratibha
M. Singh & Ms. Shruti
Kakkar, Advs.

Versus
Surendra Electricals & Ors.

...Defendant through
Mr. Valmiki Mehta, Sr.
Adv. with Mr.
Manmohan Singh,
Mr. Sanjeev Sindhwani,
Mr. Amit Gaurav Singh
& Ms. Aakansha
Sharma, Advs.

Date of Hearing : July 19, 2007
Date of Decision : September 12, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported Yes
in the Digest?
:

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
JUDGMENT

1.

This Appeal is directed against the Order of the learned

Single Judge passed on 26.4.2005 whereby the application of
the Plaintiffs'/Appellants for interim relief had been rejected.
FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 1 of 12

The Suit had been filed by the Appellants seeking a Decree of
permanent injunction restraining the Defendants from using the
word or name 'Havell's' as its trade mark or even as part of its
corporate name.

The learned Single Judge has recorded that

the Defendants admit the proprietary rights of the Plaintiffs over
'Havell's' so far as the trade mark is concerned, but dispute the
Plaintiffs' claim

for exclusive use of 'Havell's' as part of the

corporate name also. After taking note of the pleadings of the
parties and the undisputed documents, the learned Single Judge
noted that Havell's Pvt. Ltd. (Defendant No.6) was in existence
since 1956, fourteen years prior to when Haveli Ram Gandhi
executed the Assignment Deed dated 9.10.1971 relied upon by
the Plaintiffs.

At that point of time Haveli Ram Gandhi was a

Director of Havell's Pvt. Ltd. and would have possessed specific
knowledge of the fact that Havell's was part of the corporate
name of Defendant No.6. The Assignment Deed conveyed only
the right to the trade mark Havell's, explicitly excluding the
goodwill of the business.

Even Defendant No.5, namely,

Havell's Electronics Pvt. Ltd., had been incorporated as far back
as in 1974. Objections had not been raised from any quarter
including the Petitioners with regard to the continued use of
Havell's in the corporate name of either of these Defendants.
FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 2 of 12

Mr. Lalit Seth, who controls these two Defendant Companies,
had merely acknowledged the exclusive rights of the Plaintiffs to
the trade mark Havell's, in its letters dated 11.10.1971 and
6.11.1971.

Significantly, these letters were written on the

Letterhead of Havell's

Private

Limited.

Even after

the

assignment of the trade mark Havell's on 9.10.1971, Haveli Ram
Gandhi himself continued to transact business in the name and
style of Havell's Electricals Sales Corporation. Ten years later,
when the Agreement dated 13.4.1981 was executed, Haveli Ram
Gandhi had no authority to bind Defendant Nos.5 and 6.
Between 1971 and 1981 the Assignees/Plaintiffs did not
remonstrate against the use of the word Havell's as part of the
trade name of any business enterprises belonging to Haveli Ram
Gupta or of the contesting Defendants. The learned Single Judge
also came to the prima facie view that the Plaintiffs or their
predecessors-in-interest raised no objection to the use of
Havell's in the corporate name till 1988.

The decision in

Rustom Cavasjee Cooper -vs-UOI, 1970(1) SCC 248 was
applied. In these circumstances the learned Single Judge found
it fit and proper to preserve the status quo.

FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 3 of 12

2.

We have already had the occasion of considering the

interesting but complex question of the use of a word or name
as part of a corporate name in Atlas Cycles (Haryana) Ltd. -vs-

Atlas Products Pvt. Ltd., MANU/DE/2122/2007 (hereinafter
referred to as ATLAS). We had accepted the Appeal of the
Plaintiffs by restraining the Defendants from using the name or
word 'Atlas' as part of their corporate name. We had preferred
the view that ordinarily the interests of the consumer are
paramount, and if the use of a word or name as part of a
corporate name would result in creating confusion in the mind
of a prospective customer, an injunction should issue against the
new user.

In arriving at to our conclusion we had carefully

dissected, digested and applied the Judgment of the Supreme
Court in Ramdev Food Products (P) Ltd. -vs- Arvindbhai

Rambhai Patel, (2006) 8 SCC 726 : AIR 2006 SC 3304 : 2006(2)
CTMR 1(SC). We had analysed the precedents dealing with
acquiescence and honest and concurrent user. However, in the
factual matrix of ATLAS we were of the opinion that that
Plaintiffs could not be seen to have acquiesced in the
Defendants' use of 'Atlas' as part of its corporate name. No
useful purpose shall be served in repeating in detail the same
analysis of the law. It will only lead to making this Judgment
FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 4 of 12

prolix.

3.

Mr. N.K. Kaul, learned Senior Counsel for the Appellants,

has contended that the definition of the word 'mark', presently
contained in Section 2 (1) (m) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, has
not undergone any change as it corresponds exactly to the
definition contained in Section 2 (1) (j) of the Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958.

The definition of the word

'Mark' includes, inter alia, a name, ergo Havell's (we shall
presume for the present purposes that it is a name) could
constitute a mark. The fallacy in the argument is that, at the
interlocutory stage, there is no logical justification for the
conclusion that even this name constitutes a Mark as postulated
by Section 2 (1) (m). Although 'trade mark' has been defined in
Section 2 (1) (zb) of the Trade Marks Act, as meaning a mark
capable of being represented graphically and which is capable
of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those
of others, the word trade name or corporate name has not been
dealt with in that statute. This absence becomes crucial for the
simple reason that whilst the Defendants have not laid any
challenge to the Plaintiffs' claim for exclusive use of the word
'Havell's' in or as their trade mark, they have strenuously
FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 5 of 12

contended that they are entitled to its use in their trade name.

4.

The Deed of Assignment dated 9.10.1971 specifically

states that Haveli Ram Gandhi conveys to the Assignees [family
of Qimat Ram Gupta] by sale, transfer and assignment the
proprietary rights in the registered Trade Mark No.167434 and
trade mark in the pending applications Nos.272378 and 272379
but without the goodwill of the business. As has already been
mentioned above, considerable emphasis has been laid on these
words by the learned Single Judge and in our view rightly so. It
will be worthwhile to reiterate the definition given to the term
goodwill in Cooper, namely, that -”Goodwill of a business is an
intangible asset. It is the whole advantage of the reputation and
connections formed with the customers together with the
circumstances making the connection durable”. We also draw
upon the discussion of a definition of 'goodwill' available in

Ramnik Vallabhdas -vs- Taraben Pravinlal Madhvani, 2004 (1)
SCC 497. Thereafter, in paragraph 57 of Ramdev it has been
digested that normally goodwill will encompass a trade mark,
but there can be exceptions thereto. The learned Single Judge
had concluded that the use of the word goodwill encompasses
the use of the word 'Havell's' in the trade name. Prima facie,
FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 6 of 12

since the Assignment Deed in terms conveys only the trade
mark, at the interlocutory stage all other rights must be held not
to have been transferred. This is the first factor which
distinguishes this case from ATLAS.

5.

We also note that in the fourth recital of the Agreement

dated 13.4.1981 the term “trade name” finds mention along
with trade mark for the first time. At the interlocutory stage this
inclusion, after the passage of one decade, speaks volumes, but
against the Plaintiffs.

6.

So far as acquiescence or honest and concurrent user is

concerned it cannot be ignored that the use of the word
'Havell's' in the corporate name predated the Assignment Deed
by almost one and a half decades. Knowledge of the user of this
name as part of a trade name was contemporaneous to the
Assignment Deed dated 9.10.1971 in terms of the two letters
dated 11.10.1971 and 6.11.1971 authored by Mr. Lalit Seth. In
neither of these documents was there any admission or
acknowledgment by the concerned Defendants that 'Havell's'
would not be used as part of the trade/corporate name. The
author,

Mr.

Seth,

FAO(OS)124-25/2005

merely

undertakes

to

stop

further

page 7 of 12

manufacture of any product under the Trade Mark No.167484.
The Plaintiff will have to prove, through recording of evidence,
that even the trade/corporate name fell within the sweep of
Assignment Deed. A prima facie case has not been established
such as would justify the passing of interlocutory orders in
favour of the Plaintiff.

7.

The Suit which we are presently concerned with has been

filed in 2004, but after two suits previously instituted in 1998
and 1990.

It is noteworthy that in those two suits temporary

injunction against use of the word Havell's in the trade name
had not been prayed for. The learned Single Judge has rightly
and

justifiably

kept

this

feature

in

perspective.

The

Plaintiffs/Appellants will have to satisfy the Trial Court that the
principles of constructive res judicata do not foreclose the claim
for an injunction in the third suit. Learned Senior Counsel for
the Plaintiffs/Appellants had endeavoured to rely on precedents
to the effect that a mistake made by a counsel should not
irreparably damage the interests of a litigant. The Trial Court
will indubitably go into this question. However, it cannot be
contended that at the interlocutory stage these principles
disqualify the Plaintiffs from seeking interlocutory relief.
FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 8 of 12

8.

It is trite that even a good case for the issuance of an ad

interim injunction would be defeated by delay. After a delay of
over three decades there would be no justification for passing
an ad interim injunction which thereby would upset the status
quo. Ramdev is distinguishable at least on two important
grounds. Firstly, the litigation had commenced within a couple
of years of the cause of action having arisen. Secondly, the two
Assignment Deeds are diametrically different.

9.

Mr. Kaul has argued that Section 29(5) of Trade Marks

Act, 1999 pointedly prohibits the use of 'Havell's' by the
Defendants as part of their trade/corporate name. This is indeed
a conundrum, as the language of this sub-section is pre-emptory
when compared even with its precursor, viz. sub-section(1). A
dishonest or deliberately confusing use of a trade mark is
fraught with much more mischief than a trade name. While
granting permission pertaining to trade/corporate name Courts
can circumscribe user in a manner which ensures that the trade
name is not used with the objective of causing confusion viz-aviz the connected trade mark. This was ensured by the learned
Single Judge who had decided Atlas Cycles (Haryana) Ltd. -vsFAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 9 of 12

Atlas Products Pvt. Ltd., MANU/DE/1366/2002, and indeed was
accepted

by

the Defendant/Respondent.

Even

so far as

Section 29(5) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 is concerned the
learned

Single

Judge

has

observed

that the concept of

concurrent user and acquiescence would constitute a legitimate
defence. This prima facie view calls for no interference by us.

10.

The scope of Appellate interference in interlocutory orders

had

been discussed by us in some detail in ATLAS. We had

recounted and we reiterate that in Ramdev, after taking
due note of all the precedents, the law was enunciated in these
words.
The grant of an interlocutory injunction is in
exercise of discretionary power and hence, the appellate
courts will usually not interfere with it. However, the
appellate courts will substitute their discretion if they
find that discretion has been exercised arbitrarily,
capriciously, perversely, or where the court has ignored
the settled principles of law regulating the grant or
refusal of interlocutory injunctions. This principle has
been stated by this Court time and time again. [See for
example Wander Ltd. v. Antox India P. Ltd., 1990 (Supp)
Supreme Court Cases 727, Laxmikant V. Patel v.
Chetanbhai Shah, (2002) 3 SCC 65 and Seema Arshad
Zaheer -vs- Municipal Corpn. of Greater Mumbai, (2006)
FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 10 of 12

5 SCC 282].
The appellate court may

not reassess

the

material and seek to reach a conclusion different from
the one reached by the court below if the one reached
by that court was reasonably possible on the material.
The appellate court would normally not be justified in
interfering

with

the exercise of discretion

under

appeal solely on the ground that if it had considered
the matter at the trial stage it would have come to a
contrary conclusion.
However, in this case the courts below proceeded
on a prima facie misconstruction of documents. They
adopted and applied wrong standards. We, therefore,
are of the opinion that a case for interference has been
made out.

11.

In the conclusion we had said that the Trial Judge has

the

discretion

to

arrive

at

a

decision

and the dicta in

Wander Ltd. -vs- Antox India P. Ltd., 1990 (Supp) Supreme
Court Cases 727 commends, if not commands, non-interference
with. An Appellate Court cannot substitute the decision of
the lower Court by the view that it prefers, unless it finds
the former to be perverse

or contrary to the law. Neither of

these situations manifests themselves

before us.

We think it

imperative to clarify that the Defendants/Respondents are not
entitled or authorised to employ their trade name on their
FAO(OS)124-25/2005

page 11 of 12

products with such prominence or ubiquity as to transform
it into a trade mark, since it will then confuse a customer
possessing a modicum of intelligence into purchasing the
Defendants/Respondents products believing them to be that of
the Plaintiffs/Appellants. Needless to say the views expressed
herein, as is the opinion of the learned Single Judge, are only
prima facie in nature.

12.

Hence, we find no merit in the Appeal and it is dismissed.

All pending applications also stand dismissed. There shall be no
orders as to costs.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

September 12, 2007
tp

FAO(OS)124-25/2005

(S.L. BHAYANA )
JUDGE

page 12 of 12

