IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(Crl.) 75/2008
Shashi Goyal

...Petitioner through
Mr. Vikram Chaudhuri with
Mr. Akshay Anand & Ms.
Sonam Nagrath, Advs.
Versus

UOI & Ors.

...Respondent through
Mr. P.P. Malhotra, ASG with
Mr. Satish Aggarwal & Ms.
Pooja Bhaskar, Advs.
Date of Hearing : February 21, 2008
Date of Decision : February 26, 2008

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K. BHASIN
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Yes
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
JUDGMENT
1.

The Petitioner, Shashi Goyal, has filed this Petition for the

annulment of the Detention Order bearing F.No.673/07/2007CUS-VIII dated 27.12.2007 issued by Ms. Rashida Hussain, Joint
Secretary to the Government of India, in respect of her husband
Shri Bhimendra Kumar Goyal. The Detention has been ordered
WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 1 of 18

“with a view to preventing him from smuggling goods in future”.
The Grounds of Detention narrate inter alia that the Detenu was
arrested on 0200 hours on 29.10.2007 under Section 104 of the
Customs Act, 1962 and on production in the Court of learned
ACMM, Patiala House, New Delhi was lastly remanded to
judicial custody till 28.12.2007. It appears that predicated on
the impugned Order dated 27.12.2007 the Detenu was detained
on that very day in Central Jail, Tihar, New Delhi. Inasmuch as
the Petitioner had been arrested on 29.10.2007 he would have
been statutorily entitled to be enlarged on bail under Section
167(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr. PC) on the
expiry of sixty days of his arrest since the maximum punishment
awardable to him does not exceed seven years [Reference can
usefully be made to Raj Kumar Aggarwal -vs- Director General,

Central Excise, 147(2008) DLT 1 (DB)]. Therefore, the date of
the Detention Order, that is, 27.12.2007 assumes obvious
importance and significance. It has not been contested that but
for the impugned Detention Order Shri B.K. Goyal would not
have remained incarcerated for offences within the present
contemplation. Suffice it to mention that in paragraph B(ii) of
the

Counter

Affidavit

of

the

Respondents

it

has

been

asseverated that “the fact that the detenu was granted bail

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 2 of 18

under Section 167(2) of Cr. P.C. as mentioned by the petitioner
was not in the knowledge of the Detaining Authority.

It is

denied that the detention order has been used as a device to
scuttle the release of the detenu on bail as alleged. ..... The
Detaining Authority has further shown her awareness and
mentioned in the Grounds of Detention that the possibility of
release of the detenu on bail in near future cannot be ruled out.
This shows that the Detaining Authority was fully aware about
the possibility of release of the detenu on bail in near future”.

2.

Article 21 of the Constitution of India enjoins that no

person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law. Generally speaking,
personal

liberty

can

legitimately

be

curtailed,

confined,

restricted or impeded only if a person has been found guilty by
a Court of law of the commission of an offence which is
punishable by imprisonment.

Preventive Detention is an inroad

into the Fundamental Rights of a citizen. It is permissible by
virtue of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India which
prescribes that when any person is detained in pursuance of an
order made under any law providing for preventive detention,
the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be,

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 3 of 18

communicate to such person the grounds on which the order
has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of
making a representation against the order.

3.

The Supreme Court of India has zealously guarded against

the abusive use of Preventive Detention. Their Lordships have
observed that “however well-meaning the Government may be,
detention power cannot be quietly used to subvert, supplant or
to substitute the punitive law of the Penal Code. The immune
expedient of throwing into a prison cell one whom the ordinary
law would take care of, merely because it is irksome to
undertake the inconvenience of proving guilt in Court is unfair
abuse.

To detain a person after a court has held the charge

false is to expose oneself to the criticism of absence of due care
and of rational material for subjective satisfaction. After all, the
responsible officer, aware of the value of civil liberty even for
undesirable persons, must make a credible prediction of the
species of prejudicial activity in Section 3(1) before shutting up
a person. It may perilously hover around illegality, if a single act
of theft or threat, for which a prosecution was launched but
failed, is seized upon after, say, a year or so, for detaining the
accused out of pique. The potential executive tendency to shy at

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 4 of 18

Courts for prosecution of ordinary offences and to rely
generously on the easier strategy of subjective satisfaction is a
danger to the democratic way of life.

The large number of

habeas corpus petitions and the more or less stereotyped
grounds of detention and inaction by way of prosecution, induce
us to voice this deeper concern. Moreover, a criminal should
not get away with it as an unconvicted detenu if the rule of law
is a live force” (see Bhut Nath Mete v. State of W.B., (1974) 1
SCC 645).

The other dimension repeatedly emphasised by the

Apex Court is that the draconian power of preventive detention
can be resorted to only upon a strict adherence and compliance
of procedural law. In Rajesh Gulati -vs- Govt. of NCT of Delhi,
(2002) 7 SCC 129 their Lordships clarified that “preventive
detention must be meticulously followed with substantively and
procedurally by the detaining authority. The object of detention
under the Act is not to punish but to prevent the commission of
certain offences. Section 3(1) of the Act allows the detention of
a person only if the appropriate detaining authority is satisfied
that with a view to preventing such person from carrying on any
of the offensive activities enumerated therein, it is necessary to
detain such person. The satisfaction of the detaining authority
is not a subjective one based on the detaining authority's

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 5 of 18

emotions, beliefs or prejudices. There must be a real likelihood
of the person being able to indulge in such activities, the
inference of such likelihood being drawn from objective data”.

4.

In the factual matrix of the present case we cannot over-

emphasise the need to explain the necessity and the expediency
of the preventive detention of the Detenu, keeping in mind that
he had become entitled to statutory bail under Section 167(2)
of the Cr.PC as a Challan had not been filed within sixty days of
his arrest. There is a plethora of precedents to the effect that
such detention cannot be clamped down in pique, only because
the Detenu has been enlarged on bail by a competent Court.
Indeed, it would sound the death-knell of the Fundamental Right
of personal liberty if preventive detention can be resorted to
simply because the State is unable to complete its investigation
and present a Challan within the statutory period of sixty/ninety
days as the case may be. Section 167(2) of the Cr. PC would be
subverted. Wherever and whenever such action manifests itself,
courts of law would stamp it out swiftly and completely.

5.

Mr. Vikram Chaudhuri, learned counsel appearing for the

Detenu, has raised a number of points, all of which we do not

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 6 of 18

think it necessary to deal with and answer. His first contention
is that the impugned Order is liable to be struck down because
the

Detaining

Officer

has

taken

extraneous

facts

into

consideration, namely, the factum of the previous preventive
detention of the Petitioner's husband, which was struck down by
this Court, and affirmed by the Supreme Court in terms of the
rejection of the Special Leave Petition filed by the Union of
India. It is prudent to reproduce hereinbelow the relevant
paragraphs in the Grounds of Detention in order to effectively
deal with the argument of counsel for the parties:
21.

In response to the Customs office letter dated

06.11.2007,

addressed

to

the

Assistant

Director,

Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI), Delhi Zonal
Unit, New Delhi, it has been informed by DRI, vide its
letter dated 7.11.07, that you were involved in a case
of smuggling of misc. goods including medicinal
powder,

chinese

silk,

cosmetics

and

toiletries,

electronic goods etc. in a large quantity which was
detected
26.4.2004

by

DRI

and

and

seizure

14.5.2004

from

effected

between

Sanjay

Gandhi

Transport Nagar and Village Badli, Delhi; that you
were examined on 26.8.2004 and were subsequently
arrested for offences punishable under the provisions
of Customs Act, 1962; that you were also detained
under

COFEPOSA

Act

involvement in that case.
WP(Crl.)75/2008

on

20.02.2006

for

your

However, the Detention
Page 7 of 18

Order was set aside by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court
vide judgment dated 07.08.2006. The prosecution case
against you was filed by DRI, New Delhi under the
Customs Act, 1962 and the trial is in progress.
....
36.

Taking into consideration the foregoing facts and

materials on record, I am reasonably satisfied that
your activity amounts to smuggling as defined in
Section 2(39) of the Customs Act, 1962 and as adopted
in the COFEPOSA Act, 1974 via Section 2(e) thereof
since your acts and omissions have rendered the goods
involved liable to confiscation under Section 111 of the
Customs Act, 1962. Considering the nature and gravity
of the offence, your role therein and the deliberate
planned manner in which you have engaged yourself in
the aforesaid prejudicial activity as well as your
detention under the COFEPOSA Act, 1974 in the past,
all

of

which

reflect

your

high

propensity

and

potentiality to continue to engage yourself in such
activities in future, I am satisfied that you ought to be
detained under the COFEPOSA Act, 1974 with a view
to preventing you from smuggling goods in future.
...
39.

I have particularly given careful consideration to

the nexus angle.

Considering the magnitude of the

operation, the consequential extent of investigation
involved, the well organised manner in which such
prejudicial activities have been carried on, the nature
and gravity of the offence and keeping in view the

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 8 of 18

chronological sequence of events, I am satisfied that
your potentiality and propensity to indulge in such
prejudicial activities have not diminished at all and
hence the nexus between the date of incident and
passing of this Detention Order as well as object of
your detention has been well maintained.
40.

I am further aware that the adjudication and

prosecution proceedings under the Customs Act, 1962
are likely to be initiated against you in due course.
These proceedings are however, punitive in nature.
Considering

your

potentiality

and

propensity

to

indulge in such activities in future, I am satisfied that
your detention under the COFEPOSA Act, 1974 is
essential.

6.

Mr. Chaudhuri's contention is that the mere reference to

the previous Detention Order would render the impugned
Detention Order liable to be struck down. This argument is too
broadly stated to be accepted by us, as it would damn the
decision of the Government irrespective of whether the previous
Detention Order was referred to or not. If the previous Order
was ignored, the Detenu would contend that there was nonapplication of mind as this event must perforce weigh in the
mind of the Detaining Officer. Therefore, we are of the opinion
that whilst a reference to the previous Detention Order and its
fate is expedient, the effect that it has on the thought process
WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 9 of 18

of the Detaining Officer is of primary importance. Where the
Detention Order has been struck down by the Court, reliance on
it may render the next Detention Order illegal and legally
inefficacious.

Mr. P.P. Malhotra, learned Additional Solicitor

General (ASG), who appears for the Respondents, has made a
two-fold submission in this regard. Firstly that mention of the
previous Detention Order and its quashing by this Court has
been made purely by way of narrative.

Secondly, he has

contended that if the previous Detention Order has been
quashed on remediable technicalities, fresh Detention Order
based on the previous “cause of action” would be permissible.

7.

We shall deliberate upon the second question first.

In

Chhagan Bhagwan Kahar -vs- N.L. Kalna, (1989) 2 SCC 318
one of the contentions was that “the present detaining authority
took into consideration the previous grounds of detention also to
establish that the petitioner was engaged in bootlegging
activities since long”. Their Lordships opined that “even if the
order of detention comes to an end either by revocation or by
expiry of the period of detention there must be fresh facts for
passing a subsequent order. A fortiori when a detention order is
quashed by the court issuing a high prerogative writ like habeas

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 10 of 18

corpus or certiorari the grounds of the said order should not be
taken into consideration either as a whole or in part even along
with the fresh grounds of detention for drawing the requisite
subjective satisfaction to pass a fresh order because once the
court strikes down an earlier order by issuing rule it nullifies the
entire order”.

The Court drew support from their previous

decision in Ibrahim Bachu Bafan -vs- State of Gujarat, (1985)
2 SCC 24 wherein it was observed that if the Order of Detention
has been quashed by the High Court, Section 11(2) of the
Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling
Activities Act, 1974 (COFEPOSA Act) is not available to the
Detaining Authority enabling it to pass another order under
Section 3 of that Act. In Jahangirkhan Fazalkhan Pathan -vs-

Police Commissioner, Ahmedabad, (1989) 3 SCC 590 their
Lordships categorically enunciated the law to be that an order
of detention cannot be made after considering the previous
grounds of detention if those have been quashed by the Court,
and if such facts have been taken into consideration while
affirming the subjective satisfaction of the Detaining Authority
the fresh order of detention would stand vitiated.

In this

analysis reference to a previous detention order would be
expedient in order to make the Detaining Authority cautious

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 11 of 18

before passing a fresh detention order. It is for this reason that
we have mentioned above that failure to allude to the striking
down of a previous Detention Order may vitiate the fresh order
on the simple score of not taking into account all relevant facts.
It appears to us that if a person has been previously detained,
and such action has not met with the disapproval of the Court,
and if such person were to continue the same illegal activity on
his release, reference to the previous Detention would normally
support and strengthen a fresh Detention Order.

However,

where the previous Detention Order has been struck down, that
fact alone cannot obviously be supportive of the clamping down
of a fresh Detention Order.

This would render nugatory

the

decision of the Court, and may even constitute the commission
of contempt of Court.

It would be preposterous to predicate

that the State could be free to resort to preventive detention
even though the Detenu has succeeded in annulling a previous
Detention Order. We are mindful of the decision in Sadhu Roy

-vs- The State of West Bengal, AIR 1975 SC 919 where it was
observed that the acquittal by a criminal court is not necessarily
a bar to preventive detention on the same facts for 'security'
purpose. In Noor Chand Sheikh -vs- The State of West Bengal,
(1975) 3 SCC 306 it has been opined that an unsuccessful

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 12 of 18

judicial trial would not operate as a bar to a Detention Order or
make it malafide if it is shown that the discharge was because
witnesses were afraid to give evidence against the Detenu. The
seeming divergence between the ratio of these cases and of

Chhagan

Bhagwan

Kahar,

Jahangirkhan

Fazalkhan

Pathan and Ibrahim Bachu Bafan on the other have to be
reconciled. For our purposes, we are bound by the latter and
second string, which are also later in time.

8.

We shall now cogitate upon the first question i.e. that

reference to the previous Detention Order was only by way of
narration of relevant facts.

We reiterate our view that if this

narration is missing it may be indicative of the failure of the
Detaining Authority to consider all relevant facts.

It would,

however, be impermissible for the Detaining Authority to
disregard the annulment, and rely on the issuance of the
Detention Order to buttress a fresh order. We are also unable
to accept the sagacious argument of learned ASG to the effect
that mention of the previous Detention Order was only intended
to complete the factual matrix. The Counter Affidavit which is a
reiteration of the Grounds of Detention is to the effect that the
Detaining Authority rightly placed reliance on the quashing of

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 13 of 18

the earlier Detention Order by this Court. We find that there
can be no manner of doubt that the subjective satisfaction of the
Detention Authority so far as the necessity and need for
ordering the preventive detention of Shri B.K. Goyal is
concerned, has been

positively

affected by the

previous

Detention Order despite the fact that it had been quashed.

9.

Learned ASG has contended that the Court can sever the

reliance by the Detaining Authority on the previous Detention
Order, and if other grounds are available to sustain the
Detention Order, it should not be set aside. Our attention has
been drawn to Section 5A of the COFEPOSA Act. We are unable
to accept this argument.

No doubt, Section 5A contemplates

the Grounds of Detention being severable, but it categorically
refers to the preceding Section 3(1). Plainly, neither of these
Sections referred to the reasons which have prevailed upon the
Detaining Authority to pass an order of preventive detention.

10.

It is also necessary to refer to the contention of Mr.

Chaudhuri,

learned

counsel

for

the

Petitioner,

that

Ms.

Kameswari Subramanian is not competent to file the Counter
Affidavit on behalf of the Respondents.

WP(Crl.)75/2008

The learned ASG has

Page 14 of 18

filed a photocopy of the Gazette of India dated 12.5.2005
conferring upon Ms. Kameswari Subramanian with the powers
under Section 3 of COFEPOSA Act. It is his submission that this
empowerment continues till date. A photocopy of Gazette dated
12.5.2007 conferring similar powers on Ms. Rashida Hussain
has also been filed. We have been informed by the learned ASG
that Ms. Kameswari Subramanian has sworn the Counter
Affidavit for the reason that Ms. Rashida Hussain is on leave.
In Shaik Hanif -vs- State of W.B., (1974) 1 SCC 637 one of the
questions that had arisen was whether the Court should insist
on the filing of a Counter Affidavit by the Magistrate who
passes the order of detention.

Their Lordships observed that

“where mala fides or extraneous considerations are attributed
to the Magistrate or the detaining authority, it may, taken in
conjunction with other circumstances, assume the shape of a
serious infirmity, leading the Court to declare the detention
illegal” since the Counter Affidavit had been filed by another
person.

In the present case also the point of cogitation is the

extent and manner in which the previous Detention Order
affected the subjective satisfaction of the Detaining Authority in
passing a Detention Order. This could only have been explained
and elucidated by Ms. Rashida Hussain. Government servants

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 15 of 18

are entitled to avail of and enjoy their leave entitlement, but
where the Court is to pronounce upon the legitimacy of a
Preventive Detention Order, in other words where the personal
liberty of a citizen has been

curtailed, it would become

necessary for the Counter Affidavit to be filed by the Detaining
Authority, namely, Ms. Rashida Hussain herself.

In Shaik

Hanif 's case their Lordships found the explanation that the
District Magistrate had been transferred from that District, to
be “far from satisfactory”.

11.

It is in these circumstances that we had put it to learned

ASG that the Respondents should consider the expediency of
revoking the Detention Order by exercising the powers available
under Section 11 of the COFEPOSA Act.

It has already been

discussed above that recourse to such a revocation would
palpably enable the Respondents to pass a fresh Detention
Order by removing errors in the assailed one. The learned ASG
has replied by saying that since the matter is sub judice, it may
not be appropriate to charter this course, but we fail to perceive
any obstacles in doing so.

So far as the Court is concerned

there may be unremediable errors or irretrievable infractions in
a Detention Order such as failure or delay in furnishing copies

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 16 of 18

of documents relied upon by the Detaining Authority, or
disruption of the livelink necessary for passing the Detention
Order.

In the present case there is a possibility that the

Detaining Authority had taken into consideration extraneous
factors, thereby subverting its subjective satisfaction.

In

Ibrahim Bachu Bafan their Lordships had laid down that it
would not be possible for the Government to take recourse to
Section 3 by passing a fresh Detention Order on the same
grounds or facts. High prerogative writs are intended to effect
complete justice. These powers are virtually unfettered. If it is
open to the Government to revoke a Detention Order and
thereafter make another Detention Order under Section 11(2) of
COFEPOSA Act, it is beyond cavil that the same course can be
chartered by the writ Court. The order that commends itself to
us at this juncture, is to set aside the impugned Detention Order
with liberty granted to the Government to pass a fresh order on
the same facts if it considers it expedient, necessary and just to
do so. We think this to be the proper path in the present case
because the extent to which the previous Detention Order has
affected the thought-process of the Detaining Authority is
certainly nebulous.

WP(Crl.)75/2008

Page 17 of 18

12.

We allow the writ petition. The impugned Detention Order

is set aside with liberty granted to the Respondents to pass a
fresh Detention Order on the same set of facts. The Detenu,
namely, Shri B.K. Goyal, is set at liberty forthwith unless he is
wanted in any other case. There shall be no orders as to costs.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

February 26, 2008
tp

WP(Crl.)75/2008

( P.K. BHASIN )
JUDGE

Page 18 of 18

