IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005 & CM 16427/2005
Himachal Pradesh Cooperative
Group Housing Society

...Appellant through
Mr. S.K. Taneja, Sr. Adv.
with Mr. Puneet Taneja &
Mr. T.K. Tiwari, Advs.

Versus
M/s. Umesh Goel & Anr.

....Respondents through
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Sr. Adv.
with Mr. Sandeep Sharma,
Advocate.
Date of Hearing : July 23, 2007
Date of Decision : November 20, 2007

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.

Yes
Yes
Yes

JUDGMENT
1.

The salient facts of the litigation are that the

contract between the parties contained an arbitration clause.
This was invoked by Himachal Pradesh Cooperative Group
Housing Society Ltd. (Appellant) followed by its Statement of
Claims

dated 26.6.2003. The Respondent thereafter filed its

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 1 of 38

Reply and Counter Claim dated 30.8.2003.

Whilst there

appears to be legal impediment to an unregistered partnership
firm, such as the Respondents, defending any legal action
brought against it, there seems to be some controversy on its
capacity to file its own claim in arbitral proceedings. We must
not forget that a Counter-Claim can be treated by the Court as a
plaint in a cross-suit (See Laxmidas Dayabhai Kabrawala -vs-

Nanabhai Chunilal Kabrawala , AIR 1964 SC 11). The Learned
Single Judge has found that at the relevant time the Respondent
was an unregistered firm.
unregistered

Thus, if the filing of a

suit by an

firm is barred, equally and logically a counter

claim would not be maintainable. This point was raised before
the Arbitrator as well as the Leaned Single Judge, but at both
stages Kamal Pushp Enterprises -vs- D.R. Construction Co.,
(2000) 6 SCC 659 was applied erroneously. The following Table
is self explanatory so far as the claims proffered by the
Respondent unregistered partnership, which if allowed cannot
but tantamount to removing the statutory embargo articulated
in Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (for short
'Partnership Act), namely, that an unregistered firm is not
competent to enforce a right emanating from a contract. If a
suit for claiming those damages is barred, obtaining them
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 2 of 38

through the alternate or adjunct machinery of arbitration,
would also be barred.
Counter Claim made by the Amounts
Allowed
by
Respondent
Arbitrator
in
favour
Respondent

the
of

Rs.1,38,39.981 only

1.

1,52,40,102

2.

42,05,061

Rs.

3.

16,40,035

Disallowed

4.

67,50,000

Disallowed

5.

9,76,589

Partly allowed

6.

4,50,000

Disallowed

7.

70,22,829

8.

Interest @ 18% p.a. from

3,19, 000

Partly allowed
Allowed

30.8.2003 till payment
9.

2,00,000

Total Amount Claimed =
Rs.3,64,84,616 + Interest @
18% from 30.8.2003.
2.

It shall be borne by both the
parties equally.
Total Amount allowed =
Rs.1,36,24,886.80

The Appellant Society had raised ten claims, (a) to

(j). So far as Item (b) is concerned a sum of Rs.4,10,000/- had
been claimed as the value of scrap had not been returned to the
Claimant. This was allowed by the learned Arbitrator and
upheld by the learned Single Judge. Thereafter, only claim (j)
has been looked upon favourably by the Arbitrator. This was for
an amount of Rs.5,10,000/- on account of grinding and polishing

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 3 of 38

work that had not been completed in all the 102 flats. After
going through the available evidence the learned Arbitrator
awarded a sum of Rs.1,23,094.20/- as its claims had not been
certified to be released to the Respondents by the Architect. The
reasoning and conclusion on this claim has also been found
favourably by the learned Single Judge.

3.

The requirement of registration of a partnership is

not an empty formality. It serves an extremely far reaching
function. In the event of a dispute the aggrieved party should
be able to easily ascertain the names and details of persons who
would eventually be liable for recoveries against the firm.
Unlike a company a partnership firm is not a distinct legal
entity and its partners remain personally liable for all its debts
subject to their inter se compact. Given the relative ease with
which a firm can

be registered, failure on the part of the

partners to take requisite action cannot but be viewed with
suspicion; namely that they intend to unethically and illegally
defraud their creditors. To fully appreciate all the aspects of the
introduction of this statutory requirement we have reproduced
in extensio the relevant extracts from the Report of the Special
Committee which recommended these legislative changes.

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 4 of 38

Every interpretation of Section 69 of the Partnership Act must
give effect to these objectives, unless the plain language makes
it impossible to do so. In Virender Dresses -vs- Varinder

Garments, AIR 1982 Delhi 482 Sultan Singh, J. of this Court
had held that a suit for injunction on the grounds of passing off
was maintainable notwithstanding non registration of the firm
because the right sought to be enforced did not stem from a
contract but was available in common law. There is now high
authority for this proposition in terms of Raptakos Brett & Co.

Ltd. -vs- Ganesh Property, JT 1998 (6) SC 289.

4.

In Haldiram Bhujiawala -vs- Anand Kumar Deepak

Kumar, (2000) 3 SCC 250 their Lordships had referred to the
said Report of the Special Committee (1930-1931) observing
that making use thereof was perfectly impermissible. No doubt
a distinction was made between enforcing a common law right
and a civil right, which, however, does not arise in the case
before us.

5.

The reasons given for introducing the Chapter on

Registration of Firms are given in the Report of the Special
Committee

set up to examine the provisions of the Bill to

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 5 of 38

amend

the law relating to partnership, the relevant paragraphs for the
present purposes are the following:
17. The outlines of the scheme are briefly as follows.
The

English

precedent

in

so

far

as

it

makes

registration compulsory and impose a penalty for nonregistration has not been followed, as it is considered
that this step would be too drastic for a beginning in
India,

and

would

introduce

all

the

difficulties

connected with small and ephemeral undertakings.
Instead, it is proposed that registration should lie
entirely within the discretion of the firm or partner
concerned; but, following the English precedent, any
firm which is not registered will be unable to enforce
its claims against third parties in the civil courts; and
any partner who is not registered will be unable to
enforce his claims either against third parties or
against his fellow partners. One exception to this
disability is made – any unregistered partner in any
firm,

registered

or

unregistered,

may

sue

for

dissolution of the firm. This exception is made on the
principle that registration is designed primarily to
protect third parties, and the absence of registration
need not prevent the disappearance of an unregistered
or imperfectly registered firm.

Under this scheme a

small firm, or a firm created for a single venture, not
meeting with difficulty in getting payment, need never
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 6 of 38

register; and even a firm with a large business need
not

register

until

it

is

faced

with

litigation.

Registration may then be effected at any time before
the suit is instituted. The rights of third parties to sue
the firm or any partner are left intact.
18.

Once

registration

has

been

effected

the

statements recorded in the register regarding the
constitution of the firm will be conclusive proof of the
facts therein contained against the partners making
them, and no partner whose name is on the register
will be permitted to deny that he is a partner, -- with
certain natural and proper exceptions which will be
indicated later. This should afford a strong protection
to persons dealing with firms against false denials of
partnership

and

the

evasion

of

liability

by

the

substantial members of a firm.
.....
23. To sum up, it is anticipated that once a firm has
been registered the register of firms will continue to
contain a complete and up to date list of all partners
who will be liable for the debts of the firm to persons
who propose to deal with the firm.
24. One more point regarding the registration of firms
calls for mention. It is proposed that the chapter, in so
far

as

it

provides

machinery

for

registration,

amendment of the register, grant of copies and so
forth, should come into force along with the rest of the
Bill, so that firms may apply for registration at once.
The clause regarding the conclusive nature of the

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 7 of 38

statements recorded in the register will come into
force at the same time. However, it would obviously
be unjust to make all unregistered firms and partners
incapable of suing until they have had a reasonable
opportunity to register; and it is proposed that they
should be allowed one year, by enacting that the
clause rendering them incapable of suing shall not
come

into

force

until

one

year

after

the

The

Bharat

commencement of the rest of the Act.
6.

In

Messrs

Mohatta

Brothers

-vs-

Survodaya Mills Co. Ltd., AIR 1976 SC 1703 one of the
controversies centered around who all were partners of the
registered firm. It was in that context that their Lordships had
cautioned that the distinction between a plaintiff firm as against
a defendant firm invariably ought to be kept in mind.

It was

opined that it would be open for the Plaintiff to prove who all
were partners of a firm against whom a suit for recovery had
been instituted. The contrary position, that is, where the plaintiff
firm was not registered or all partners were not shown in the
Register of Firms, renders proceeding void. (see Gandhi & Co.

-vs- Krishna Glass Pvt. Ltd., AIR 1987 Bombay 348).

7.

It is well settled that a decree obtained by an

unregistered partnership is a nullity, and all such proceedings
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 8 of 38

are devoid of jurisdiction, and objections in this regard can be
raised in even at the stage of Appeal or in Execution. (See

K.K.A. Ponnuchami Goundar -vs- Muthusami Goundar, AIR (29)
1942 Madras 252, A.T. Ponnapa Chettiar -vs- Bodappa Chettiar,
AIR

1945

Madras

146,

Shriram

Sardarnal

Didwani

-vs-

Gourishankar Alia Rameshwar Joharmal, AIR 1961 Bombay 136,
In the matter of Abani Kanta Pal, AIR 1986 Calcutta 143 and
definitively in Badri Prasad -vs- Nagarmal , AIR 1959 SC 559).

8.

In Panchu Gopal Bose -vs- Board of Trustees for Port

of Calcutta, (1993) 4 SCC 338 there was a delay of about ten
years from the date of the accrual of the cause of action and the
making of the Reference. The Supreme Court held that “the
proceedings before the Arbitrator are like civil proceedings
before the Court within the meaning of Section 14 of the
Limitation Act.”

We are also in respectful agreement with

similar views expressed by a Division Bench of this Court in

Vanita Gambhir -vs- District Judge, Delhi 2005 (1) Arb. L.R.
166, where it has been enunciated that (a) arbitral proceedings
are akin to civil proceedings are (b) that Section 69

bars

adjudication of claims even through arbitration unless it is for
the dissolution of the firm.

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 9 of 38

9.

A plethora of precedents prevails on the conundrum

whether disputes pertaining to an unregistered firm can be
referred to arbitration because of an agreement to this effect.
Divergent conclusions have been arrived at by Single Benches
of this Court itself, even though the opinion of the Supreme
Court in Jagdish Chander Gupta -vs- Kajaria Traders (India)

Ltd., (1964) 8 SCR 50 : AIR 1964 SC 1882 had perforce to be
applied.

In Paras Ram Darshan Lal -vs- UOI, AIR 1979 Delhi

135 Sultan Singh, J., however, has also expressed the opinion
that a petition under Sections 8 and 20 of the erstwhile
Arbitration Act, 1940 was not maintainable for the reason that
the plaintiff was an unregistered firm.

After noticing this

precedent, Sultan Singh, J. nonetheless came to the opposite
conclusion in Jagat Mittar Saigal -vs- Kailash Chander Saigal,
AIR 1983 Delhi 134. The reason that prevailed upon the learned
Judge obviously was that the dissolution of a firm, or for
accounts of a dissolved firm, or any right or power to release
property of a dissolved firm, was the exception carved out
under sub-section (3) of Section 69 of the Indian Partnership
Act. In Saigal it was this exercise which was to be undertaken,
and instead of filing a civil suit the parties have contractually
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 10 of 38

agreed to enter into arbitration.

Therefore, a statutory relief

was, in fact, being availed of. Conceivably, subsequent to the
initiation of litigation those parties could have agreed to
arbitrate upon their disputes, in which case a

contractual

agreement would not have had to be given effect to. Under the
Arbitration Act, 1940 as well as in the Arbitration & Conciliation
Act, 1996, adversaries can obtain orders from the Court
referring them to arbitration. In such cases alone can it be
regarded as availing of a statutory relief. We are supported in
our understanding by the explanations given by the Apex Court
in paragraph 8 of Kajaria Traders (infra).

Our humble

endeavour is to bury and inter these discordant views. It is our
understanding that when recourse is to be taken to arbitration
through the intervention of the Court, the pre-condition being
the existence of an arbitration agreement, it is not a statutory
but a contractual right which is being exercised. With due
respect, we are unable to subscribe to the later Judgment of the
Single Bench in Saigal which necessarily ought to have been
referred by the learned Single Judge to a larger Bench since he
was unable to subscribe to the view taken by an earlier Single
Bench.

In

any

event we

find it

irreconcilable

to the

authoritative view in Kajaria Traders.
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 11 of 38

Kajaria Traders has been decided by a Four-Judge

10.

Bench. One of the clauses of the Agreement between the parties
was that “in case of a dispute the matter will be referred for
arbitration in accordance with the Indian Arbitration Act.”

The

Bombay High Court had taken the position that Section 69 of
the Partnership Act did not bar the entertainment of an action
under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act even though the
partnership

was

not

registered.

After

a

perspicuous

consideration of the law their Lordships held as follows:
8. Some cases noticed by the High Court were cited to
us but none of them appears to be really in point. In

Hafiz Qamar Din v. Nur Din, AIR 1936 Lah 136 and
Babulal Dhandhania v. Gautam and Co., AIR 1950 Cal
391

proceedings were started on an award, in one to

make it a rule of the Court and in the other to get it set
aside. These cases are distinguishable because they
deal with awards and it is not necessary to decide
whether after an award the proceeding is one to
enforce a right arising from a contract. We do not refer
to them. In Sreemannarayanamuthy v. Arjanadu, AIR

1939 Mad 145 a petition for adjudication of a partner
as insolvent was held to be a right arising not from a
contract but from statute. Here the right that is being
enforced through the medium of the Arbitration Act
arises from the contract between the parties and is a
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 12 of 38

part of it. In Jamal v. Firm Umar Haji Karim, ILR

(1943) Nag 543 the bar of Section 69(3) was claimed
during the execution of a consent decree and was
disallowed. Grille, C.J., observed that the expression
“other proceeding” indicated something which was “sui
generis of a claim of set-off”. If the partners of an
unregistered firm go to court without either asking for
a dissolution of the firm or dissolving it themselves and
enter into an agreement and compose their differences
it is possible to say that the enforcement of the consent
decree is no more than the enforcement of a right
arising from a contract and is within the ban. It is,
however, not necessary to decide this point here in

Ram Lal Harnam Das v. Pal Krishan, AIR 1957Punj 159
it was expressly pointed out that the expression “other
proceedings”

in

the

third

sub-section

applied

to

proceedings of the nature of a claim of set-off and
nothing else. This case cannot be said to interpret the
sub-section correctly. Similarly, Mahendra v. Gurdeyal,

ILR 30 Pat 109 which lays down that Section 69 does
not bar a partner of an unregistered partnership firm
from applying to the court under Section 8 of the
Arbitration Act for referring the dispute between
partners to arbitrator as provided in the condition of
their agreement, cannot be accepted as sound. The
reason given by the Divisional Bench that as Section 69
allows

dissolution

and

accounts

of

unregistered

partnership it cannot bar such an application appears
to us to be not quite in point.

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 13 of 38

9. In our judgment, the words 'other proceeding' in subs.(3) must receive their full meaning untrammeled by
the words 'a claim of set-off'. The latter words neither
intend nor can be construed to cut down the generality
of the words 'other proceeding'. The sub-section
provides for the application of the provisions of subsecs. (1) and (2) to claims of set-off and also to other
proceedings of any kind which can properly be said to
be for enforcement of any right arising from contract
except those expressly mentioned as exceptions in subsec. (3) and sub-sec. (4).
10. The appeal is, therefore, allowed. The decision of
the High Court will be set aside and the application
under S. 8(2) of the Arbitration Act shall stand
dismissed with costs throughout on the applicant in the
High Court.
11.

It has been seen that a distinction has been drawn in

several decided cases between litigation where the unregistered
partnership firm is the plaintiff and where it is the defendant.
Both sub-sections (1) and (2) contemplate a lis in which the
plaintiff is an unregistered firm and categorically proclaim that
such proceedings are not maintainable. Sub-section (3) further
clarifies that even a “set off” would be inadmissible if put
forward by an unregistered firm thus encapsulating and
perpetuating the statutory disqualification or penalty that visits

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 14 of 38

partner's obduracy, recalcitrance or devious design for non
compliance with the salutary stipulation of registration of the
partnership firm.

A Counter Claim is in reality a plaint itself

except that it accompanies a Written Statement and there is no
conceivable reason why it can be adjudicated upon even though
a “set-off” is disqualified. What needs now to be seen is whether
the opinion of the Two-Judge Bench in Kamal Pushp charters
a contrary course in essential aspects from Kajaria Traders.
The very first paragraph of Kamal Pushp sets down the
parameters of the problem before their Lordships, namely,
whether Section 69

does not stand

in the

way

of an

unregistered firm defending proceedings against it and/or
whether it precludes only the initiation of any proceedings by
such a firm. In this context the ratio is in the following words:
9. The prohibition contained in Section 69 is in respect
of instituting a proceeding to enforce a right arising
from a contract in any Court by an unregistered firm,
and it had no application to the proceedings before an
Arbitrator and that too when the reference to the
Arbitrator was at the instance of the appellant itself. If
the said bar engrafted in Section 69 is absolute in its
terms and is destructive of any and every right arising
under the contract itself and not confined merely to
enforcement of a right arising from a contract by an
unregistered
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

firm

by

instituting

a

suit

or

other

Page 15 of 38

proceedings

in

Court

only,

it

would

become

a

jurisdictional issue in respect of the Arbitrator's power,
authority and competency itself, undermining thereby
the legal efficacy of the very award, and consequently
furnish a ground by itself to challenge the award when
it is sought to be made a rule of Court. The case before
us cannot be said to be one such and the learned
Counsel for the appellant though was fully conscious of
this fact, yet tried to assert that it is open to the
appellant to take up the objection based upon Section
69 of the Partnership Act, at any stage - even during
the post award proceedings to enforce the award
passed. The Award in this case cannot either rightly or
legitimately said to be vitiated on account of the
prohibition contained in Section 69 of the Partnership
Act, 1932 since the same has no application to
proceedings before an Arbitrator. At the stage of
enforcement of the award by passing a decree in terms
thereof what is enforced is the award itself which
crystallise the rights of parties under the Indian
Contract Act and the general law to be paid for the
work executed and not any right arising only from the
objectionable contract. It is useful in this connection to
refer to the decision of this Court in Satish Kumar and
Ors. v. Surinder Kumar and Ors., AIR 1970 SC 833 :
(1969) 2 SCR 244, wherein it has been stated in
unmistakable terms that an Award is not a mere waste
paper but does create rights and has some legal effect
besides being final and binding on the parties. It has

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 16 of 38

also been held that the Award is, in fact, a final
adjudication of a Court of the parties' own choice and
until

impeached

upon

sufficient

grounds

in

an

appropriate proceedings, an Award which is on the face
of it regular, is conclusive upon the merits of the
controversy submitted for Arbitration. Consequently,
the post Award proceedings cannot be considered by
any means to be a suit or other proceedings to enforce
any rights arising under a contract. All the more so
when, as in this case, at all stages the respondent was
only on the defence and has not itself instituted any
proceedings to enforce any rights of the nature
prohibited under Section 69 of the Partnership Act,
before any Court as such. We see no infirmity or error
whatsoever in the decision of the courts below to call
for our interference in this appeal. The appeal fails and
shall stand dismissed.
(underlining added)
12

It needs to be clarified that Satish Kumar v.

Surinder Kumar, AIR 1970 SC 833 did not deal with the
execution of an arbitral award passed at the instance of an
unregistered firm. On the contrary their Lordships had to
cogitate on the narrow issue of whether “an award given under
the Act on a private reference requires registration under
Section 17(1)(b) of the Registration Act, if the Award effects
partition of immovable property exceeding the value of Rs.100.”
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 17 of 38

Obviously Satish Kumar as also Kamal Pushp could not lay
down any law irreconcilable with Kajaria Traders, which was
delivered by a larger Bench. When we keep in perspective the
fact that their Lordships had categorically commented that the
case before them concerned an unregistered firm defending
proceedings, it becomes clear that Kajaria Traders is not an
authority

for

the

proposition

canvassed

before

us

that

arbitration can be commenced or indirectly invoked by an
unregistered firm.
against

Therefore, even if arbitration is

initiated

an unregistered firm, the latter would not become

enabled to raise claims of their own thereby bypassing or
annulling the disability created by Section 69 of the Partnership
Act. An arbitral award passed in respect of claims filed against
the unregistered firm, allowing them or rejecting, would alone
be legally efficacious. In the case in hand, the Kajaria Traders
ratio militates against an arbitral award granting the claims
raised before it by an unregistered firm. This is altogether
different from according sanction to a rejection of or only a
partial grant of a claim brought against an unregistered firm,
which

would

attract

finality

as

well

as

executability.

Accordingly, the impugned Award is severable, and the portion
thereof which allows the claim raised by the Respondent which
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 18 of 38

is

an

unregistered

partnership

before

the

Arbitrator,

notwithstanding the fact that it is the Appellant who invoked
arbitration, must be set aside. If a Firm is desirous of having its
own claims adjudicated either as an independent or distinct
claim, or as a Counter-Claim, it must be registered on the date
when such an action is filed before the Arbitrator.
13.

Mr.

Sethi,

learned

Senior

Counsel

for

the

Respondent has drawn attention to Firm Ashok Traders -vs-

Gurmukh Das Saluja, (2004) 3 SCC 155, which is a decision of a
Two Judge Bench.

If only the Head Notes are read the

Judgment appears to read in favour of the Respondents.
However, we must not lose sight of two facts; firstly, that the
disputes were inter se partners of an unregistered firm which
prima facie may fall within the exceptions carved in Section 69
of the Partnership Act itself.

Secondly, the Apex Court was

concerned with the appointment of a Receiver and not the
adjudication of claims filed by an unregistered partnership
before the Arbitrator.

The Court noted its

decision in

Sundaram Finance Ltd. -vs- NEPC India Ltd., AIR 1999 SC 565
and by similar dialectic concluded that much like an injunction
can be granted as a statutory relief, a Receiver could also be
appointed under Section 9 as an interim measure before all
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 19 of 38

aspects are considered.

The Court did not, as it could not,

speak differently to law enunciated by it in Kajaria Traders.
The following paragraphs make it abundantly clear that Firm

Ashok did not intend to lay down the law in respect of Section
69 of the Partnership Act, and certainly not in variance to

Kajaria Traders which it noted to be that of

a Constitution

Bench.
10. To begin with, for the controversy centring around
the abovesaid two provisions, we told the learned
counsel for the parties that we are not inclined to go in
depth into the issue inasmuch as a prolonged hearing
on the issue and decision thereon may take time and
that would have devastating effect on the rights of the
parties. The learned counsel for the parties agreed
that de hors the issue, the Court may proceed to
determine the appeal on merits. Yet, we feel dutybound to record at least our prima facie opinion on the
issue; lest we should be misunderstood as having
sidetracked the same.
11. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 69 of the
Partnership

Act

strike

at

the

very

root

of

the

jurisdiction of the court to entertain a suit to enforce a
right arising from a contract, if the applicability of
Section 69 is attracted. By virtue of sub-section (3), the
bar enacted by sub-sections (1) and (2) applies also to
a claim of set-off or “other proceedings to enforce a
right arising from a contract” which, in the submission
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 20 of 38

made by the learned counsel for Groups 'B' and `C',
includes a proceeding commencing on an application
under Section 9 of the A&C Act.
12. In our opinion, which we would term as prima
facie, the bar enacted by Section 69 of the Partnership
Act

does

not

affect

the

maintainability

of

an

application under Section 9 of the A&C Act.
13. The A&C Act, 1996 is a long leap in the direction
of alternate dispute resolution systems. It is based on
UNCITRAL Model. The decided cases under the
preceding Act of 1940 have to be applied with caution
for determining the issues arising for decision under
the new Act. An application under Section 9 under the
scheme of the A&C Act is not a suit. Undoubtedly, such
application results in initiation of civil proceedings but
can it be said that a party filing an application under
Section 9 of the Act is enforcing a right arising from a
contract? “Party” is defined in clause ( h ) of subsection (1) of Section 2 of the A&C Act to mean “a
party to an arbitration agreement”. So, the right
conferred by Section 9 is on a party to an arbitration
agreement. The time or the stage for invoking the
jurisdiction of court under Section 9 can be: (i) before,
or (ii) during arbitral proceedings, or (iii) at any time
after the making of the arbitral award but before it is
enforced in accordance with Section 36. With the
pronouncement of this Court in Sundaram Finance

Ltd. v. NEPC India Ltd. the doubts stand cleared and
set at rest and it is not necessary that arbitral

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 21 of 38

proceedings must be pending or at least a notice
invoking arbitration clause must have been issued
before an application under Section 9 is filed. A little
later we will revert again to this topic. For the moment
suffice it to say that the right conferred by Section 9
cannot be said to be one arising out of a contract. The
qualification which the person invoking jurisdiction of
the court under Section 9 must possess is of being a
“party” to an arbitration agreement. A person not
party to an arbitration agreement cannot enter the
court

for

protection

under

Section

9.

This

has

relevance only to his locus standi as an applicant. This
has nothing to do with the relief which is sought for
from the court or the right which is sought to be
canvassed in support of the relief. The reliefs which
the court may allow to a party under clauses (i) and (ii)
of Section 9 flow from the power vesting in the court
exercisable by reference to “contemplated”, “pending”
or “completed” arbitral proceedings. The court is
conferred with the same power for making the
specified orders as it has for the purpose of and in
relation to any proceedings before it though the venue
of the proceedings in relation to which the power
under Section 9 is sought to be exercised is the
Arbitral Tribunal. Under the scheme of the A&C Act,
the arbitration clause is separable from other clauses
of

the

partnership

deed.

The

arbitration

clause

constitutes an agreement by itself. In short, filing of an
application by a party by virtue of its being a party to

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 22 of 38

an arbitration agreement is for securing a relief which
the court has power to grant before, during or after
arbitral proceedings by virtue of Section 9 of the A&C
Act. The relief sought for in an application under
Section 9 of the A&C Act is neither in a suit nor a right
arising from a contract. The right arising from the
partnership deed or conferred by the Partnership Act
is being enforced in the Arbitral Tribunal; the court
under Section 9 is only formulating interim measures
so as to protect the right under adjudication before the
Arbitral Tribunal from being frustrated. Section 69 of
the Partnership Act has no bearing on the right of a
party to an arbitration clause to file an application
under Section 9 of the A&C Act.
14. In Jagdish Chandra Gupta case

the Constitution

Bench approved of a liberal and full meaning being
assigned to the phrase “other proceedings” in subsection (3) of Section 69 of the Partnership Act
untrammeled by the preceding words “a claim of setoff”. The Court refused to countenance the plea for
interpreting the words “other proceedings” ejusdem

generis with the preceding words “a claim of set-off”.
Shreeram Finance Corpn.

calls for the effect of bar

created by Section 69 being determined by reference
to the date of institution of the suit and not by
reference

to

any

subsequent

Development Authority case

event.

In

Delhi

this Court held Section

69 of the Partnership Act applicable to an application
under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, as such

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 23 of 38

an application (under the scheme of that Act) would be
included within the meaning of “other proceedings” in
Section 69(3) of the Partnership Act. In Kamal Pushp

Enterprises this Court held that the bar under Section
69 of the Partnership Act is not applicable at the stage
of enforcement of the award by passing a decree in
terms thereof because the award crystallises the rights
of the parties and what is being enforced at that stage
is

not

any

right

arising

from

the

objectionable

contract. None of the cases throws any direct light on
the issue at hand. Rather, the undercurrent of dictum
in Kamal Pushp Enterprises lends support to the view
we are tentatively taking herein. We leave the matter
at that and proceed to examine the merits of the
appeal as agreed to by all the learned counsel
appearing.

14.

It is necessary to refer to Delhi Development

Authority -vs- Kochhar Construction Work, (1998) 8 SCC 559 in
which their Lordships categorically held as follows:
3. Section 69(1) provides that no suit to enforce a right
arising from a contract shall be instituted in any court
by or on behalf of any person suing as a partner in a
firm against the firm or any person alleged to be or to
have been a partner in the firm unless the firm is
registered and the person suing is or has been shown
in the Register of Firms as a partner in the firm. This
sub-section begins with the words: “No suit ... shall be
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 24 of 38

instituted in any court ... “, which prima facie bar the
institution of the suit by a firm which is unregistered.
Sub-section (2) next provides that no suit to enforce a
right arising from a contract shall be instituted in any
court by or on behalf of a firm against any third party
unless the firm is registered and the persons suing are
or have been shown in the Register of Firms as
partners in the firm. This sub-section also begins with
the words: “No suit ... shall be instituted in any court
...”, which clearly bars the institution of a suit by a
firm which is not registered. The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) have been made applicable to
other proceedings to enforce a right arising from a
contract by virtue of sub-section (3) of Section 69. It
would thus seem on a plain reading of Section 69(2)
that a suit instituted in any court by or on behalf of a
firm against any third party shall not be valid unless
the firm is registered and the persons suing are or
have been shown in the Register of Firms as partners
of the firm. Plainly, the institution of the suit itself is
barred both by sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of
Section 69 of the Partnership Act. Section 20 of the
Arbitration Act provides that where any persons have
entered into an arbitration agreement before the
institution of any suit with respect to the subjectmatter of the agreement or any part of it, and where a
difference has arisen to which the agreement applies,
they or any of them, instead of proceeding under
Chapter II (Chapter II refers to arbitration without

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 25 of 38

intervention of a court) may apply to a court having
jurisdiction in the matter to which the agreement
relates, that the agreement be filed in court. Such an
application, says sub-section (2) thereof, shall be in
writing and shall be numbered and registered as a
suit. Therefore, an application filed by an unregistered
firm under Section 20 would also be treated as a suit
and would be hit by Section 69(2) if the firm filing the
application is not registered with the Registrar of
Firms. This appears to be the position in law which
emerges on a plain reading of Section 69 of the
Partnership Act and Section 20 of the Arbitration Act.
This is the view which this Court took in the case of

Shreeram Finance Corpn. v. Yasin Khan, (1989) 3 SCC
476 (paras 5 and 6). The fact that it is an application to
be registered and numbered as a suit would not make
any difference for the obvious reason that though subsections (1) and (2) of Section 69 of the Partnership
Act refer to a suit, sub-section (3) thereof makes those
sub-sections applicable even “to other proceedings
which would include an application registered and
numbered as a suit under Section 20 of the Arbitration
Act”. [See Jagdish Chandra Gupta v. Kajaria Traders

(India) Ltd. AIR 1964 SC 1882]
4. Counsel for the respondents, however, invited our
attention to two decisions which took a view that
subsequent registration of the firm can cure the initial
defect provided the registration is before the period of
limitation has run out. Our attention was drawn to

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 26 of 38

M.S.A. Subramania Mudaliar v. East Asiatic Co. Ltd.,
AIR 1936 Mad. 991 and Atmuri Mahalakshmi v.
Jagadeesh Traders, AIR 1990 AP 288. However, the
High Court of Patna in Laduram Sagarmal v. Jamuna

Prasad Chaudhuri, AIR 1939 Pat 239 and the High
Court of Madras in T. Savariraj Pillai v. R.S.S. Vastrad

& Co., AIR 1990 Mad 198 took a contrary view and
hold that the suit is incompetent ab initio. We have
considered these decisions, but in the light of the plain
language of Section 69 of the Partnership Act read
with Section 20 of the Arbitration Act and in view of
the decision of this Court reported in Shreeram

Finance Corpn.

we are clearly of the opinion that

proceedings under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act
were ab initio defective since the firm was not
registered and the subsequent registration of the firm
cannot cure that defect.
5. In view of the above, we allow this appeal, set aside
the order of the High Court and hold that the
proceedings were ab initio defective as they could not
have been instituted since the firm in whose name the
proceedings were instituted was not registered at the
date

of

the

institution

of

the

proceedings.

We,

however, make no order as to costs.
15.

Quite recently, in U.P. State Sugar Corporation Ltd.

-vs- Jain Construction Co., (2004) 7 SCC 332 the Supreme Court
has sounded a caution against any view contrary to Kajaria

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 27 of 38

Traders in these words -7. The question as to whether Respondent 1 firm is
registered or not is essentially a question of fact. It is
true that the arbitral proceedings would not be
maintainable at the instance of an unregistered firm
having regard

to

the

mandatory

provisions

contained in Section 69 of the Indian Partnership Act,
1932. It has been so held in Jagdish Chandra Gupta v.

Kajaria Traders (India) Ltd. We may, however, notice
that

this Court

in

Firm

Ashok Traders

despite

following Jagdish Chandra Gupta held that Section 69
of the Indian Partnership Act would have no bearing
on the right of a party to an arbitration clause
under Section 9 of the 1996 Act. As correctness or
otherwise of

the said decision is not

in

question

before us, it is not necessary to say anything in this
behalf but suffice it to point out that in the event it
is found by the High Court that
Judge

the

learned

was wrong in rejecting the application

Civil
for

amendment of the plaint and in fact the respondent
firm was registered under the Indian Partnership Act,
the question of throwing out the said suit on that
ground would not arise. There cannot, however, be any
doubt whatsoever that the firm must be registered at
the time of institution of the suit and not later on.
(See

Delhi

Development

Authority

v.

Kochhar

Construction Work .)
16.

In this analysis we think it necessary to severe and

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 28 of 38

truncate the impugned Award into two parts. Firstly, claims
advanced by the Appellant Society and secondly, claims
advanced

by the Respondent

unregistered partnership firm.

So far as the second set of claims is concerned we are of the
view

that they are clearly and plainly non

judicable, either

through the avenue of the civil suit or through the alternate
route of
where

arbitration.

We clarify that unlike in other cases

parties have agreed that their claims be adjudicated

through arbitration either at the instance of the Court or on
a mutual understanding, both the parties were indubitably
acting pursuant to the arbitration clause contained in the
Agreement. The present legal adversaries were not attempting
to dissolve the partnership concern and/or seeking rendition of
accounts from each other, which is the exception carved out in
the second sub-section of Section 69 of

the Partnership Act.

The Award, insofar as it allows partially or otherwise, any of the
claims of the Respondent unregistered partnership firm is
accordingly set aside.

17.

We now turn to the Claims put forward by the

Appellant Society. In this context the following observations of
the Apex Court in Union of India v. Rallia Ram, AIR 1963 SC
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 29 of 38

1685, have not been varied and still hold the field despite the
passage of forty years, and numerous subsequent judgments on
the subject.
"An award being a decision of an arbitrator whether a
lawyer or a layman chosen by

the parties, and

entrusted with power to decide a dispute submitted
to him is ordinarily not liable to be challenged on the
ground that it is erroneous. In order

to make

arbitration effective and the awards enforceable,
machinery is devised for lending the assistance of the
ordinary Courts. The Court is

also entrusted with

power to modify or correct the award on the ground
of imperfect form or clerical errors, or decision on
questions not referred, which are severable from
those referred. The Court has also power to remit the
award

when

it

has

undetermined, or when

left

some

matters

referred

the award is indefinite, or

where the objection to the legality of the award is
apparent on the

face of the award. The Court

may

also set aside an award on the ground of corruption
or misconduct of the arbitrator, or that a party has
been

guilty

of

fraudulent

concealment

or

wilful

deception. But the Court cannot interfere with the
award if otherwise proper on the ground that

the

decision appears to it to be erroneous. The award of
the arbitrator is ordinarily final and conclusive, unless
a contrary intention is disclosed by the agreement. The
award is the decision of a domestic tribunal chosen by

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 30 of 38

the parties, and the Civil Courts which are entrusted
with the power to facilitate arbitration

and

effectuate

appellate

the

awards,

cannot

exercise

to

powers over the decision. Wrong or right the decision
is

binding

if

it be

reached

fairly

after

giving

adequate opportunity to the parties to place their
grievances in the manner provided by the arbitration
agreement. But it is now firmly established that an
award is bad on the ground of error of law on the face
of it, when in the award itself or in a document
actually incorporated in it, there is found some legal
proposition which is the basis of the award and which
is erroneous".

18.

Acknowledging that the Arbitrator is the final judge

of facts, the Apex Court in State of Orissa and Anr. v. Kalinga

Construction Co. (P) Ltd., 1970 (2) SCC 861 held that the High
Court erred in considering the matter as a court of appeal and
in re-evaluating the evidence and that it further erred in
recording a finding in reversal of the conclusions of the
arbitrator. In Hindustan Iron Co. v. K. Shashikant & Co., AIR
1987 SC 81 the Court held that the award of the Arbitrator
ought not to be set aside for the reason that, in the opinion of
the Court, the Arbitrator had not reached wrong conclusions or
failed to appreciate the facts.
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 31 of 38

19.

In Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Jagan Nath

Ashok Kumar and Anr., AIR 1987 SC 2316 the Court held that if
the reasons appear per se to be not unreasonable and irrational
the Court ought not to reappreciate the evidence. It approved
the observations made in Mediterranean & Eastern Export Co.

Ltd. v. Fortress Fabrics Limited, (1948) 2 ALL ER 186, which
are as follows - "A man in the trade who is selected for his
experience would be likely to know and indeed to be expected
to know the fluctuations of the market and would have plenty of
means of informing himself or refreshing his memory on any
point on which he might find it necessary so to do. In this case
according to the affidavit of sellers they did take the point
before the Arbitrator that the Southern African market has
slumped. Whether the buyers contested that statement does not
appear but an experienced Arbitrator would know or have the
means of knowing whether that was so or not and to what
extent and I see no reason why in principle he should be
required to have evidence on this point any more than on any
other question relating to a particular trade. It must be taken I
think that in fixing the amount that he has, he has acted on his
own knowledge and experience. The day has long gone by when
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 32 of 38

the Courts looked with jealousy on the jurisdiction of the
Arbitrators. The modern tendency is in my opinion more
especially in commercial arbitrations, to endeavour to uphold
awards of the skilled persons that the parties themselves have
selected to decide the questions at issue between them. If an
arbitrator has acted within the terms of his submission and has
not violated any rules of what is so often called natural justice
the Courts should be slow indeed to set aside his award." That
this is a well settled proposition of law was reiterated in the
decision of the Apex Court in Coimbatore District Podu

Thozillar Sangam v. Balasubramania Foundary and Ors., AIR
1987 SC 2045. It was opined that it is only an error of law and
not a mistake of fact, committed by the arbitrator, which is
justiciable in the Application/Objection before the Court. If no
legal proposition emerges from a perusal of either the Award or
any document annexed with the Award which is erroneous, and
the alleged mistakes or alleged errors, are only mistakes of fact,
and if the Award is made after giving adequate opportunity to
the parties to place their grievances in the manner provided by
the arbitration agreement, the Award is not amenable to the
correction of the Court. Similar views were again expressed in

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Indian Carbon Ltd., (1988) 3 SCC
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 33 of 38

36; Jawahar Lal Wadhwa and Anr. v. Haripada Chakroberty,
(1989) 1 SCC 76; Puri Construction Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India,
(1989) 1 SCC 411; Sudarsan Trading Co. v. Government of

Kerala and Anr., (1989) 2 SCC 30; Food Corporation of India v.
Joginderpal Mohinderpal and Anr., AIR 1989 SC 1263 where
even a plausible view taken by the Arbitrator was held not to be
open to Court interference, if the latter preferred a contrary or
alternate view.

20.

In U.P. Hotels etc. v. U.P. State Electricity Board,

AIR 1989 SC 268,

the decision of the Umpire had been

challenged in respect of his interpretation of Section 49 of the
Electricity (Supply) Act. Even on this aspect, which quite
palpably takes on the characteristics of a point of law in
contradiction to point a fact, the Apex Court did not favour jural
intervention. It observed that "the view taken by the Umpire on
Section 49 was a possible view in the light of the decision of this
Court in Indian Aluminium's case. In the premises, a question of
law arose certainly during the course of the proceedings. Such a
question has been decided by the Umpire on a view which is a
possible one to take. Even if there was no specific reference of a
question of law referred to the Umpire, there was a question of
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 34 of 38

law involved. Even on the assumption that such a view is not
right, the award is not amenable to interference or correction
by the courts of law as there is no proposition of law which
could be said to be the basis of the award of the Umpire, and
which is erroneous."

21.

In Hind Builders v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC

1340 the Court cautioned that where two opinions were
possible it could not be predicated that there was an error
apparent on the face of the Award. In Bijendra Nath Srivastava

v. Mayank Srivastava and Ors., AIR 1994 SC 2562 the view was
expressed that the reasonableness of reasons given by the
arbitrator were not open to challenge and that the proper
approach would be for the Court to support the Award.
Similarly, in Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. v. Governor of

Orissa and Ors., AIR 1995 SC 2189 it was repeated that the
Court cannot reappreciate the material on the record. In

Trustees of the Port of Madras v. Engineering Constructions
Corporation Ltd., (1995) 5 SC 531 the decision of a Division
Bench of the High Court of Madras, which reversed the Award
on a question of fact and not a question of law, was set aside by
the Supreme Court. After considering its previous decisions, the
FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 35 of 38

Apex Court in B.V. Radha Krishna v. Sponge Iron India Ltd.,
(1997) 4 SCC 693 again held that the Court could not substitute
its own view in place of that of the Arbitrator. In Army Welfare

Housing Organisation v. Gautam Construction & Fisheries Ltd.,
(1998) 7 SCC 290 the Court declined to vary an award for the
reason that without reappreciating evidence it would not be
possible to fault the quantum awarded towards anticipated
expenses.

22.

On the other hand, in Steel Authority of India Ltd. v.

J.C. Budharaja, Government and Mining Contractor, (1999) 8
SCC 122, the Apex Court found the Award to be illegal as it was
passed by the Arbitrator against the conditions agreed upon by
the

contracting

parties

and

in

conscious

disregard

of

stipulations of the contract from which the Arbitrator derives
his authority. The Apex Court also found fault with the Award
since it granted claims which were palpably barred by
limitation. The Courts interference with an Award would be
expected and justified where the Arbitrator has travelled
beyond the frontiers fixed by the contract between the parties.
In

Rajasthan

State

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Mines

&

Minerals

Ltd.

v.

Eastern

Page 36 of 38

Engineering Enterprises and Anr., (1999) 9 SCC 283, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court exercised jurisdiction in context of the
interpretation of two clauses in the subject contract since it held
the opinion that their construction was 'absolutely clear and
unambiguous'. The Court observed that in ignoring these
clauses the Arbitrator had travelled beyond his jurisdiction
since the Award was irreconcilable with those clauses.

23.

On an analysis of the judgments of the Apex Court

spanning

several

interventions
prescribed.

with

decades,
Awards

what

emerges

is

proscribed,

is

that

jural

rather

than

The role of the Appellate Court is logically

minuscule, and would be restricted to errors of law or
jurisdiction of immense import. The learned Single Judge has
considered the factual matrix of these claims, has perused the
grounds set-out in the Objections, and after giving due
consideration to the law laid down in Oil & Natural Gas

Corporation Ltd. -vs- Saw Pipes Ltd., 2003(2) ALR 5 found that
the Award in respect of the claims pressed by the Society is
without merit.

We find neither scope nor justification for

interference with this part of the impugned Judgment.

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

Page 37 of 38

24.

In conclusion the impugned Judgment is reversed

only in respect of the claims put forward by the Respondents
unregistered firm on the ground that these claims were not
justiciable by virtue of Section 69 of the Partnership Act.

25.

Appeal is decided in these terms. Parties shall bear

their respective costs.
( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE
November 20, 2007
`n/tp'

FAO (OS) 376 of 2005

( S.L. BHAYANA )
JUDGE

Page 38 of 38

