IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
FAO(OS) 129/2006
M/S SHREE VINAYAK CEMENT
CLEARING AGENCY

.....Appellant through
Mr. Anurag Kumar Aggarwal
with Mr. Umesh Mishra, Advs.

versus
M/S. CEMENT CORPORATION ...Respondent through
OF INDIA
Mr. Arvind K. Gupta, Adv.

Date of Hearing : July 17, 2007
Date of Decision : July 25, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

JUDGMENT
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.:
1.

This Appeal is directed against the Judgment of the learned

Single Judge dated 28.11.2005 dismissing the Objections filed by
FAO129/2006

Page 1 of 8

the Appellant under Section 34 read with Section 16(6), 28 (1) (a)
and

31(3)

of

the

Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996

(hereinafter referred to as the 'Act' for short) for setting aside the
Arbitral Award dated 5.12.2002 passed by the Sole Arbitrator.
The learned Single Judge has recorded the argument of the
Appellant, predicated on Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd.

-vs- Saw Pipes Ltd., AIR 2003 SC 2629, that the Award is
patently illegal and, therefore, deserves to be set aside. The
learned Single Judge has also noted that it was a detailed and
reasoned Award that was under challenge. The Petitioner's
attempt to take the learned Single Judge through the complete
records in an effort to reappraise the material including the
evidence on the record of the Arbitral Tribunal was rejected, as
being clearly impermissible in view of the provisions of Section
34 of the Act.

The scope of Inquiry before us is even more

restricted and limited than before the Court dealing with an
action under Section 34 of the Act.

2.

Learned counsel for the Appellant has relied on Hindustan

Zinc Ltd. -vs- M/s. Friends Coal Carbonisation, 2006(2) R.A.J. 1
(SC) : 2006(4) JT 392 : 2006(4) SCC 445 where their Lordships
observed that the Supreme Court had made it clear in Saw Pipes
FAO129/2006

Page 2 of 8

Ltd. that it was open to the Court to consider whether an Award
is contrary to the specific terms of contract since the Award
would then be subject to interference on the ground that it was
patently illegal and hence opposed to the public policy of India.

3.

Learned counsel for the Appellant has also drawn our

attention to paragraph 59 of Mcdermott International Inc. -vs-

Burn Standard Co. Ltd., 2006(2) R.A.J. 661(SC) which speaks of
reasons being the link between the material on which certain
conclusions are based. We are satisfied that the Award as well as
the Judgment of the learned Single Judge do not suffer from this
vice and are, therefore, unable to appreciate the relevance of

Mcdermott.

4.

Learned counsel for the Respondent relied on Bharat Heavy

Electricals Ltd. -vs- Globe Hi Fabs Ltd., 116(2005) DLT 1(DB). In
that case it was contended that there was a specific bar in the
contract against payment of interest to the contractor in view of
Clause 3.3 which stated that - “no interest shall be payable by the
employer on earnest money, security deposit or any money due to
the contractor by the employer”. The Division Bench nevertheless
held that the Award granting the interest to the Respondent was
FAO129/2006

Page 3 of 8

not without jurisdiction and the Award was not liable to be set
aside on that ground. Our learned Brothers held that a contract
did not debar payment of interest illegally withheld by the
employer after it became due.

5.

The Arbitral Tribunal as well as the Court cannot ignore the

provisions of Section 28(3) of the Act which enjoins the Arbitral
Tribunal to decide disputes before it in accordance with the
terms of the contract, and while doing so to take into account the
usages of the trade applicable to the transaction. “It is beyond
any cavil that a Bank Guarantee must be construed on its own
terms. It is considered to be a separate transaction.” (See State

Bank of India -vs- Mula Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd.,
(2006) 6 SCC 293).

The contention of learned counsel for the

Appellant is that it was illegal to invoke the Bank Guarantee
amounting to Rs.5 lacs in respect of dues of a third party. A vain
endeavour has been made before us, as before both forums
below, that the subject engagement was one of a Performance
Guarantee. We must record that the learned Single Judge, while
issuing Notice, had restricted it to Claim Nos.4 and 5 which
concerned the Bank Guarantee of Rs.5 lacs and the Security
Deposit of Rs.1.5 Lacs. Before us learned counsel for the
FAO129/2006

Page 4 of 8

Appellant stated that he had no quarrel with the Orders
pertaining to the Security Deposit of Rs.1.5 lacs.

6.

The document at the fulcrum of the dispute is captioned

“Proforma of Bank Guarantee in lieu of Security Deposit for
Satisfactory

Completion

of

Contract”

whereby

the

Punjab

National Bank had undertaken to pay the Respondent “an amount
not exceeding Rs. five lakhs against any loss or damage caused
to or suffered or would be caused to or suffered by the
Corporation(Respondent before us] by reason of any breach by
the Supplier/Contractor (Appellant before us] of any of the terms
and conditions contained in the Purchase Order Contract”. It,
therefore, becomes immediately appropriate and necessary to
refer to the Terms of the Purchase Order Contract.

A Bank

Guarantee is a separate transaction but where it specifically
refers to another contract that document would become an
integral part of the Bank Guarantee. It would thus not be correct
to rely solely on the short and concise enunciation of the law in

Mula Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd. The Purchase Order
Contract inter alia contains the following Clauses :1.7 The Corporation shall have a lien over all or any
money that may become due and payable to the
contractor under this contract or any other contract or
FAO129/2006

Page 5 of 8

transaction of any other nature either all alone or
jointly with others and unless the contractor pays and
clears the claim of the Corporation immediately on
demand the Corporation shall be entitled at all times
to deduct, the said sum of debt due by the contractor
from any money/security deposit which may have
become due or become payable to the contractor
under

this

contract

or

any

other

contract

or

transaction whatsoever between the contractor and
the Corporation, without prejudice and in addition to
other rights of the Corporation to recover the amount
of any such claim by other remedies legally available.
...
5.0 SECURITY DEPOSIT
For due fulfillment of his obligations under this
agreement, the Handling Agent shall furnish within 15
days from award of work a security deposit @ Rs.1.5
per M.T. of quality expected to be handled per annum
subject to a minimum amount of Rs.50,000/- by
Demand draft drawn in favour of Cement Corpn. of
India Ltd. In addition for storage and safe custody of
stock handling agent shall furnish a Bank Guarantee
amounting to Rs.5 Lacs (Rupees five lacs only) for BG
and 3 Lacs for MG and 1 lac for road only for each
dump to be served. The Corporation shall have right
of appropriate the said amount so deposited as
security deposit either in whole or in parts and the
amount of bills payable to the handling Agent to
liquidate

FAO129/2006

any

claim

of

the

Corporation

against

Page 6 of 8

Handling Agent or as penalty for breach of the terms,
conditions and covenants of this agreement by the
handling agent. The security deposit will be refunded
to the Handling Agent after termination of the
agreement and after final adjustment of accounts
between the parties.

Any sum of money due and

payable to the Handling Agent (including security
deposit returnable to him) under the contract may be
appropriated by the Corporation and set off against
any claim as the Corporation.

7.

It is not in dispute that the Bank Guarantee has been

invoked in connection with the dues of a firm other than the
Appellant at whose instance the Bank Guarantee was issued.
What should not be ignored is that the Appellant is a partnership
concern comprising a father and his sons, all of whom are also
transacting business through their other partnership firms. It is
trite that unlike a company incorporated under the Companies
Act, a partnership concern is not a distinct legal entity. Akin to
so-called sole proprietorship concerns it is only a convenience by
which more than one individuals are permitted to jointly transact
business with third parties in an assumed name. It is, therefore,
irrelevant whether it is one firm or the other which is indebted to
a particular party. If the partners are common the liability of any

FAO129/2006

Page 7 of 8

individual can be recovered from his assets in a firm of which he
is a partner. Therefore, even if strictest of interpretations is
imparted to the Bank Guarantee, the liability of the individual
partners, so far as they may be trading through a firm, can be
recovered from another firm in which they are partners by virtue
of the clauses in the Purchase Order Contract which finds
specific mention in the Bank Guarantee itself. In doing so, law
looks towards the individual concerned and not the firm through
which he may be

trading. In the present case, the situation is

hopeless for the Appellants since all the three firms were lifting
cement from the Respondent. All these legal complexities have
been kept in view not only by the learned Single Judge but also
by the Sole Arbitrator.

8.

We find no infirmity in the impugned Order. The Appeal is

accordingly dismissed with costs of Rs.5,000/-.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

( S.L. BHAYANA )
JUDGE
July 25, 2007
tp
FAO129/2006

Page 8 of 8

