IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 17538-42 of 2006
Dharamvir Singh & Ors.

...Petitioners through
Mr. C.B. Varma with
Mr. Raghuvinder Varma,
Advocates.

Versus
Lt. Governor Delhi & Ors.

...Respondents through
Mr. Arun Birbal, Advocate for
Respondents 1 to 3/Govt.
of NCT of Delhi.
Mr. Gaurav Sarin with
Ms. Jhum Jhum Sarkar, Advs.
for Respondent-4/DDA
Mr. Sanjay Poddar, Advocate
for LAC

Date of Decision : March 20, 2007

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.P. SINGH
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

JUDGMENT
1.

The Petitioners have invoked

the extraordinary

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution
praying for the issuance of

a writ of certiorari or similar writ,

W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  1 of 9

order or direction quashing the Notification dated 8-10-2002
bearing No. F.10/41/2002/L&B/LA11820 under Section 4, and the
Declaration of even number dated 30.12.2004 under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894

(hereinafter referred to as `the Act')

relating to the Revenue Estate of Village Bakkarwala; and
seeking

protection against their

dispossession from the land

and from the demolition of their structures thereon; notably it has
also been prayed that this Court should direct the Respondents
to de-notify the land.

2.

Mr. C.B. Varma, learned counsel appearing on behalf

of Petitioners, has contended that without acting

upon the

previous acquisition, fresh steps have been taken under Sections
4 and 6 of the Act for the purposes of construction/widening of
the existing road. It has not been contested, as it cannot be, that
construction or widening of a road is a public purpose which is
not impervious to any challenge on the grounds that it does not
qualify as a public purpose. Mr. Varma has also contended that
there was no justification for resorting to Section 17 of the Act in
view of the delay on the part of the Respondents to complete the
acquisition.

The argument is that

although the Notification

under Section 4 took place on 8.10.2004 the purpose for which
W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  2 of 9

the land

was acquired has not till date been fulfilled.

argument has to be summarily rejected forthwith.

This

Keeping in

view the spate of litigation and writ petitions filed by owners
of the land

in the wake of Section 4 Notifications, the

Respondents cannot be faulted for the delay.

We are not

persuaded by Mr.Varma, therefore, to apply Parveen Gupta -vs-

Union of India, 41 (1990) DLT 166.

So far as reliance on

Satyendra Kumar -vs- Union of India, 1994 (28) DRJ 264 (DB) is
concerned we find it misplaced. The acquisition in that case was
looked upon unfavourably since it was evident in the facts of
that case that the powers had been exercised for extraneous or
irrelevant considerations and the Respondents had not come
forward to explain the delay on non-payment of compensation.

3.

The arguments that have been raised before us are a

reiteration of the contentions

voiced in W.P. (C) No. 19107 of

2005 titled Vishav Jagriti Mission vs. Union of India which was
dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court in terms of the
Judgment dated 7.11.2005. The Notification under Sections 4
and 17(4) as well as the Declaration under Section 6 which were
challenged in these proceedings are the very same ones that have
been assailed before us. The matter stands covered on all fours
W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  3 of 9

against the Petitioners, and we see no justification in adding to
the volume of precedents by articulating our agreement thereto.

4.

Faced with this difficulty Mr. Varma drew our

attention to orders passed in W.P. (C) 13577-666 of 2006 titled

Nanak Chand vs. Lt. Governor dated 21.2.2006 in which the
challenge

to the Notification under Section 4 and Declaration

under Section 6 of the Act had been dismissed. However, by the
consent of learned counsel for the parties, the Petitioners'
Representation under Section 48 of the Act was directed by
another Division Bench to be disposed of by the Competent
Authority within three months. Till

a period of two weeks

thereafter, the Court had protected the Petitioner's possession as
well as structures. Mr. Varma has prayed that similar orders
may be passed by us.

5.

As has already been noted above, the writ petition

bearing No. W.P. (C) 13577-666 of 2006 had been dismissed.
Learned counsel for the Respondents have argued that this may
have been

for the reason that

the Petitioner had filed an

application under Section 48 of the Act asking for de-notification
of the land in question in those Petitions. Their contention is
W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  4 of 9

that as soon as such a prayer is made, it cannot but be assumed
that the Petitioner do not have any subsisting challenge to the
acquisition proceedings under the Act. In W.P. (C) No. 6384 of
2000 titled Baijnath Aggarwal Dharmarth Trust Society vs. The

Lt. Governor decided on 22.8.2006 another Division Bench of this
Court had noted that during the pendency of that writ petition,
“the Petitioner opted

to seek de-notification of the land in

question by filing an application in terms of S.48 of the Act. ....
clearly the petitioner gave up its challenge to the validity of the
Notification under challenge.”

Since this approach had not

been contested before the Division Bench as is palpable from the
absence of any analysis of all facets of this interesting legal
nodus, the conclusion must be restricted to the facts of that case.

6.

We have considered the appropriateness of passing

orders similar to those passed in Nanak Chand. However, Mr.
Gaurav Sarin and Mr. Arun Birbal, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of Respondents, stoutly

opposed

such orders being

reiterated in these proceedings and we find that this is for good
reason. In the first place the Petitioners have approached this
Court as late as on 22.11.2006

in respect of

an assault to

Notification dated 8.10.2004 under Section 4 of the Act. For two
W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  5 of 9

years, the Petitioners were sitting on the fence watching the fate
of litigation initiated by persons similarly placed to them.
Valuable and extremely scarce time of the Court has been taken
up in argument on these petitions which fittingly have already
been heard and disposed of in

Vishav Jagriti Mission. It is

obvious to us that the Petitioners

had intentionally withheld

their challenge till the judgment was delivered in those matters
on 7.11.2006.

This ground by itself is a sufficient

reason to

decline to exercise the extraordinary jurisdiction possessed by us
by virtue of Article 226 of the Constitution, and we hold so.

7.

Even otherwise it has been pointed out by Mr. Sarin,

who also appeared in Nanak Chand that compared to the public
purpose which is intended to be satisfied in the present
proceedings there was no pressing or urgent need in that case.
Hence in Nanak Chand the Respondents had not objected to
the time bound disposal of Section 48 applications.

Mr. Birbal

had justifiably underscored the fact that the present Petitioners
have approached the Court after an inordinate and unexplained
delay of two years.

Our attention has been drawn

to the

observations made by another Division Bench in Raheja Hospital

& Psychiatric Research Institute -vs- Lt. Governor of Delhi, 121
W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  6 of 9

(2005) DLT 193 (DB). In that case the Bench had observed that
the “representation made by a landowner under Section 48 of the
Act really cannot say anything more or different from what has
already been indicated. .... This being the position, we are of the
view that the Act does not give
opportunities
process.”

to

repetitive or unlimited

a landowner to challenge the acquisition

To these

observations we add that

recourse to

Section 48 of the Act leads to the passing of an administrative
order which, in the absence of violation of principles of natural
justice, ought not to be judicially reviewed. Although there is
tendency to repeat the grounds of challenge under Sections 4
and 6 in the applications filed under Section 48 of the Act the
considerations would be altogether different.

8.

In the present case Mr. Varma has belaboured the

point that some assurance had been given by the Hon'ble Lt.
Governor to the effect that colonies and “built up areas would be
identified for regularisation and would also be excluded from
the ongoing and fresh acquisition proceedings.”

This assurance

was not given to the Petitioners and hence would not operate as
estoppel in their favour.

Even otherwise we fail to appreciate

how the principles of estoppel would have any role to play since
W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  7 of 9

it

has not been pleaded that construction took place

Petitioners acted to their detriment because

or the

of the assurance

given by the Lt. Governor. It is incongruent that built-up areas
which may subsequently be regularised would be impervious to
acquisition, whereas regular and legal colonies would be subject
to acquisition for public purposes. If this approach is followed it
would militate against the equality rule

promised

to every

citizen within India by Article 14 of the Constitution.

If an

intelligible differentia is to be carved out between illegally builtup areas which have been regularised for any reason (usually
political)

and

colonies

authorised

from

the

inception

appropriate Authority and on which structures
constructed in accordance with

by

have been

municipal laws, favourable

treatment could be justified in the case of the latter class. In the
context of the present regularisation drive by the Government
we may only observe that the effect would be that demolition of
unauthorised constructions would no longer be permissible. It
cannot possibly be argued that that newly regularised colonies
could not be

the subject matter of acquisition for public

purposes.

9.

The writ petition is wholly without merit.

Granting

W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  8 of 9

the indulgence and protection given in Nanak Chand would
only cause further delay attributable to the pendency of judicial
proceedings. It is our experience that when all else fails Section
48 is resorted to as a last measure which very often results in a
second round of litigation.

The consequence is delay in the

implementation of public projects.

10.

Keeping in view the fact that there has been

inordinate delay in approaching this Court and that arguments
have been addressed for some time in spite of the decision of
this Court in Vishav Jagriti Mission the writ petitions are
dismissed with costs of Rs.5000/-.

(VIKRAMAJIT SEN)
JUDGE

(J.P. SINGH)
JUDGE
March 20, 2007
`n'

W.P.(C) 17538­42 of 2006                                                                    Page  9 of 9

