*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 6163/2007

Ex. GC Raghav Singh

... Petitioner through
Col. R.S. Kalkal, Adv.

versus
Union of India & Ors.

... Respondent through
Ms. Saroj Bidawat with
Major S.S. Pandey,Adv.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L.BHAYANA
%

ORDER
22.08.2007
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Order ?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the Order should be reported
Yes
in the Digest?
The Petitioner prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of

mandamus directing the Respondents to release 25 per cent Disability
Pension or release the service element of Pension in favour of the
Petitioner. The prayer for disability pension, however, has not been
pressed before us by learned counsel for the Petitioner since the
Report/Findings of the Medical Board are akin to those recorded in CW
12460/2005. Arguments were restricted to the release of the service
element of pension.
The facts of the case are that the Petitioner was selected as a
Technical Graduate for direct entry into the Indian Military Academy
(IMA), Dehradun on 3.6.2003. It has been highlighted that the Medical

WP(C)6163/2007

Page 1 of 6

Board, which examined the Petitioner, did not make any note in the
Medical Enrollment Form of the existence of any disease. The
Petitioner joined the IMA on 10.7.2003. It has been incorrectly
mentioned in the Petition that from October, 2003 the Petitioner
started having health problems and he reported to Medical Authorities
in the Army for treatment. It is, however, correct that the Petitioner
was diagnosed as suffering from Acyanotic Heart Atrial Septal Defect.
The Petitioner, who is a Cadet, was invalidated as being low medical
category 'EEE' on 22.10.2003.
Learned counsel for the Petitioner has relied on Regulation 423
(c) of the Regulations for the Medical for Services of the Armed Forces,
1983 dealing with “Attributability to Service” which reads as follows:(c) The cause of a disability or death resulting from a disease
will be regarded as attributable to service when it is
established that the disease arose during service and the
conditions and circumstances of duty in the Armed Forces
determined and contributed to the onset of the disease.
Cases in which it is established that service conditions did not
determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but
influenced the subsequent course of the disease, will be
regarded as aggravated by the service. A disease, which has
led to an individual's discharge or death, will ordinarily be
deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at
the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the
Armed Forces. However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons
to be stated that the disease could not have been detected on
medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the
disease will not be deemed to have risen during service.

WP(C)6163/2007

Page 2 of 6

Learned counsel has emphasised on the fact that the Medical
Board has not answered Paragraph 11 and 12 of Part III of their Memo
of Proceedings which contemplate whether the disability is attributable
to service or whether the disability is aggravated by service. We have
perused the Medical Board proceedings which merely mention the
disability as Congenital Acyanotic Heart Atrial Septal Defect, with a
disability of 11 to 14 per cent.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner has

belaboured the point that it was essential for the Respondents to have
duly filled-up paragraphs 11 and 12 mentioned above.
In this context we take serious note of the fact that the
Petitioner has not approached this Court with clean hands. The
Petitioner had earlier filed CW 12460/2005 which was dismissed as
withdrawn on 18.7.2006 with the noting that the Petitioner intended to
approach the Appellate Medical Board. It is only the proceedings of
the Appellate Medical Board which have been filed with this Petition.
In the Counter Affidavit to CW 12460/2005 the Respondents had filed
copies of the Medical Proceedings which also records the disability to
be Congenital Acyanotic Heart Atrial Septal Defect.

In response to

Paragraph 11 of Part III it had been specifically recorded that the
disability of the Petitioner was not attributable to service.
'Summary

and

Opinion'

is

appended

to

those

Medical

The
Board

proceedings which recorded that the Petitioner, who was a 23 year old
Gentleman Cadet (G.C.), had been detected to have Cardiac Murmur

WP(C)6163/2007

Page 3 of 6

during Re-Medical Exam on 4.9.2003; that he had not reported sick
during his 1-1/2 months of training; that his ailment was congenital;
that he needed to undergo closure of ASD. Hence, it was recommended
that the Gentleman Cadet/Petitioner be invalidated out of service. It
has been specifically recorded that - “disability not attributable and not
aggravated by service”. We are of the view that the failure to place
this Medical Report in the second Writ Petition with which we are
presently dealing as deliberate and intentional. This would constitute
sufficient reason for us to dismiss the Petition.
Be that as it may, we are of the view that the Petitioner cannot
rely on Regulation 423(c) for two reasons, firstly because his disability
is avowedly congenital and secondly because the Petitioner took no
medical treatment during his Training. Had the Training triggered of
the ailment it should have manifested itself and would not have
remained hidden or latent. In fact, the medical problem of the
Petitioner was detected in a routine examination. It is also not right to
contend that if any disability is not detected during the medical
examination conducted at the time of recruitment, the only conclusion
that can be drawn is that any medical ailment discovered thereafter
must be either attributable to service or aggravated by service.
operation of

By

Regulation 423(c) the onus of substantiating that the

disability was attributable or was aggravated due to service shifts to
the Respondents. This conclusion will have to be drawn on a case to
case basis.

'Congenital' has been defined in the Concise Oxford

WP(C)6163/2007

Page 4 of 6

Dictionary as a disease or abnormality present from birth. The Collins
Cobuild English Dictionary states that a congenital disease or medical
condition is one that a person has from birth. Therefore, so far as such
a health affliction is concerned, it can at best be aggravated by service.
The material available on the record does not indicate this to have
happened.
Learned counsel for the Petitioner has relied on the decision of
the Division Bench in WP(C) No.10837/2004 titled Ex. GNR Lakhi Ram
-vs- UOI & Ors. without showing how the Judgment is applicable to the
facts of the present case. He has also placed on record a copy of the
Notice issued in Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.19277 of 2006
without also showing how that decision has a bearing to the facts of
the present case. Finally, reliance has been placed on Rule 114 of the
Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 which reads thus - “An officer
cadet drawn from the ranks shall continue to be eligible for pensionary
benefits appropriate to his rank”.

While interpreting this provision it

would be fatal to lose sight of the word 'continue', which obviously
refers to the years of service already put in by a person in any of the
ranks below the commissioned ones.

It has no relevance to fresh

recruits. This Rule has palpably no application to Petitioner Gentleman
Cadet since he is not 'an officer cadet drawn from the ranks'.
Reliance on Rule 14 of the Entitlement Rules for Casualty
Pensionary Awards, 1992 is also of no avail to the Petitioner. As has
already been noted above it is categorically recorded that the

WP(C)6163/2007

Page 5 of 6

Petitioner's ailment is congenital and that he did not receive any
treatment while in training. Obviously, it was neither attributable nor
aggravated by his service.
The Petitioner has willfully concealed relevant documents from
this Court . The Petition is devoid of merit and is dismissed with costs
of Rs.5,000/-.
VIKRAMAJIT SEN,J

S.L.BHAYANA, J
AUGUST 22, 2007
tp

WP(C)6163/2007

Page 6 of 6

