8.
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 959/1987
TILAK RAJ KAPOOR
Through :

..... Petitioner
Mr. A.S. Gambhir, Advocate.

versus
MCD

..... Respondent
Through : Mr. Vibhu Shankar, Advocate.
Date of Hearing:  January 22, 2007
Date of Decision: January 22, 2007

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.P. SINGH
1.
2.
3.

Whether Reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment.
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No
Yes
Yes

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J (ORAL)
1.

In this Writ Petition it has been prayed as follows :
“A. Issue a Writ of Certiorari or any
other Writ, Order or Direction as may
be deemed fit and proper in the
circumstances of the case to call for
the entire record of allotment of
plots/specific numbers to know the
basis of feeding number to computer;
B.
Issue a Writ of Mandamus, or
any other Writ, Order or Direction as
deemed appropriate to direct the
respondent to allot and grant the

    W.P.(C) 959/1987

Page 1 of 8

specific number for the plot booked
under file cover No.135/220 for which
the requisite payment of Rs.59,400/has already been made as demanded
by the respondent;
C.
Issue any other Writ, Order or
Directions
deemed
appropriate
directing the respondent Corporation
to strictly adhere to the policy and
decisions of meeting dated 16.9.1985
and provide all necessary amenities
and facilities at the site of the new
Sanjay Gandhi Transport Nagar,
Samaipur Badli, Delhi;
D.
AND further to grant any other
relief as may be deemed appropriate
in the circumstances of the case,
including the costs of the petition, to
meet the ends of Justice.”
2.

The case of the Petitioner, as pleaded by

Mr. Gambhir,

learned counsel for the Petitioner is that his application for
allotment of an alternate plot has been incorrectly and illegally
rejected on the grounds that the firm, namely M/s Nagpur Bhopal
Transport Company, which was transacting business from 110,
New Qutab Road, Sadar Bazar, Delhi-110006 has been allotted a
site in Sanjay Gandhi Transport Nagar. It is submitted that the
Petitioner was transacting his business from the said site even in
his individual capacity and, therefore, was eligible to an
allotment of a separate plot also.

    W.P.(C) 959/1987

No pleadings in the Writ

Page 2 of 8

Petition to this effect have been read out to us. However, Mr.
Gambhir draws attention to the reply affidavit filed on 24.7.1989
wherein it has been stated that the Petitioner made enquiries and
discovered that some transporters had been given more than one
plot.
3.

It is well settled that if an incorrect allotment has been

made to any party, it does not entitle every other person to claim
the benefits of such illegal allotments even under Article 14 of the
Constitution of India. An illegality will not be perpetuated on the
strength of the right to equality. Therefore, merely because the
MCD may have committed illegality in granting more than one
plot to some of the transporters, that per se would not entitle the
Petitioner to claim by means of a Writ Petition, the grant of one
more plot of land. Moreover, we do not know as to how much
area of land other transporters were occupying.
4.

Mr. Shankar, firstly contended that we may refer the matter

back to the MCD for a fresh consideration. We are not inclined to
do so as such orders are often conveniently misconstrued. It is
evident that the scheme pertaining to allotment of alternate site
enured to the benefit of those persons who undertook to
discontinue the use of their premises on Qutab Road for carrying
on transport business and that it was relative to and dependant
    W.P.(C) 959/1987

Page 3 of 8

upon the area of land that they were occupying on Qutab Road
itself, since this would result in the decongestion of the area. The
firm M/s Nagpur Bhopal Transport Company is a partnership
concern whose partners are members of two HUFs, the Karta of
one being Mr. A.C. Kapoor and the Karta of the other HUF being
the Petitioner. Both are real brothers.
5.

So far as the MCD is concerned they have made an

allotment pursuant to a survey made in the month of December,
1986.

It is contended that the Petitioner had also made an

application for the allotment of an alternate plot in his individual
capacity. But perusal of the application shows that he did not
specifically and categorically disclose in that claim that he was
also using a part of plot No.110, Qutab Road, Delhi for his
individual business as well. Even if such a statement had been
made, the Petitioner would not have automatically become
entitled to allotment of another plot, since the allotment was to
be made as per the scheme relating to the area of land in
occupation of the person who was to be re-located.
6.

In the course of hearing the Petitioner has handed over

photocopy of a Sale Deed by which the Petitioner’s wife as well as
the wife of his elder brother Mr. A.C. Kapur (the Karta of the
other HUF which comprised the allottee firm namely M/s Nagpur
    W.P.(C) 959/1987

Page 4 of 8

Bhopal Transport Company), are the owners of Shop No.116,
New Qutab Road, Delhi.

It is stated that now the transport

business is being continued from this site by the Petitioner only.
This is inexplicable since one of the owners is the wife of the
Karta of the HUF who, along with Petitioner's HUF, carried on
business in the name and style of Nagpur Bhopal Transport
Company. Prima facie it appears to us that after availing of and
enjoying the benefit of the allotment of an alternate plot by the
State, the Petitioner re-started the very activity which was
intended to be re-located from Qutab Road, Delhi. Whether he
could do so or not is a question with which we are not concerned
in these Writ proceedings.

Certainly since Shop No.116, New

Qutab Road, Delhi was purchased by the wives of Kartas/partners
of M/s Nagpur Bhopal Transport Company in the year 1994, this
would not entitle them to avail of the scheme which was related
to 1970s.
7.

Mr. Gambhir, learned counsel for the Petitioner has

emphasized on the fact that in re-survey carried out in 1988-89
the total area of 690.5 sq. meters was found to be in possession of
the Petitioner, though in the earlier survey the measurement of
the area was 60 sq. meters only.

This re-survey, very

conveniently, has been carried out by the MCD at the Petitioner’s
    W.P.(C) 959/1987

Page 5 of 8

instance. Even on a quick perusal of these papers it is evident
that M/s Nagpur Bhopal Transport Company, or for that matter
Mr. A.C. Kapur, Karta (HUF) and

Mr. Tilak Raj Kapur, Karta

(HUF) find no mention in the documents.
8.

Moreover the re-survey includes to two different areas i.e.

Dina Nath Road, Subzi Mandi and G.T. Karnal Road, near Village
Siraspur, Delhi. The land at Qutab Road measures only 66.32 sq.
yards. This shows that land other than the land at Qutab Road
has now been included in the re-survey, we wonder why !
9.

Mr. Gambhir, learned counsel for the Petitioner states that

Sanjay

Gandhi

respondents

by

Transport
using

Nagar

the

was

amounts

developed
received

by

the

from

the

Transporters. In the present case the firm M/s Nagpur Bhopal
Transport Company had deposited a sum of Rs.1,18,800/- and the
petitioner had deposited Rs.59,400/-. The argument, therefore, is
that having enjoyed the investment made by the Petitioner the
respondents

should

not

Petitioner’s application.

now

be

permitted

to

reject

the

We are unable to agree. The scheme

devised by the respondents was given vide publicity. It would be
almost impossible for the MCD to sift through every application
which it receives at the initial stage. At the commencement of
the scheme it may receive thousands of applications against the
    W.P.(C) 959/1987

Page 6 of 8

few plots that were available. Therefore, careful attention would
be given to every application only at the time of specific
allotments after ascertaining the area of plots in occupation of
the applicants, which is a pre-requisite as per terms and
conditions of allotment.

It is not unreasonable that some

applications would be rejected at that stage.
10.

The stand of the MCD is that on the basis of the area

occupied by the firm M/s Nagpur Bhopal Transport Company (i.e.
60 sq. meters or 66.32 sq. yards) an alternate allotment has
already been made. We have noted above that the application
form filled by the Petitioner does not clarify that he has preferred
the claim in his individual capacity and if so, against which part
of 110, Qutab Road, Delhi and what was the area in his individual
possession which could have entitled him to receive a separate
plot, in addition to the allotment of plot made to the firm.
11.

In the Writ Petition as well as during the hearing a number

of documents have been relied upon. In these proceedings it is
well nigh impossible for the court to determine the authenticity of
all these documents and decide upon disputed questions of facts.
In this analysis, keeping the salient features of the Scheme in
perspective, once prayer clause “C” is taken up for consideration,
no conclusion other than rejection of the petition can be arrived
    W.P.(C) 959/1987

Page 7 of 8

at.
12.

The Writ Petition is dismissed accordingly. However, there

shall be no order as to costs.

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J

J.P. SINGH, J
JANUARY 22, 2007
nvn

    W.P.(C) 959/1987

Page 8 of 8

