IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
WP(C) 2511/1992
Ex. LN Vishav Priya Singh

...Petitioner through
Ms. Rekha Palli, Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Ms. Barkha Babbar, Adv.

WITH
WP(C) No.3519/1998
Ex. NK Prem Singh

...Petitioner through
Mr. C.P. Singh, Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Ms. Barkha Babbar, Adv.

WITH
WP(C) No.6185/2002
Ex. NK Dwarka Prasad

...Petitioner through
Col. S.R. Kalkal, Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Mr. Sanjeev Sachdeva with
Mr. Ashwani Bhardwaj &
Ms. Geeta Dhingra, Advs.

WITH
WP(C) No.2433/2003
Ex. Hav Dharambir Kanker
CW 2511/1992

...Petitioner through
Col. S.R. Kalkal, Adv.
Page 1 of 36

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Mr. Sanjeev Sachdeva with
Mr. Ashwani Bhardwaj &
Ms. Geeta Dhingra, Advs.

WITH
WP(C) No.17622/2004
Sep/Clerk S.K. Nair

...Petitioner through
Mr. S.M. Dalal, Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Ms. Barkha Babbar, Adv.

WITH
WP(C) No.18185/2004
Sep/Clerk Balwinder Singh

...Petitioner through
Mr. S.M. Dalal, Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Ms. Barkha Babbar, Adv.

WITH
WP(C) No.20233/2005
Sep U.S. Mishra

...Petitioner through
Col. S.R. Kalkal, Adv.
Versus

Union of India & Ors.

CW 2511/1992

...Respondent through
Ms. Barkha Babbar, Adv.

Page 2 of 36

Date of Hearing : December 10, 2007
Date of Decision : January 25, 2008
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
Yes
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
JUDGMENT
1.

This batch of Writ Petitions raises two common questions

of law pertaining to the Summary Court Martials (SCMs
hereafter) of general importance – (a) whether an SCM can be
convened, constituted and completed by the Commanding
Officer (CO for short) of a Unit to which the accused did not
belong and (b) circumstances in which an SCM can be convened
rather than a General Courts Martial (GCM) or District Courts
Martial (DCM) or Summary General Courts Martial (SGCM) as
envisaged in Section 108 of the Army Act, 1950 (Army Act for
short).

CW 2511/1992

Page 3 of 36

2.

In CWP 2511/1992 the Petitioner, Ex. L Nk Vishav Priya

Singh, has alleged that he had made complaint against the CO,
19th Batallion Mahar Regiment of prejudicial treatment meted
out by him to the Petitioner. It has been asseverated in the Writ
Petition that initially the Brigade Commander had nominated
the CO, 17th Kumaon to investigate into the Petitioner's
complaint. The CO of 19th Mahar through manipulation got his
close friend, the CO of 18th Batallion, Punjab Regiment, detailed
to investigate these complaints. The Petitioner was ordered to
proceed to 18th Punjab Regiment. Eventually, the CO, 18th
Punjab

Regiment

tried

the

Petitioner

by

SCM

and

convicted/sentenced him to suffer Rigorous Imprisonment of six
months in the Civil Jail and dismissal from service. The
argument is that since the Petitioner belonged to the 19th
Mahar, but was tried by SCM held by CO of 18th Punjab
Regiment, the Trial was rendered coram non judice. The factual
matrix, as will be seen, is similar to those existing in S.K.

Sharma (infra) inasmuch as the accusation had been leveled
against the CO of the Unit to which the Petitioner belonged. It
is important to mention that the Petitioner had made complaints
against his CO on 26.3.1990; he was interviewed by the Brigade
Commander on 30.5.1990; was asked to appear before the CO,

CW 2511/1992

Page 4 of 36

18th Punjab Regiment on 15.7.1990; was charged under Section
41(2) of the Army Act for disobeying a lawful command given by
a superior officer in that he, when asked to accept a letter dated
16.7.1990,

requiring

his

presence

in

CO's

Office

for

investigation in Unit, refused to do so and disobeyed verbal
orders.

3.

Ex. NK Prem Singh has filed CWP 3519/1998 pleading

that he belonged to 15 INF DIV ORD Unit which assertion
stands admitted. On 17.4.1998 he was charged under Section
40(a) of the Army Act for using criminal force to his superior
officer in that he, at Amritsar on 20.10.1997 struck with an iron
implement on the head and legs of Company Hav. Major Clerk.
The Petitioner was sentenced to (a) reduced to ranks, (b)
dismissed from service and (c) Rigorous Imprisonment for six
months in the Civil Jail. It is also pleaded that Regulation 381
does not include offences under Section 40(a) of the Army Act,
an aspect which we do not propose to consider at the present
juncture.

The CO, 194 Field Regiment, convened the SCM

which concluded on 21.4.1998. The Respondents have pleaded
that the Petitioner was attached for disciplinary purposes with
194 Field Regiment vide letter dated 21.10.1997. In paragraph

CW 2511/1992

Page 5 of 36

3 of the Counter Affidavit it has been asseverated that the
“occurrence for which the petitioner was taken into custody
took place on the evening of 20.10.1997.

He was taken into

custody by the CO of his Unit and since his Unit had no quarter
guard, the petitioner was shifted to the quarter guard towards
of 194 Field Regiment for safe custody”.

It has further been

pleaded that by letter dated 24.10.1997 the Petitioner was
attached with the Unit for disciplinary purposes, to remain
attached till finalisation of the investigation against him. In
other words, six months had elapsed between the incident
which is the subject matter of the SCM and the holding of the
SCM.

4.

CWP 6185/2002 has been filed by Ex. NK Dwarka Prasad

stating that he belonged to 24th Rajput Regiment. In the year
2000 he was temporarily attached to 61st Infantry Brigade to
perform the duties as a Sahayak. By Charge-sheet dated
29.10.2001 under Section 69 of the Army Act he was accused of
committing a civil offence on 25.10.2001, that is to say, using
criminal force to a woman with an intent to outrage her modesty
and on that very date the Commander, 65th Infantry Brigade
ordered that he be tried by an SCM. The Petitioner was tried by

CW 2511/1992

Page 6 of 36

the

SCM

between

3.11.2001

and

5.11.2001

and

was

convicted/sentenced (1) to be reduced to ranks (ii) to be
dismissed from service, (iii) to suffer imprisonment in civil jail
for one year.

5.

CWP 2433/2003 has been filed by Ex. Hav Dharambir

Kanker who had been promoted to the rank of Havaldar in the
Corps of the Military Police. After sixteen years he was posted
to 4th Corps Provost Unit at Tezpur in Assam. By Charge-sheet
dated 9.6.2000 the Petitioner was accused of making sundry
accusations against a person subject to the Army Act. On
22.6.2000 the SCM sentenced the Petitioner (a) to be reduced
to the ranks and (b) to be dismissed from service.

6.

CWP 20233/2005 has been filed by Sepoy U.S. Mishra

stating that he was enrolled in the Indian Army in March, 1987
and that on 18.3.1999 he was posted to 38 Defence Medical
Store Depot.

By letter dated 27.3.2002 the Petitioner was

attached, for disciplinary purposes, to 38 AMSD Blocks.

The

Petitioner was, along with 15 Army personnel, tried by SCM
between 20.12.2004 and 4.1.2005 by CO 118 Field Regiment
where the Petitioner was attached for disciplinary purposes.

CW 2511/1992

Page 7 of 36

The first charge under Section 52(f) of the Army Act was that
the Petitioner between 4.8.1999 to 6.6.2001, with intent to
defraud, improperly

altered

several

entries in the

Issue

Vouchers. The Petitioner was found guilty and sentenced to be
reduced to ranks on 4.1.2005. The contention is that the CO of
118 Field Regiment could not try the Petitioner by SCM since
he was only “attached with the Unit”. Delay in convening the
SCM would also obviously come in for consideration.

7.

The facts in CWP 17622/2004 filed by Sep/Clerk S.K. Nair

and CWP 18185/2004 filed by Sep/Clerk Balwinder Singh are
similar. In September 1998 a Court of Inquiry was ordered to
investigate into the irregular enrollment during a recruitment
rally held at Pathankot in March 1995. The Petitioners' assert
that since they were posted to 14th Sikh Regiment, only the CO
of

that

Unit

was

competent

to

try

them

by

an

SCM.

Accordingly, SCM by the CO of 1 TB ASC Centre, Gaya was
legally incompetent and non-est. Delay in convening the SCM
would also obviously come in for consideration.

8.

On the first question, two Single Benches of this Court

have taken the view that an SCM cannot be held by the CO of a

CW 2511/1992

Page 8 of 36

Unit to which the accused/delinquent did not belong. See Ex-

Havildar Mahipal Singh -vs- Union of India, 55(1994) DLT 176
and Hav. (AEC) S.K. Sharma -vs- Union of India, 2002 (1) Forces
Law Judgment 308. The latter case was carried to the Division
Bench by way of appeal and came to be reversed in Union of

India -vs- S.K. Sharma, 103(2003) DLT 785(DB). We have
painstakingly perused this Judgment of the Division Bench and,
with respect, find that a rhetorical question has been raised but
not answered. The discussion or dialectic is confined to these
words7. A bare reading of Regulation 381 and the operative
words as set out in Regulation 381 makes it manifestly
clear that the said regulation is only for the trial of
deserters and in an eventuality where a deserter has
to be tried by a Summary Court Martial, such deserter
has to be tried by the Commanding Officer of that
Unit only to which he belongs.

How the procedure

prescribed under regulation 381 for the trial of
deserter can be applied for offences under Section
56(a) and Section 63 of the Act? Therefore, the
reliance placed by the learned Single Judge on Ex
Havildar Mahipal Singh's case is misplaced.

9.

Meanwhile, a Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Hav

(MP) Hanuman Singh -vs- Union of India, Mil LJ 1999 All 37

CW 2511/1992

Page 9 of 36

relying on Mahipal has also concluded that attachment of the
accused/delinquent to another Unit for the purpose of an SCM
viz-a-viz charges of using threatening language to a superior
officer was legally improper. This decision is also of importance
and significance to the issue before us in that the Court found
insufficient cause and reason for taking immediate action in the
nature of an SCM rather than taking recourse to the convening
of either a District Court Martial or a Summary General Court
Martial.

After careful cogitation, the only possible conclusion

that we can conceive of is that the Division Bench in S.K.

Sharma did not specifically overrule Mahipal but merely found
its ratio not to apply to the factual matrix before them.
Otherwise, the Division Bench was bound to explain the reasons
which prevailed upon it to take a different view from the two
Single Benches.

Furthermore, both Mahipal as well as Hav.

(AEC) S.K. Sharma have been considered in great detail by
another Division Bench in K.P. Pandey -vs- Union of India, 2003
LAB. I.C. 1937. His Lordship, Justice S.B. Sinha (as the Chief
Justice of this Court), speaking also for our learned brother
Justice A.K. Sikri, inter alia, extracted with approval the
following passage from the Judgment of the learned Single
Judge in Hav. (AEC) S.K. Sharma :-

CW 2511/1992

Page 10 of 36

9. There is no doubt that in view of the allegations
having been made by the petitioner against his own
commanding officer, the decision of the respondents to
attach the petitioner to a different unit cannot be
faulted.

The proceeding before the summary court

martial also shows that the petitioner was granted
opportunity to cross-examine the witness. In view of
the offence charged, there would also be no question
of application of Section 120(2) of the Act. The
question however, remains whether the petitioner
having been once attached to a different unit other
than his own, summary court martial proceedings
could or could not take place after such attachment.
The question is not to doubt the bona fides of the
attachment to the other unit since the same was
rightly done. In Ex. Havildar Mahipal Singh's case
(supra), the learned Single Judge has considered the
scope and ambit of a summary court martial under
section 116 of the Act and has categorically held that
the summary court martial cannot take place by
transfer of the petitioner to another unit for purposes
of trial. The only exception made out vide Note 5 of
the Manual of Military Law would not apply to the
case

of

the

petitioner

admittedly not a deserter.

since

the

petitioner

was

It has also to be kept in

mind that in fact the CO had recommended a District
court martial but the Superior Military authority, in
their wisdom, directed holding of a summary Court
martial. It cannot be doubted that the superior

CW 2511/1992

Page 11 of 36

authority does have a right to direct summary court
martial as stated in judgment in Ex. Sepoy Vijay
Kumar's case (supra). The controversy has arisen in
the present case by reason of the fact that as a
consequence of the direction to hold a summary court
martial the same had to be held by a commanding
officer other than the commanding officer of Regiment
to which the petitioner was attached where he is
alleged to have committed the offence for which he
was allegedly charged. The letter dated 8-2-1997
(Annexure R) further makes it clear that the petitioner
was

attached

to

1842

Light

Regiment

only

for

discipline purposes. In view of the aforesaid I am of
the considered view that the ratio of Ex. Havildar
Mahipal Singh's case (supra) would squarely apply to
the facts of the present case and in view of the facts of
the present case and in view of the fact that summary
court martial has been held by a commanding officer
of another unit, the same cannot be sustained in law.

10.

We propose to deal with this legal nodus in detail. The

relevant provisions, namely, Sections 116 and 120 of the Army
Act and Paragraph 381 of the Defence Services Regulations,
Regulations for the Army to be considered, are reproduced for
facility of reference:116. Summary court-martial.--(1) A summary courtmartial may be held by the commanding officer of any

CW 2511/1992

Page 12 of 36

corps, department or detachment of the regular Army,
and he shall alone constitute the Court.
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by
two other persons who shall be officers or junior
commissioned officers or one of either, and who shall
not as such be sworn or affirmed.
Note

5:-

See

Regs

Army

para

381

for

the

circumstances under which a CO of a different unit
may hold the trial by SCM of a person subject to AA.
120. Powers of summary courts-martial--(1) Subject
to the provisions of sub-section (2), a summary courtmartial

may

try any offence punishable under this

Act.
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action
and reference can without detriment to discipline be
made to the officer empowered to convene a district
court-martial or an active service a summary general
court-martial for the trial of the alleged offender, an
officer holding a

summary

court-martial

shall

not

try without such reference any offence punishable
under

any of the sections 34, 37 and 69, or any

offence against the officer holding the court.
(3) A summary court-martial may try any person
subject to this Act and under the command of the
officer holding the court, except an officer, junior
commissioned officer or warrant officer.
(4) A summary court-martial may pass any sentence
which may be passed under this Act, except a sentence
of death or (imprisonment for life) or of imprisonment

CW 2511/1992

Page 13 of 36

for a term exceeding the limit specified in sub-section
(5).
(5) The limit referred to in sub-section(4) shall be one
year if the officer holding the summary court-martial is
of the rank of lieutenant-colonel and upwards, and
three months if such officer is below that rank.
Note 5:- A NCO or a sepoy cannot be attached to
another unit for the purpose of his trial by SCM except
as provided in Regs Army para 381.
Trial

381.

of

Deserters.--

Under

normal

circumstances trial by summary court martial for
desertion will be held by the CO of the unit of the
deserter. However, when a deserter or an absentee
from a unit shown in column one of the table below
surrenders to, or is taken over by, the unit shown
opposite in column two and is properly attached to and
taken on the strength of the latter unit he may,
provided

evidence,

particularly

evidence

of

identification, is available with the latter unit, be tried
by summary court-martial by the CO of that unit when
the unit shown in column one is serving in high
altitude area or overseas or engaged in counterinsurgency operation or active hostilities or Andaman
and Nicobar Islands.
In no circumstances will a man be tried by
summary court-martial held by a CO other than the CO
of the unit to which the man properly belongs; a unit
to which the man may be attached subsequent to
commission of the offence by him will also be a unit to

CW 2511/1992

Page 14 of 36

which the man properly belongs.
TABLE
Column one

Column two

Armoured Corps Regiment

Armoured Corps Centre
and School

A unit of Artillery

Regimental Centre
concerned

A Unit of Engineers

Headquarters Engineers
Group, concerned

A unit of Signals

Signal Training Centre,
Jabalpur

Infantry battalion

Regimental Centre
concerned

Gorkha Rifle battalion

Gorkha Regimental
Centre concerned

ASC Unit
RV Corps

11.

ASC Centre concerned
RVC Centre

It should also be noted that paragraph 448(c) of the

Defence

Services

Regulations,

Regulations

for

the

Army

prescribes valuable safeguards against abuse of SCMs, but the
spirit of all these provisions is far too often ignored so much so
that the vice has become the norm - SCMs invariably pass
orders of dismissal from service.
448. Scale of Punishments Awardable by Summary
Courts-Martial.--The following general instructions
CW 2511/1992

Page 15 of 36

are issued for the guidance of officers holding summary
courts-martial

in

passing

sentence,

but

nothing

contained in them will be construed as limiting the
discretion of the court to pass any legal sentence,
whether in accordance with these instructions or not, if
in its opinion, there is good reason for doing so:.....
(c) The award of imprisonment in a civil jail coupled
with dismissal from the service must never be used
merely as a mean of getting rid of a man from the
service but should be imposed only when the offence
by itself, or the offence and the man's previous record
taken together, actually merits such a punishment. In
other cases in which removal is considered desirable in
the interest of the service, the discharge of the
individual under the appropriate item of Army Rule 13
should be applied for by the CO and authorised by the
brigade or superior commander.

12.

Learned counsel for the Respondents have strenuously

contended before us that the two Notes 5 on which reliance has
been placed by learned counsel for the Petitioners cannot be
given any legal effect. We find no merit in the objection as this
question has already been considered by the Supreme Court on
several occasions. Tara Singh -vs- State of Rajasthan, (1975) 4
SCC 86 enunciates that the “function of the note is to provide
procedure and to control discretion.
CW 2511/1992

The real purpose of the
Page 16 of 36

Note is that when Rules are silent the Notes will fill up the
gaps”. Thereafter their Lordships analysed several decisions in

Shyam Lal -vs- State of UP, (1970) 2 SCC 458 and T.G.
Shivacharana Singh -vs- State of Mysore, AIR 1965 SC 280 and
further opined “that Notes which are appended to Rules are of
aid not only in applying the Rules but also in interpreting the
true import of the Rules”. These very passages have been
applied in H.C. Sarin -vs- Union of India, (1976) 4 SCC 765. In
the backdrop of these precedents there is no justification or
scope for the Respondents to raise the objection as to the
binding force of the Rules yet again, and that too before us. It
has led to the protraction of the present proceedings. This
position is highlighted on a perusal of the Union of India -vs-

Charanjit S. Gill, (2000) 5 SCC 742 (decided without any
reference of these cases) in which the rank/qualification of the
Judge Advocate was at the fulcrum of the controversy, that is,
whether he could be junior to the accused.

The Respondents

had taken a stand diametrically opposite to that adopted by
them before us, as is manifest upon a reading of these
paragraphs:22. Further relying upon Note 2 mentioned at the foot
of Rule 102 providing, “as to disqualification of Judge
Advocate CAR 39(2)”, the learned Additional Solicitor
CW 2511/1992

Page 17 of 36

General submitted that the said Note having the force
of law has been followed by the Army authorities from
the very beginning and thus disqualifications of a
Judge advocate are referable to only Rule 39(2) of the
Rules. It is contended that as the source of the Rules
and the Note thereto is the same, the efficacy of Note
2

cannot

be

minimised.

The

Army

authorities,

according to the learned Additional Solicitor General
have understood Rules 39, 40 and 102 in this context
while making appointments of the Judge Advocate.
.....
24. Per contra Respondent 1 in his affidavit has
submitted that the Notes under the sections and rules
as are found under various provisions of law compiled
by the Army authorities in the Manual of Military Law
do not form part of the Army Act, 1950 and Army
Rules, 1954. The Rules of 1954 are stated to have been
borrowed from the Indian Army Act, 1911 and the
Rules framed thereunder. It is contended that the
Notes are not law passed by Parliament and have not
been vetted even by the Ministry of Law & Justice or
by the Law Commission.
25. It is not disputed that Section 191 of the Army Act
empowers the Central Government to make rules for
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the
Act and Section 192 to make regulations for all or any
of the provisions of the Act other than those specified
in Section 191. All rules and regulations made under
the Act are required to be published in the Official

CW 2511/1992

Page 18 of 36

Gazette and on such publication shall have the effect
as if enacted in the Act. No power is conferred upon
the Central Government of issuing notes or issuing
orders which could have the effect of the rules made
under the Act. Rules and regulations or administrative
instructions

can

neither

be

supplemented

nor

substituted under any provision of the Act or the rules
and regulations framed thereunder. The administrative
instructions issued or the notes attached to the rules
which are not referable to any statutory authority
cannot be permitted to bring about a result which may
take away the rights vested in a person governed by
the Act. The government, however, has the power
to fill up the gaps in supplementing the rules by
issuing instructions if the rules are silent on the
subject provided the instructions issued are not
inconsistent
Accepting

with

the

the

contention

rules
of

already

holding

framed.

Note

2

as

supplementing Rules 39 and 40 would amount to
amending

and

superseding

statutory

Rules

by

administrative instructions. When Rule 39 read with
Rule 40 imposes a restriction upon the Government
and a right in favour of the person tried by a Court
Martial to the effect that a person lower in rank shall
not be a Member of the Court Martial or be a Judge
Advocate, the insertion of Note 2 to Rule 102 cannot
be held to have the effect of a rule or regulation. It
appears that the “Notes” have been issued by the
authorities of the Armed Forces for the guidance of the

CW 2511/1992

Page 19 of 36

officers connected with the implementation of the
provisions of the Act and the Rules and not with the
object of supplementing or superseding the statutory
Rules by administrative instructions. ...

13.

We should briefly refer to the Constitution Bench decision

in Ram Sarup -vs- Union of India, AIR 1965 SC 236 in which
several issues had been formulated, one of which was the vires
of Section 125 of the Army Act. The Appellant had been found
by the General Court Martial to be guilty of the murder of three
Army

personnel.

Article

33 of

the Constitution,

which

empowers Parliament to determine to what extent any of the
Fundamental Rights of members of the Armed Forces could be
restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of
their duties and the maintenance of discipline among them, was
duly taken into consideration. The vires of Section 125 of the
Army Act were upheld observing that it is not discriminatory
and does not infringe Article 14 of the Constitution. Their
Lordships observed that even though Section 125 did not itself
circumscribe the circumstances in which discretion to try an
accused by General Court Martial or by a referral to a Civil
Court, there is sufficient material in the statute to serve as
guidance in the matter. This decision has been followed in Lt.

CW 2511/1992

Page 20 of 36

Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi -vs- Union of India, (1982) 3 SCC
140 and more recently in Union of India -vs- Ex. Flt. Lt. G.S.

Bajwa, 2003 (9) SCC 630. It appears to us that Section 120(2)
of the Act also delineates the limits within which a Summary
Court Martial can be held, but this provision is mostly ignored if
not deliberately breached by the Respondents.

14.

The contention on behalf of the Respondents is that Notes

5 appended to Sections 116 and 120 are not statutory notes and
have been issued by the Authorities merely for the guidance of
the officers responsible for the implementation of the Act and
Rules. The Notes, the submission continues, is intended neither
to supplement nor to supersede the statutory Rules by this
means of administrative instructions. Our immediate response is
that this is contrary to the stand taken by the Respondents
themselves in Charanjit S. Gill, which we have extracted above
for highlighting this very point. We are in no doubt that if the
Notes are inconsistent with the Act or Rules or Regulations we
would immediately strike them down and render them legally
inefficacious.
established legal

However,

beyond

articulating

proposition, learned

counsel

this

well

for

the

Respondents have not shown in what manner the Notes

CW 2511/1992

Page 21 of 36

supplement or supersede any legal provision. It seems to us
that the Rules are merely clarificatory and have always been
relied upon and applied by the Army Authorities as per their
own submission in Charanjit S. Gill

before the Supreme

Court. Reference by learned counsel for the Respondents to
the definition of CO found in Regulation 9 of

Defence

for the Army, in

Services Regulations, Regulations

the

our view

militates against the position posited by them. It reads -“Except
where otherwise expressly provided in these Regulations, the
CO of a person subject to the Army Act is either:(a) the officer who has been appointed by higher
authority to be a commanding officer while able
effectively to exercise his power as such, or
(b) where no appointment has been made, the officer
who is, for the time being, in immediate command of -(i) the unit

to which

the person belongs or is

attached to, or
(ii)any detachment or a distinct sizeable separate
portion of a unit with which the person is for
the time being serving,
and in respect of which it is the duty of such
officer, under these Regulations or by the custom of
the

service,

to

discharge

the

functions

of

a

Commanding Officer”.

CW 2511/1992

Page 22 of 36

15.

Before venturing further into the question of the nature

and need for holding SCMs, we propose to respond to the
submissions made by Ms. Barkha Babbar, learned counsel for
the Respondents. She has, inter alia, contended that Sections
116 and 120 empower the holding of an SCM by the CO of any
Corps, Department or Detachment of the Regular Army. These
statutory provisions do not carve out any exceptions and,
therefore, there is no scope for undertaking this exercise merely
because it suits the Petitioner to so contend.

We have also

perused the definition of Corps, Department and Detachment
and regretfully find that they do not shed any light on the
conundrum before us. Ms. Barkha Babbar has argued that the
Regulations

for

the

Army,

being

compilations

of

the

Administrative Instructions, cannot, on their own confer on any
officer/authority to conduct an SCM; that unless Section 120 of
the Act permits trial by SCM of a person on detachment to a
unit, even paragraph 381 cannot validate such a trial. According
to her, even the trial of a deserter on detachment to another
unit, would be illegal. Having made this submission we are
unable to appreciate how Ms. Babbar can logically contend that
- “para 381 of the RA provides for trial of Deserters on
attachment and indisputably that is a legal mode of trial by

CW 2511/1992

Page 23 of 36

SCM. Since para 381 of the RA is non-statutory, being merely
administrative instructions, the trial by SCM of deserter on
attachment to be valid has to fall within the purview of Section
120 (3) of the Act. As a corollary, if a deserter on attachment
can be validly tried by SCM, then it becomes clear that a person
attached to another unit can be validly tried by SCM”. It seems
to us that, even assuming that this interpretation does not
militate against the stand of the Respondents, the situation
remains nebulous and uncertain, necessitating and requiring
elucidation by means of Notes.

16.

The absence of the words “unit to which the person

belongs or is attached to” is conspicuous by its absence in the
preceding sub-regulation 9(a).

Accordingly, if an officer has

been appointed as the CO only he shall exercise powers
assigned to the CO and no one else. Only in the absence of such
an appointment can an officer temporarily appointed as CO
either of the Unit to which he belongs or to the Unit to which he
is attached exercises the powers normally reserved to the CO.
Furthermore, if the Act, Rules or Regulations postulate that a
CO of a Unit to which a person may be attached, can exercise
the powers of the person's regular CO there would scarcely

CW 2511/1992

Page 24 of 36

have been any reason or requirement to incorporate either
of

the subject Notes 5.

Conversely

stated,

the

need

to

clarify that in a case of alleged desertion the CO of a Unit to
which the person may be attached, that too if the Unit falls
within

a

relatively

select category is in the circumstances

spelt out in Regulation 381, shall be authorised and competent
to conduct an SCM, cannot

but

indicate that he would

otherwise have not been so empowered. Clearly these

are

exceptions to the norm and therefore require to be spelt
out.

17.

Counsel on both sides of the Bar have made extensive

arguments on the provenance, origin, nature and need for
holding
India

SCMs.

We

have seen further

is a Republic, the rights

emasculated
Personnel

to

a substantial

of the Armed

that

even

though

of Army personnel remain
and

significant extent.

Forces are entitled as much as any

other citizen to the protection

of

the Constitution

of India.

The Supreme Court had observed over thirty years ago and
reiterated regularly thereafter (yet regretfully unheeded by
the Respondents)

that

longer be viewed as a

CW 2511/1992

service in the Armed Forces can no
support or adjunct of the Rulers.

We

Page 25 of 36

cannot do better than to reproduce the following extract from
the decision in Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi :
44. Reluctance of the apex court more concerned with
civil law to interfere with the internal affairs of the
Army is likely to create a distorted picture in the minds
of the military personnel that persons subject to Army
Act are not citizens of India. It is one of the cardinal
features of our Constitution that a person by enlisting
in or entering Armed Forces does not cease to be a
citizen so as to wholly deprive him of his rights under
the Constitution. More so when this Court held in Sunil
Batra v. Delhi Administration, that even prisoners
deprived of personal liberty are not wholly denuded of
their fundamental

rights.

In the larger interest of

national security and military discipline Parliament in
its wisdom may restrict or abrogate such rights in their
application to the Armed Forces but this process
should not be carried so far as

to

create a class of

citizens not entitled to the benefits of the liberal spirit
of the Constitution.

Persons subject to Army Act are

citizens of this ancient land having a feeling of
belonging to the civilised community governed by the
liberty-oriented constitution.

Personal liberty makes

for the worth of human being and is a cherished and
prized right. Deprivation thereof

must

be preceded

by an enquiry ensuring fair, just and reasonable
procedure and trial by a judge of unquestioned
integrity and wholly unbiased. A marked difference
in the procedure for trial of an offence by the criminal
CW 2511/1992

Page 26 of 36

court and the court martial is apt to generate
dissatisfaction
treatment.

arising

out

of

this

differential

Even though it is pointed out that the

procedure of trial by court martial is almost analogous
to the procedure of trial in the ordinary criminal courts,
we

must

recall

what

Justice

William

O'Douglas

observed : “[T]hat civil trial is held in an atmosphere
conducive to the protection of individual rights while a
military trial is market by the age-old manifest destiny
of retributive justice. Very expression 'court martial'
generally strikes terror in the heart of the person to
be tried by it. And somehow or the other the trial is
looked upon with disfavour.” In Reid v. Covert, Justice
Black observed at page 1174 as under:
Courts martial are typically ad hoc bodies
appointed by a military officer from among his
subordinates. They have always been subject to
varying degrees of “command influence”. In essence,
these tribunals are simply executive tribunals whose
personnel are in the executive chain of command.
Frequently, the members of the court martial must
look

to

the

appointing

officer

for

promotions,

advantageous assignments and efficiency ratings – in
short, for their future progress in the service.
Conceding to military personnel that high degree of
honesty and sense of justice which nearly all of them
undoubtedly have, the members of a court martial, in
the nature of things, do not and cannot have the
independence of jurors drawn from the general

CW 2511/1992

Page 27 of 36

public or of civilian judges.
Absence of even one appeal with power to review
evidence, legal formulation, conclusion and adequacy
or otherwise of punishment is a glaring lacuna in a
country where a counterpart civilian convict can prefer
appeal after appeal to hierarchy of courts. Submission
that

full

review

of

finding

and/or

sentence

in

confirmation proceeding under Section 153 is provided
for is poor solace. A hierarchy of courts with appellate
powers each having its own power of judicial review
has of course been found to be counter-productive but
the converse is equally distressing in that there is not
even a single judicial review. With the expanding
horizons of fair play in action even in administrative
decision, the universal declaration of human rights
and

retributive

justice

being

relegated

to

the

uncivilised days, a time has come when a step is
required

to be taken for at least one review and it

must truly be a judicial review as and by way of appeal
to a body composed of non-military personnel or civil
personnel. Army is always on alert for repelling
external aggression and suppressing internal disorder
so that the peace-loving citizens enjoy a social order
based on rule of law; the same cannot be denied to the
protectors of this order. And it must be realised that
an appeal from Ceaser to Ceaser's wife – confirmation
proceeding under Section 153 – has been condemned
as injudicious and merely a lip sympathy to form. The
core question is whether at least there should be one

CW 2511/1992

Page 28 of 36

appeal to a body composed of non-military personnel
and who would enjoy the right of judicial review both
on

law and facts as also determine the adequacy of

punishment being commensurate with the gravity of
the offence charged. Judicial approach by people wellversed in objective analysis of evidence trained by
experience to look at facts and law objectively, fair
play and justice cannot always be sacrificed at the
altar of military discipline. Unjust decision would be
subversive of discipline. There must be a judicious
admixture of both.

18.

Historically, the origin of SCM is traceable to the

widespread agitations and insurgency which occurred in 1857,
which British or imperialist historians labelled as the Mutiny,
and Indian or nationalist historians referred to as the first War
of Independence. We do not propose to comment on the
nomenclature or epithet that should be adopted. It was
ubiquitously believed by the Raj administrators that the 1857
events were attributable in large measure to the fact that the
CO did not possess the power to summarily punish the
transgressors, and thereby squelch rebellion, revolt or mutiny
quickly and ruthlessly, if required.

SCMs were introduced in

1869, with the avowed purpose of prompt and swift award of
punishment to indisciplined sepoy malefactors. Indeed, it is not
CW 2511/1992

Page 29 of 36

surprising that an SCM cannot be convened where the accused
is an officer or junior commissioned officer; rebellion from this
cadre had been rare. In Charanjit S. Gill the absence of a
regular appeal from the sentence of an SCM had already been
highlighted.

Even

post

independence,

Parliament

has

substantially repeated the provisions of the Indian Army Act,
1911 while enacting the Army Act. Contrast this state to the
position in the United Kingdom in terms of the Armed Forces
Act, 2006 – (a) Section 54 requires prior permission of a SCM by
an authority of the rank of Rear Admiral, Major General or Air
Vice Marshal; (b) under Section 129 the CO must afford the
accused the opportunity of electing a trial by Court Martial; (c)
Section 141 recognizes the right of an appeal in respect of a
charge which has been heard summarily to the Summary Courts
Appeal; (d) Section 239 contemplates the reduction in sentences
if an offender pleads guilty to a service offence; (e) Section 253
spells out the duties of the Summary Appeal Court; (f) Section
132 prescribes the powers of punishment imposable by the CO
which includes detention upto 90 days, reduction in rank,
fine etc. but does not empower dismissal from service, unlike
in India.

CW 2511/1992

Page 30 of 36

19.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners have also contended

that there is a material difference between the provisions
contained in the Indian Army Act, 1911 and the Army Act. It is
pointed out that Section 64(I)(b) states that the SCM may be
held by a CO of any British Corps or Detachment to which
details subject to the Act are attached. Section 116 of the Army
Act, however, does not contain any such provision. The
argument is that it is palpably evident that a departure from the
earlier law was intended and hence the power of the CO of the
Corps or Detachment to which a person was “detached” had
been withdrawn.

20.

An SCM can legitimately be convened where there is

grave and compelling cause for taking immediate action which
would be defeated if reference to a District Court Martial or
Summary General Court Martial is made. In other words,
holding of an SCM is the exception and not the rule. From the
multitude of possible offences it is only those envisaged in
Sections 34, 37 and 69, that can be tried by an SCM, further
fortifying the exceptional and extraordinary character of an
SCM. We think it necessary to underscore that it is not proper
to convene an SCM merely because the offence(s) with which a

CW 2511/1992

Page 31 of 36

sepoy of the force is charged finds mention in the enumeration
contained in these three Sections. What is of preeminence in
convening an SCM is that it should be found imperative that
immediate action is manifestly necessary. Therefore, it is
essential that this factor, viz. need to hold a trial immediately,
is articulated and reasoned out in writing in the order
convening the SCM. Failure to do so would create good reason
to quash

the

SCM itself.

Routinely, and certainly far too

frequently, the sentence passed by SCMs violates the spirit of
Regulation
livelihood

448(c) (supra) thereby taking away the sepoys'
without

affording

them

the

normal

procedural

protections of law.

21.

In the United States of America the position is similar to

that obtaining in the United Kingdom. The function of the SCM
is to promptly adjudicate minor offences under a simple
procedure expecting the SCM to impartially inquire into the
merits of the case on both sides. The

maximum punishment

awarded by an SCM does not include death, dismissal,
dishonourable or bad conduct discharge, hard labour without
confinement for more than 45 days, restriction to specified
limits for more than 2 months or forfeiture of more than 2/3rd of

CW 2511/1992

Page 32 of 36

one month pay. If the accused is above the 4 th enlisted pay
grade, the SCM can only reduce him to the 4th enlisted pay
grade. Rule 1303 gives the right to the accused to object to the
trial by an SCM. This comparison between the SCM regime
prevailing in India, and that presently existing in the United
States and/or United Kingdom presents a sad picture, which
portrays that the law in India remains a vestige of the colonial
era. Mindful of the fact that Article 33 of the Constitution of
India confers unbridled powers on Parliament to bring into
place a situation which severely abridges the Fundamental
Rights of a citizen it becomes the bounden duty of the Courts to
ensure that the equality doctrine is not needlessly nullified. It
also becomes essential that the Courts should interpret the law
in a manner which will reduce to the minimum the inroads into
the

infrangible

rights

contained

in

Chapter

III

of

the

Constitution.

22.

We shall endeavour to discharge this duty by enunciating

firstly that it is the CO of the Unit to which the accused belongs
who is empowered to convene an SCM. This is not a empty
formality or pointless punctilio. There is an abiding and
umbilical connection between the CO and his regime. The Ranks

CW 2511/1992

Page 33 of 36

have always looked up at their CO as the father figure who
will be as concerned with their welfare

as

with

their

discipline. This is the only conclusion that can be arrived
at on a holistic reading of the Army Act, Rules and Regulations.

23.

As per our analysis above, the exception to this Rule

is restricted to the case of Deserters and that too where the
CO of the Unit to which they belong is not readily and easily
available.

Secondly, an SCM must be the exception and not

the Rule.

It can only be convened where the exigencies

demand an

immediate and swift decision without which the

situation will indubitably be exacerbated with widespread
ramifications.

Obviously,

where

the

delinquent

or

the

indisciplined action partakes of an individual character or
has civil law dimensions, an SCM should not be resorted to.
Delay would thus become fatal to an

SCM.

Thirdly,

the

decision to convene an SCM must be preceded by a reasoned
order which itself will be amenable to Judicial Review. We are
certain that once this formality is complied with, the inevitable
disregard

of

the

accused

rights

automatically be restricted to those
interests of maintaining a

CW 2511/1992

for

a

fair

trial

shall

rare cases where the

disciplined military force far

Page 34 of 36

outweigh the protection of the minor civil rights of a citizen of
India.

24.

In this analysis of the law in the context of the factual

matrix spelt out in the Petitions, we set aside the verdict of the
impugned SCMs on the short ground that it was not convened,
constituted and completed by the CO of the Unit to which the
Petitioner belonged.

We are fully mindful of the fact that in

Vishav Priya Singh's petition the situation is a complex one,
inasmuch as the allegations have been levelled against the CO
of the Unit to which the Petitioner belongs. If the CO were to
himself convene the SCM it would tantamount to his being a
judge in his own cause.

It has so often been quipped in the

portals of the Court that hard cases should not make bad law.
Therefore, solution may lie in constituting any other Court
Martial, on an emergency footing if the circumstances so
dictate. None of the Petitioners have been charged with the
most reprehensible offence conceivable in the Armed Forces,
that is of Desertion. Even if so charged it would have to have
been further established, as a pre-condition for the holding of
an SCM by the CO of the Unit to which the Petitioner was
attached, that the CO of the Unit to which the accused belonged

CW 2511/1992

Page 35 of 36

was serving in a high altitude area, or overseas or engaged in
counter-insurgency

operations

or

active

hostilities

or

in

Andaman and Nicobar Islands. We clarify that since the Trial is

non est ,the Respondents shall be free to proceed against the
Petitioners de novo in accordance with law.

25.

Petitions are allowed.

Pending applications, if any, are

disposed of. There shall be no orders as to costs.

January 25, 2008
tp

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

( S.L. BHAYANA )
JUDGE

CW 2511/1992

Page 36 of 36

