IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C)3063/1995
Ranbir Singh Rathaur

...Petitioner through
Ms. Kiran Suri, Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondents through
Mr. Vikas Singh, ASG
with Ms. Rekha Palli,
Ms. Jyoti Singh,
Mr. Satyakam,
Mr. Ankur Chibber &
Ms. Punam Singh, Advs.
Col. T. Prashad, Dy.JAG

WITH
W.P.(C) 4082/1995
Ashok Kumar Rana

...Petitioner through
Mr. Dipak Bhattacharya
with Mr. Anurag
Mathur & Mr. Niraj
Kumar, Advs.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondents through
Mr. Vikas Singh, ASG
with Ms. Rekha Palli,
Ms. Jyoti Singh,
Mr. Satyakam,
Mr. Ankur Chibber &
Ms. Punam Singh, Advs.
Col. T. Prashad, Dy.JAG

Date of Hearing : December 17, 2007
Date of Decision : December 20, 2007

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 1 of 50

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
:

Yes
Yes
Yes

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
JUDGMENT

1.

These two Writ Petitions have been remitted back for

fresh hearing in terms of the Judgment of the Supreme Court in

Union of India -vs- Ranbir Singh Rathaur, (2006) 11 SCC 696.
We have been directed to first decide the Preliminary Objections
raised on behalf of the Union of India concerning the nonmaintainability of the Writ Petitions. In Ranbir Singh Rathaur's
writ petition (CWP No.3063/1995) an affidavit dated 17.10.1996
has been filed on behalf of the Respondents limited to the
challenge to the maintainability thereof. The first Objection was
that the Petitioner had filed Crl. WP 9/1981 in which one of the
prayers was to issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of
certiorari setting aside the findings and sentence of the General
Court Martial (GCM) passed against the accused/petitioner,
which petition was dismissed on 23.3.1982 by Division Bench-I
comprising D.K. Kapur, J. (as the learned Chief Justice of Delhi
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 2 of 50

then was) and Charanjit Talwar, J. These Orders were in accord
with the decision in Crl. Writ Petition No.90/1980, filed by Ex.
Captain Ashok Kumar Rana, who is also before us. The prayers
in that Petition are in pari materia, namely, for the issuance of a
writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari quashing the
findings and sentence of the Court Martial. Crl. Writ Petition
No.90/1980 was dismissed by a detailed Judgment dated
4.6.1981 of the Division Bench comprising Rajindar Sachar, J.
and R.N. Aggarwal, J. (as the learned Chief Justices of Delhi
then were). The Special Leave Petition against the Order passed
in Crl. WP No.9/1981 bearing SLP No. 3573/1983, came to be
dismissed on 10.2.1986. It is in the circumstances of these
annals of litigation that the Respondents have pressed that the
principles of res judicata apply in their favour. Secondly, it has
been asseverated in the same writ petition that all the reliefs
that the Petitioner has now claimed could and ought to have
been claimed in the previous proceedings. In other words, the
principles analogous to constructive res judicata are claimed by
the Respondents to justify the dismissal of the writ petition.
Thirdly, it is contended that the petition is barred on the
application of principles of laches.

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 3 of 50

2.

In Ashok Kumar Rana's Writ Petition (CWP 4082/1995)

(second round) the failure to raise these Preliminary Objections
is conspicuous by its absence. However, the proceedings in
these Petitions make it palpably clear that the Preliminary
Objections had been orally raised and arguments had been
heard in respect thereof. Since these Objections are essentially
legal or technical in nature, it is not essential or mandatory that
they should have been raised in the pleadings itself. In
compliance with the directions of their Lordships we propose to
decide these Preliminary Objections.

3.

We must immediately highlight the observations made by

the Division Bench to the effect that the Crl. Writ Petition
No.90/1980 was filed even before the decision of the Court
Martial was confirmed, as required under Section 154 of the
Act. Rana pleaded not guilty; the GCM convicted him on
15.9.1980, awarding cashiering and rigorous imprisonment for
fourteen years. These findings and sentence were recommended
for confirmation by the GOC-in-Chief on 30.11.1980 and
confirmed by COAS on 30.7.1981. Inasmuch as this petition
(first round) was dismissed on 4.6.1981 along with Crl. WP
No.83/1980 titled R.S. Gahlawat -vs- Union of India, although by
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 4 of 50

separate Judgment, the Petitioner could have and ought to have
pleaded these facts and raised his Objections either by
amending the first round of writ petition or even by filing a fresh
writ petition before the Order rejecting/dismissing the petition
had been passed. In the event, a challenge has now been laid to
the findings and the sentence of the GCM, after the lapse of
fifteen years. Rathaur also pleaded not guilty. The GCM found
him guilty of both charges and sentenced him to be cashiered
and to suffer rigorous imprisonment for fourteen years. These
findings and sentence were confirmed on 12.2.1980 by COAS.
Inasmuch as this petition was dismissed on 23.3.1982 the
Petitioner could have and ought to have pleaded these facts and
raised his Objections either by amending the writ petition or
even

by

filing

a

fresh

writ

petition

before

rejecting/dismissing the petition had been passed.

the

Order

Instead, a

challenge has been mounted to the findings and the sentence of
the GCM after the lapse of fifteen years. It will be further
relevant

to

note

that

Rathaur

had

also

filed

WP

(Crl.)No.1577/1985 which was dismissed on 28.4.1986 by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court observing that it was not “a proper case
for calling for the records or for re-opening the matter and
hearing it”.
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 5 of 50

4.

Considerable litigation has already been generated in

connection with the subject matter of these petitions, commonly
and conveniently referred to as the Samba Espionage Case. The
services of thirteen officers had been terminated, eleven of
whom filed writ petitions challenging that decision, out of which
nine petitions were dismissed by a common Order of this Court
dated 21.4.1980. The Court opined that the officers held their
tenure during the pleasure of the President of India and that
they were not dismissed for misconduct or otherwise. SLP
No.7225-33/1980 against the said Order was dismissed on
4.9.1980. The two remaining writ petitions were eventually
dismissed on 22.3.1985, having been heard with six other writ
petitions subsequently filed, assailing the deduction/cut of five
per cent pensionary benefits. This common Order was assailed
by

means

of

Letter

Patent

Appeals.

In

1986

the

LPA

No.116/1985 of one of the dismissed officers, namely, Captain
N.D. Sharma was allowed on 19.8.1986 wherein his termination
from service was upheld but the attempt to impose a cut of five
per cent on his pensionary benefits was quashed. The SLP filed
against this Order was also dismissed on 27.2.1987. The
remaining four LPAs filed between 1987 and 1994 were
referred to the Full Bench which, by its Judgment dated
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 6 of 50

8.7.1994, held that even in the case of a termination simpliciter,
malafides could be examined and if these were found to exist,
the termination could be set aside. SLP(C) Nos. 18732-36/1994
filed by the Union of India against the Order of the Full Bench
came to be dismissed on 17.11.1994 holding the statement of
law that an Order passed under Section 18 of the Army Act,
1950 (Act for short) can be challenged on the grounds of
malafides, is unexceptional. Shri T.V. Rajeswar has erroneously
alluded

to these

Orders in his

article

dated

4.12.1994,

concluding or implying that the Apex Court had bestowed its
imprimatur on the innocence of the Petitioners. Their Lordships
went further and clarified that the person who lays the
challenge of malafides would have to make out a prima facie
case; alternatively stated, the Union of India would not, from the
very inception, have to prove that malafides were absent.

5.

The present and the second salvo of litigation commenced

in 1995. Meanwhile, Ex. Major Subhash Juneja and Harish Lal
Singh had filed CWP Nos.271/1995 and 1169/1995. These two
Petitions were dismissed by Division Bench-I of this Court by
Judgment dated 8.3.1996 authored by Dr. M.K. Sharma, J. as
the learned Chief Justice of Delhi then was. It was inter alia
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 7 of 50

observed as follows:
21.

Further the issues raised in the present writ

petitions are similar to that of the earlier writ
petitions and the said fact is apparently admitted by
the statement of the writ petitioner wherein, it is
stated that the subject matter of the present writ
petition had been the subject matter of the previous
writ petition filed by the petitioner. Besides the
petitioners have sought to invoke the extraordinary
jurisdiction of this court once again after a period of 15
years on the ground that in view of the Full Bench
decision of this court, the Court can lift the veil in
order

to

examine

as

to

whether

the

order

of

termination was innocuous or was passed malafide.
The aforesaid effort on the part of the petitioner
through the present writ petition appears to be based
on question of fact or at the most mixed question of
law and fact.
22.

The conclusion that could be deduced from the

aforesaid discussion is that the petitioners herein
through the present writ petitions are trying to reopen
the decisions or the aforesaid impugned orders which
were earlier given by this court and subsequently
affirmed by the Supreme Court, which, in our opinion,
reached a finality.
23.

Since there is no change in law either in respect

of jurisdiction conferring or taking away the same nor
there being any obliteration of statutory provisions in
view of decision of court or legislature nor there being
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 8 of 50

change in the cause of action we feel that we are not
competent to reopen the issues raised in these two
writ petitions which have already reached a finality.
We also respectfully agree with the law laid down in
Abdul Salam -vs- State of Jammu and Kashmir, AIR
1981 JK 21, holding that the principles of res-judicata
and the general principles emanating therefrom must
be resorted to, to secure and freeze the issue once
appointed and finally decided and the principles of resjudicata cannot be ignored merely on the plea that the
earlier judgment was wrong or erroneous. Through
the present writ petitions, the petitioners seek to
reopen the decision of this court and affirmed by
the Supreme Court on the same subject matter
without fulfilling any of the conditions laid down
by

the

Supreme

reopening

a

Court

case

and,

in

that

regard

therefore,

in

for
our

considered opinion the present writ petitions are
barred by the principles of constructive resjudicata.
24.

In the result, the writ petitions are held to be not

maintainable

being

constructive

res

barred
judicata

by
and

the
are

principles

of

accordingly

dismissed, but, without any costs.
It is our analysis that the above reasoning of the Division Bench
is irrefutable, and ought to have deterred the Petitioners from
venturing into their second salvo of litigation.

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 9 of 50

6.

One of the other dismissed officers, namely, Captain

N.D. Sharma, who had filed and

argued CWP 423/1980 (also

filed CWP 4585/1995 after CWP 3107/1992), was dismissed by
Order dated 7.9.1992 by a Bench comprising B.N. Kirpal, J.
(as the learned Chief Justice of India then was) and P.K.
Bahri, J. Thereafter, CWP 4585/1995 was
Division

dismissed

Bench comprising Devinder Gupta, J. and

by

a

Dalveer

Bhandari, J. (as their Lordships then were) observing that by
means of

the

fresh

writ petition the petitioner is trying to

reopen the decision which has attained finality. Meanwhile,
Subhash Juneja filed Civil Appeal 1931/1997, which was also
dismissed by their Lordships on 23.4.2002, observing inter alia
that the Appellants were endeavouring to once again agitate the
same Issues. The two Petitions, which we are presently dealing
with, were allowed in terms of the Judgment of the Division
Bench dated 25.12.2000, which has been remitted back to us
for fresh consideration.

7.

We now revert to Writ Petition No.4082/1995 filed by

Ashok Kumar Rana. The primary prayer is to issue a writ of
mandamus commanding the respondents in accordance with
Section 165 of the Act to annul the proceedings of the General
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 10 of 50

Court Martial affecting the Petitioner as they are malafide,
irrational, unjust and illegal resulting in the occurrence of a
violation of justice.

In the first writ petition filed by Ashok

Kumar Rana the prayers were for the issuance of a writ of
Habeas Corpus and Certiorari “quashing the findings and
sentence of the Court-Martial which tried the petitioner”.
Therefore, the prayers in both the writ petitions are similar in
essential features. So far as the case of Ranbir Singh Rathaur
is concerned (CWP 3063/1995) the primary relief is verbatim
Ashok Kumar Rana's case and the narration of facts is also
similar.

Initially, Smt. Swaran Rathaur, wife of Ranbir Singh

Rathaur, had filed Criminal Writ Petition 294/1979 which was
dismissed by the Supreme Court on 27.4.1979. The gravamen of
both these petitions is predicated on newspaper Reports and
Articles published in various newspapers from November, 1994
to January, 1995, as well as an Affidavit dated 19.12.1994 of
which the affiant is Ex. Gunner Sarwan Das.

8.

By way of clarification we reiterate that the Issues which

pertain to the very maintainability of these present petitions and
which we must now decide are whether present writ petitions
are barred by the principles of res judicata and/or constructive
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 11 of 50

res judicata and further whether the Petitions are barred on the
application of principles of laches.
9.

The ramifications of applying the principles of laches shall

be considered first and while doing so we must immediately
recall the opinion of the Supreme Court on the absence of any
avenue of appeal against sentences imposed by General Courts
Martial.
such

The only recourse available to persons convicted in

circumstances

jurisdiction

reposed

is

to

in

the

invoke
High

the

extraordinary

Courts

throughout

writ
the

territories of India by virtue of Article 226 of the Constitution of
India. Ordinarily, since writ proceedings are thus a surrogate
for Appeals, the High Court should be approached expeditiously,
within a few months. In the present case the Petitioners have
already undergone their respective sentences and accordingly,
if they succeed in their writ actions, they would at best retrieve
some of their honour. Where a claim for damages is advanced,
delayed filing would inevitably result in swelling or augmenting
the quantum of damages, in which the person may be seen to
have had a contributory role.

10.

The Army Act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to as the Act)

makes no provision for the filing of an Appeal against the
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 12 of 50

sentence of a Court-Martial other than Section 164, and for
annulment of proceedings under Section 165. It is in this
context that learned counsel for the Petitioner has relied on the
poignant, yet unheeded, remarks made in Union of India -vs-

Charanjit Singh Gill, JT 2000 (5) SC 135. This decision, in turn,
refers back to a decision in Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi -vs-

Union of India, (1982) 3 SCC 140 and Sunil Batra -vs- Delhi
Administration, 1979 (1) SCR 394. In Bedi the Supreme Court
had recorded these pithy observations which were extracted by
their Lordships in Gill.
44. Reluctance of the apex court more concerned with
civil law to interfere with the internal affairs of the
Army is likely to create a distorted picture in the minds
of the military personnel that persons subject to Army
Act are not citizens of India. It is one of the cardinal
features of our Constitution that a person by enlisting
in or entering Armed Forces does not cease to be a
citizen so as to wholly deprive him of his rights under
the Constitution. More so when this Court held in Sunil
Batra v. Delhi Administration, that even prisoners
deprived of personal liberty are not wholly denuded of
their fundamental rights. In the larger interest of
national security and military discipline Parliament in
its wisdom may restrict or abrogate such rights in their
application to the Armed Forces but this process should
not be carried so far as to create a class of citizens not
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 13 of 50

entitled to the benefits of the liberal spirit of the
Constitution.

Persons subject to Army Act are citizens

of this ancient land having a feeling of belonging to the
civilised community governed by the liberty-oriented
constitution.

Personal liberty makes for the worth of

human being and is a cherished and prized right.
Deprivation thereof must be preceded by an enquiry
ensuring fair, just and reasonable procedure and trial
by a judge of unquestioned integrity and wholly
unbiased. A marked difference in the procedure for
trial of an offence by the criminal court and the court
martial is apt to generate dissatisfaction arising out of
this differential treatment.

Even though it is pointed

out that the procedure of trial by court martial is
almost analogous to the procedure of trial in the
ordinary criminal courts, we must recall what Justice
William O'Douglas observed : “[T]hat civil trial is held
in an atmosphere conducive to the protection of
individual rights while a military trial is marked by the
age-old manifest destiny of retributive justice.

Very

expression 'court martial' generally strikes terror in the
heart of the person to be tried by it. And somehow or
the other the trial is looked upon with disfavour.” In
Reid v. Covert, Justice Black observed at page 1174 as
under:
Courts martial are typically ad hoc bodies
appointed by a military officer from among his
subordinates. They have always been subject to
varying degrees of “command influence”. In essence,

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 14 of 50

these tribunals are simply executive tribunals whose
personnel are in the executive chain of command.
Frequently, the members of the court martial must
look

to

the

appointing

officer

for

promotions,

advantageous assignments and efficiency ratings – in
short, for their future progress in the service.
Conceding to military personnel that high degree of
honesty and sense of justice which nearly all of them
undoubtedly have, the members of a court martial, in
the nature of things, do not and cannot have the
independence of jurors drawn from the general
public or of civilian judges.
Absence of even one appeal with power to review
evidence, legal formulation, conclusion and adequacy
or otherwise of punishment is a glaring lacuna in a
country where a counterpart civilian convict can prefer
appeal after appeal to hierarchy of courts. Submission
that

full

review

of

finding

and/or

sentence

in

confirmation proceeding under Section 153 is provided
for is poor solace. A hierarchy of courts with appellate
powers each having its own power of judicial review
has of course been found to be counter-productive but
the converse is equally distressing in that there is not
even a single judicial review.

With the expanding

horizons of fair play in action even in administrative
decision, the universal declaration of human rights and
retributive justice being relegated to the uncivilised
days, a time has come when a step is required to be
taken for at least one review and it must truly be a

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 15 of 50

judicial review as and by way of appeal to a body
composed of non-military personnel or civil personnel.
Army

is

always

on

alert

for

repelling

external

aggression and suppressing internal disorder so that
the peace-loving citizens enjoy a social order based on
rule of law; the same cannot be denied to the
protectors of this order. And it must be realised that
an appeal from Ceaser to Ceaser's wife – confirmation
proceeding under Section 153 – has been condemned
as injudicious and merely a lip sympathy to form. The
core question is whether at least there should be one
appeal to a body composed of non-military personnel
and who would enjoy the right of judicial review both
on law and facts as also determine the adequacy of
punishment being commensurate with the gravity of
the offence charged. Judicial approach by people wellversed in objective analysis of evidence trained by
experience to look at facts and law objectively, fair
play and justice cannot always be sacrificed at the
altar of military discipline. Unjust decision would be
subversive of discipline. There must be a judicious
admixture of both.

11.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner has fervently contended

that since no remedial action has been taken by Parliament, nay
not even a discussion or cogitation on this point has at all been
been made by Parliament, the Writ Court should virtually
transform and metamorphose itself into an Appellate Court.
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 16 of 50

Such a course can be chartered, but constantly with cautious
circumspection. In other words, contrary to the perception of
Parliamentarians, with the same degree of disciple and restraint
that Courts have exercised in the realm of Public Interest
Litigation where directions are passed by it in one out of ten
complaints received by it. The argument is predicated on the
following observations in Gill :
...Despite lapse of about two decades neither the
Parliament nor the

Central Government appears to

have realised their constitutional obligations as were
expected by this Court except amending Rule 62
providing that

after recording the finding in each

charge the Court shall give brief reasons in support
thereof.

The Judge-Advocate

has been obliged to

record or caused to be recorded brief reasons in
the

proceedings. Even

Armed Forces

remains

today

the

static

law

relating to

requires

to

be

changed keeping in view the observations made by
this Court in Prithi Pal Singh Bedi's case (supra), the
constitutional mandate and the changes effected by
other democratic countries. The time has come to
allay the apprehension of all concerned that the
system of trial by court-martial was not the arch
type of summary and arbitrary proceedings.
10. In the absence of effective steps taken by the
Parliament and the Central Government, it is the
constitutional
WP(C)3063/1995

obligation

of

the

courts

in

the

Page 17 of 50

country to protect and safeguard the constitutional
rights of all citizens including the persons enrolled
in the

Armed

Forces

to

the extent

permissible

under law by not forgetting the paramount need of
maintaining the discipline in the Armed Forces of the
country.
RES JUDICATA
12.

The prayers made in the previous writ petition (Crl. WP

No.9/1981) and the present writ petition (CWP 3063/1995) filed
by Ranbir Singh Rathaur and the previous writ petition (Crl.
WP 90/1980) and the present writ petition (CWP 4082/1995)
filed by Ashok Kumar Rana are reproduced as under:
Crl. WP 9/1981
(a) Send for the record of the case.
(b) Direct the respondents to allow inspection of the
proceedings at Delhi and allow the petitioner to make
extracts subject to the provisions of the Official Secrets
Act.
(c) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of
Habeas Corpus directing respondent No.2 to order
release of the petitioner from jail custody forthwith.
(d) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of
certiorari setting aside the finding and sentence of the
General Court Martial passed against the accused.
(e) Grant any further or other relief.
CWP3063/1995
(1) To issue a writ of Mandamus and any other
appropriate writ, order or direction, inter alia,
commanding the respondents No.1 and 2, in
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 18 of 50

accordance with S.165 of the Army Act, 1950, to annul
the proceedings of the General Court Martial affecting
the petitioner as they are malafide, irrational, unjust
and illegal, and there has been failure of justice;
(2) To direct the respondents 1, 2 and 5 to take action
(including such action to found criminal prosecution) in
respect of those responsible for the building up of the
false case/cases and for the resulting grave
consequences;
(3) To direct the respondents 1,2 and 5 to remedy and
rectify the grave damage, loss and harm caused by
them to the petitioner by gross violation of Article 21
of the Constitution of India and to make restitution and
all consequential reparations for the serious damage
and harm to his body, mind, career, property,
reputation and honour;
(4) To direct respondent No.1 to review and revamp
the Army Act, 1950 and the Rules framed thereunder
so
that
they
are
in
conformity
with
the
contemporaneous law of the land and consistent with
Human Rights and the dignity of the individuals;
(5) To direct respondent No.1 to constitute a Court of
Appeal under Justices of the High Court where the
findings of Courts Martial would be dealt with in
respect of cases in which the findings of Court Martial
are mala fide or cannot be supported on Evidence, or
involves a wrong decision on a question of law, or any
other ground involving miscarriage of justice;
(6) To direct the respondents 1 and 2 to frame Rules
breach of which would be punishable regarding
handcuffing of arrested Army personnel; their
detention in military custody under humane conditions
pending trial; safeguarding against keeping arrested
persons incommunicado and in solitary confinement
pending trial;
(7) To direct that S.165 Army Act be given teeth
against inaction on the part of the Government, COAS,
etc.;
(8) To direct that the Judge Advocate General Branch
of the Defence Services be separated from the other
executive branches of the respective Services;
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 19 of 50

(9)
To declare Rule 147-A of the Army Rules,
providing that copy of proceedings not to be given in
certain cases as unconstitutional and ultra vires of
Article 14 and Article 21 of the Constitution of India,
being contrary to natural justice;
(10) To direct the respondents to produce the record of
the case;
(11) To pass any other order or orders which may be
deemed fit and proper in the interest of justice on the
facts and circumstances of the case; and
(12) To award costs throughout in favour of the
petitioner.
Crl. WP(C)90/1980
To issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of
Habeas Corpus ordering the production of the
petitioner and his being set at liberty and that the
Hon'ble Court may further issue a writ, order or
direction in the nature of certiorari quashing the
finding and sentence of the court Martial which tried
the petitioner and that the Hon'ble Court may issue a
writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus
ordering the respondent Nos.2 and 3 to produce the
record of the trial and allow the petitioner inspection
of the same in Delhi and that the Hon'ble Court may
grant such other or further relief as the petitioner in
the circumstances of the case may be entitled to.
CWP 4082/1995
(1) To issue a writ of Mandamus and any other
appropriate writ, order or direction, inter alia,
commanding the respondents No.1 and 2, in
accordance with S.165 of the Army Act, 1950, to annul
the proceedings of the General Court Martial affecting
the petitioner as they are malafide, irrational, unjust
and illegal, and there has been failure of justice;
(2) To direct the respondents 1, 2 and 5 to take action
(including such action to found criminal prosecution) in
respect of those responsible for the building up of the
false case/cases and for the resulting grave
consequences;
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 20 of 50

(3) To direct the respondents 1,2 and 5 to remedy and
rectify the grave damage, loss and harm caused by
them to the petitioner by gross violation of Article 21
of the Constitution of India and to make restitution and
reparations for the serious damage and harm to his
body, mind, career, property, reputation and honour;
(4) To direct respondent No.1 to review and revamp
the Army Act, 1950 and the Rules framed thereunder
so
that
they
are
in
conformity
with
the
contemporaneous law of the land and consistent with
Human Rights and the dignity of the individuals;
(5) To direct respondent No.1 to constitute a Court of
Appeal under Justices of the High Court where the
findings of Courts Martial would be dealt with in
respect of cases in which the findings of Court Martial
are mala fide or cannot be supported on Evidence, or
involves a wrong decision on a question of law, or any
other ground involving miscarriage of justice;
(6) To direct the respondents 1 and 2 to frame Rules
(breach of which would be punishable) regarding
handcuffing of arrested Army personnel; their
detention in military custody under humane conditions
pending trial; safeguarding against keeping arrested
persons incommunicado and in solitary confinement
pending trial;
(7) To direct that S.165 Army Act be given teeth
against inaction on the part of the Government, COAS,
etc.;
(8) To direct that the Judge Advocate General Branch
of the Defence Services be separated from the other
executive branches of the respective Services;
(9)
To declare Rule 147-A of the Army Rules,
providing that copy of proceedings not to be given in
certain cases as unconstitutional and ultra vires of
Article 14 and Article 21 of the Constitution of India,
as this is violative of the principles of natural justice;
(10) To direct the respondents to produce the record of
the case;
(11) To pass any other order or orders which may be
deemed fit and proper in the interest of justice on the
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 21 of 50

facts and circumstances of the case; and
(12) To award costs throughout in favour of the
petitioner.
13.

It is indeed unfortunate that even though the principles of

res judicata and constructive res judicata should reasonably
have been anticipated by the Petitioners to arise, and in fact
have been raised by the Respondents, copies of the writ
petitions filed in 1980 and 1981 have not been filed by either
side. Some delay has been caused in the pronouncement of this
Judgment since those records had to be requisitioned by the
Court from the Record Room.

14.

The parameters of Judicial Review embarked upon by the

Writ Court in respect of decisions of Tribunals and Authorities
have been delineated by the Full Bench of this Court, as well as
Division Benches of this Court on numerous occasions. In Flying

Officer Sundarajan -vs- Union of India, AIR 1970 Delhi 29 the
Full Bench has opined that the remedy of a writ is not available
to test the propriety or veracity of the verdict of a Competent
Authority; that interference may be justified only where the
illegality affects the jurisdiction of the court-martial or the
confirming authority; that a writ could not issue for examining
mere errors of procedure. In Ex. Major R.S. Budhwar -vs- Union
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 22 of 50

of India, 58(1995) DLT 339(DB) the Division Bench of this Court
had considered almost all precedents on the subject, including

Sundarajan, Capt. Harish Uppal -vs- Union of India, AIR 1973
SC 258, R.S. Ghalwat -vs- Union of India, 1981 Crl. L.J.1646,

Sewa Ram Nagial -vs- Union of India, 1983 Crl. L.J. 1788 of the
Jammu and Kashmir High Court, Captain Ram Kumar -vs- Chief

of the Army Staff, AIR 1985 Delhi 374, Guru Villi Bhima Rao -vsUnion of India, 1987 Crl. L.J. 504 and S.N. Mukherjee -vsUnion of India, AIR 1990 SC 1984. In S.N. Mukherjee it has
been opined that a violation of Fundamental Rights was
sufficient reason to exercise the extraordinary jurisdiction of the
Writ Court. It would be advantageous to recall the enunciation
of the frontiers of Judicial Review as digested in Council of Civil

Service Unions -vs- Minister for the Civil Service , (1984) 3 WLR
1174(HL) where Lord Diplock, speaking for the House of Lords,
recognized illegality, irrationality, procedural impropriety and
proportionality as its four concomitants. It is always worthy of
reiteration that the Writ Court is not an appellate forum. Even
if the procedure has been violated, minor deviations or
aberrations which have not resulted in a miscarriage of justice
would not call for jural interference. If the verdict or conclusion
is based on evidence available on the record, and if the assailed
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 23 of 50

decision is not perverse, the Writ Court would be exceeding
even the boundaries of its extraordinary jurisdiction if it
intermeddles or interferes with pausable conclusions arrived at
by those Authorities. The Court will always abjure substituting
the impugned Order with its own appraisal of facts. In the case
in hand, the Writ Court has already gone into the legal propriety
of

the

Court-Martial

and

the

sentence

imposed

on

the

Petitioners, details of which have been disclosed above. Thus,
even if finality in ordinary criminal verdicts may be susceptible
to reconsideration, such interference would be extremely rare
where a court-martial is the subject to judicial review.

15.

The common law doctrine that prevents a person from re-

litigating an issue decided by a Competent Court precludes and
prohibits a second look on the matter. Although the source of
this doctrine can be found in civil law, in the United States of
America it has been applied even to federal criminal law as is
evident from the cases of United States -vs- Oppenheimer, 242
U.S. 85 and Ashe -vs- Swenson, 297 U.S. 436. It is well-settled
that a decision pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction
is binding upon the parties. It is in public interest that finality
should attach to all decisions pronounced by Courts. In
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 24 of 50

Laloobhai Jogibhai Patel -vs- Union of India, (1981) 2 SCC 427
their Lordships noted thus:6.

The

preliminary

question,

therefore,

to

be

considered is, whether the doctrine of constructive res
judicata applies to a subsequent petition for a writ of
habeas corpus on a ground which he “might and
ought” to have taken in his earlier petition for the
same relief. In England, before the Judicature Act,
1873, an applicant for habeas corpus had a right to go
from court to court, but not from one Bench of a court
to another Bench of the same Court. After the
Judicature Act, 1873, this right was lost, and no second
application for habeas corpus can be brought in the
same court, except on fresh evidence.
16.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners have drawn our

attention to the observations in Shivdeo Singh -vs- State of
Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 1909 to the effect that the High Court had
not acted without jurisdiction in reviewing its previous order at
the instance of a person who was not a party in the previous
proceedings. The enunciation of law by the Constitution Bench
was that “there is nothing in Article 226 which precludes a High
Court ... to prevent miscarriage of justice or to correct grave
and palpable errors”. Res judicata palpably did not apply since
the Petitioner was not a party to the earlier decision. It is also

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 25 of 50

our opinion that reliance on Bhanu Kumar Jain -vs- Archana

Kumar, (2005) 1 SCC 787 is entirely misplaced. Their Lordships
were dealing with the interplay between the right to have an ex
parte order set aside under Order IX Rule 13 and the right to file
an appeal against the ex parte decree. The question that had
arisen was whether an appeal was maintainable even though the
application had been dismissed; the answer

was in the

affirmative.

17.

In Frank Dean Teague -vs- Michael Lane, US Supreme

Court Reports 103 L Ed. 2d 334, the US Supreme Court in 1989
was called upon to decide whether the conviction of a black
person by an all white jury called for its interference. The Court
had already ruled that a jury in criminal cases should comprise
a

cross

section

peremptorily

of

the

community.

The

prosecutor

challenged, and thereby excluded,

had

all black

persons from the Jury. A plea for a mistrial had been rejected by
the Illinois Appellate Court; the Illinois Supreme Court denied
leave to appeal; the US Supreme Court denied certiorari. The
convict Teague then started a second salvo of litigation taking
recourse to a federal habeas corpus petition. In this context the
Court had to decide whether its 1986 decision in Batson -vsWP(C)3063/1995

Page 26 of 50

Kentucky, which overruled a portion of Swain -vs- Alabama
(1965) could be relied upon by Frank Dean Teague, whose
conviction had become final two and a half years prior to the
pronouncement in Batson. In other words, his endeavour was
to apply Batson retroactively, which attempt did not succeed.
Although the Court was primarily concerned with the amplitude
of habeas corpus jurisdiction, the extracted observations from
the opinion of Justice Sandra Day O' Connor can be extrapolated
onto the conundrum before us:We agree with Justice Harlan's description of the
function of habeas corpus.

“[T]he Court never has

defined the scope of the writ simply by reference to a
perceived need to assure that an individual accused of
crime is afforded a trial free of constitutional error”.
Kuhlmann v Wilson, 477 US 436, 447, 91 L Ed 2d 364,
106 S Ct 2616 (1986) (plurality opinion). Rather, we
have recognized that interests of comity and finality
must also be considered in determining the proper
scope of habeas review. Thus, if a defendant fails to
comply with state procedural rules and is barred from
litigating a particular constitutional claim in state
court, the claim can be considered on federal habeas
only if the defendant shows cause for the default and
actual prejudice resulting therefrom. See Wainright v
Sykes, 433 US, at 87-91, 53 L Ed 2d 594, 97 S Ct
2497. We have declined to make the application of the
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 27 of 50

procedural default rule dependent on the magnitude of
the constitutional claim at issue, see Engle v Isaac,
456 US, at 129, 71 L Ed 2d 783, 102 S Ct 1558, or on
the

State's

interest

in

the

enforcement

of

its

procedural rule, see Murray v Carrier, 477 US 478,
493-496, 91 L Ed 2d 397, 106 S Ct 2639 (1986).
This

Court

has

not

“always

followed

an

unwavering line in its conclusions as to the availability
of the Great Writ. Our development

of the law of

federal habeas corpus has been attended, seemingly,
with some backing and filling”.

Fay v Noia, 372 US

391, 411-12, 9 L Ed 2d 837, 83 S Ct 822, 24 Ohio Ops
2d 12 (1963). See also Stone v Powell, 428 US 465,
475-476, 49 L Ed 2d 1067, 96 S Ct 3037 (1976).
Nevertheless, it has long been established that a final
civil judgment entered under a given rule of law may
withstand subsequent judicial change in that rule. In
Chicot Country Drainage District v Baxter State Bank,
308 US 371, 84 L Ed 329, 60 S Ct 317 (1940), the
Court held that a judgment based on a jurisdictional
statute later found to be unconstitutional could have
res judicata effect.

The Court based its decisions in

large part on finality concerns. “The actual existence
of a statute, prior to such a determination [of
unconstitutionality], is an operative fact and may have
consequences which cannot justly be ignored.

The

past cannot always be erased by a new judicial
declaration. .... Questions of prior determinations
deemed to have finality and acted upon accordingly.....

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 28 of 50

demand examination.”
Ct 317.

Id., at 374, 84 L Ed 329, 60 S

Accord Rooker v Fidelity Trust Co. 263 US

413, 415, 68 L Ed 362, 44 S Ct 149 (1923) (“Unless
and until ....reversed or modified” on appeal, an
erroneous constitutional decision is “an effective and
conclusive adjudication”); Thompson v Tolmie, 2 Pet
157, 169, 7 L Ed 381 (1829) (errors or mistakes of
court with competent jurisdiction “cannot be corrected
or examined when brought up collaterally”).
These underlying considerations of finality find
significant and compelling parallels in the criminal
context.

Application of constitutional rules not in

existence at the time a conviction became final
seriously undermines the principle of finality which is
essential to the operation of our criminal justice
system. Without finality, the criminal law is deprived of
much of its deterrent effect.

The fact that life and

liberty are at stake in criminal prosecutions “shows
only that 'conventional notions of finality' should not
have as much place in criminal as in civil litigation, not
that they should have none”. Friendly, Is Innocence
Irrelevant?

Collateral Attacks on Criminal Judgments,

38 U Chi L Rev 142, 150 (1970).

“[I]f a criminal

judgment is ever to be final, the notion of legality must
at

some

point

include

the

assignment

competence to determine legality”.

of

final

Bator, Finality in

Criminal Law and Federal Habeas Corpus for State
Prisoners,

76 Harv L Rev

441, 450-451

(1963)

(emphasis omitted). See also Mackey, 401 US, at 691,

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 29 of 50

28 L Ed 2d 404, 91 S Ct 1160 (Harlan, J., concurring in
judgments in part and dissenting in part) (“No one, not
criminal defendants, not the judicial system, not
society as a whole is benefited by a judgment
providing a man shall tentatively go to jail today, but
tomorrow and every day thereafter his continued
incarceration shall be subject to fresh litigation”).
.....
The “costs imposed upon the State [s] by
retroactive application of new rules of constitutional
law on habeas corpus .... generally far outweigh the
benefits of this application”. Stumes, 465 US, at 654,
79 L Ed 2d 579, 104 S Ct 1338 (Powell, J., concurring
in judgment).

In many ways the application of new

rules to cases on collateral review may be more
intrusive than the enjoining of criminal prosecutions,
cf. Younger v Harris, 401 US 37, 43-54, 27 L Ed 2d
669, 91 S Ct 746 (1971), for it continually forces the
States to marshal resources in order to keep in prison
defendants whose trials and appeals conformed to
then-existing constitutional standards.

Furthermore,

as we recognized in Engle v Isaac, “[s]tate courts are
understandably frustrated when they faithfully apply
existing constitutional law only to have a federal court
discover,

during

a

[habeas]

constitutional commands”.

proceeding,

new

456 US, at 128, n 33, 71 L

Ed 2d 783, 102 S Ct 1558. See also Brown v Allen,
344 US, at 534, 97 L Ed 469, 73 S Ct 397 (Jackson, J.,
concurring in result) (state courts cannot “anticipate,

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 30 of 50

and

so

comply

with,

this

Court's

due

process

requirements or ascertain any standards to which this
Court will adhere in prescribing them”).
We find these criticisms to be persuasive, and we
now adopt Justice Harlan's view of retroactivity for
cases on collateral review. Unless they fall within an
exception to the general rule, new constitutional rules
of criminal procedure will not be applicable to those
cases which have become final before the new rules
are announced.
18.

The present petitions endeavour to obtain orders for a

retrial on the tenuous support of the affidavit of one of persons
involved in the case (Sarvan Dass) and some views ventilated in
the Press by persons responsible for the investigation and
prosecution. We shall deal with their respective probative value
later on. Compared to the fragility of the features on which the
Petitioners

have

pinned

their

prospects

for

a

retrial,

advancement in the field of DNA testing presents much firmer
ground. Hence we have traversed down the DNA avenue, our
research being directed towards ascertaining the manner in
which Courts have responded to pleas predicated on this
practically unimpeachable evidence.

Jenner vs Dooley, 590

N.W. 2d. 463, decided in 1999 by the Supreme Court of South
Dakota, is topical. Jenner was convicted for the murder of her
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 31 of 50

infant daughter.

A second phase of litigation journeyed down

the federal habeas corpus route, pleading inter alia that (a) she
had incompetent legal counsel (witnesses were not produced
and/or had not been cross-examined) and (b) that DNA testing
had not been performed on the hair found in the deceased
infant's palms/hands. The Court denied the request. On the
question of incompetent counsel it recalled the following
passage from its 1984 decision in Strickland -vs- Washington,
466 U.S. 668:
A convicted defendants' claim that counsel's assistance
was so defective as to require reversal of a conviction
... has two components. First, the defendant must show
that counsel's performance was deficient. This requires
showing that counsel made errors so serious that
counsel

was

not

functioning

as

the

“counsel”

guaranteed the defendant by the Sixth Amendment.
Second, the defendant must show that the deficient
performance prejudiced the defense. This requires
showing that counsel's errors were so serious as to
deprive the defendant of a fair trial, a trial whose
result is reliable.

Unless a defendant makes both

showings, it cannot be said that the conviction .....
resulted from a breakdown in the adversary process
that renders the result unreliable.
19.

In Townsend -vs- Sain, 372 US 293 Chief Justice Warren of

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 32 of 50

the US Supreme Court on March 18, 1963 had observed “Where newly discovered evidence is alleged in a habeas
application, evidence which could not reasonably have been
represented to the trier of facts, the federal court must grant an
evidentiary hearing. Of course, such evidence must bear upon
the constitutionality of the applicant's detention; the existence
merely of newly discovered evidence relevant to the guilt of a
prisoner is not a ground for relief on federal habeas corpus”.
This passage has been relied on in Herrera -vs- Collins, (1993)
122 L Ed 2d 203 in which the attention of the US Supreme
Court had been engaged by way of a second federal habeas
corpus petition. The plurality held that affidavits supporting the
prisoners claim for “actual innocence” were not adequately
persuasive or conclusive to sustain federal habeas corpus relief.

Herrera also reaffirmed that whilst a person is presumed to be
innocent until proven guilty, once convicted in a fair trial, the
presumption of innocence reverses or vanishes. Therefore,
evidence that may be relied upon after conviction must not
merely cast a doubt as to innocence but should be indubitably
indicative of innocence; in other words the evidence relied upon
must disclose an egregious miscarriage of justice. In Sanders

-vs- United States, 373 US 1 (decided in April 1963) the accused
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 33 of 50

had waived the right to legal assistance of counsel and the right
to proceed to indictment, and instead had pleaded guilty to the
charges.

He

was

sentenced

to

15

years

imprisonment.

Thereafter, he endeavoured, but in vain, to set aside his
sentence

on

these

grounds.

The

plurality

opined

that

“conventional notions of finality of litigation have no place
where

life

or

liberty

is

at

stake

and

infringement

of

constitutional rights is alleged”. Justice Harlan, joined by Justice
Clark, dissented. The previous decision of Fay -vs- Noia, 372 US
391

(delivered

on

March

18,

1963)

was

relied

upon.

Remarkably, neither of these cases were referred to in Herrera,
which in effect reiterated the minority view of Justice Harlan in

Sanders.

This reversal of views exemplifies that judicial

opinion is not static but dynamic, keeping pace with modern
thought and times. Thus, current American jurisprudence has
perceptibly moved away from

accepting repeated motions on

the same issue in criminal justice, towards imparting finality to
criminal verdicts pronounced by a competent court with due
consideration, after following prescribed procedure even where
there may be some chances of innocence.

20.

In Bhagat Ram -vs- State of Rajasthan, (1972) 2 SCC 466

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 34 of 50

as well as the State of Rajasthan -vs- Tarachand Jain, (1974) 3
SCC 72 the Supreme Court has pronounced that the principles
of res judicata would extend even to criminal proceedings.

21.

Apart from the wisdom of attaching finality to judicial

verdicts, pragmatic considerations of availability of evidence
after several years and if available, its veracity and reliability
after the passage of time, would dissuade, if not militate against
its reception. These observations can be found in McCleskey-

vs-Zant, 499 U.S. 467 (1991), where the US Supreme Court also
expressed concern for expending scarce judicial resources on
second or successive challenges. The Court reiterated that a
point not previously raised would stand precluded from jural
scrutiny. Not surprisingly, therefore, legislation in the United
States places severe restrictions on requests for post-conviction
DNA testing (see Article 64 of Code of Criminal Procedure,
Texas).

22.

It is our analysis that Courts should be circumspect in

relooking at judicial pronouncements, even in criminal matters.
Whilst the liberty of an individual will always remain its primary
concern, a Court will recogitate upon a verdict duly arrived at
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 35 of 50

only

in

the

imperatives

rarest
of

of

cases

according

since

finality

jurisprudentially,
thereto,

should

the
have

preeminence. These rare cases would be the availability of fresh
evidence which would strongly show, not suggest, that the
verdict

cannot

be

allowed

to

stand.

Thus,

if

further

investigation is required, the request for retrial should be
rejected.

Merely

creating confusion or doubt is insufficient,

and where the evidence already on record conclusively proves
guilt, embarking on a retrial would be futile and frivolous effort
which would inexorably squander scarce resources of the State.
Where a conviction has been

pronounced, the burden of

disclosing that a miscarriage of justice has occurred rests
entirely on the convict, since the cherished common
concept of presumed innocence stands reversed.
where

the

writ

court

exercises

judicial

law

A fortiori,
review

in

contradistinction to an appellate exercise, such as in courtmartial matters, these rare instances justifying a retrial or
reconsideration would almost always be unavailable.

In

addition, the principles of res judicata and/or constructive res
judicata should always be applied.

23.

Rathaur had made a confessional statement firstly on

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 36 of 50

31.8.1978. After a passage of four months the confession was
repeated by him to a separate set of officers on 1.1.1979. This
sequence renders
statements

were

it

impossible to

extracted by

suspect

that these

means of torture, not only

because of the time that elapsed between their making, but also
for the reason that different officers were involved at the two
stages.

24.

In Rathaur, confirmation of the sentence under Section

164 of the Act was recorded on 12.2.1980 and the writ petition
was filed thereafter, in May 1981. Rana pleaded not guilty; the
GCM convicted him on 15.9.1980, awarding cashiering and
rigorous imprisonment for fourteen years. These findings and
sentence were recommended for confirmation by the GOC-inChief on 30.11.1980 and confirmed by COAS on 30.7.1981. It is
argued on behalf of the Petitioners that Section 165 has not
been complied with and since this point has not been canvassed
before the previous Benches we can revisit the entire case. The
contention does not appeal to us for the simple reason that the
Petitioners ought to have raised this plea before a judicial
verdict had been delivered by a Court of competent jurisdiction.
Moreover, whilst a right is recognized in favour of the charged
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 37 of 50

officer in Section 164, and therefore a corresponding duty is
cast on appropriate authority to properly decide whether or not
to confirm the sentence/order of the court-martial, neither of
these elements are contained in the next following Section 165,
which in essence allows suo moto powers to the next superior
authority to annul proceedings. In any event, as soon as the
decision under Section 164 has been challenged before a Court
of law, the Central Government, the Chief of Army Staff or any
prescribed officer, as is envisaged in this Section, should desist,
if not decline to exercise jurisdiction on the simple ground that
the matter has become sub judice. We are quite certain that
once a decision has been delivered by a competent Court, it
would be wholly inappropriate, if not illegal, for any of these
Authorities to exercise powers contained in Section 165. The
doctrine of separation of powers stands inextricably woven into
the fabric of our Constitution.

25.

We have taken the trouble to reproduce the prayer clauses

from the writ petitions in order to underscore that the question
of the innocence of the Petitioners was the central question
before the Court. In Rathaur confirmation of the sentence
occurred on 12.2.1980 and the writ petition was filed in May,
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 38 of 50

1981. This is exactly what the Petitioners were pleading when
they had prayed for setting aside the sentence of the General
Court Martial. But even if this were not so, since such a prayer
could have been made, raising these prayers on a second
occasion would be impermissible because of the principles of
constructive res judicata.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners

have sought to avoid this pitfall by contending that the
Petitioners' assault preceded the stage of Section 165 of the Act.
We find no merit in the submission as the ground was available
in the previous writ petitions.

26.

There is yet another factor which cannot be glossed over.

Even if res judicata does not apply against the Petitioners, they
would have to negotiate the laches barrier. Over a decade has
passed by and the sentence has already been undergone. What
appears to us to be critical is not the date on which the writ
petition had been filed, but the duration of years that its
consideration spanned over. Therefore, even if a cause of action
had not ripened when the earlier petitions had been initiated,
the petitioners could and ought to have filed fresh actions, if not
amend

the

pleadings

in

the

existing

petitions.

The

unsurmountable problem is that a fresh determination is now
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 39 of 50

attempted for, after detailed hearings have already been
consumed and exhausted which attempt must be resolutely
repulsed. Finality must be accorded to the earlier proceedings.

27.

Learned counsel for the Petitioners have drawn our

attention to these pithy observations of the Seven Judge Bench
in A.R. Antulay -vs- R.S. Nayak , AIR 1998 SC 1531 - “Therefore,
singling out of the accused in such case for a speedier trial by
the High Court for an offence of which the High Court had no
jurisdiction to try under the Act of 1952 was unwarranted,
unprecedented and the directions given by the Supreme Court
for the said purpose were not warranted.

When that fact is

brought to the notice of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court
can remedy the situation. In rectifying the error, no procedural
inhibitions should debar the Supreme Court because no person
should suffer by reason of any mistake of the Court. Here no
rule of res judicata would apply to prevent the Supreme Court
from

entertaining

the

grievance

and

giving

appropriate

directions. The Supreme Court is not powerless to correct this
error which has the effect of depriving the citizen of his
fundamental rights and more so, the right to life and liberty. It
can do so in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction in any
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 40 of 50

proceeding pending before it without insisting on the formalities
of a review application. Powers of review can be exercised in a
petition filed under Article 136 or Article 32 or under any other
provision of the Constitution if the Court is satisfied that its
directions have resulted in the deprivation of the fundamental
rights of a citizen or any legal right of the petitioner.

The

Supreme Court therefore recalled the directions contained in
the

order

in

question.

The

basic

administration of justice are simple.

fundamentals

of

the

No man should suffer

because of the mistake of the Court. No man should suffer by
technical procedure or irregularities. Rules of procedure are the
hand-maids of justice and not the mistress of justice. Ex debito
justitiae, the Court must do justice to him. If a man has been
wronged so long it lies within the human machinery of
administration of justice that wrong must be remedied”.

In

Dwarka Prasad -vs- B.D. Aggarwal, (2003) 6 SCC 230 their
Lordships emphasised that the “basis on which a judicial
process can be resorted to is reasonableness and fairness in a
trial. Under our Constitution as also the International Treaties
and Conventions, the right to get a fair trial is a basic
fundamental/human right. Any procedure which comes in the
way of a party in getting a fair trial would be violative of Article
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 41 of 50

14 of the Constitution of India. Right to a fair trial by an
independent and impartial Tribunal is part of Article 6(1) of the
European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms 1950 (See Clark (Procurator Fiscal,
Kirkcaldy) v. Kelly [2003] 1 All ER 1106). Furthermore, even if
the Petitioner herein had filed a writ petition before the High
Court in terms of Article 226 of the Constitution of India the
same would not have been entertained as the impugned order
had been passed consequent to and in furtherance of the
purported consent order passed by the High Court. Ordinarily,
the High Court would not have issued a writ of certiorari for
quashing its own order. Even in that view of the matter too, it is
apposite

that

this

petition

under

Article

32

should

be

entertained”. Both these landmark Judgments demarcate the
distinction between the all encompassing jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court and that of the High Courts in India. We cannot
lose sight of this difference and arrogate to ourselves the
unparalleled powers that the Constitution of India has reposed
in the Supreme Court of India. These constraints would not be
felt were we exercising appellate jurisdiction. On the contrary
we have to decide these writ petitions in circumstances where
the Supreme Court has not found any error in the conviction of
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 42 of 50

the Petitioners in the earlier round of litigation.

28.

In Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh -vs- State of Gujarat, (2004)

4 SCC 158 the Apex Court has cautioned against criminal trials
being reduced to mock trials or shadow-boxing or fixed trials.
Despite noting the fact that the accused persons had been
acquitted and that the Appellate Court had affirmed the
acquittal, the Court opined that “if the acquittal is unmerited
and based on tainted evidence, tailor investigation, unprincipled
prosecutor

and

perfunctory

trial

and

evidence

of

threatened/terrorised witnesses, it is no acquittal in the eye of
the law and no sanctity or credibility can be attached and given
to the so-called findings. It seems to be nothing but a travesty
of truth, fraud on the legal process and the resultant decisions
of courts – coram non judis and non est. There is, therefore,
every justification to call for interference in these appeals”. It
was further enunciated

that the “principle of a fair trial now

informs and energises many areas of the law. The operating
principles of a fair trial permeate the common law in both civil
and criminal contexts. ....It has to be unmistakably understood
that a trial which is primary aimed at ascertaining the truth has
to be fair to all concerned. It will not be correct to say that
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 43 of 50

it is only the accused who must be fairly dealt with. That
would be turning a Nelson's eye to the need of society at
large and the victims or their family members and relatives.
Each one has an inbuilt right to be dealt with fairly in a criminal
trial.

Public interest

in

the proper administration of justice

must be given as much importance, if not more, as the interest
of individual accused. In this courts have a vital role to play.
The cause of community deserves

equal

treatment

at the

hands of the court in the discharge of its judicial functions.
.... Whether a retrial under Section 386 or taking up of

additional evidence under Section 391 is the proper
procedure will depend on the facts and circumstances of
each case for which no strait-jacket formula of universal
and invariable application can be formulated”. In Zahira
Habibullah Sheikh(5) -vs- State of Gujarat, (2006) 3 SCC 374
similar judicial sentiments have been voiced and re-emphasised.

29.

A reading and analysis of these Judgments indicates that

the Supreme Court of India is not averse to diluting the doctrine
of finality or res judicata on the altar of determining truth at a
trial.

This departure, however, has been circumscribed to

special circumstances which may arise in the particular case. It
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 44 of 50

would also be pertinent to highlight the fact that in the Zahira
cases the Supreme Court was exercising appellate jurisdiction
or its plenary powers under Article 136 of the Constitution of
India as underscored by it in Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh -vs-

State of Gujarat, AIR 2004 SC 3467.

30.

Even otherwise, assuming that the res judicata and finality

of decisions does not operate as a complete bar to a fresh
adjudication of the petitioner's cases, we would have to
investigate into the nature of the evidence on the basis of which
a fresh determination would become feasible and expedient.
The constraints accepted by US laws even in the context of DNA
pleas have already been discussed above. So far as newspaper
reports or articles are concerned, we are in no manner of doubt
that it would be most improper to launch into a fresh judicial
determination

predicated

thereon.

Newspapers'

contents

partake of the character of hearsay evidence, and its reception
would rarely not encounter resistance. In Laxmi Raj Shetty -vs-

State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1988 SC 1274 the following
observations are made:
25. ....

We cannot take judicial notice of the facts

stated in a news item being in the nature of hearsay
secondary
WP(C)3063/1995

evidence,

unless

proved

by

evidence

Page 45 of 50

aliunde. A report in a newspaper is only hearsay
evidence. A newspaper is not one of the documents
referred to in S. 78(2) of the Evidence Act, 1872 by
which an allegation of fact can be proved. The
presumption of genuineness attached under S.81 of the
Evidence Act to a newspaper report cannot be treated
as proof of the facts reported therein.
26. It is now well-settled that a statement of fact
contained in a newspaper is merely hearsay and
therefore inadmissible in evidence in the absence of
the maker of the statement appearing in Court and
deposing to have perceived the fact reported. The
accused should have therefore produced the persons in
whose presence the seizure of the stolen money from
appellant No.2's house at Mangalore was effected or
examined the press correspondents in proof of the
truth of the contents of the news item. The question as
to the admissibility of newspaper reports has been
dealt with by this Court in Samant N. Balakrishna v.
George Fernandez, (1969) 3 SCR 603 : (AIR 1969 SC
1201). There the question arose whether Shri George
Fernandez,

the

successful

candidate

returned

to

Parliament from the Bombay South Parliamentary
Constituency had delivered a speech at Shivaji Park
attributed to him as reported in the Maratha, a widely
circulated Marathi newspaper in Bombay, and it was
said:
“A newspaper report without any further proof
of what had actually happened through witnesses is

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 46 of 50

of no value. It is at best a secondhand secondary
evidence. It is well known that reports collect
information and pass it on to the editor who edits the
news item and then publishes it. In this process the
truth might get perverted or garbled. Such news
items cannot be said to prove themselves although
they may be taken into account with other evidence if
the other evidence is forcible”.
We need not burden the judgment with many citations.
There is nothing on record to substantiate the facts as
reported in the newspapers showing recovery of the
stolen amount from the residence of appellant No.2 at
Mangalore. We have therefore no reason to discard the
testimony of PW50 and the seizure witnesses which go
to establish that the amount in question was actually
recovered at Madras on the 29th and the 30th as
alleged.

31.

Apart from partaking of the character of the hearsay

evidence the letter published in the newspaper allegedly
authored by Mr. V.K. Kaul, proffering the opinion that the
Petitioners were wrongly convicted is not sufficiently impressive
to reopen a decision which has attained finality.
already

mentioned

above,

once

a

As we have

conviction

has

been

pronounced, the burden to prove innocence shifts to the convict,
in reversal to the duty to prove culpability or guilt of the

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 47 of 50

accused.

Mr. Kaul was the Chief Investigator of the Samba

case, and if, despite all his efforts, he was unable to establish
the innocence of the Petitioners at that stage, subsequent
remarks made cannot be given any credence.

The Article by

Mr. T.V. Rajeswar, on which reliance has been placed, manifests
an erroneous understanding of the orders passed by the
Supreme Court in 1994.

As already mentioned, we are not

aware of any decision of the Apex Court indicating, even
obliquely, that the Petitioners were innocent. Mr. Rajeswar was,
at the material time, at the helm of the Intelligence Bureau. If
he was unsuccessful in securing the innocence of the Petitioners
while adorning that powerful and influential office, there is no
room to take cognizance of his opinion after the case has been
scrutinized upto the Apex Court. Statements

made after the

event are seldom sufficient to reopen or rehear a verdict which
has attained finality. The Affidavit of Ex. Gunner Sarvan Dass
dated

19.12.1994,

asserting

therein

that

he

had

falsely

implicated the Petitioners in the subject espionage case, is
surrounded by suspicious circumstances and does not inspire
any confidence.

32.

Our learned Brothers, who had decided these petitions

WP(C)3063/1995

Page 48 of 50

which have been remanded back for hearing, recorded adverse
remarks on the failure of the Respondents to file certain
documents for the perusal of the Court. The Orders dated
14.8.1998 record that the originals have been perused. In the
hearings before us several documents have been filed again, the
scrutiny of which reveals that they had been filed before the
previous Bench also, having been returned to the Respondents
on 3.1.2001 as recorded by the Remand Order of the Supreme
Court. This is also evident from the Receipt or Acknowledgment
dated 3.1.2001 signed by the Advocate of the Union of India. It
is quite possible that this fact may have been gone unheeded
because of the passage of years between the conclusion of the
hearing and the pronouncement of the Judgment. In any event,
even assuming that the documents were not filed, that fact
alone would not ipso facto result in the writ petitions being
rendered maintainable. Having perused the original documents,
we record that we have returned them to the Respondents.

33.

Mr. Deepak Bhattacharya, learned counsel for Rathaur

has eloquently quoted Salmond on Jurisprudence, 10th Edition
by Granville Williams, Chapter 10 dealing with Legal RightsWrongs ({73), Duties ({74), Rights ({75). Succinctly stated, the
WP(C)3063/1995

Page 49 of 50

argument is that to permit a wrong to continue is itself a breach
of law and a dereliction of duty, whether on a legal, moral or
ethical platform. The flaw in the contention, in our opinion, is to
presume that the previous decisions are erroneous. As has been
seen, the

evidence or material

on the basis of which a

rehearing is being supplicated is not unimpeachable (unlike a
favourable DNA Test).

The material does not, standing on its

own, preponderantly prove the innocence of the petitioners; at
the highest it casts a doubt which after a conviction has been
returned, is not adequately persuasive to dislodge the finality
that attaches to such verdicts. To reopen a concluded case only
on a showing of plausible incongruity, is judicial anathema.

34.

In this analysis the writ petitions are dismissed as not

maintainable. Although imposition of costs is justified, we
decline from doing so.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE
December 20, 2007
tp

WP(C)3063/1995

( S.L. BHAYANA )
JUDGE

Page 50 of 50

