IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 550/2004 & CM 930/2005
Havaldar Shital Prasad Singh

...Petitioner through
Mr. Suresh Chand,
Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

..Respondent through
Mr. Manoj Ohri, Adv.

Date of Hearing : November 20, 2007
Date of Decision : November 30, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
Yes
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
Yes
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported Yes
in the Digest?
:

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
JUDGMENT

1.

The Petitioner prays for the issuance of a writ of certiorari

calling for the records of the case and for the quashing of the
Instructions dated 9.5.2002; and for a direction to promote the
Petitioner to the rank of Naib Subedar and that his seniority be
counted with effect from 1.6.2002 having passed the Army
English Certificate-II (AEC-II). The Petition discloses that the
Petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 27.5.1982 in the rank of
WP(C) 550/2004

Page 1 of 9

Sepoy. At that time the Petitioner was a matriculate, however
without English being one of his subjects.

There is some

controversy as to whether the Petitioner was an Infantry Soldier
or a Gunner. From the Counter of the Respondent it appears
that he could have fulfilled these dual roles. The Petitioner has
been promoted to the rank of Havaldar on 1.1.1999 without
having cleared the AEC-II. It is not in dispute that the Petitioner
has cleared the Promotion Cadre Test on 27.6.2001, making him
partially eligible for the promotion of Naib Subedar. The
Petitioner makes a grievance of the fact that after about one
year of that event, on 9.5.2002, he was informed that his
promotion could not be effected as he had not passed the AEC-II
Examination. According to the Petitioner this is the first time he
came to know that an essential prerequisite for being promoted
to the rank of Naib Subedar was passing of this Examination.
The letter dated 9.5.2002 is Annexure P-2 to the Petition. The
letter also mentions that the said precondition would apply to
drivers/operators/gunners, and obviously for this reason a
controversy has been raised as to whether the Petitioner was in
the Infantry or was a Gunner.

2.

The immediate question that arises is whether the

WP(C) 550/2004

Page 2 of 9

Petitioner learnt of the necessity to pass the AEC-II in May 2002
or even prior thereto. Learned counsel for the Respondent has
drawn our attention to Appendix 'C' to the letter dated 9.5.2002
containing a note which reads thus:Personnel who have passed Matric or equivalent exam
without English and with Maths subjects need not to
pass any Army Certificate of Education and Army
English Certificate but required to pass Army English
Certificate

of

initial

mustering

and

subsequent

upgradation.

3.

Instead, learned counsel for the Petitioner seeks to rely on

Appendix 'D' which refers to personnel enrolled in the Army
under Matric prior to 1/4/1986 and personnel enrolled in the
Army under dispensation in education standard for recruitment
vide Army HQ letter No.B/10133/MP3 (PBOR) dated 19.3.2001
are required to pass only Army Certificate of Education for
initial mustering and subsequent upgradation. However, on a
proper perusal of Appendix-C it will become evident that in the
case of the Petitioner it was necessary for him to have cleared
AEC-II as he was a Normal Entry Rate, that is, a Matriculate
with Maths but without English. A letter vide dated 19.3.1991
given under Annexure-I reiterates that 'Normal Entry Rate'
personnel who are lacking mandatory requirement of passing a
WP(C) 550/2004

Page 3 of 9

particular subject are required to qualify the same before they
are detailed to undergo the promotion cadre. Although the
question does not arise in this case, for the Petitioner to be
eligible for further promotion to Subedar, he would have to
clear AEC-II. It is worth emphasising that these requirements
have been laid down in Qualification Regulations for Soldiers,
1958 (for short Regulations) dated AI115/70 (CS No.306/10/70).
Rule 8 of the Regulations specifically states that persons who
have passed matriculation examination without English as one
of the subjects will require to pass the Army English Certificate
Examination as prescribed for the concerned category in
Chapter-IV for initial mustering and subsequent upgradation. It
is noteworthy that these Regulations predate the Petitioner's
engagement in the Army.

4.

The problem that has arisen is that the Petitioner was

permitted to appear for the promotion cadre without his having
the prerequisite qualification of AEC-II.

In view of the

Regulations it would not be correct for the Petitioner to assert
that he learnt of this necessity only on 9.5.2002. Learned
counsel for the Respondents has stressed the point that
Circulars, highlighting this requirement, had been issued from
WP(C) 550/2004

Page 4 of 9

time to time, which were also placed in the Unit Movement Hall
and were displayed on the Notice Board. The conundrum to
ponder upon is whether the Respondents should be disallowed,
at this stage, from insisting that the Petitioner should possess
the AEC-II qualification, on the face of their negligent error in
permitting him to appear in the Promotion Cadre without the
prerequisite of AEC-II.

5.

The Petitioner had filed a non-statutory as well as

statutory complaint on 27.6.2002 and 8.9.2003 respectively to
the appropriate Authorities representing that he should not be
compelled to clear the AEC-II, for the second time, subsequent
to his having cleared the Promotion Cadre. The Petitioner has
also relied on the fact that he has cleared the pre-law
examination, which, on equivalence, is higher than AEC-II. We
are not at all impressed with the last argument. If qualifications
have been laid down by an appropriate or competent authority
they must be complied with.

Equivalence would arise only

where two qualifications appear to be the same, albeit they have
been awarded by Universities or School Education Boards.
6.

The statutory as well as non-statutory complaints proved

to be sterile. Dissatisfied with this result the Petitioner appears
WP(C) 550/2004

Page 5 of 9

to have addressed a communication to the Chief of Army Staff,
which is contrary to the extant Regulations. This is viewed as
an act of indiscipline, and with just foundation. As a result the
Petitioner received a Red Ink Entry which imposed on him the
punishment

of

not being eligible

for

consideration

for

promotion for one year, that is, with effect from 9.10.2002 to
8.10.2003. It will be recalled that the Petitioner passed the
Promotion Cadre on 11.6.2002, and thus could not have claimed
a

promotion in this period.

Arguably,

had

the AEC-II

Examination been held between 11.6.2002 and 9.10.2002, and
had the Petitioner appeared with success, a promotion may have
become claimable. The present Petition has been filed in
January, 2004.

7.

We consider this factor to be of importance as it discloses

the reasons which propelled the Petitioner into filing the present
Petition. It appears to us that till the imposition of the Red Ink
Entry the Petitioner had not articulated his argument that he
was eligible for promotion to the rank of Naib Subedar without
clearing the AEC-II Examination. Having become debarred for
consideration for promotion till 2003 he realised that he would
become much junior to his colleagues if he were to obtain all the
WP(C) 550/2004

Page 6 of 9

qualifications after October 2003.

8.

We are of the opinion that since the Petitioner was a

matriculate without English, it was an essential prerequisite for
him to have cleared his AEC-II prior to appearing in the
Promotion Cadre. Since the Regulations were in existence much
prior to his enrollment, the Petitioner cannot contend that the
terms of service have been altered to his detriment or that he
was unaware of them. There is also another intervening event
which has had the effect of delaying the Petitioner's promotion
and that is “Operation Parakaram” as a consequence of which
the AEC-II Examination, scheduled for May 2002, was cancelled.
This had the effect of delaying or postponing the Petitioner's
promotion. As already noted above the Petitioner's Red Ink
Entry had also delayed his promotion.

9.

It is because of these events that the Petitioner has now

put forward a case that he should stand exempted from clearing
the AEC-II, for which we find no foundation. In order to catch up
with the seniority of his peers the Petitioner now seeks to
contend that he should be granted seniority/promotion from the
date when he had passed the Promotion Cadre on 27.10.2001.
WP(C) 550/2004

Page 7 of 9

However, on that date, as we have already observed, he did not
have the prerequisite qualification of AEC-II. The confusion has
become worse confounded by the fact that the Petitioner has
cleared the AEC-II on 11.6.2002. However, contrary to his
expectations, the Respondents have insisted that he should
thereafter reappear in the Promotion Cadre. It is this insistence
which has further delayed his promotion.

10.

While

exercising

powers

under

Article

226

of

the

Constitution of India, we would interfere with any Policy setdown/established by a Competent Authority only if it appears to
us to be unconscionable, or perverse, or unreasonable in the
Wednesbury mould. We do not find any such infirmity in the
Respondents' action in this case. Their insistence has been on
strict adherence to a sequence of events envisaged under the
Regulations, that is, possessing of AEC-II clearance, wherever
applicable, as a precondition for appearing in the Promotion
Cadre. Had the Petitioner not received a Red Ink Entry he may
have been able to appear in the Promotion Cadre between
9.10.2002 to 8.10.2003. Obviously he would not have filed the
present petition.
11.

The Petitioner alone has not been singled out for adverse

WP(C) 550/2004

Page 8 of 9

treatment. Havildar Jagjeevan was similarly placed, in that he
had first cleared his Promotion Cadre and thereafter passed the
AEC-II. The Respondents had insisted that he should appear in
Promotion Cadre after having passed the AEC-II which he
complied with. This sequence must also be fulfilled by the
Petitioner.

So far as Havaldar Brajesh Kumar and Havaldar

Hem Chand are concerned, the Respondents have stated that
they would be eligible for promotion only on following the
settled sequence. In any event the Writ Court will abjure from
passing orders which run counter to legitimate established
Policy, Rules or Regulations or law even if there has been an
infraction in respect of other candidates, otherwise the writ
would run counter to law, which is clearly impermissible. The
question of giving any retrospective operation with effect from
1.6.2002 to Petitioner's qualification is not tenable.
12.

In these circumstances we find no merit in the Petition

and the same is dismissed.
( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE
November 30, 2007
tp

WP(C) 550/2004

( S.L. BHAYANA )
JUDGE

Page 9 of 9

