*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

W.P.(C) 2261/2005
PROMOD KUMAR
Through

..... Petitioner
Mr.Y.D.Nagar, Advocate

versus
UOI & ORS.
Through

..... Respondent
Ms.Barkha Babbar, Advocate

Date of Decision: October 30, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L.BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the Judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes
Yes
Yes

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J. (ORAL)
1.
In this Writ Petition it has been prayed for the quashing of
the Order dated 30.6.2004 of the Bureau of Sailors, Mumbai,
authored by the Staff Officer (Pension). The disability suffered
by the Petitioner during his service in the Navy had been
rejected on the ground that it had not been sustained while on
duty. The Petitioner also prays that a writ of mandamus be
issued directing the Respondents to release disability pension to
the Petitioner with effect from 1.6.2004 together with interest at
the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
WP(C)2261/2005

Page 1 of 7

2.

We may also note that the impugned Order dated

30.6.2004 informed the Petitioner that an Appeal should be
preferred against it within six months. No Appeal has been filed
and it is for this reason that a threshold Objection has been
taken against the maintainability of the writ petition.

3.

The Petitioner joined the Indian Navy on 5.5.1989 as an

MER. Promotion was declined to him as he had been placed on
low medical category owing to a 'displaced fracture of medial
hallocolus (RT) Foot” vide an Injury Report dated 12.2.1998.
The Writ Petition itself recites that the petitioner had suffered
this injury as a consequence of the skidding of his motorcycle to
save a cycle and due to break fail. Paragraph 3 of the Petition
narrates that a Court of Inquiry was not held and that the
Medical Officer had opined that - “the injury occurred in peace
area and is not attributable to military service”. This view was
concurred with by the OC Unit. Annexure P1 is the “Report on
Accidental and Self Inflicted Injuries – Officers”. It contains a
declaration of the Petitioner that the injury sustained by him on
1.2.1998 did not occur while he was in the performance of
military duty; that it did not constitute an offence triable under
the disciplinary code applicable to him; that the accident did not
WP(C)2261/2005

Page 2 of 7

occur during his journey or transport from his quarters to or
back from an appointed place of duty. This Report is dated
12.2.1998 and is, therefore, a contemporaneous document. It is
trite that admissions in pleadings are most conclusive on any
aspect of a controversy.

4.

Annexure P-2, dated 24.2.2004, is the “Role of PBOR

proposed to be invalided” and bears the recommendation of the
Competent Authority. It will be relevant to record that the
columns dealing with invaliding/disability pension have been left
blank by the Petitioner. We record so for the reason that an
unsubstantiated claim had been made before us by learned
counsel for the Petitioner that the OC Unit had made a
favourable recommendation for entitlement to invalidment
pension.

5.

Annexure R-1 is the Release Medical Board proceedings as

is obvious from the scoring out of the word “invalidment”. It
bears the signatures of the Petitioner and notes that the
Petitioner is “fit for release in medical category S3A2 (P) PMT”.
The Medical Officer has made the endorsement that the
disability is neither attributable to nor aggravated by his
WP(C)2261/2005

Page 3 of 7

service. While the disability has been assessed at 20 per cent, it
has been again mentioned in paragraph 8 thereof that it is a
“release” (in contradistinction to an “invalidment” which has
been scored out) in medical category. The distinction between
these terms should not be lost sight of. Where any personnel
seeks to be released from service because of loss of promotional
prospects he cannot simultaneously claim Disability Pension.
Where any personnel is discharged by any of the Armed Forces
because

of

his

disability/injury,

such

pension

would

be

admissible if the criteria is met.

6.

Our attention has been drawn by learned counsel for the

Petitioner to Appendix-V pertaining to Regulations 43, 101 and
109

concerning nature,

assessment and

attributability

of

disability and entitlement to disability pension. Rule 2, on which
reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the Petitioner,
militates against the Petitioner's claim inasmuch as it stipulates
that invalidment from service is a necessary condition for the
grant of disability pension, since it also contemplates disability
of sailors because no alternative or suitable employment can be
provided. We had enquired from learned counsel for the parties
whether the Petitioner had been discharged on this ground.
WP(C)2261/2005

Page 4 of 7

Learned counsel for the Respondent has stated that the
discharge was pursuant to the Petitioner's request, whereas
learned counsel for the Petitioner has contended that he was
invalided out of service.

7.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner has also placed reliance

on the Navy (Pension) Regulations, 1964 (for short Regulations)
which speak in harmony with Rule 2 of Appendix-V to which we
have already adverted above. Learned counsel for the Petitioner
has also drawn our attention to Regulation 105-B of the
Regulations which unfortunately for the Petitioner has no
application in his case for the simple reason that apart from the
service pension admissible to him, a disability element on
account of his disability has not been sanctioned.

As has been

noted this was for the reason that the disability was neither
attributable to nor aggravated by service.

8.

We are also unable to appreciate any manner by which the

decision in Ex. Naik Bijender Singh -vs- Union of India dated
19.10.2006 is of any avail or succor to the Petitioner. The
Petitioner has himself acknowledged that the injury sustained
by him was not attributable to service. Mr. Nagar also refers us
WP(C)2261/2005

Page 5 of 7

to two decisions of the Division Bench delivered on the same
day, that is, 19.10.2006 (Jitendra Kumar -vs- Chief of Army Staff
and

Hav.Rohtas

-vs-

Union

of

India).

Predictably

these

Judgments contain the same dialectic and conclusions, inter
alia, that if the injury causes over 20 per cent disability and it is
attributable to or aggravated by military service, Disability
Pension may become payable.

9.

CDA (Pension) is not competent to give a decision

different to that of the Invalidating Board. We reiterate that in
the present case there is no recommendation for the grant of
invalidment pension in favour of the Petitioner for the reason
that he has not been invalidated out of service due to his
disability

and

injury,

on

the

Petitioner's

own

pleadings/admission, is neither attributable to nor aggravated
by military service.

10.

Petition is devoid of merit and is dismissed.

( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

( S.L.BHAYANA )
WP(C)2261/2005

Page 6 of 7

OCTOBER 30, 2007
tp

WP(C)2261/2005

JUDGE

Page 7 of 7

