IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
W.P.(C) 1860/2001
Subedar Virendra Singh

...Petitioner through
Mr. E.J. Varghese, Adv.

Versus
Union of India & Ors.

...Respondent through
Ms. Manisha Dhir, Adv.

Date of Hearing : August 16, 2007
Date of Decision : August 31, 2007
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAMAJIT SEN
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.L. BHAYANA
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
allowed to see the Judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
:
1.

No
Yes
Yes

VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.
The Petitioner had earned the rank of Subedar in the Indian

Army and is aggrieved by the fact that he has not been promoted
to the rank of Subedar Major and thereby has been denied the
privileges

of

an

Honorary

Rank

together

with

all

other

consequential benefits.

2.

For the relevant years 1993-1997 the Petitioners gradings

in the ACRs are as follows:
WP(C)1860/2001

Page 1 of 6

1993 1994 -

Outstanding

1995 -

Outstanding

1996 -

Average

1997 -

3.

Above Average

Above Average

In order to be eligible for promotion to the rank of Subedar

Major the Petitioner should have earned three Above Average
gradings and two High Average gradings. It is palpably clear that
had the Petitioner received Above Average grading for the year
1996 he would have been eligible for consideration for promotion
to the rank of Subedar Major.

The Petitioner has asseverated

that 'Average' grading had not been communicated to him; this
assertion is not controverted by the Respondents. The submission
made on their behalf is that “average” grading cannot be
construed as an adverse Report and therefore need not be
conveyed to the Petitioner.

4.

Over a decade ago in Karnail Singh -vs- State of Punjab, JT

1994(6) SC 583 :1994 Supp (3) SCC 724 it has been laid down
that a bad record, if not communicated, cannot be taken into
consideration. Some years later this question again came up for
consideration in UP Jal Nigam -vs- Prabhat Chandra Jain, AIR

WP(C)1860/2001

Page 2 of 6

1996 SC 1661. Their Lordships were considering a progression
where an employee receives a grading of Very Good, followed by
a grading of Good, both of which cannot but be seen as positive
gradings.

Nevertheless, it was opined that even in a case of

“going a step down” reason should be recorded and the officer
concerned should be informed so that he could once again
improve his work. What is of importance is that the Court further
emphasised that “even a positive confidential entry in a given
case can perilously be adverse and to say that an adverse entry
should always be qualitatively damaging may not be true”.
These observations are indeed pithy to the present Petition. Even
though a grading may not be negative or below average one, it
may have the effect of rendering the officer/employee concerned
ineligible for further promotion. We are in no manner of doubt
that wherever this happens it is the bounden duty of every
employer to convey the adverse or debilitating grading to the
concerned officer.

5.

In the present case the Petitioner required three Above

Average and two High Average gradings. So far as promotion is
concerned, therefore, an 'average grading' would per se partake
the character of an adverse grading since the consequence would
WP(C)1860/2001

Page 3 of 6

be the person's disqualification for consideration for promotion.
Every employer, regardless of whether it is an Armed Force, such
as the Indian Army or Navy or the Air Force, should deeply and
earnestly cogitate upon the ACR where the grading given therein
has the effect of closing the promotional avenues of the
concerned employee. It is an exceptional case where an
employee is unmindful of his promotional prospects.

In this

analysis it appears to us that the Petitioner ought to have been
informed of the fact that in 1996 he had received an 'Average
ACR'. He would then have been in a position to file a
Representation against the grading or resign himself to his fate.
We need not speculate upon what the fate or outcome of such a
Representation would be.

6.

The morale and cohesive competence of an Armed Force is

best served when every personnel can rest assured that his
interest shall be carefully considered by his superiors. In the
present case the Petitioner was enrolled in the Army Education
Corps in August, 1970. On the basis of the pleadings before us
we must come to the conclusion that the Petitioner has 28 years
of unblemished service to his credit. Despite this fact, he has
been passed-over for promotion to the rank of Subedar Major.
WP(C)1860/2001

Page 4 of 6

This would have come to him as a rude shock because he was
unaware that for the intervening year 1996 he had received only
an Average ACR which put paid to his promotional prospects.
From his prospective such a grading can only constitute an
adverse grading. It ought to have been conveyed to him so that
even if his promotional prospects could not be salvaged or
improved upon, he would have been able to prepare himself for
what fate had in store for him. We are not called upon nor do we
propose to make any observations on the correctness of the
'Average' grading for 1996.

7.

The question which now remains is what relief should be

granted to the Petitioner. It is legitimate expectation for noncommissioned personnel in the Armed Forces to aspire to earn
their Commission even if it is only an Honorary Rank. The
Petitioner has retired from the Indian Army. Since it is our view
that the Respondents have committed a grievous error in not
conveying to him his average ACR for the year 1996, the question
whether this grading would have been altered favourably
towards the Petitioner is wholly irrelevant. The personal glory
and honour that the Petitioner would have enjoyed had he been
promoted to the rank of Subedar Major cannot be bestowed upon
WP(C)1860/2001

Page 5 of 6

him by a judicial fiat. What we can do, and what direction should
be given effect to, is to grant the rank of Subedar Major to the
Petitioner

with

effect

from

the

date

on

which

the

Recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee
(DPC) held in August 1997 came into effect, assuming in favour
of the Petitioner that he had been found suitable for promotion to
the rank of Subedar Major by that DPC. We favourably note that
the Petitioner had been granted the Honorary Rank of Subedar
Major with effect from the date of his retirement, that is,
1.9.1998, on the occasion of Republic Day in 1998 as per letter
dated 18.9.2000. The Petitioner will, therefore, be only entitled to
pecuniary benefits that would result from his notional promotion
to the rank of Subedar Major from the date on which the
Recommendations of the DPC held in August, 1997 would be
implemented.

8.

Petition along with other applications is disposed of. There

shall be no orders as to costs.
( VIKRAMAJIT SEN )
JUDGE

August 31, 2007
tp
WP(C)1860/2001

(S.L. BHAYANA )
JUDGE

Page 6 of 6

