*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

OMP No. 4/2007
Judgment reserved on: January 9, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: February 01, 2007
Subhash Chander Chachra & Others
..... Petitioners
Through: Mr. Dushyant Dave, Sr.Advocate
with Mr.H.S.Chandhoke, Mr. Ritesh
Kumar, Mr.Manu Krishnan & Mr.
Bharat Singh, Advocates
versus
Ashwani Kumar Chachra & Another
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Suresh Dutt Dobhal,
Ms. Nandini Gidwaney, Mr. Rishi Jain
& Mr. Biju Nair, Advocates

CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

Present is an appeal under Section 37(2)(b) of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 (the Act) directed against the order dated
November 16, 2006 passed by the Arbitral Tribunal on an application
i.e. IA – C/4, filed by the claimants (Respondent herein) under Section
OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 1 of 19

17 of the Act. The application IA - C/4 was filed for interim relief on
which

the Arbitral Tribunal has issued interim directions

to the

appellants to release an amount of Rs.1 crore to the respondents in
four equal installments of Rs.25,00,000/- each in four months being in
the first week of December, 2006 and to pay interest to the
respondents on their balance amount of capital reflected in the final
amounts as on 31.3.2005 @ 18% per annum.

The appellants herein

are respondents before the Arbitral Tribunal.
2.

Disputes are essentially between two families.

Appellant

Subhash Chander Chachra is the elder brother while the respondent
Sh. Ashwani Kumar Chachra is the younger brother.

The brothers

along with their family members were carrying on business jointly. The
two families led by the two brothers consisted of the following
members :
1.

Mr. Subhash Chander Chachra
Ms. Saroj Chachra (wife)
Mr. Deven Chachra (son)
Ms. Yogita (daughter)

They are collectively referred to herein as the
Appellants
2.

Mr. Ashwani Kumar Chachra
Ms. Madhu Chachra (wife)
Ms. Ruchita (daughter)”

They are collectively referred to herein as the
Respondents
3.

The parties constituted three partnership firms, details whereof

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 2 of 19

are as follows :
FIRMS

SHARE (%)

M/s. SUPERIOR CRAFTS
1.
2.

Mr. Ashwani Kumar Chachra
Mr. Subhash Chander Chachra

-

50%
50%

M/s. SUPERIOR CRAFTS (INDIA)
1.
2.

Mr. Ashwani Kumar Chachra
Ms. Saroj Chachra
(W/o MR. Subhash Chander Chachra)

55%
45%

M/s. SUPREME EXPORTS (INDIA)
1.
2.
4.

Ms. Madhu Chachra
(W/o Mr. Ashwani Kumar Chachra) Mr. Subhash Chander Chachra
-

45%
55%”

Disputes arose between the partners which lead to filing of

three applications under Section 9 & 11 of the Act registered as OMP
No. 262/2005, 263/2005 and 290/2005 in this Court.

They were

disposed of on 16th January, 2006 leading to the constitution of the
Arbitral Tribunal. It appears that a company petition relating to M/s.
Superior Crafts Private Ltd., a family concern of the parties was also
pending before the Company Law Board. On 20th February, 2006, the
parties agreed to withdraw the Company Petition from the Company
Law Board and to raise all the disputes in that petition before the
Arbitral Tribunal.

The Arbitral Tribunal is therefore ceased of all the

disputes arising between

the parties in relation to the three

partnership concerns as well as their closely held company, namely,

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 3 of 19

Superior Crafts Private Ltd.
5.

As recorded by the Learned Arbitral Tribunal, it is not

seriously

disputed

that

differences

between

the

parties

arose

sometime in 2004-05. While advancing his arguments, learned senior
counsel for the appellant Sh. Dushyant Dave also stated that dispute
between the parties arose in July, 2005. It is also not in dispute that
the appellant herein took control of the business of all the three
partnership firms, namely, M/s. Superior Crafts, Superior Craft (India)
and M/s. Supreme Export (India) as also the company M/s. Superior
Crafts Private Ltd. Resultantly since July, 2005, the respondents have
not received any payments and no withdrawls were allowed to them
while the appellants continued to run and manage the businesses of
dealing in garments locally as well as overseas.
6.

Having been ousted from the business,

respondents preferred

OMP No. 262/2005 and 263/2005 under Section 9 & 11 of the Act,
while appellant no. 2 Smt. Saroj Chachara, wife of appellant no. 1
herein preferred OMP No. 290/2005 in this Court. These proceedings
are collectively referred to as the “earlier proceedings”.
7.

Grievance

raised

in

the

earlier

proceedings

by

the

respondents was that the business of the partnership firms was
diverted to the company, namely, M/s. Superior Crafts Private Ltd. The
assets and funds of the partnership firms had also been siphoned of
and

transferred

OMP No. 4-2007

to

the

said

company

which

was

under

the

Page No. 4 of 19

management and control of the appellants.
interim measures of protection.

Respondents sought

Further grievance of the respondents

was that after taking over the entire working of the firms, the
appellants were withdrawing large sums of money in cash or through
false expenses in books. All accounts in the banks were cleaned up
regularly by the appellants and no money is left in the bank accounts
of the firm. It was being done to minimise the profits in order not to
share the profits with the respondents.
8.

It appears that there is not much dispute about the fact

that the businesses of the three partnership firms were in fact
transferred to M/s. Superior Crafts Private Ltd. While it is the case of
the appellants that the said transfer of business was with the consent
of the respondents, this position is denied by the respondents.

In its

order dated 16th January, 2006, this Court after discussing the facts
brought on record by the parties observed: “From the aforesaid
submissions and material on record the admitted position is that the
assets of the partnership firm are being utilised by the company. It
also cannot be disputed that though the petitioner has 50%
shareholding in the partnership firm, the shareholding of the petitioner
and his family members is 30%.... Therefore, due to this diversion, if
not permissible, the petitioner may suffer.

It also cannot be denied

that normally, without the consent of the partners, there could not
have been diversion of the partnership business into the company.”

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 5 of 19

9.

Since the appellants disputed that the diversion of business

was unilateral and contended that it was consensual, the Court left this
aspect to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. In order to ensure that
during the Arbitral proceedings the properties of the partnership firms
are not allowed to be wasted and the appellants

do not act in a

manner which prejudicially affect the respondents in case respondent
ultimately succeeds in the arbitration, this court after discussing the
various interim protections granted to the respondent

in different

proceedings, held as follows:

10.

“By this order I have not approved the diversion of
partnership business, assets and workers to the
company. I have left to the learned arbitrator to take
holistic view of the matter and give further directions
and pass any appropriate orders or interim award,
including under Section 17 of the Act. The whole
idea is to protect the interest of the petitioner and at
the same time to ensure that before the matter is
thrashed out, the respondent or the company's
interest also does not suffer in the process.”
In the aforesaid background, respondents moved the

Arbitral Tribunal by filing IA - C/4 being an application under Section 17
of the Act.

Respondents sought directions/interim relief to withdraw

50% of their capital and share of profits in the three partnership firms
and the family held company namely, M/s. Superior Crafts Private Ltd.
11.

The Arbitral Tribunal, after considering the facts and

record, passed the following interim directions :
“In view of the above said state of affairs and,
in particular, keeping in view the fact that the
Claimants are out of control of business, it
OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 6 of 19

will be reasonable to grant them some
interim relief.
Mr. Mata, the Ld. Senior
Counsel for the Claimants, during the course
of hearing, pressed the claim of the
Claimants at this stage being confined to
permitting withdrawal to the extent of Rs.1
crore and being allowed interest on the
balance left in the capital accounts @ 18%
per annum in the light of Clause 10 of the
partnership deeds, in respect of the
partnership firms.
It is hereby directed as under:(i) The Respondents no.1 and 2 shall release
an amount of Rs.1 crore to the Claimants in
four equal installments of Rs.25,00,000/each, payable in the first week of every
next four calender months, beginning with
first week of December 2006;
(ii)On the balance amount of capital as
reflected in the final accounts on
31.03.2005, the Claimants shall be paid
interest by the Respondents calculated @
18% per annum.
(iii)The amount so paid shall be available for
adjustment consistently with the final
award.
The above said is only an interim order
based on considerations which appear
prima-facie and is not in any manner
intended to be a reflection or expression of
opinion on the merits of the case..”
12.

Learned counsel for the appellant assails the order dated

16th November, 2006 passed by the Arbitral Tribunal, primarily, on the
ground that the said order is contrary to Section 48 of the Indian
Partnership Act. The submission is that the claim before the Arbitral

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 7 of 19

Tribunal is for dissolution of the partnership businesses between the
parties and unless the accounts are taken and all the debts and
liabilities of the firms are settled, no partner can take priority in
respect of his claims. He further submits that the interim directions
issued by the Arbitral Tribunal, in fact, tantamount to partially granting
final relief. He submits that before the Arbitral Tribunal, the certificate
issued by the Chartered Accountants M/s.

Ashok Jain Aggarwal and

Company was filed which stated that as on 30th September, 2006, the
total liabilities of the three partnership firms and the company M/s.
Superior Crafts Private Limited was over Rs. 50 crores.

Learned

counsel further submits that until and unless accounts are taken, the
debts and liabilities as indicated above are settled, no direction could
have been issued to the appellants to pay a sum of Rs.1 crore to the
respondents and to order the grant of interest at the rate of 18% per
annum on the capital of the respondents invested in the said
partnership firms. It was also argued that the claim for interest @ 18%
per annum on the capital of the respondents invested in the said
partnership firms had not even been made by the respondents, yet the
same has allowed by the Arbitral Tribunal.

By passing the interim

direction, the Arbitral Tribunal had partially granted to the respondents
what they had claimed as a final relief. He also relied upon Addanki
Narayanappa & Another Vs. Bhaskara Krishnappa (dead) and
thereafter his heirs & others AIR 1966 SC 1300, Mt. Nag Kuer

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 8 of 19

Vs. Sham Lal Sahu & others AIR 1925 P.C. 257, and S.V.
Chandra Pandian & others Vs. Sivalinga Nadar & others
(1993)1 SCC 589.
13.

To butteress

the argument that the claim before the

Arbitral Tribunal was for the dissolution of the partnership firms,
learned counsel for the appellant referred to various observations of
the Arbitral Tribunal.
14.

On the other hand, learned Senior counsel for the

respondents Mr. Neeraj Kaul,

who appeared on Caveat, at the

threshold submitted that the scope of interference by this Court, with
the interim directions issued by the Arbitral Tribunal is limited.

He

submitted that if the view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal is a possible
view, the same should not be interfered with by the Court. Even if an
error is committed by the Arbitral Tribunal while acting with in its
jurisdiction, the Court should not interfere with the directions issued by
the Arbitral Tribunal.

In support of his aforesaid submissions, learned

counsel for the respondent relied on Aeroson International Limited
Vs. Union of India and Anrs. (1999) 9 SSC 449, Bharat Cocking
Coal Limited Vs. Annapurna Construction (2003)8 SSC 154 and
Indu Engineering and Textiles Limited Vs. Delhi Development
Authority (2001)5 SSC 691.
15.

He further submitted that the claim before the Arbitral

Tribunal made by the respondents was not a claim for dissolution of

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 9 of 19

partnership firms. In fact it was the appellants who had argued before
the Tribunal that the claim made by the respondents should be treated
as a claim for dissolution of the partnership firms. Learned counsel for
the respondent further submits that bare perusal of the claims made
by the respondents before the Arbitral Tribunal would show that the
respondents have never sought dissolution of the partnership firms or
the corporate entity Superior Crafts Private Limited.

He referred to

Clause (a) of claim no.1, whereby the respondents had claimed 50%
beneficial interest and/or ownership right in the businesses of the three
partnership firms and the corporate entity viz. Superior Crafts Private
Limited. He further submits that the partnership firms had never been
dissolved and no dissolution had been sought by either party.

He

submitted that the appellants for the first time, in their reply to the
statement of claims filed before the Arbitral Tribunal stated that the
Arbitral Tribunal may treat the claimant’s notice dated 26th July, 2005
invoking the Arbitration Clause as a notice of dissolution in respect of
the firms M/s. Superior Crafts and M/s. Supreme Export (India) and that
the notice dated 8th August, 2005 of the appellants in respect of the
partnership firm Superior Crafts (India) may be treated as a notice of
dissolution of the said firm.

In the alternative, the appellants

requested the Arbitral Tribunal to treat their reply to the statement of
claim as a notice of dissolution of partnership firms.

Learned counsel

submitted that the so-called notices of dissolution did not have the

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 10 of 19

effect of dissolving the partnership firms.

He further submitted that

the appellants have not sought any relief before the Arbitral Tribunal
for dissolution of the partnership firms.
judgment reported as

He placed reliance on the

Banarasi Das Vs. Kanshi Ram, AIR 1963

Supreme Court 1165 and on the decision of the High Court of
Bombay

in

Dhulia-Amalner

Motor

Transport

Limited

Vs.

Raychand Roopsi Dharamsi and Ors. AIR 1952 Bom. 337.
16.

He strongly relied upon the admitted position recorded by

this Court in its order dated 16th January, 2006 that the assets of the
partnership firms were being utilized by the company Superior Crafts
Private Limited and also to the observations made by this Court that
the Arbitral Tribunal should take a holistic view of the matter while
issuing further directions, including under Section 17 of the Act. He
submits that the Arbitral Tribunal has taken a holistic view while
issuing the interim direction under challenge. The Tribunal had noticed
that in the year 2004-05 the total sales were to the tune of Rs.60
crores while the profits had gradually risen to more than 3 crores in the
year 2002-03 and stood at Rs.1.13 crores in the year 2003-04. These
figures did not include the profits of Superior Crafts Private Limited.
The capital accounts for the year ending 31.3.2005 of the firm Superior
Crafts showed that the capital invested by the appellant no. 1 was
Rs.1,75,94,920/- while that invested by respondent no. 1 was
Rs.3,40,42,976/-. This shows that even though the profits of this firm

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 11 of 19

were agreed to be shared equally, the capital investment of the
respondent no. 1, Ashwani Kumar Chachra, was nearly twice as much
as that of appellant no.1. In M/s. Superior Craft (India) while appellant
no. 2 had withdrawn an amount of Rs.28,95,849/- in the year 2004-05,
the withdrawals of respondent no. 1 was a meager amount of
Rs.4,76,109/-.

In M/s. Supreme Exports (India) as on 31.3.2005, the

capital account of appellant no. 1 stood at Rs.54,40,071/- while that of
respondent no.2 was Rs.33,87,057/-.
17.

Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that taking

into account the aforesaid position with regard to capital investments
and withdrawals made by the appellants and the respondents
respectively, the Arbitral Tribunal had on equitable consideration
directed payment of the amount of Rs. 1 crore to the respondents
apart from granting interest on the capital investment at the rate of
18% per annum, particularly, in view of the fact that the respondents
were completely ousted from the business which had been transferred
to M/s. Superior Crafts Private Limited. It was further submitted that
while it was recorded in the order passed by this Court on 16 th January,
2006 that the shareholding of the respondents in the said company
was to the tune of 30%, the appellants were now contending that the
shareholding of the respondent was only 2%. This further showed the
intent of the appellants to deprive the respondents of their fair share in
the businesses being run in partnership as well as through their closely

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 12 of 19

held company.
18.

In

his

rejoinder,

learned

counsel

for

the

appellant

submitted that the respondents had made a claim for a liquidated
amount, which itself amounted to a claim for dissolution of the
partnership firms and the respondents were not right in now
contending that they were not claiming dissolution of the partnership
firms.
19.

In my opinion, the issue raised by the parties with regard to

the fact whether the three partnership firms stand dissolved or not, or,
whether the claim before the Arbitral Tribunal is for dissolution of the
partnership firms and businesses or not, are issues which are to be
determined by the arbitral tribunal and it is not necessary for me, at
this stage even to take a prima facie view on these issues, since, in my
opinion they are not relevant to decide the present appeal. This is so
because, in my opinion, the argument of the appellants based on
Sections 48 and 46 of The Indian Partnership Act, 1932, is itself
misplaced. Even if it were to be assumed that, in fact, the respondents
had sought dissolution of the partnership firms and businesses, in my
view the said provisions of The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 do not
come in the way of the Arbitral Tribunal in issuing interim direction of
the kind that it did.
20.

Section 48 of The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 states that

in settling the accounts of a firm after dissolution, various claims are to

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 13 of 19

be settled in the order of priority as detailed therein. The settlement of
accounts of the firm after dissolution dealt with in Section 48 is the
final settlement of accounts between the parties.
21.

In Saligram Ruplal Khanna and another Vs. Kanwar

Rajnath, AIR 1974 SC 1094, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
even after dissolution of a partnership firm, the mutual rights and
obligations of the partners continue, notwithstanding the dissolution in
so far as it is necessary to wind up affairs of the firm and to complete
the transaction begun, but unfinished at the time of dissolution. This is
so provided in Section 47 of The Indian Partnership Act, 1932. While
dealing with Section 47 of

The Indian Partnership Act, 1932, the

Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the word “transaction” in Section 47
refers not merely to commercial transaction of purchase and sale but
would include also all other matters relating to the affairs of the
partnership. The Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows :“The proposition, in our opinion, cannot be
disputed
that
after
dissolution,
the
partnership subsists merely for the purpose of
completing pending transactions, winding up
the business, and adjusting the rights of the
partners; and for these purposes, and these
only, the authority, rights and obligations of
the partners continue.” (emphasis added)
22.

In my view, merely because a partnership firm has been

dissolved, it does not preclude the erstwhile partners from dealing with
the partnership assets, or withdrawing from the bank accounts held in
the name of the partnership firm before the final settlement of
OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 14 of 19

accounts takes place under Section 48 of The Indian Partnership Act,
1932.
23.

The question that arises for consideration is; Has the

Arbitral Tribunal, while passing the interim directions, proceeded under
Section 48 of The Indian Partnership Act, 1932?
24.

In my opinion, the answer is plainly in the negative. The

stage for settlement of accounts has not yet arrived. The arbitration
proceedings are still at a preliminary stage. If at the stage of settling
the final accounts the priority set out in Section 48 for settlement of
debts, liabilities and claims were to be ignored or breached, then
certainly it could be questioned, but that is not the case here.

The

interim direction issued by the Arbitral Tribunal for payment of Rs.1
crore to the respondents, does not tantamount to “paying to each
partner rateably

what is due to him from the firm for advances as

distinct from capital” or “paying to each partner rateably assets due to
him on account of capital” or “dividing the residue among the partners
in proportion in which they were entitled to share profits.”
25.

Mere direction to make payment of Rs.1 crore under an

interim direction to the respondents does not and cannot be taken to
mean that the rights of the partners are being finally determined. Each
partner in the partnership firms would continue to be liable in respect
of debts and liabilities owed to third parties to the fullest extent, for the
debts and liabilities incurred prior to dissolution, and, subject to Section

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 15 of 19

47 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, in respect of liabilities incurred
even thereafter. Therefore, merely to say that there are outstanding
liabilities to the tune of Rs.50 crore owed by the three partnership firms
and the closely held private limited company is neither here nor there.
The amount directed to be paid to the Respondents would also be
adjustable at the time of final settlement of accounts.
26.

The decisions relied upon by the appellants also, to my

mind, do not apply in the facts of the present case.
Narayanappa

(supra)

lays

down the

general

Addanki

principal

that a

partnership firm has no legal existence, the partnership property vests
in all the partners and in that sense every partner has a interest in the
property of the partnership firm.

During the subsistence of the

partnership, however, no partner can deal with any portion of the
property as his own. He cannot assign his interest in a specific item of
the partnership property to anyone. His right is to obtain such profits,
if any, as fall to his share from time to time and upon the dissolution of
the firm to a share in the assets of the firm which remains after
satisfying the liabilities set out in Clause (a) and sub-Clauses (i), (ii) and
(iii) of Clause (b) of Section 48.

It sets out the passage from the

Lindley on Partnership which states: “what is meant by the share of a
partner is his proportion of the partnership assets after they had been
all realised and converted into money, and all the partnership debts
and liabilities have been paid and discharged.” It also refers to a Full

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 16 of 19

Bench decision in Ajudhia Pershad Ram Pershad VS. Sham
Sunder AIR 1947 Lahore 13 which inter alia states “ It is obvious
that the Act contemplates complete liquidation of the assets of the
partnership as a preliminary to the settlement of the accounts between
the partners upon dissolution of the firm and it will, therefore, be
correct to say that, for the purposes of the Indian Partnership Act, and
irrespective of any mutual agreement between the partners, the share
of each partner is, in the words of Lindley: “his proportion of the
partnership assets after they had been all realised and converted into
money, and all partnership debts and liabilities have been paid and
discharged.”
27.

As aforesaid, the Arbitral Tribunal has not yet determined

the share of the partners of either of the three firms before it.
Moreover, the settlement of accounts between the partners is yet to
take place. What has been directed to be paid by the Arbitral Tribunal
to the respondents is not their determined share.

It is an amount

determined by the Arbitral Tribunal on equitable considerations taking
into account the earnings, profitability and capital investments made
by the partners in the three partnership firms and also the fact that the
respondents have been completely ousted from business by the
appellants. It is an order passed to equitably, but not finally adjust the
rights of the partners.
28.

Mr. Nag Kuer (supra) was a case where the Privy Counsel

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 17 of 19

was dealing with a final decree passed by a Court. The Privy Counsel
found that the distribution of assets was improper and not in
accordance with the law.
29.

S. V. Chandra Pandian (supra) was a case where once

again the Supreme Court laid down the general principles applicable to
dissolution of partnership firm. It does not deal with a situation like the
present where, by an interim direction on equitable considerations, one
of the partners has been directed to pay certain amounts to the other.
30.

In my view, learned counsel for the respondent is right in

contending that the scope of interference by a court in an interim
direction issued by an Arbitral Tribunal is also limited.

The Arbitral

Tribunal has taken an equitable view taking into account the status of
capital investment of the two groups, their respective withdrawals, the
profits earned by the firms in the past few years and the fact that
admittedly the businesses of the three partnership firms have been
brought into the fold of the closely held private limited company
wherein the appellants have a majority and they claim majority
shareholding of 98% shares (their claim of shareholding before this
court in the earlier proceedings was 70%).
31.

In view of the aforesaid discussion, I see no merit in the

present appeal. I hold that the interim directions issued by the Arbitral
Tribunal are not contrary to law and, in particular, to Sections 48 and
46 of

The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or to the agreement of the

OMP No. 4-2007

Page No. 18 of 19

parties.

The grant of interest on the capital investment of the

respondents is as per the partnership deed executed between the
parties.

The interim directions issued by the Arbitral Tribunal in the

facts of the case, are fair, reasonable and equitable. I, therefore, reject
the present appeal with costs of Rs. 25,000/-.

February 01, 2007
aruna/spg

OMP No. 4-2007

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

Page No. 19 of 19

