HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision:3rd September, 2007
W.P ( C) No.8650/2003
#Sub Inspector Om Prakash
.....Petitioner
!
Through: Ms. Avnish Ahlawat & Ms.Latika
Chaudhary, Advocates
versus
$ UOI & Ors.
^

..... Respondent
Through: Mr.V.K. Diwan, Advocate

*CORAM:
HON”BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

A.K.SIKRI, J.
1.
This is the second round of litigation as far as we are
concerned.

Departmental Enquiry

was

held

against

the

petitioner vide chargesheet dated 21.11.94. The allegation was

WP(C) No.8650/2003

page 1 of 9

that while working as Clearing Officer in departure Left Wing in
shift 'B' at IGI Airport, the petitioner gave immigration clearance
to one passenger named Ajay Pal Singh after demanding and
accepting Rs.100 from him. The said passenger had submitted
his complaint on the suggestions/complaint card before leaving
IGI Airport, New Delhi by flight no. AC-897 which was bound for
Vancouver, Canada.

The Enquiry Officer after conducting the

enquiry recorded his finding to the effect that charges against
the petitioner were not proved. However, disciplinary authority
differed with the same. Along with the enquiry report, note of
disagreement was served upon the petitioner.

Petitioner

submitted his reply thereto and after considering the same,
detailed order dated 28th July, 1995 was passed against the
petitioner imposing upon him the punishment of forfeiture of 3
years of approved service and reducing the pay for a period of 3
years with the stipulation that the petitioner would not earn
increment throughout the period of reduction and It will also
affect

the future increments.

Petitioner submitted his appeal

which was dismissed vide order dated 17.5.1996.

After

exhausting the statutory remedies, petitioner filed OA No.
1764/1996 before the Tribunal challenging the impugned
punishment orders and the order passed by the Appellate
WP(C) No.8650/2003

page 2 of 9

Authority.
2.

This petition was dismissed by the learned Tribunal,

vide judgment dated 7th March, 2000.

Feeling aggrieved,

petitioner preferred Writ Petition in this Court alleging that on
the day when his application was heard by the Tribunal there
was a strike by the lawyers and therefore lawyer of the petitioner
could not appear and advance arguments. It was also submitted
that the Tribunal had proceeded to consider the claim ignoring
the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Punjab
National Bank vs. Kunj Behari (1998) 7 SCC 84 and some
other contentions raised in the OA, which were not looked into
by the Tribunal. The Court rejected this plea of the petitioner,
vide order dated 15.4.2000. It was observed that in case the
contentions taken by the petitioner were not considered by the
Tribunal, the appropriate remedy was to file an application for
review. Giving liberty to petitioner to file a Review Petition, Writ
Petition was dismissed.
3.

The petitioner in these circumstances filed Review

Petition which has also been dismissed by the learned Tribunal
vide impugned order dated 21.5.2003.

Challenging these

orders, present petition is preferred by the petitioner.
4.

The main ground on which the order of the Tribunal is

WP(C) No.8650/2003

page 3 of 9

assailed is that the disciplinary authority did not give the
petitioner opportunity of being heard before arriving at the
conclusion that the charges against the petitioner stood proved.
Submission was that in case disciplinary authority was differing
with the Enquiry Officer it was incumbent upon the disciplinary
authority to give tentative note of disagreement and afford an
opportunity to the petitioner to represent against the same and
only thereafter disciplinary authority could arrive at the final
conclusion. It was also submitted that after arriving at his final
conclusion, there was another obligation on the part of the
disciplinary authority to serve the copy of his final findings and
give another opportunity to the petitioner to represent against
the proposed punishment.

Ignoring this the disciplinary

authority passed the orders dated 28th July, 1995 imposing the
punishment upon the petitioner as mentioned above.
5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of this

proposition has referred to the judgment of Supreme Court in
PNB vs. Kunj Behari (supra) which is followed by the Supreme
Court in Lav Nigam vs. Chairman and MD ITI Ltd. and Anr.
2006 (9) SCC 440. It is not in dispute and could not be disputed
even by the learned counsel for the respondent that in case the
disciplinary authority differs from the findings arrived at by the
WP(C) No.8650/2003

page 4 of 9

Enquiry Officer, the disciplinary authority has to record its
tentative reasons on which there was disagreement and at the
same time giving opportunity to the delinquent before it records
its findings. This principal of law is stated in the following terms
by the Supreme Court in Kunj Behari (supra).
“18. Under Regulation - 6 the inquiry proceedings
can be conducted either by an inquiry officer or by
the disciplinary authority itself. When the inquiry is
conducted by the inquiry officer his report is not final
or conclusive and the disciplinary proceedings do not
stand concluded. The disciplinary proceedings stand
concluded with decision of the disciplinary authority.
It is the disciplinary authority which can impose the
penalty and not the inquiry officer. Where the
disciplinary authority itself holds an inquiry, an
opportunity of hearing has to be granted by him.
When the disciplinary authority differs with the view
of the inquiry officer and proposes to come to a
different conclusion, there is no reason as to why an
opportunity of hearing should not be granted. It will
be most unfair and iniquitous that where the charged
officers succeed before the inquiry officer they are
deprived of representing to the disciplinary authority
before that authority differs with the inquiry officer's
report and, while recording a finding of guilt, imposes
punishment on the officer. In our opinion, in any such
situation the charged officer must have an
opportunity to represent before the Disciplinary
Authority before final findings on the charges are
recorded and punishment imposed. This is required
to be done as a part of the first stage of inquiry as
explained in Karunakar's case.
19. The result of the aforesaid discussion would be
that the principles of natural justice have to be read
into Regulation 7(2). As a result thereof whenever
the disciplinary authority disagrees with the inquiry
authority on any article of charge, then before it
records its own findings on such charge, it must
record its tentative reasons for such disagreement
WP(C) No.8650/2003

page 5 of 9

and give to the delinquent officer an opportunity to
represent before it records its findings. The report of
the inquiry officer containing its findings will have to
be conveyed and the delinquent officer will have an
opportunity to persuade the disciplinary authority to
accept the favourable conclusion of the inquiry
officer. The principles of natural justice, as we have
already observed, require the authority, which has to
take a final decision and can impose a penalty, to
give an opportunity to the officer charged of
misconduct to file a representation before the
disciplinary authority records its findings on the
charges framed against the officer.”

6.

It is, however, to be seen as to whether such an

opportunity was given to the petitioner in the instant case or not.
We find from the record that the disciplinary authority had
served notice dated 30th May, 1995 upon the petitioner in which
he has referred to the enquiry conducted against the petitioner
and the report of the Enquiry Officer as also given the reasons as
to why disciplinary authority was not inclined to agree with the
findings of the Enquiry Officer.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner does not dispute

service of this notice and reply dated 5th July, 1995 given by the
petitioner thereto.

Her grievance is to the manner the

disciplinary authority recorded his findings finally in the said
notice, which, according to her were as good as final, and
therefore it was not in the nature of the show-cause notice.
8.

We have gone through the said notice dated 30th May,

WP(C) No.8650/2003

page 6 of 9

1995 and do not agree with the aforesaid submissions of the
learned counsel for the petitioner. No doubt, after recording the
findings of the Enquiry Officer, the disciplinary authority
proceeds with these remarks that it does not agree with the
Enquiry Officer for the reasons stated therein. After spelling out
his reasons, the last para of this notice reads as under :-

9.

“The findings of the EO is enclosed herewith. I,
S.K. Jain, Dy. Commissioner of Police/FRRO, New
Delhi being the Disciplinary Authority of the
instant delinquent employee will take a suitable
decision after considering all the facts
mentioned above.
Is, SI Om Prakash No.
1273/D
wishes
to
make
any
representation/submission he can do so in
writing to the undersigned within 15 days from
the date of receipt of this communication. He is
also at liberty to say anything in his defence in
the OR of the undersigned on the date, so fixed
on his request.”
The apt conclusion that can be drawn from above

extract is that the disciplinary authority had mentioned that he
would pass suitable decision after considering all the facts and
the representation of the petitioner for which petitioner was
given 15 days' time from the date of receipt of the said
communication. Thus the disciplinary authority had not taken a
final decision and the reasons given because of which he chose
to agree with the Enquiry Officer were his tentative reasons.
This becomes further clear from the reply which is furnished by

WP(C) No.8650/2003

page 7 of 9

the petitioner to this notice. Perusal of this reply would indicate
that the petitioner adverted to those reasons and also heavily
relied upon the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and
pleaded before the disciplinary authority that the findings of the
Enquiry Officer were correct and should be accepted.
10.

Thereafter, in the order dated 28th July, 1995 each of

the contentions raised by the petitioner in his reply to the notice
has been considered but it did not find favour with the
disciplinary authority.
petitioner

was

Therefore, we are of the view that the

given

adequate

opportunity

to

make

representation which was duly considered by the disciplinary
authority before passing the final orders and the proceeddure
which were required to be followed in terms of Kunj Behari
(supra) have been followed in this case.
11.

It was not necessary to afford any further opportunity

of hearing to the petitioner as contented by the learned counsel
for the petitioner.

This aspect stands concluded by another

judgment in the case of State of Rajasthan vs. M.C. Saxena
1998 (1) LLJ 218.
12.

We are, therefore, of the opinion that the matter does

WP(C) No.8650/2003

page 8 of 9

not call for any interference in exercise of our power of judicial
review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
This writ petition is accordingly dismissed.

A.K.SIKRI, J.

September 03, 2007
aruna

WP(C) No.8650/2003

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

page 9 of 9

