*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

%

Date of Decision: 03.01.2008

#
^

Smt. Sona Devi

..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Mayank Goel, Advocate
versus

!

M/s. Karamvir Aggarwal and Sons
Through: None.

.....Respondents

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*
1.

Despite the matter being shown on the

Regular

Board, none has appeared for the Respondent.
2.

This

Revision

Petition

is

directed

against

the

judgment dated 31st August 2005 passed by the Additional Rent
Controller, Karkardooma, Delhi, whereby the Petition filed by the
Petitioner herein under Section 14D of the Delhi Rent Control Act

R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 1 of 13

(The Act), has been dismissed.
3.

The case of the Petitioner was that she was the

owner of property bearing No. 477-478, Mohalla Teliwara,
Shahdara, Delhi. One big room situated on the Ground Floor
forming part of the said property was let out to the Respondent @
Rs.50/- per month excluding other charges in the year 1983 for
running a shop. It is this premises in respect of which the eviction
Petition was preferred.
4.

The husband of the Petitioner died on 11.11.1989.

When she became a widow, she was 61 years of age and at the
time of the filing of the Eviction Petition No.502/2000, she was
about 72 years of age. She filed the Petition on the ground that
she bonafide require the premises let out, for her residence and
for the residence of her family members, dependent upon her.
She used to live earlier in House No.201, Mohalla Gurhai,
Shahdara, Delhi, which was an ancestral house of her husband
during the lifetime of the husband, with her family consisting of
her husband, herself, her four sons out of which the eldest son
was married and had two children. The entire family was living in
one room measuring 12'-4” x 8'-2” and another room measuring
7'-8” x 13'-5” and a Duchhatti on mezzanine floor measuring 9'-3”
x 6'-3”. The room measuring 7'-8” x 13'-5” was also being used as
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 2 of 13

kitchen and passage. Since that accommodation was grossly
inadequate for her requirement, she had filed an Eviction petition
for eviction of her tenant one Shri Rama Shanker, who was in
possession of one room, one kitchen, one tin shed etc. situated on
the first floor of the property No.477-478, Teliwara, Shahdara,
Delhi under Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act on
15.4.1981 and eviction order was passed on 17.10.1990 on the
ground of bonafide requirement in favour of the Petitioner. She
was able to obtain the possession after executing the eviction
order in September 1991. She could not immediately occupy the
premises since it was found to be unsafe. Her endeavour to repair
the premises resulted in litigation with the Respondent which was
ultimately compromised and repair works were undertaken by the
Respondent in terms of the compromise. The accommodation on
the First Floor which is now in occupation of the Petitioner, her
married son Rakesh Kumar, who was about 28 years of age, his
wife and one son, was not sufficient, since it consisted of one
room, kitchen and bathroom and she required the premises on
the Ground Floor consisting of one room for her residence and
the residence of his family.
5.

The petition was contested by Respondents on

various grounds. While dismissing the petition one of the factors
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 3 of 13

that has swayed with the learned ARC is the fact that the
Petitioner did not personally appear before the court to depose.
Her son Rajinder Kumar had appeared as a witness and had
stated that presently the Petitioner was residing on the First Floor
of the property bearing No. 477-478, Teliwara, Shahdara, Delhi
which is situated over the tenanted premises and prior to that she
was residing at 201, Mohalla Gurhai, Shahdara, Delhi, i.e., a
double storied house in which there are four rooms, two small
rooms, latrine, bathroom and kitchen on the Ground Floor and
four rooms and a kitchen on the First Floor. The said witness has
also stated that the said house belongs not only to the Petitioner
but also the other three uncles of the witness, namely, Ram
Prakash, Jai Prakash and Om Prakash. The Petitioner's family was
in possession of two rooms on the Ground Floor and Duchhatti on
the mezzanine floor of the said property and after the demise of
the father of the witness, i.e., husband of the Petitioner, the
Petitioner's family had become the owner of the portion, which
was marked and Ex.PW-1/3. The portions in occupation of his
uncles Ram Prakash,Jai Prakash and Om Prakash were also
disclosed by the said witness. He also deposed with regard to the
residence of his brother Ashok, his wife and two sons in property
bearing No.201.
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

He stated that he along with his family was
Page 4 of 13

occupying the first and second floors of the property bearing No.
322, Old Post Office Street, Shahdara, Delhi, which is built upon
the land measuring 25 sq.yds consisting of Ground Floor, First
Floor and Second Floor and one Mumti on the Third floor.

The

accommodation on the first and the second floor with him
consisted of one living room, one bed room, kitchen. His family
consisted of himself and his wife, one son aged 24 years and
three daughters aged 21, 18 and 16 years.

The second floor

consisted of two rooms, out of which one was being used

as

latrine cum bathroom and the other room was with Ramesh
Chand wherein he kept his household goods. He stated that his
mother, i.e., the Petitioner had no other accommodation with her
where she could reside. He explained the conduct of his mother
not stepping into the witness box by stating that she was hard of
hearing.
6.

The learned Additional Rent Controller observed that

the question before the court is as to whether the Petitioner, who
had already sought eviction on the ground of bona fide
requirement under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act previously from the
court in respect of the First Floor portion, could again come to the
court under Section 14D of the Act in respect of Ground Floor
portion. However, she does not answer this question specifically.
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 5 of 13

In my view, there is no impediment in invoking and maintaining
two petitions, one under Section 14(1)(e) in respect of one tenant
and thereafter maintaining another petition under Section 14D in
respect of other tenant in case the landlord is able to establish the
necessary ingredients relevant for invoking the said provisions of
law. On a reading of section 14D it is clear that it is irrelevant as
to whether the premises, which is let out by her or by her
husband in respect of which she has filed the Eviction petition
have not been let only for residential purpose. Even if the purpose
of letting is other than residential, the petition under Section 14D
could be maintained provided that the widow is able to establish
that the said premises is capable of being used by her for her own
residence or for the residence of her family.

It has come on

record in evidence that the said premises could be used as a
residence in conjunction with the premises in her occupation on
the First Floor, inasmuch as, the First Floor has, apart from one
room, also as a kitchen and a bathroom. Merely because there
was no separate bathroom or kitchen on the Ground Floor, is no
ground to conclude that the tenanted premises on the Ground
Floor which consisted of only one room could not be used as a
residence. The requirement of law is not that the widow should
establish that the premises in respect of which she is seeking
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 6 of 13

eviction under Section 14D, should by itself independently be
capable of being used as residence. Considering the fact that the
Petitioner was nearly 72 years of age, it is reasonable to assume
that she needs the assistance and care of her sons and their
family and she cannot be expected to live all by herself. It is
apparent from para 26 of the impugned order itself that the case
of the Petitioner was that she could not live alone in the premises
being more than 72 years of age. Considering the fact that she,
alongwith her married son, his wife and one grand son were in
occupation of only one room accommodation on the First Floor, it
cannot be said that the need projected by the Petitioner was not
bonafide or was whimsical and fanciful. Merely because the
Petitioner did not appear as a witness, to my mind, does not disentitle her from seeking eviction if her case is otherwise duly
proved on record. The purpose of production of witness is to bring
before the court the relevant evidence. That evidence can be led
by any witness who has personal knowledge of the facts deposed
by him.
7.

It is not for the court to determine which particular

premises the widow landlady may chose to occupy. It was
explained by the Petitioner that the ancestral house was in joint
ownership and occupation of not only by her family but also that
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 7 of 13

of her three other brother-in-laws. PW-1, Rajinder Kumar had
clearly deposed with regard to the extent of accommodation
available in the ancestral house situated at 201, Mohalla Gurahai,
Shahdara, Delhi and that the family is in occupation of two rooms
on the Ground Floor and Duchhatti on the mezzanine floor. He has
stated that his brother Ashok, his wife and his two sons, aged 10
and 8 years and his another brother Ramesh, were residing in the
portion of the said premises which fell to their branch of the
family. The witness had even identified separate rooms in
occupation of the different members of the family. Therefore, it
could not be said that the Petitioner has created an artificial
scarcity and has filed the present petition for eviction while not
utilizing accommodation otherwise available to her and her
family.
8.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner has relied on S.N.

Kapoor (D) by his LRs., v. Basant Lal Khatri and others,
AIR 2002 SC 171, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court quoted
from its earlier decision in 1995 Sup. (3) SCC 172 and held as
follows:
“"we are of the view that under Section
14D, the tenant has practically no defence
whatever. All that has to be proved under
the said Section extracted above are-(i) that
the landlady is a widow and (ii) the
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 8 of 13

premises are required by her for her own
residence". The Court further observed that
the fact that she is living with her daughter
or any other person, is no ground to say
that the premises in question is not
required for her residence. So far as Section
14(1)(e) is concerned, the bona fide nature
of the requirement need be established for
getting an order of eviction and even in the
absence of a specific stipulation in this
regard this Court, in order to make the
enabling power under Section 14D to be
more reasonable read into it also the need
to substantiate that the request of the
widow to recover possession of the
premises for her own residence should be
bona fie. The common determining factor
being the "Bona fides" in both cases and
the landlady seeks an adjudication on the
basis of material already on record there
should be no impediment for the Authorities
Courts functioning even under the Act to
permit such conversion of alteration and
consider the claims made under the altered
provision of law. As a matter of fact
subsequent developments and altered
circumstances were held to be relevant in
adjudging the nature and character of the
claim made, ate all stages of the
proceedings.”
9.

In

that

case,

the

court

was

considering

the

requirement of a widow, who was otherwise residing at Bhopal
with one of her sons and his family. While dealing with the said
issue, the Hon'ble Apex Court observed as under:
“The need felt by the landlady to do so
does appear to be sincere and honest and
not a mere pretence only to evict the
tenant. No material has been brought on
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 9 of 13

record and no proof has bene made by the
tenant by any positive material that it is
neither genuine nor bona fide or reasonable
but a mere excuse to get rid of the tenant.
Though the choice or proclaimed need
cannot be whimsical or merely fanciful yet
certain amount of discretion has to be
allowed in favour of the landlady too and
courts should not also impose its own
wisdom forcibly upon the landlady to
arrange her own affairs, according to their
own perception carried away only by the
interests or hardship of the tenant and
inconvenience that may result to him in
passing an order of eviction. In adjudging
the claim under Section 14D what is
required to be substantiated is that the
landlady is a widow and that she wants the
premises for her own residence and that the
claim by her is bona fide and not a feigned
one. So far as a claim under Section
14(1)(e) is concerned the very requirement
has to be shown not only to be bona fide
but the move of the landlord/landlady to
seek the eviction of the tenant must be
genuine. As far as the claim under Section
14D is concerned, the widow-landlady's
need for her own residence is recognized
statutorily to be a valid one, but the move
or request made to avail of the special
benefit must be shown to be a bona fide
and nota a pretext only to get rid of the
tenant. Viewed in the context of the
indisputable facts on record that the widow
has no other premises of her own at New
Delhi and that she wants to reside away
from Bhopal and aloof from her daughter
-in-law are by themselves sufficient to
sustain her claim. The rejection of the claim
seems
to
be
on
hyper
technical
appreciation of the materials on record and
does not constitute a real, proper and
effective consideration at all. Therefore,
viewed form any angle we find the need
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 10 of 13

and requirement of the appellant-landlady
to be bona fide and consequently an order
of eviction shall follow. We allow the claim
of the landlady for eviction and the appeal
against the order dated 3.7.2000 shall
stand allowed.”
10.

In the present case, the Respondent has not been

able to establish that the claim of the Petitioner was not genuine
or was an artificially created necessity. Learned counsel for the
Petitioner has also relied on the decision of this court in 52 (1993)
DLT 83, Navneet Rai v. Narinder Kaur, wherein this court has
observed as follows:
“As held in P.P.Kapur's case (supra) what is
important is whether the premises in
question after reversion to the landlady
could or could not be used for residential
purposes. As stated above, though let out
for commercial purposes, the premises in
question, being a part of the whole house
and
connected
therewith
through
intervening doors can well be used for
residential pur-poses. However, if the
premises in question was the only space
owned and sought to be got vacated and
used independently for residence by the
respondent, it could perhaps be said that
the premises in question having been built
and let out for commercial purposes were
not covered by section 14D of the Act as
the same could not be used for residential
purposes after the same are vacated by the
petitioner. But the present case is entirely
different. It is not that after eviction of the
petitioner, it is only the premises in
question which will be available to the
respondent for residence. She is already in
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 11 of 13

occupation of the remaining adjoinng
connected portion of the house, under use
by her as residence which, as found by the
learned Rent Controller, is not sufficient for
her residential requirement.”
11.

This case is very similar to the one in hand. To

contend that the accommodation available at the ancestral house
is not reasonably suitable accommodation in view of the fact that
it is already in occupation of two of her sons and his family, the
Petitioner relies on AIR 2001 SC 522, M.A. Prabhakar v. Rajiv
Singal, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the
suitability of alternative accommodation has to be seen from the
convenience of the landlord and his family members and on the
basis of the totality of the circumstances including their
profession, fashion, style of living, habits and background.
12.

In view of my aforesaid discussion, I find that the

impugned order passed by learned Additional Rent Controller is
laconic and the learned Additional Rent Controller has failed to
appreciate the facts of the case as well as the law applicable
thereto. The learned ARC has misdirected herself in law. I also
find that the Petitioner has been able to make out a case for
eviction of the Respondent under Section 14D of the Act.
Accordingly, I set aside the impugned order dated 30th August
2005 passed by learned Additional Rent Controller in Eviction
R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 12 of 13

Case No.502/2000 and pass an eviction order in respect of the
premises in question, namely, Ground Floor portion of the
premises No.477-478, Teliwara, Shahdara, Delhi against the
Respondent. The eviction order shall be executable at the expiry
of two months from today.
13.

With the aforesaid directions, the petition stands

disposed of.

January 03, 2008

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

P.K. BABBAR

R.C. Rev. No.24/2006

Page 13 of 13

