HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004
Judgment reserved on: May 14, 2007
Judgment delivered on: December 04, 2007
#
!

M/s. Kamdhenu Ispat Limited
..... Plaintiff
Through: Mr. Ajay Amitabh Suman
with Mr. Pankaj Kumar
versus

$
^

M/s. Kamdhenu Metal

Through: None

..... Defendant

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this order I propose to dispose of the above suit

filed by the plaintiff seeking the relief of a perpetual injunction
restraining passing off the goods by defendants under the mark
'Kamdhenu Metal', rendition of account of profits, delivery up, etc.

C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 1 of 11

2.

Summons were issued in the prescribed form and

were duly served upon the defendant. However, the defendant
did not take part in the proceedings and the matter was
proceeded ex-parte against him. Ex-parte evidence was led.
Documents were exhibited. Arguments advanced and orders
reserved.

PLAINTIFF'S CONTENTIONS

3.

The plaintiff company which is duly registered under

the Companies Act, 1956, having its registered office at A-1114,
Riico Industrial Area, Phase III, Bhiwadi, Alwar, Rajasthan and
Delhi Office at 5/2, Punjabi Bagh Extension, New Delhi is a public
limited company. The suit has been filed through Mr. Arvind
Gupta, Company Secretary of the plaintiff who has been duly
authorized for the said purpose vide a Board Resolution in his
favour. The plaintiff company in the year 1991 honestly,
bonafidely adopted the trademark / trade name 'Kamdhenu' in
the course of the trade of manufacturing and marketing of Steel
Bars and other allied goods. Plaintiff's products are being

C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 2 of 11

distributed in the major parts of the country. The word
'Kamdhenu' also forms a vital part of its trade name, i.e.,
Kamdhenu Ispat Ltd.

4.

Plaintiff has filed a number of applications under

different classes of Trademarks Act, 1999 for the registration of
the said mark.

5.

The plaintiff also has copyright in the unique stylized

manner alongwith the colour combination, in which the word
'Kamdhenu' is depicted. The same is registered under the
Copyrights Act, 1957. The plaintiff's goods and business under the
said trademark have acquired tremendous goodwill and enviable
reputation in the market. The Plaintiff has built up an extensive
trade thereunder. The plaintiff has spent enormous amount of
money in publicizing the said trademark/trade name through
several modes. As a result, the said trademark and trade name
have acquired secondary meaning which denotes the plaintiff and
its goods exclusively. Thus, the said trademark is a well known
trademark within the meaning of Section 2(1)(ZG) of the

C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 3 of 11

Trademarks Act, 1999. The public at large associates and
identifies the said trademark with the plaintiff and its goods alone.

6.
and

The defendants are engaged in the manufacturing
marketing

of

the

steel

products

including

household

containers under the trademark / trade name 'Kamdhenu Metal'.
Defendant No. 1 appears to be the firm and defendant No. 2 the
person managing the affairs of defendant No. 1. However, the
exact constitution/relation of the defendants is not known.

7.

Towards the end of June, and beginning of July 2004,

the plaintiff came to know that the products of the defendants are
being sold under the trademark / trade name 'Kamdhenu Metal'
identical in depiction as well, to that of the plaintiff.

8.

The goods of the defendants are similar/cognate

goods. The trademark / trade name adopted by them is identical
and deceptively similar to the trademark / trade name that of the
plaintiff in each and every respect including getup, make up and
the artistic manner in which it is depicted. It is also phonetically
similar to the plaintiff's trademark / trade name. Therefore, the
C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 4 of 11

impugned trademark / trade name of the defendant is bound to
cause, deception and confusion in the normal course of business
and has been adopted by the defendant with the sole aim of
riding piggyback on the reputation of the plaintiff. Thus, the
defendants are passing off and enabling others to pass off their
goods and business as that of the plaintiff. The defendants are not
the proprietor of the impugned trademark / trade name and
therefore have no right to adopt to use the same as a trademark /
trade name or in any other manner without the leave, license or
authority of the plaintiff.

9.

The plaintiff through their attorneys addressed a

cease and desist notice dated 14.7.2004 to defendant No. 1
calling upon it to desist from using the said trademark / trade
name. The same was returned with the remarks 'unclaimed'. The
plaintiff launched inquiries in the market about the business
activities of the defendants and received information that the
defendants had recently started using the said trademark / trade
name commercially. The business is being carried out by the
defendant in a clandestine manner without issuing any formal
C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 5 of 11

bills and invoices against the sales being made by them.

10.

The cause of action arose in its favour in the end of

June and beginning of July 2004, when the plaintiff obtained
knowledge of the illegal activities of the defendants. This court
has jurisdiction to try and adjudicate upon the present suit as the
impugned acts of passing off are being committed within the
jurisdiction of this court, as the business is being conducted in
Delhi and other parts of the country in clandestine manner. The
plaintiff has its corporate office at Delhi and the application for
registration of trademark has also been filed in Delhi. Thus,
Section 134 of the Trademarks Act, 1999 is applicable.

DISCUSSION AND DECISION

11.

Since the defendant has failed to appear, the

matter was proceeded with ex-parte and after arguments order
was reserved. However, while preparing the judgment it was
noticed that the affidavit by way of evidence filed by the Plaintiff
was deficient, inasmuch as, ex parte evidence with respect to the
territorial jurisdiction of this court to entertain this suit was not led
C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 6 of 11

and therefore the matter was listed for directions on 31.7.2007.
Pursuant thereto, an additional affidavit by the Plaintiff was filed
on 14th September 2007 taking care of the deficiencies. Since the
matter is ex-parte, I will now proceed to consider the claim of the
Plaintiff on the basis of the ex-parte evidence lead by it.

12.

The Plaintiff has filed its evidence by way of

affidavit as Ex. PW-1/A deposing the facts as narrated in the
plaint. The Plaintiff also proved various documents marked as
Ex.P-1 to Ex.P-4. Ex.P-1 is the document depicting the trademark
of the Plaintiff. The mark KAMDHENU SARIA is depicted in red and
black colour in Capital Letters in English and in the Devnagari
script. It also comprises of a logo with the words “Sampurna
Suraksha ki Guarantee” written in the Roman script and devnagri
script. Ex.P-2 is the trademark/trade name adopted by the
defendant. The depiction of the defendants mark “Kamdhenu
Metal” in Ex. P-2 is in a different font. The Plaintiff's sales figure
for the years 1995-96 to the years 2003-2004 have been
exhibited as Ex.P-3. It is seen that the Plaintiff has sales figures of
over Rs.75 crores in the year 2003-2004 and there has been a
C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 7 of 11

steady growth in the sales from 1995-1996 onwards. By way of
additional affidavit dated 21.7.2006, the Plaintiff has also filed a
copy of the certificates issued by the trademark registry in
respect of the registration of the trademark Kamdhenu in various
classes.

13.

Having gone through the evidence adduced by the

Plaintiff and having perused the marks of the Plaintiff and the
defendant, I am of the opinion that the Plaintiff has made out a
case for grant of permanent injunction, as prayed for. Since the
marks in question are phonetically similar, and the Plaintiff has
been using its mark for the sale of its goods for a considerable
period of time and has acquired goodwill and repute in the
business in the market, therefore the likelihood of confusion and
deception being caused to the public at large cannot be ruled out
and appears to be inevitable. Since the plaintiff has been using
this mark in respect of Steel and Allied products, the use of the
mark by the defendant in respect of Steel Utensils can only lead
an ordinary man to believe that the products have originated from
the plaintiff or otherwise have connection with his business.
C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 8 of 11

14.

I, therefore, pass a decree in favour of the plaintiff,

permanently injuncting and restraining the defendants and their
proprietors/partners, servants, agents, representatives, dealers
and others acting for and on its behalf from infringing the trade
mark of the plaintiff or infringing the copyright of the Plaintiff
contained in the artistic manner in which the said mark is
depicted, or in any manner represent that its goods originate from
the plaintiff or to do anything the exclusive right to do which is
conferred

upon

the

plaintiff

as

the

owner

of

the

trademark/copyright in the said mark. The defendants are further
restrained

from

manufacturing,

selling

offering

for

sale,

advertising, etc., directly or indirectly goods under the trademark
Kamdhenu or any other trademark, which may be desciptively
similar to the plaintiff's mark. I further direct the rendition of
accounts by the defendant. I also award cost of the suit in favour
of the plaintiff and against the defendant.

15.

However, it is noted that though the relief of

rendition of account has been valued for the purposes of the
jurisdiction at Rs.20,00,500/- for the purposes of court fee, it has
C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 9 of 11

been valued at Rs.1,000/- and court fee of Rs.150/- only has been
affixed thereon. The total court fee paid by the plaintiff is only
Rs.300/-. To my mind, the suit has not been properly valued for
the purposes of court fee and adequate court fees has not been
affixed thereon. This Court in Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. vs.
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Executive Association (Regd.) and
others, 130 (2006) DLT 195, deprecated the practice of valuing
the suit for the purpose of pecuniary jurisdiction at higher value
wherein court fees is not affixed accordingly, wherein it was held
that though the fixation of value of the suit is in the discretion of
the plaintiff, but once he exercises such discretion on bona fide
belief, he is obliged to pay the court fee in accordance with the
provision of the Court Fees Act, 1870. Consequently, the plaintiff
is directed to pay ad valorem court fees on the amount of
Rs.20,01,500/- at which amount the suit has been valued within
one month. The decree shall be drawn up only upon the payment
of the balance court fees by the Plaintiff.

VIPIN SANGHI, J
C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 10 of 11

December 04, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

C.S. (OS) No. 1204 of 2004

Page 11 of 11

