HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002
Dated : February 05, 2008
#
^

Sharifuddin

.....
Through:

Petitioner
Mohd. Iqbal, Advocate

versus
!

Mehrun Nisa & Ors.

..... Respondents
Through: None.

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J.(ORAL)
*
1.

This Petition under Section 25B of the Delhi Rent

Control Act

(the Act) has been filed by the petitioner landlord to

impugn the order passed by the learned Additional Rent Controller
Delhi in eviction Petition No. E-96/2000 dated 18.10.2001 whereby
the eviction Petition filed by the petitioner landlord on the ground of
bonafide requirement under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act has been
dismissed. The Petition has been dismissed primarily on two grounds.
The first is that the petitioner had failed to establish that the purpose
of letting was only residential and the second that the petitioner
CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002

Page 1 of 8

himself has not appeared as witness and the evidence has been led
on behalf of petitioner through his son and General Attorney Shri
Zulfikar Ahmed.
2.

The case of the Respondent tenant was that the

Respondents were heirs of the Late Ahsan Ali, who had taken on rent
the premises situated on First Floor of the property No.6360, Ward
No. 14, Gali Babu Bashat, Kasabpura, Sadar Bazar, Delhi in the year
1965 from the erstwhile owner. The property was subsequently
purchased by the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioner Late Shri
Shamsuddin. So far as the ownership and the relationship between
the parties is concerned, the learned Additional Rent Controller gave
a finding in favour of the petitioner that the petitioner was the owner
and the landlord of the suit property of which the respondent was the
tenant.
3.

On the aspect of the purpose of letting, the petitioner

landlord had relied upon the counter foil of three rent receipts and
counterfoils which had been proved on record as Ex. AW-1/6 to AW1/8. Pertinently, these very receipts/counterfoils were proved on
record by Respondent as well, as RW-2/P1 to RW-2/P3. These counter
foils are in Urdu language. The learned Rent Controller has
understood the purpose of letting as recorded therein as “upper
house”. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner argued that in two of
these receipts, namely RW-2/P1 and RW-2/P2, the purpose of letting
is stated to be “balai makan” and in RW-2/P3 the same is mentioned
CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002

Page 2 of 8

as “balai khana”. Mr. R.P. Bansal, Senior Advocate, who happened to
be present in court in relation to another regular matter at Srl.No.4
was called upon by the court to assist the court in reading and
understanding the said exhibits, which are in Urdu language. He has
confirmed that the user recorded in the aforesaid exhibits is as
aforesaid.
4.
the

The admitted position on record is also that the bills of
water and electricity connections installed in the premises are

being raised only for residential purpose. This is evident from the
examination in chief of RW-3 Shri Naeem Ali son of Ahsan Ali, who is
Respondent No. 5 herein. The case of the Respondents was that they
were carrying on business in the name of Asha Auto Industries apart
from residing in the suit premises. They were manufacturing motor
parts in the tenanted premises. The respondents, to prove the
purpose of letting produced Munshi Shokat, a neighbor of the
Respondent as RW-1 and Smt. Mehrun Nisa, wife of Shri Ahsan Ali as
RW-2).

The

Respondent's

witness

RW-1

had

stated

that

the

Respondents were manufacturing auto parts in the name of Asha Auto
Industries in the open space in front of their room. However, it was
also stated that there were no machinery and there was no bhatti.
There is only one blower for manufacturing various parts/items. The
learned ARC has relied upon these testimonies. The learned
Additional Rent Controller held that the petitioner could not establish
the purpose of letting to be residential. For arriving at that conclusion,

CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002

Page 3 of 8

the reason given by him is that the petitioners are not the original
landlords and therefore they could not be aware of the purpose of
letting. The premises had been let by the erstwhile owner which has
been subsequently purchased in the years 1965 by Late Shri
Sharifuddin.
5.

I am not in agreement with the line of reasoning

adopted by learned Additional Rent Controller to determine the
purpose of letting. Admittedly, neither party produced any rent note
or agreement, which could throw light on the aspect of the purpose of
letting. Admittedly, the suit premises is situated on the First Floor.
The rent receipts/counter foils relied upon by both the parties
recorded the user as “balai makan” and “balai khana”. The
expression “balai” connotes the upper floor. The expression “khana”
generally means “house”, as in a premises that houses, e.g., a
“Karkhana”. It does not necessarily connote a residential premises
since it is used as a suffix to describe different kinds of “houses”.
However, the use of the expression 'makan' in two of the rent
receipts is very material and throws light on the purpose of letting.
“Makan” clearly means a residential premises.
6.

The mere use of the premises for a commercial

purpose, in any case, does not establish the purpose of letting to be
commercial. One has to look at the user specified in the rent deed.
Since there is no rent deed produced by either side, one can look at
the rent receipts and counter foils. These receipts/counter foils show
CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002

Page 4 of 8

the user to be as a “makan” i.e. a residence. In this regard I may
refer to the Supreme Court judgment in M/s Precision Steel and
Engineering Works. v. Prem Deva Niranjan Deva Tayal, AIR
2003 SC 650.
7.

The Respondents had failed to produce any document

to substantiate and conclusively establish the purpose of letting as
residential-cum-commercial.

The case of the respondents was that

they were using the open space for manufacturing some motor parts
using a blower. Even if that version of the respondent is believed to
be true, that by itself cannot be taken to lead to the inference that
the premises was let out for residential-cum-commercial purpose. A
tenant may carry out some insignificant activity related to his
business, trade or profession in his residential tenanted premises.
That does not mean that the purpose of letting of the premises is for
residential-cum-commercial purpose. For example, a lawyer, a doctor
or even a businessman may use a portion of the residential premises
as his office/clinic. A teacher may use a room for taking tuition
classes. That does not make the user as residential-cum-commercial.
Having said this, I must also observe that the actual user of the
property for a particular purpose overtly, and to the knowledge of the
landlord over a sustained period of time which is not objected to by
the landlord, in the absence of any other documentary evidence to
the contrary with regard to the purpose of letting, may lead the Court
to infer that the purpose of letting is the same for which the premises

CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002

Page 5 of 8

is being put to use.

However, in those situations, the dominant

purpose of user is required to be seen. In this case, the dominant
purpose of user was for residential purpose only. Only the open space
was being used, if at all, for the manufacturing purposes. Hardly any
machinary was installed. It is not the respondents case that any other
persons were employed to carry out the manufacturing activity. The
rooms were being used for residential purpose. The suit property is
situated on the first floor. The water and electricity bills continued to
be raised over the decades on residential basis only. Had the user
been for commercial purpose on a sustained and regular basis, and
on any significant scale, the electricity and water charges, apart from
property tax assessments would have been levied on commercial
basis.

There

would

Establishment Act.

be

registration

under

the

There would be other workmen.

such evidence has been produced.

Shops

and

However, no

Since the premises was

admittedly being used for residential purpose, in my view, it was
incumbent upon the Respondents to have proved that the purpose of
letting was not confined to residential but also included the
commercial purpose, which the Respondents failed to established. I,
therefore, hold that the petitioner had established that the purpose of
letting was residential.
8.

The learned Additional Rent Controller also fell in error

in rejecting the evidence of the petitioner on the ground that he had
failed to appear as a witness and that his son and General Attorney

CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002

Page 6 of 8

had deposed as a witness on behalf of the petitioner in support of the
petitioner. It is not necessary that the party himself should appear in
the witness box in all cases. The purpose of leading evidence through
a witness is to establish the case of the party. Any person, who is in a
position to depose with regard to the facts about which that person
deposes, can be considered to be a witness competent to depose. The
witness AW-1 has deposed as per his personal knowledge being a
family member of the petitioner and residing with him, and his
evidence could not be rejected merely because the petitioner did not
appear as his own witness.
9.

The learned Additional Rent Controller while dismissing

the Petition has not addressed himself on the issue of the bonafide
need of the petitioner and the suitability of the accommodation
available with him. This was an issue which he should have decided
while deciding the Petition.
10.

In view of the aforesaid the impugned order passed by

the learned Additional Rent Controller in eviction Petition No.E96/2000 dated 18.10.2001 is set aside and I remand the case back to
the learned Additional Rent Controller to determine the issues with
regard to the bonafide need of the petitioner and the sufficiency of
accommodation of the petitioner. The parties may appear before the
concerned Additional Rent Controller, Delhi on 25th February 2008.
11.

In case the Respondents are not represented, the

CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002

Page 7 of 8

learned

Additional

Rent

Controller

shall

issue

notice

to

the

Respondents and through their counsels.
12.

The learned Additional Rent Controller will proceed to

decide the remaining issues expeditiously, and in any event within six
months from today. The record of the lower court be sent to the
concerned court immediately.
13.

With the aforesaid directions, the Petition stands

disposed of.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
February 05, 2008
P.K. BABBAR

CIVIL REVISION NO.40 OF 2002

Page 8 of 8

