*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

IA No. 47/2007 in CS(OS) No. 1394/96 and
IA No. 36/07 in CS(OS) No. 434/1998
Judgment reserved on: May 10, 2007
Judgment delivered on: October 5, 2007

%

Shri K.K Modi & Anr.
Through:

..... Plaintiffs
Mr. S.Ganesh, and Mr. Jayant
Bhushan, Sr. Advocates, with Mr.
Pravin Bahadur, Ms. Meghalee
Barthakur, Ms.Kanika Gomber, Mr.
Rajan Narain , Advocates.
versus

Shri K.N. Modi & Ors.
Through:

..... Defendants
Ms. Neha Khatri Advocate for
defendant No. 3 and Lrs of
defendant No. 1.
Ms. Bharti, Advocate for
defendant No. 2.
Mr. Amit Chadha Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Jayshree Shukla, Ms. Geeta
Sharma and Ms. Preeti Dalal,
Advocates for D.K. Modi/defendant
no.15.
Mr. Alok Dhir, Ms. Jayshree Shukla
and Ms. Preeti Dalal , Advocates for
Ginni Modi.
Mr. P.K. Bansal for defendant no.12.
Mr. A.S. Mathur for defendant No.
14 and LR of Dr. K.N.Modi
Mr. Anurag Dubey, Mr. Meenesh
Dubey, Ms. Anu Sahney for Mr. U.K.
Modi.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

CS(OS)1394-96

page 1 of 29

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J
1.

By this order, I proceed to dispose of IA No. 47/2007 in

CS(OS) No. 1394/96 and IA No. 36/07 in CS(OS) No. 434/1998, both
filed under Order XXIII Rule 1 CPC by the respective plaintiffs in these
suits for unconditional withdrawal of these suits.
2.

The applications are vehemently opposed by defendant no.

12, Dr. B. K. Modi and defendant no.15, Dr. D. K. Modi in Suit
No.1394/1996 and lengthy arguments have been addressed by both
sides on the question as to whether the plaintiffs in these suits can be
permitted to withdraw the suits unconditionally or not.

Smt. Ginni

Modi, defendant no.1A in the aforesaid suit has also opposed the said
applications.

In suit No.434/1998, Dr. D.K. Modi (Defendant no. 3A)

and Ginni Modi (Defendant no. 3B) are the objecting defendants. Dr.
B.K.Modi is not arrayed as defendant in the said suit.
Background Facts:
3.

Late Shri Gujjar Mal Modi had five sons;
(i) Sh. K.K. Modi, (ii) Shri V.K. Modi, (iii) Shri S. K. Modi, (iv)
Dr. B. K. Modi and (v) Shri U.K. Modi.

CS(OS)1394-96

page 2 of 29

4.

His younger brother Kedar Nath Modi (K.N. Modi) has three

sons;
(i) Shri M. K. Modi, (ii) Shri Y.K. Modi and (iii) Dr. D. K. Modi.
5.
public

The Modi family has been in control of a large number of
limited

businesses.

companies,

which

hold

properties,

assets

The family also holds various other assets.

and

Disputes

surfaced between the members of the family and two groups were
formed. Group 'A' comprises of Shri K.N. Modi and his three sons, and
Group 'B' comprising of 5 sons of Late Gujjar Mal Modi.
6.

A

settlement

was

arrived

at,

and

reduced

to

a

Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) dated 24.1.1989 with the
intervention of Financial Institutions, such as Industrial Finance
Corporation of India Ltd. (IFCI), who also had a stake in seeing that the
disputes get amicably resolved, as they have heavily invested in the
various companies in question.
understanding so arrived at.

Parties began

implementing the

Clause 9, inter alia, stated that all

disputes, clarifications etc. in respect of the implementation of the
understanding shall be referred to the Chairman, IFCI or his nominee
whose decision will be final and binding on the groups. In this process
various representations were made to the Chairman and Managing
Director of IFCI.

The Chairman, IFCI submitted his report on 8 th

December, 1995 on the disputes referred to him, indicating therein
CS(OS)1394-96

page 3 of 29

that the MOU already stood implemented to a large extent. As per the
said report Rs.2135.55 lacs was payable by Group 'B' to Group 'A' by
1st January, 1996.
7.

On 20.5.1996 suit No. 1394/96 was filed by Shri K.K. Modi

and Shri S.K. Modi (Group B) to seek various reliefs of declaration and
injunction, inter alia, to enforce the MOU dated 24.1.1989 and in
respect of the decision of the Chairman, IFCI. In 1998, Sh. M.K. Modi
(Group'A') filed suit No. 434/98. This suit primarily pertained to one of
the companies viz. Modipon Ltd.

Subsequently, Sh.U.K. Modi and Sh.

V.K. Modi (of Group 'B') filed suits bearing nos. 2712/1998 and
2694/1998 respectively.

These suits also sought, inter alia, the

declaration that the MOU dated 24.1.1989 is binding on all the parties
and also sought reliefs regarding the decision of the Chairman IFCI. On
28.9.1999, the above four suits were consolidated.
8.

Common issues have been framed in all the suits, and all

the parties have made a statement that they do not wish to lead any
evidence and that the suits may be decided on the basis of the record.
9.

Shri. K. K. Modi (Group B) and Shri. M. K. Modi (Group A)

signed an “Aide Memoire” on 22.3.2003 to resolve their inter se
disputes. Clause 1 (3) of the Aide Memoire provides for withdrawal of
pending cases including in particular, suit Nos. 1394/96 and suit No.
434/98 by the respective plaintiffs.
CS(OS)1394-96

page 4 of 29

10.

In pursuance of the said mutual agreement between Shri.

K.K. Modi and Shri M.K. Modi, the aforesaid applications have been filed
by them to withdraw the respective suits filed by each one of them.
Release of the amount of Rs. 5 crores deposited at the behest of Shri
K.K. Modi the plaintiff in Suit No.1394/96 in this Court, on the direction
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court given on 4.2.1988, as a condition for
grant of an injunction restraining the sale of shares of Godfrey Philips
(India) Ltd. is also prayed for. As aforesaid, these applications for
unconditional withdrawal of suits have been opposed primarily by
defendant nos. 12, Dr. B.K. Modi & 15, Dr. D.K. Modi (in suit no.
1399/1996) (herein also referred to as the objecting defendants) who
have filed their replies to the said applications.
11.

Since an application for unconditional withdrawal of a suit is

generally granted, the plaintiff being the dominus litus, i.e., the master
of the suit, subject, of course to the award of costs to the defendants if
the court considers just in the facts and circumstances of the case (see
AIR 1994 Delhi 207, AIR 1968 SC 111), it would be appropriate to first
set out the objections raised by the objecting defendants to such
unconditional withdrawal, as their contentions are that there are
legally recognised exceptions to the said general rule, and that the
suits sought to be withdrawn fall within those exceptions.
OBJECTING DEFENDANTS CONTENTIONS

CS(OS)1394-96

page 5 of 29

12.

The objecting defendants contend that there is no absolute

right of withdrawal of a suit. They content that in the peculiar facts
and circumstances of the present case, as certain rights have got
vested in favour of the defendants due to the pendency of these suits,
plaintiffs cannot be permitted to withdraw the suits. The two suits in
question have been filed to seek enforcement of the MOU dated
24.1.1989, which is in the nature of family settlement and is to be
viewed differently. They rely on the observations of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in K.K.Modi v. K.N.Modi & Ors (1998) 3SCC 573,
paragraph 52, which is a decision inter-parties, where they say, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the MOU in question has been
acted upon by some members of the family since 1989 and parties
must be held to the settlement, which is in the interest of the family.
They submit that all the parties have accepted the MOU, and have at
no point in time sought to challenge the same. All the family members
have been seeking the implementation of the said MOU.

The

respective rights and obligations of all the parties have to be
determined in these suits. Each party has to receive something under
the said MOU.

The suits are akin to suits for partition of family

property. Thus, each party is a plaintiff and therefore the suit cannot
be permitted to be withdrawn.

If the plaintiffs in these suits are

permitted to withdraw the two suits, the defendants would be left
remedeless, since their rights to claim enforcement of the MOU as a

CS(OS)1394-96

page 6 of 29

family settlement and seek partition in terms thereof would either get
barred by limitation or, at least, they would be relegated to filing their
own suits at this stage, when the present suits are ripe for final
hearing.

Defendant

no.

15

contends

that

he

has

interest

in

determination of issues pertaining to the validity and enforceability of
the decision of the Chairman, IFC Ltd. under clause 9 of the Memo of
Understanding and with regard to the scope and effect of the aforesaid
“Aid Memoire”. They have also referred to the order dated 29.11.2005
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No.9195-96/2003
M.K.Modi v. K. K. Modi & Others, with CA No.9197-9198/2003” IFCI
Ltd. v. K.K.Modi & Others. Modipon Ltd. to contend that the said
plaintiffs had led the Hon'ble Supreme Court to pass the said order on
the premise that these suits would proceed and that they would be
disposed off expeditiously. Withdrawal of these suits, when they are at
the final stage of hearing is a dishonest and malafide attempt to
scuttle the rights of the defendants.

Defendant No. 15 particularly

raised an objection to the withdrawal of the suit without a decision on
the issue of transfer of seven lakhs shares of Modipon Ltd. which may
result in collapse of the scheme sanctioned by BIFR and as approved
by AAIFR.
13.

It is also contended that the plaintiff Shri K.K. Modi has

obtained an advantage/benefit under the suit inasmuch as, the plaintiff
in suit nos. 1394/1996 opposed the transfer of seven lakhs shares of
CS(OS)1394-96

page 7 of 29

Modipon Ltd. in favour of Rajputana Distillaries Ltd.

The Hon'ble

Supreme Court passed an order on 7.1.1998 whereunder the transfer
of the shares held by Group A companies in Godfrey Phillips India Ltd
was stayed, subject to the plaintiff Shri K.K. Modi depositing Rs. 5
crores in this suit.

The interim order pertaining to share holding in

Modipon Limited was also continued.
14.

Defendants contend that the plaintiffs have all this while

prevented the transfer of these 7 lakhs shares of Modipon Ltd. in
favour of Rajputana Distillaries Ltd. by keeping this suit pending. The
defendants further contend that the plaintiff have prevented the AAIFR
from pronouncing upon the Memorandum of Understanding on the
ground that these suits are pending and that the said issue would be
determined in these suits.

Now that the time for determination has

arrived, the plaintiffs in these suits are seeking to withdraw the suits to
prevent the determination of the validity and enforceability of the
Memorandum of Understanding and other related issues. It is argued
that the applications for withdrawal have been filed after the
defendants had filed IA No. 13117/2006 in Suit No. 1394/1996 to seek
a restraint against the implementation of the “Aid Memoire”, and
merely to avoid a decision on that application.
15.

Moreover, vide order dated 28.9.1999 the above four suits

were consolidated as raising interconnected issues.

CS(OS)1394-96

Consolidated

page 8 of 29

issues have been framed in these four suits and therefore it is not
possible to bifurcate these issues with regard to a particular case.
Thus, the individual suits have lost their independent existence, and
have became one suit for all practical purposes.

To draw support,

several decisions have been relied upon which I will deal with later.
Plaintiffs contentions
16.

The suits are being withdrawn unconditionally and without

seeking any liberty to file a fresh suit on the same cause of action. The
plaintiff has an unqualified right to abandon his claim at any stage and
withdraw his suit.

The present suits are not for partition, nor has any

preliminary decree been passed in the suits for any vested right to
come into existence in favour of any of the parties.
17.

Moreover, the application filed by K.K. Modi for amendment

of plaint, seeking to bring on record the said “Aide Memoire” and
praying for orders and directions in accordance therewith has already
been allowed on 11.4.2005. No objection to the said amendment was
taken by Dr. B.K. Modi, defendant No. 2 and having so acquiesced to
the said “Aide Memoire”, it is not open to Dr. B.K. Modi to object to
withdrawal of suit no. 1394/96. Said defendant No. 2 in suit No. 1394
of 1996 was expressly given the liberty to get himself impleaded as a
plaintiff in suit no. 1394/96.

The offer is duly recorded in the order

dated 16.4.1998 of S. N. Kapur, J. However, he did not choose to avail
CS(OS)1394-96

page 9 of 29

of the opportunity. Therefore, the said defendant cannot now object to
the withdrawal of his suit by the plaintiff. Moreover, the said defendant
has till date not even filed his written statement, and by his conduct he
is dis-entitled from raising objections to the withdrawal of the suit.
18.

Dr. B.K. Modi, defendant no. 12 has also filed an affidavit

dated 14.1.2005 affirming that the “Aide Memoire” provides for full
and final settlement of all disputes between Shri K.K. Modi & Shri M. K.
Modi, and the plaintiff contends that after having acquiesced in the
said “Aide Memoire”, the said defendant cannot now seek to object to
the withdrawal of the suit, since the withdrawal is in consonance with
the terms of the “Aide Memoire”.
19.

Smt. Ginni Modi, one of the Legal representative of

deceased defendant no. 1 Sh. K. N. Modi had also filed an affidavit
dated 19.7.2005 unequivocally stating that she was not an interested
party in determination of the issues by the Court in the suit. She has
also signed a formal declaration dated 7.9.2005 relinquishing all her
rights/interests in properties, assets, etc. of the deceased defendant
no.1.

She has also sought her deletion as a party defendant to the

suit. Thus, she cannot object to the suit being withdrawn.
DISCUSSION & DECISION
20.

Before dealing with the rival submissions made and the law

cited by the parties, I may note that on 10.5.2007, with the consent of
CS(OS)1394-96

page 10 of 29

parties, the following order was passed with regard to the seven lakh
shares of Modipon Ltd. and for that reason, objection of

defendant

no.15 to that extent has become infructuous:
“+I.A.Nos. 11046/03, 931/04, 5821/04 and
6163/04
in
CS(OS)434/1998
with
I.A
Nos.11047/03,
932/04,
6198/04,5292/04
in
CS(OS)No.1394/96
With the consent of the parties this order is being
passed in the aforesaid two suits and the same be
placed in the files of both the suits.

The parties agree that 7 lakh shares of Modipon
Ltd held by Modi Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd
be transferred to Rajputana Fertilisers Ltd, in
terms of the scheme formulated by BIFR and as
approved by the AAIFR in its order dated 11-82006. Accordingly the interim order dated 13-92004 passed in Suit No.434/98 stands vacated.

There is no impediment on the transfer of 7 lakh
shares of Modipon Ltd held by Modi Spinning and
Weaving Mills Ltd to Rajputana Fertilisers Ltd., in
terms of the scheme sanctioned by the BIFR on
24th March, 2004 and subsequently confirmed by
the AAIFR in its order dated 11th August, 2006.

The aforesaid
disposed of.”
21.

applications

are

accordingly

On the same day an order was passed with regard to the

withdrawal by the plaintiff of the amount of Rs.5.00 crores and the
vacation of the stay on the transfer of shares of Godfray Phillips India
Ltd. in the following terms.
CS(OS)1394-96

page 11 of 29

“+I.A. No.47/07 in CS(OS)1394/1996

Arguments have been heard by me at length on
this application and they are still continuing.

Counsel for the plaintiff points out that in terms of
the directions issued by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in its judgment in Civil Appeal No.613/98
and 614/98 along with T.C.13/97 decided on 4-21998, which is reported as (1998) 3 SCC 573 and
further order of this Court dated 5-3-1998, the
defendants in the suit designated as Group `A'
headed by Late Shri K.K.Modi, now
by Shri
M.K.Modi, Shri Y. K. Modi and Shri D.K.Modi were
restrained from selling any shares held in Godfrey
Philips India, provided the plaintiffs in the suit i.e.
K.K. Modi & Ors. deposit a sum of Rs. 5 crores
within four weeks from the date of the said order.

In accordance with that order, Indofil Chemical,
the chemical division of Modipon Limited, which is
under the control of the plaintiff deposited for and
on behalf of plaintiff no.1, an amount of Rs.5
crores in the name of the Registrar of this Court.
The said amount was thereafter invested in a fixed
deposit with Corporation Bank, Connaught Place,
New Delhi. The fixed deposit matured on 23rd
March, 2007, and counsel for the plaintiff states
that the same has been renewed once again.

Counsel for the plaintiff submits that since the said
deposit was made only with a view to secure the
interim protection to prevent the parties
designated as Group A as aforesaid from selling
their shares held in Godfrey Philips India, they be
permitted to withdraw the amounts deposited
since they are no longer pressing for continuance
of the stay. Counsel appearing for defendants 2,
13 and 15 have no objection to the withdrawal of
CS(OS)1394-96

page 12 of 29

the deposit made by the plaintiffs since the
interim injunction is also simultaneously vacated.
Counsel for defendant no.12 however does not
consent to the same.

In any event, in my view since the deposit was
required to be made only as a condition for
enforcement of an interim order and since the
plaintiff has himself stated that he does not wish
that the interim order should continue, I see no
impediment in directing the return of the amounts
deposited along with upto date interest to the
plaintiff. The plaintiff prays that the amount to be
returned, be paid through a cheque drawn in
favour of Indofil Chemical Company.

Let the registry draw out a cheque in the name of
Indofil Chemical Company for the entire proceeds
lying deposited in the fixed deposit, details
whereof are mentioned in para 4 of the application
which is stated to have been renewed on its expiry
on 23-3-2007.
The plaintiff's counsel
should
collect the cheque from the Deputy Registrar(O)
on 17-5-2007 at 2 p.m. This order is being passed
without prejudice to the rights and contentions of
the parties.
Interim order dated 5th March, 1998 passed in
CS(OS) 434/1998 stands vacated.”
22.

Consequently, the objections of the contesting defendants

based on the stay of transfer of the shares of Modipon Ltd. and Godfrey
Phillips India Ltd. no longer survive.

Even otherwise, before the

BIFR/AAIFR, as well as before the Supreme Court in I.A. No. 3/1997 in
SLP

(C)

No.18711/1997,

the

issue

pertaining

to

transfer

of

shareholding of Modipon Ltd. concerned only Shri K.K. Modi (plaintiff in
Suit No.1394/1996 and Shri M.K. Modi (Plaintiff in Suit No.434/1998)
CS(OS)1394-96

page 13 of 29

and did not concern any of the contesting defendants The said order
was neither obtained against the objecting defendants, nor obtained by
them against the plaintiff in the two suits sought to be withdrawn.
They were not concerned with the issue relating to the sale of the said
shares of Modipon Ltd.

Consequently, it cannot be said that Shri

K.K.Modi or Shri M.K. Modi obtained any unfair advantage against the
objecting defendants by filing or continuing with their suits. Therefore
this objection is also without any merit.
23.

I now proceed to deal with the remaining objections raised

to the withdrawal of the suit unconditionally.
24.

The defendants have sought to contend that vested rights

have accrued in favour of the defendants. In support of this argument,
reliance has been placed on Vidhydhar Dube and others V. Har
Charan & Others, AIR 1971 all 41; Kanhaiya and Others V. Mst.
Dhaneshwari & another, AIR 1973 All 212; Ram Dhan V. Jagat
Prasad & Others, AIR 1982 Rajasthan 235. In my view, these cases
are of little assistance to the defendants, as these decisions are based
on the proposition that once a decree is passed, or final determination
of rights is made in favour of one of the parties to the lis and certain
rights get vested in favour of such parties, the other cannot seek to
deprive the party the fruits of such determination by seeking to
withdraw the proceeding. All these are cases in which withdrawal of

CS(OS)1394-96

page 14 of 29

the suit was sought to be made at the appellate stage by a plaintiff
against whom the declaration of rights had been made in the suit. In
the suits before me, no decree has been passed (preliminary or final)
whereunder rights of the parties have been crystalised.
25.

Reliance is also placed on R. Ramamurthi Aiyar(dead)

by L.Rs vs. Raja V. Rajeswara Rao, AIR 1973 SC 643 and Ms.
Hulas Rai Baij Nath v. Firm K.B.Bass and Co. ,AIR 1968 SC 111 to
contend that even if a decree (preliminary or otherwise) has not been
passed in the suit, if a vested right has come into existence court could
refuse withdrawal of the suit.
26.

In Hulas Rai (supra),

the court refused to answer the

question as to whether a court is bound to allow withdrawal of the suit
to a plaintiff even after some vested right may have accrued in the suit
in favour of the defendant, and noted that in the facts of the case
before it, no vested rights existed in favour of the opposite party to
deny the right of the plaintiff to withdraw the suit. The Court was
dealing with the application for withdrawal of suit for rendition of
accounts at the stage of recording of evidence where no preliminary
decree had been passed. The Court rejected the proposition that in a
suit for accounts, a defendant is always entitled to relief in his favour
and that the withdrawal of such a suit by the plaintiff cannot be
permitted.

CS(OS)1394-96

The Court observed that the plaintiff may not be

page 15 of 29

necessarily permitted to withdraw the suit if the defendant has become
entitled to a relief in his favour. Such a right can accrue only upon
passing of a preliminary decree for rendition of accounts. Thus, unless
a preliminary decree was passed the plaintiff's right to withdraw the
suit would remain unbriddled.
27.

An exception to the rule recorded in the decision is where a

counter claim or a set off has been

pleaded by a defendant.

Otherwise there is no provision in the code which requires the Court to
refuse permission to the withdrawal of the suit by the plaintiff
unconditionally.
28.

In Ramamurthi (supra) a two judge bench of the Apex

Court recognized one more exception to the rule enunciated in Hulas
Rai (supra) in the facts and circumstances of the case before it. The
Court held that in a suit for partition, as soon as a shareholder applied
for leave to buy at a valuation the share of a party asking for sale
under Section 3 of the Partition Act, an advantage, a privilege or a
benefit accrues in favour of such a shareholder, as the Court is
thereafter bound to order a valuation and after getting the same done,
bound to offer to sell the same to the shareholder who has so applied
at the valuation made. Therefore, once a shareholder (defendant) so
applied for purchase of the plaintiff's share, permitting the plaintiff to
withdraw the suit would defeat the purpose of Section 3(i) of the

CS(OS)1394-96

page 16 of 29

Partition Act as also the right/privilege so accrued in favour of the
defendant/shareholder.
29.

In the two suits in question, no vested rights have been

acquired by the defendants, which would entitle the defendants to a
decision in their favour, since no preliminary decree or any other order
declaring the rights of the parties, or determining any of the issues
arising in the suits has been passed till date, and none has been
brought to my notice.

Even if the two suits are assumed to be akin to

suits for partition of joint family property, that would not make a
difference, since no preliminary decree has been passed in the suits
declaring the rights/shares of the parties.

Therefore these decisions

are of no avail. I do not agree with the defendants submission that a
defendant has a vested right to get the issues arising in a suit
determined, since according to his assessment, the determination of
the issues, or some of them, might lead to declarations, which would
vest rights in his favour. The possibility of getting vested with a right in
future is not a vested right. A vested right is a right that is complete
and consumated, and of such character that it cannot be divested
without the consent of the person to whom it belongs, and is fixed or
established and no longer open to controversy (Blacks Law Dictionary,
6th Edition). If the meaning ascribed by the defendants to 'vested
rights' is accepted in the present context, no plaintiff would be able to
withdraw his suit without the consent of the defendant. Such an
CS(OS)1394-96

page 17 of 29

interpretation would be contrary to the plain meaning of Order 23 Rule
1 CPC, substantive portion whereof read as “At any time after the
institution of the suit, the plaintiff may as against all or any of the
defendants abandon his suit or abandon a part of his claim.”
30.

Defendants

also

rely

on

Executive

Officer

Arthanareshwarar Temple vs. R Sathyamoorthy (1999) 3 SCC
115 to contend that the plaintiffs had obtained an advantage by
keeping the proceedings in these suits pending, and therefore they
could not be permitted to withdraw the two suits.
31.

In Sathyamoorthy (supra), “on the ground that they would

agree for an adjudication as to the nature of the property, the
hereditary trustees prayed in this Court in Civil Appeal No. 1930 of
1990 that the proceedings initiated by the Commissioner against them
under the Endowment Act, 1959 should be directed to be dropped.
This Court thought that in view of the agreement by the trustees' to
have an adjudication on merits, the Commissioner could and should
drop the proceedings. In fact, by the date of the Memo filed for
withdrawal of the CRP and the OP, the Commissioner had dropped the
proceedings initiated against the hereditary trustees.”
32.

Paragraph 17 and 18 of the judgment being relevant are

reproduced here-in-below :“17. It is, therefore, clear that this Court by consent
CS(OS)1394-96

page 18 of 29

of the parties wanted an adjudication by the High
Court on the questions whether there was a
dedication of the corpus of the property or only a
charge on the income, and even if it was so, whether
there was a specific endowment vested in the
Commissioner, HR&CE and whether the property
could be permitted to be sold when there was a
prohibition in the trust deed, whether permission of
the District Court under Section 34 of the Trusts Act
was sufficient and whether permission under Section
34 of the Endowments Act, 1959 was necessary.
Further, the Courts have a general “parens patriae”
jurisdiciton over trusts for charitable and religious
purposes and a question of public interest was
involved because of the contentions raised by the
Commissioner, HR&CE.
18. Therefore, we are of the view that the High
Court should go into the above aspects on merits and
in accordance with law.”
33.

In my view, the aforesaid decision has no application in the

facts of the present case. In Sathyamoorthy (Supra), Respondent No.
1 and 2 had earlier, by agreeing that the issue as to whether there was
a dedication of the corpus of the property or only a charge on the
income and other related issues would be decided by the High Court
in revision proceedings, caused the proceedings initiated against them
under the Endowment Act to be dropped. Moreover, that was a case
involving

properties

belonging

to

a

charitable

and

religious

organisation, and, therefore, the Supreme Court held that the Court
have a general “parens patriae” jurisdiction.

However, in the present

case, it cannot be said that the plaintiffs in these two suits have lead
any court or other forum to drop any proceedings against them, or that
they have obtained any favourable order by projecting or representing
CS(OS)1394-96

page 19 of 29

that they would proceed with the final determination of the two suits in
question. The order dated 29.11.2005 was passed by the Supreme

Court in an appeal filed by Shri M.K. Modi, (plaintiff in Suit
No.434/1998) against Shri K.K. Modi (plaintiff in Suit No.1394/1996). It
pertained to the issue of transfer of the shares of Godfrey Phillips India
Ltd. (GPI) and Modi Rubber Ltd. (MRL) by Modipon Ltd. This court had
vide order dated 8.10.2001 permitted Modipon Ltd. to sell 50% of GPI
and MRL shares to repay its debts to the Banks and Financial
Institutions so that the company, Modipon Ltd., could be saved from
becoming sick. The Division Bench of this court had reversed the
aforesaid order of the learned Single Judge. The Supreme Court, in
the aforesaid appeal decided not to interfere with the order of the
Division Bench by observing:
“After hearing the counsel for the parties at
length, and keeping in view the overall interests
of the parties, the Financial Institutions and the
fact that the following four suits (i) C.S. (OS)
No.1394/96 filed by the Respondents (ii) C.S.
(OS) No. 434/98 filed by the appellants and the
other two suits being C.S. (OS) No. 2712/98 and
2694/98 filed by the two brothers of K.K. Modi,
pending in the High Court of Delhi, are ripe for
arguments, we are not inclined to go into the
dispute arising in the present appeals and
dispose
them
of
with
the
following
directions:..........”
34.

Firstly it is to be noted that the said appeal was preferred

before the Supreme Court by Shri M.K. Modi against Shri K.K. Modi

CS(OS)1394-96

page 20 of 29

who are the two plaintiffs in the aforesaid two suits. The contesting
defendants were neither the appellants nor the contesting respondents
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the said appeals. This was so
because issue of transfer of shareholdings held by Modipon Ltd.
concerned Shri M.K. Modi and Shri K.K. Modi and not the contesting
defendants herein. Thirdly, the issue of transfer of shares of GPI no
longer remains in view of the aforesaid order dated 10.5.2007.
35.

The contention that the defendants would be precluded

from getting a determination on the question of binding nature of the
Memorandum of Understanding, if the suit is withdrawn, inasmuch as,
institution of a fresh suit by them for that purpose would be barred is
also not relevant.
36. The defendants own stand is that none of the parties have till date
sought to challenge the MOU and all have been seeking its
implementation.

A person claiming a right before a court of law must

stand on his own legs and cannot be permitted to ride piggy back on
the shoulders of his adversary. If the defendants were keen on
determination of any of their rights under the MOU dated 24.1.1989,
nothing preclude them from filing their own suit or from seeking
transposition as plaintiffs in the present suits. Having so failed to get
themselves arrayed as plaintiffs, when the opportunity was granted to
them, they cannot now turn around and claim that they have a right to

CS(OS)1394-96

page 21 of 29

force the plaintiff to continue to prosecute the same, which the plaintiff
is no longer interested in pursuing.
37.

The issue, whether such a suit if now filed by the

defendants would or would not be barred by limitation would be for the
Court, before which such a suit may subsequently brought to decide
and is not a matter in issue before me. Even if the suit of the
defendant would be barred by limitation, no vested right can be said to
have accrued in favour of the defendants, inasmuch as, the defendants
themselves are to be blamed for the situation in which they find
themselves.
38.

The argument that the Apex Court had held the MOU had

been substantially acted upon by the parties, and they must be held to
the settlement and for that reason the suit to enforce the said
settlement could not be withdrawn is also fallacious.

The above

statement has been read out of context and relied upon as a
finding/determination of fact by the Apex Court, though it was only
recorded as a submission made on behalf of the Group A parties. The
Court instead of commenting on the said submission, directed the
parties to raise the same before the High Court. The said paragraph
from the copy of the judgment placed amongst the order sheets in the
Part I file of suit no. 1394/96 is reproduced herein for the sake of ready
reference.

CS(OS)1394-96

page 22 of 29

“Group A also contends that there is no merit
in the challenge to the decision of the Chairman
of IFCI which has been made binding under the
Memorandum of Understanding. The entire
Memorandum
of
Understanding-including
Clause 9 has to be looked upon as a family
settlement between various members of the
Modi family. Under the Memorandum of
Understanding, all pending disputes in respect
of the rights of various members of the Modi
family forming part of either Group A or Group B
have been finally settled and adjusted. Where it
has become necessary to split any of the
existing companies, this has also been provided
for in the Memorandum of Understanding. It is a
complete settlement, providing how assets are
to be valued, how they are to be divided, how a
scheme for dividing some of the specified
companies has to be prepared and who has to
do this work. In order to obviate any dispute,
the parties have agreed that the entire working
out of this agreement will be subject to such
directions as the Chairman, IFCI may give
pertaining
to
the
implementation
of
Memorandum of Understanding. He is also
empowered to give clarifications and decide
any differences relating to the implementation
of the Memorandum of Understanding. Such a
family settlement which settles disputes within
the family should not be lightly interfered with
especially when the settlement has been
already acted upon by some members of the
family. In the present case, from 1989 to 1995
the Memorandum of Understanding has been
substantially acted upon and hence the parties
must be held to the settlement which is in the
interest of the family and which avoids disputes
between the members of the family. Such
settlements have to be viewed a little
differently from ordinary contracts and their
internal mechanism for working out the
settlement should not be lightly disturbed. The
respondents
may
make
appropriate
submissions in this connection before the
High Court. We are sure that they will be
considered as and when the High Court is
CS(OS)1394-96

page 23 of 29

required to do so whether in interlocutory
proceedings
or
at
the
final
hearing.”(emphasis supplied)
39.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court after recording the submissions

of the Group 'A' parties, left it to the High Court to decide these issues
“as and when.....required”.

The aforesaid does not lead to the

inference that the plaintiffs in these suits cannot be permitted
withdraw the suits where these issues have been raised.

to

A mere

withdrawal of these suits does not lead to the inference that the
plaintiffs in these suits are walking out of the MOU or acting contrary
to it. Even if they were to act contrary to the terms of the Memo of
Understanding, the other parties to the Memo of Understanding, who
may feel aggrieved by such conduct would be free to agitate their
rights under the Memo of Understanding. Therefore, I do not consider
that the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kale v. Dy.Director
Consolidation (1976) 3 SCC 119 can be pressed into service by the
objecting defendants at this stage.
40.

The fact that these suits have been consolidated is also of

hardly any significance for the present purpose. Consolidation of suits
is done under the inherent powers of the Court and there is no specific
provision of

law which lays down the guidelines for, and the legal

effect of consolidation of suits. The purpose of consolidation of suits is
“to save costs, time and effort and to make the conduct of several
actions more convenient by treating them a one action.” [See (2007) 2
CS(OS)1394-96

page 24 of 29

SCC 551]. “Consolidation of suits is ordered for meeting the ends of
justice as it saves the parties from multiplicity of proceedings, delay
and expenses....... The parties are relieved of the need of adducing
the same or similar documentary and oral evidence twice over in the
two suits at two different trials.” [See JT 2004(2) SC 533]. In State of
Rajasthan V. Moti Ram, AIR 1973 Rajasthan 223, which has been
relied upon by this Court in S.C.Jain V. Bindeshwari Devi, 67(1997)
DLT 189, relied upon by the defendant, the Rajasthan High Court held:“The learned counsel for the plaintiff respondent also
contended that since the two suits were consolidated
during the course of the trial, the trial court should
have passed one judgment and decree and the State
should have filed one appeal instead of two appeals.
The learned counsel was however not able to point
out how the two separate judgments and decrees
and the two appeals therefrom prejudiced the
plaintiff and resulted in failure of justice. He was also
not able to show how separate judgments and
decrees could be deemed to be void or ineffective. It
may be mentioned here that the Code of Civil
Procedure provides no specific provision for
consolidation of suits.
It is under the inherent
powers of the Court under Sec.151 C.P.C. that the
suits are consolidated. The whole object behind
consolidation of suits is to avoid multiplicity of
proceedings and to prevent delay and avoid
unnecessary
costs
and
expenses.
By
consolidation, it cannot be inferred that the
court after consolidation ceased to have
jurisdiction to dispose of consolidated suits
separately without any objection, then, after
consolidation, the court would be debarred
from doing so even if separate decisions are
desirable for the sake of convenience to the
parties as well as to the court. It is true that
ordinarily the court after consolidation should
dispose of consolidated suits by one judgment if
CS(OS)1394-96

page 25 of 29

separate judgments and decrees are passed, such
decrees are illegal or void or ineffective. The fact
that separate judgments and decrees are passed in
the consolidated suits, at best shows an irregularity
in following a correct and ideal procedure and not
lack of jurisdiction. This contention of the learned
counsel for the plaintiff has therefore no force.”
(emphasis supplied)
41.

The closing lines in the aforesaid extract have to be

understood in the context of the two or multiple suits proceeding and
culminating in judgments at the same time. However, in the present
case, since the two suits aforesaid are sought to be withdrawn, leaving
the other two suits pending, the said observation is not of any
relevance in the present context. It is not that suits which have been
consolidated cannot be subsequently separated for any purpose
whatsoever. In Halsbury's Laws of England, (Fourth Edition, Vol. 337,
para 69), the learned author observes that “the Court has the power
to deconsolidate actions which have been consolidated, in other words,
to restore the separate identity of each of the actions comprised in the
consolidation order. This has been noticed in the aforesaid decision in
S.C.Jain (supra). The consolidation of two or more suits whereby it is
stated that the individual suits loose their identity is primarily for the
purpose of trial. In Manohar Vinayak & Ors v. Laxman Anandrao
Deshmukh & Ors, AIR 1947 Nagpur 248 which is also relied on by
this Court in S.C.Jain (supra), it is observed that there is no specific
provision of law in the Civil Procedure Code for consolidation of two
suits as is contained in Order 49 of the Rules of Supreme Court
CS(OS)1394-96

page 26 of 29

requiring one trial and one judgment in consolidated actions.

It is

under the inherent powers of the Court under S.151, C.P.C. that the
suits are consolidated. The legal effect of a de facto consolidation is
usually achieved by two suits being tried together by consent of parties
and with the approval of the Court. After consolidation there is only
one case, and the suit consolidated has no independent existence
for trial.
42.

After

consolidation,

the

multiple

suits

which

are

consolidated are treated as one for purposes of trial, judgment and
decree. However, consolidation is not to be looked at too technically.
43.

Right to withdraw his suit, which is specifically vested in a

plaintiff under Order XXIII Rule 1 C.P.C, being a statutory right cannot
be denied on the basis of a procedure of consolidation which is evolved
by the Courts with a view to save time, costs, conflicting decisions and
from other such like considerations. The real test to decide the issue
whether the plaintiff should be permitted to withdraw his suit has to be
decided by the application of the test of prejudice that such withdrawal
may cause to any of the defendants.
44.

It may be noted that none of the decisions cited by the

defendants have been rendered in similar fact situation as is placed
before me, and none of them deal with the issue of withdrawal of a suit
after its consolidation with another suit.
CS(OS)1394-96

The decisions in Ram
page 27 of 29

Kishore & Ors V. UOI ILR(1973) IT Delhi 513 and S.C.Jain (supra)
relied upon by the contesting defendants to contend that upon
consolidation, the consolidated suits lose their independent existence
or identity and become one suit, have to be understood in the light of
the aforesaid decision in Manohar Vinayak (supra).

Both

Ram

Kishore (supra) and S.C.Jain (supra) have expressly relied upon
Manohar Vinayak (supra).
45.

Admittedly the suits retain their independent identity as

they are registered as different suits and continue to be so registered
even after consolidation. The plaintiffs in all the suits are different. In
fact some of the reliefs prayed for are also distinct. The Court found it
appropriate that these “suits should be consolidated and tried
together” (see order dated 28.9.1999) and common issues have been
framed by the Court in all the four suits in hand.

The dismissal as

withdrawn of the two suits in question out of the four suits which have
been consolidated by this Court would therefore not require this Court
to proceed to hear those specific suits alone any further. However the
remaining two suits would still have to be proceeded with by the Court.
Since all the four suits were consolidated with the consent of parties,
the pleadings and documents filed in the two suits being withdrawn
would continue to be available to the Court for deciding the two
pending suits which are not being withdrawn and it would still be open
to the parties to the remaining two suits to refer to and rely upon the
CS(OS)1394-96

page 28 of 29

pleadings and the documents filed on the record of the two suits which
are being withdrawn.

While exercising its inherent power under

Section 151 C.P.C to consolidate the four suits, the Court could not be
assumed to have intended to deprive any of the parties of their
statutory rights including those under Order 23 C.P.C.
46.

In this view of the matter, there is no impediment in the

withdrawal of these suits.

The IAs are accordingly allowed and the

suits treated as unconditionally withdrawn, subject to the aforesaid
observations with regard to the rights of the parties in the two
surviving suits to rely upon the pleadings and documents filed in the
two withdrawn suits. In view of the fact that the contesting defendants
have not filed their written statements, I do not consider it a fit case to
award any costs.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
October 5, 2007
as/P.K. BABBAR

CS(OS)1394-96

page 29 of 29

