*
+
%

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
W.P(C)13444 OF 2005
Judgment reserved on:
Judgment delivered on:
Randhir Singh
Through:

September 03, 2007
October 5, 2007

..... Petitioner
Mr. A. S. Chauhan, Advocate

versus
N.C.T of Delhi
Through:

..... Respondent
Ms.Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate.

CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.
Petitioner has by way of this writ petition impugned the
order dated 29.4.2005 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal
(Tribunal for short) whereby the OA preferred by the Petitioner before
it came to be dismissed.
Brief Facts
2.
The petitioner had joined the Indian Army during the National
Emergency declared as a result of the Chinese aggression, on
2.11.1962.

He belonged to the Jat Regiment and participated in the

war for varying periods between 1.6.64 and 20.1.66. He was awarded

W.P(C)13444.05

Page 1 of 7

“Sainya Sewa Medal with Clasp” for his services. After having served
in a regular term for a little over 4 years the petitioner sought
discharge from the army on compassionate grounds.

He was

discharged on 31.12.1966. On account of his short tenure, he was not
entitled to and so was not granted any pensionary benefit. Thereafter
he completed his B.Ed. and joined a Haryana Government School as a
TGT in the year 1969 and continued to so work till 1972 when, on 30 th
October, 1972 he

joined the Government Boys Senior Secondary

School, Chhawla, New Delhi as a TGT

under the Directorate of

Education, Govt. of NCT of Delhi. At the time of his appointment he
was given age relaxation by deducting the period of 4 years, 1 month
and 30 days spent in the Indian Army. This relaxation was granted
pursuant to the letter dated 25.3.1980 written by the Dy. Director of
Education, Distt.-West.
3.

Thereafter

on

21.9.1995

the

applicant

submitted

a

representation to the Director of Education claiming grant of
increments and consequent benefits on the basis of war service
rendered by him. However, the said representation

was not

responded to. Consequently the petitioner preferred OA No.148/2002
before the Tribunal which was disposed of with a direction to the
respondents to decide the said representation of the Petitioner. The
said representation was considered and rejected vide order dated
18.3.2002. The petitioner then impugned the said order rejecting his

W.P(C)13444.05

Page 2 of 7

representation before the Tribunal by filing OA No.1880/2004 which
was also dismissed vide order dated 29.4.2005. It is this order of the
Tribunal which is impugned before us.
4.

The Tribunal rejected the claim of the petitioner by holding that

Ex-Servicemen (Reservation of vacancies in the Central Civil Services
and posts, Class III & Class IV) Rules, 1974 do not confer any benefit
of the past service for the purpose of fixation of pay and pension.
Rule 20 of CCS(Pension) Rules, 1972 was also held as inapplicable to
the petitioner as declaration of emergency in 1962, in its opinion, did
not imply that war had been declared and therefore services rendered
by petitioner were not war services.
5.

Before us the petitioner has assailed the aforesaid order

on the ground that the Tribunal failed to consider and deal with the
provisions contained in G.I.M.F Memo No.F.3(71)EV(A)/63, dated 1st
October 1964.
6.

The respondents having failed to file their counter

affidavit in opposition despite numerous opportunities,their right to
file the same was closed. However, we have gone through their reply
filed before the Tribunal.
7.

The

aforesaid O.M dated 1.10.1964, on which the

petitioner places reliance provides:
“A question has arisen as to whether the
Enlisted/Commissioned Military Service which
is shown as non-pensionable by the Defence
Authorities in the Certificate of Verification of
W.P(C)13444.05

Page 3 of 7

Military Service, should count towards civil
pension in the case of persons who are
permanently appointed to civil posts.

8.

The position is that, in the Defence
Services there are no non-pensionable
establishments
and
the
service
officers/personnel are either on regular or
non-regular terms. Those who are on regular
terms are entitled to pension/gratuity after
rendering the prescribed periods of service
and others who are not on regular terms are
entitled to gratuity as admissible under the
rules/orders in accordance with which they
are engaged. Non-regular Military service
when followed by service on regular terms
counts
for
Military
pension.
In
the
circumstances, the service which is shown as
non-pensionable/war- time engagement is in
fact non-regular (purely temporary) military
service and will be allowed to count towards
civil pension.(emphasis supplied)”
As per the said O.M non-pensionable/purely temporary

service will count towards civil pension where the said service is
followed by permanent appointment to a civil post. The purpose of
the O.M was given due recognition to the military service rendered by
the citizens of the nation, when the nation was faced with an
emergency in the face of external aggression.

At that time the

country needed youth who could defend its borders, even at the cost
of their lives and careers.

Keeping the objective sought to be

achieved by the said O.M, it does not stand to reason that regular
officers who took discharge from army, and were therefore not
admitted to pension should be deprived of such an advantage. If the
aforesaid O.M is interpreted to exclude the regular term military men

W.P(C)13444.05

Page 4 of 7

from its application, it would be rendered discriminatory and arbitrary
since the regular term military men who joined the military at the
time

of

external

aggression

were

similarly

placed

as

those

enlisted/commissioned in military service and, for the purpose of
being granted the aforesaid benefit, constituted one class. The Apex
Court in Raj Pal Sharma & Ors. V. State of Haryana & ors,
1985(supp.) SCC 72 observed as follows:“All those persons released from military
service constitute one class and it is not
possible to single out certain persons of the
same class for differential treatment. There
appears to be no reasonable classification
between the persons who were released on
compassionate grounds and those who were
released on other grounds and in this respect
the petitioners have been deprived of the
equal opportunity.....”
The above quote was cited with approval in Dhan Singh

9.

& Ors V. State of Haryana & Ors, C.A.No.1060 of 1990 decided by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 5.12.1990.

The Court made certain

significant observations with reference to young citizens of India, who
had joined the armed forces during the Chinese aggression, which
would be relevant for our purpose:
“on account of the external aggression by the Chinese
forces in the Indian territory, the emergency was
imposed by the President of India in 1962. In order to
attract young men to join military service at that critical
juncture, the Central Government and the State
Governments
issued
different
circulars
and
advertisements on the radio and in the press promising
certain benefits to be given to those young men who join
the military service.

W.P(C)13444.05

Page 5 of 7

The young persons who have joined the military
service during the national emergency and those who
were already in service and due to exigencies of service
had been compelled to serve during the emergency form
two distinct classes. The appellants and the petitioners
who joined the army before the proclamation of
emergency had chosen the career voluntarily and their
service during emergency was as a matter of course.
They had no option or intention of joining the
government service during the period of emergency as
they were already serving in the arm. The persons who
enrolled or commissioned during the emergency, on the
other hand, had on account of the call of the nation
joined the army at that critical juncture of national
emergency to save the motherland by taking a greater
risk where danger to the life of a member of the armed
forces was higher. They include persons who could have
pursued their studies, acquired higher qualifications and
joined a higher post and those who could have joined the
government service before attaining the maximum age
prescribed and thereby gained seniority in the service.
Foregoing all these benefits and avenues, they joined the
army keeping in view the needs of the country and
assurances contained in conditions of service in
executive instructions.
The latter form a class by
themselves and they cannot be equated to those who
joined the army before the proclamation of the
emergency. Benefits had been promised to such persons
who heeded to the call of the nation at that critical
juncture. Older man by joining the military service lost
chance of joining other government service and when he
joins such service on release from the army younger man
had already occupied the post. To remove the hardship,
the benefit of military service was sought to be given to
those young persons who were enrolled/commissioned
during the period of emergency forgoing their job
opportunities.”
10. The timing of the issuance of the aforesaid O.M, more so when
the O.M itself was brought out after the Chinese aggression,
apparently to provide succor to those enlisted with army who had not
got any pensionary benefit.

W.P(C)13444.05

Page 6 of 7

11.

The finding of the Tribunal that the petitioner had not

rendered war service is contrary to the record inasmuch as the
certificate of service issued to the petitioner by the Indian Army gives
complete details of the war services rendered by him between
1.6.1964 and 20.1.1966.
12.

Accordingly, the impugned order dated 29.4.2005 is set

aside and the respondents are directed to take into consideration the
past military service of the petitioner of 4 years, 1 month and 30 days
into account for the purpose of fixation of his pension.
13.

Parties are left to bear their own costs.

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
(A.K.SIKRI)
JUDGE
October 5, 2007
aj/as

W.P(C)13444.05

Page 7 of 7

