*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

OMP No.25/2003
Judgment reserved on:

April 03, 2007

Judgment delivered on:

September 05, 2007

%

BWL Ltd
Through:

Mr.

Mr.Rajesh
Kohli,

.....
Petitioner
D.
K.
Malhotra,
Malhotra and Mr. S.
Advocates.

versus
Mahanagar Telephone Nigam
Ltd. & Anr.
..... RespondentS
Through: Mr. Ravi Sikri and
Mr.Ayushya
Kumar,
Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

Petitioner has preferred the present petition under Section

34 read with section 13 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
challenging the award dated 24.10.2002 by the Sole Arbitrator (Mr.)
Justice S. Ranganathan (Retired).

OMP 25/2003

Page 1 of 27

BACKGROUND FACTS
2.

The Respondent No. 1 had, on 25.5.1993, floated a tender,

inter alia, for supply of 1672 Kms optical fiber cable with joining
materials and accessories. The petitioner submitted its bid in
response to the said tender. After going through the evaluation
process, on 26.7.1994, a letter of intent was issued by Respondent
No.1 to the petitioner indicating its intention to place an order for
supply of 49 Kms of optical fibre cable and accessories upon the
petitioner, subject to certain terms and conditions. The delivery of the
materials had to be completed by February 28, 1995 at the latest. The
Respondent No. 1 thereafter, issued a purchase order dated August
22, 1994 for supply of 49 kilometers of optical fiber cables (OFC)
along with the accessories on the terms and conditions indicated
therein.
3.

Petitioner, however, could not commence production of

OFC within time to be able to supply the same to the Respondent
within the contractual period. Consequently, the petitioner repeatedly
sought extension of delivery period. Extension of time was granted by
the Respondent upon certain

terms and conditions, which were

incorporated in the various amendments to the purchase order. These
have been discussed later in the course of the judgment.
4.
OMP 25/2003

The petitioner could manage to effect the delivery only on
Page 2 of 27

26th September 1995, for which the last amendment was made to the
purchase order described as amendment No.6. The Respondent also
issued a letter of the same date under which the price payable for
1995-96 supplies was fixed at Rs.97,588.60 per kilometer (all
inclusive). This was based on the rates fixed by the DOT in respect of
OFC cable supplied during the financial year 1995-96.
5.

Respondent paid to the petitioner for the supplies effected

at the rates fixed by DOT for 1995-96 supplies. However, while
making payments to the petitioner, the Respondent made deductions
towards liquidated damages. The petitioner raised disputes about the
rate at which the payment had been made by claiming that it was
entitled to be paid at the rates fixed under the purchase order. i.e @
Rs.1,21,512.50 per km. The petitioner also objected to the deduction
of liquidated damages. Since the Respondent repudiated these claims
of the petitioner, they were referred to the sole arbitration of Mr.
Justice S. Ranganathan (retired). Before the learned Arbitrator, the
petitioner made the following claims:

“(1)

Excess price collected for the supplies

(2)

Amount unlawfully deducted by MTNL from
the bills towards alleged liquidated damages Rs. 5,47,205

(3)

Interest on the above amounts from
17.10.95 till 31.5.2000.
Rs.41,38,807

OMP 25/2003

Rs.27,47,458

Page 3 of 27

Total
6.

-----------------Rs.74,33,470
-----------------

The petitioner also claimed interest on the aforesaid

amount @ 18% per annum from 1.6.2000 till the date of the award.
7.

By his impugned award, the learned arbitrator has

rejected all the claims of the petitioner and consequently this petition
has been filed by the petitioner to challenge the award.
Petitioner's submissions:8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner firstly argues that the

impugned award has been rendered contrary to the contractual terms.
His submission is that a perusal of the contractual terms shows that
the price of optical fiber cable to be supplied by the petitioner was
fixed, and the unit price was Rs.1,21,512.50 per KM. He has drawn
my attention to clause 8.1 of the Purchase Order dated 22nd August
1994, which states that “The total price of the purchase order shall be

Rs.68,32,344.50”. He also refers to Annexure `A’ to the purchase
order which contains the details of the Stores ordered on the
Petitioner under the purchase order in question. The first item
mentioned in the tabulation in Annexure `A’ is '12 Fiber Optical

Cable'. The quantity is stated to be 49 Kms. The unit price mentioned
is Rs.1,21,512.50 thereby making a total price of the optical fiber
cable as Rs.59,54,112.50. The total price of all the items again comes
OMP 25/2003

Page 4 of 27

to Rs.68,32,344.50. He also refers to clause 12 of the General
Conditions of Contract which reads as follows:
“12. PRICES:
12.1 Prices charged by the supplier for goods
delivered and services performed under the
contractor shall not vary from the prices
quoted by the supplier in his bid.
12.2 PRICES FOR ORDERING:
The prices fixed by MTNL shall remain valid for
the period of delivery schedule stipulated
under the ‘Schedule of Requirements’ by
MTNL. Increase and decrease of taxes and
duties will not affect the price during the
originally offered delivery schedule.
12.3 For any add-on order, price will be fixed
after adjusting the price according to the taxes
and duties as on date of such order.”
9.

He submits that under the General Purchase Conditions,

the bidders, like the Petitioner, were required to quote firm prices,
item wise (clause 3.2). The bidders were also required to confirm that
their “quoted prices shall remain, in the event of an order, Firm and

Fixed and subject to no variation of any description during operation
of the order” (clause 3.3 of the General Purchase Conditions). All
these clauses, according to the Petitioner, clearly show that the
contract was a fixed price contract for all supplies to be made
thereunder

and

the

Respondent

could

not

reduce

the

prices

unilaterally to the detriment of the Petitioner.
10.
OMP 25/2003

Learned counsel for the petitioner, while dealing with
Page 5 of 27

clause 5 of the General Purchase Conditions, which gives to MTNL
“the right to modify or amend this order subject to an adjustment in

the price and/or delivery date in accordance with the applicable
provision of the order, if any, or pursuant to mutual agreement”,
argued by reference to clause 13 of the General Conditions of
Contract, (which in effect authorises the purchaser, i.e., MTNL to
change specifications, method of transportation and packing, place of
delivery and services to be provided by the supplier), that the right of
modification given in clause 5 of the General Purchaser Condition is to
be read in the light of the right given to the purchaser to amend the
specifications etc. He submits that only if there is a change in
specifications etc., the firm prices could be changed “in accordance

with the applicable provision of the order, if any, or pursuant to
mutual agreement”. However, according to the Petitioner, there was
no change in the specifications or any other relevant terms or
condition for supply of cable and, consequently, clause 5 of the
General Purchase Condition could not be resorted to by the
Respondent to reduce the price of the cable supplied by the
Petitioner.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that while

dealing with the aspect of liquidated damages, the learned Arbitrator
has failed to consider clause 16.2 of the General Conditions of
Contract and failed to determine whether the liquidated damages
ought to have been 0.5% of the value of the delayed supply, for each

OMP 25/2003

Page 6 of 27

week of delay or part thereof, subject to the maximum of 10% of the
value of the delayed supply, or the same should have been levied at
the aforesaid rate on the total value of the contract.
11.

Counsel for the petitioner submits that the respondent

could not have simultaneously imposed liquidated damages and varied
the price to the detriment of the petitioner. Learned counsel submits
that the award in question is contrary to sections 73 and 74 of the
Contract Act. Under Section 73, “when a contract is broken, the party

who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive, from the party who
has broken the contract, compensation for any losses or damages
caused to him thereby, which inter-alia, arose in the usual course of
things from such breach or which the party knew, when they made
the contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it. Such
compensation is not to be given to any remedy or indirect loss
sustained by reason of the breach”.

Under Section 74, “'when a

contract has been broken if a sum is named in the contract as the
amount to be paid in case of such breach, or if the contract contains
any other stipulation by way of penalty, the party complainant of the
breach is entitled, whether or not actual damages or loss is proved to
have been caused thereby, to receive from the party, who has broken
the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount so
named or, as the case may be the penalty stipulated for”.

OMP 25/2003

Page 7 of 27

12.

On the basis of aforesaid two provisions, it is argued that

the Respondent, in any event, ought to have proved that it had
suffered some damages on account of the failure of the Petitioner to
make the supplies within the contractual period. That not having been
done by the Respondent, there was no question of levy of any
liquidated damages upon the Petitioner. Consequently, the finding of
the learned Arbitrator whereby he upholds the liquidated damages
deducted by the Respondent from the amounts due to the Petitioner
cannot be sustained.
13.

Learned counsel for the petitioner also sought to rely on

M/s. Sikkim Subba Associates vs. State of Sikkim, JT 2001 (5) SC
186 and particular paragraph 14 thereof, wherein the Hon'ble
Supreme Court observed that “it is also, by now, well settled that an

Arbitrator is not a conciliator and his duty is to decide the dispute
submitted to him according to the legal rights of the parties and not
according to what he may consider it to be fair and reasonable”.
14.

Reliance has also been placed on the decision of the

Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajasthan States Mines and Minerals

Ltd. Vs. Eastern Engineering Enterprises & another, (1999) 9
SCC 283. In this judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had observed
that 'it is settled law that the Arbitrator is the creator of the contract

between the parties and hence if he ignores the specific terms of the

OMP 25/2003

Page 8 of 27

contract, it would be a question of jurisdictional error which could be
corrected by the court and for that limited purpose agreement is
required to be considered.' He also refers to Chiranji Lal Sri Lal
Goenka (Dead) by LRs vs. Jasjit Singh and others, (2001) 1 SCC
486. In this case, rejecting the argument that where two views are
possible and that since the Arbitrator has taken a plausible view, the
award cannot be interfered with, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
the award on the face of it was illegal and erroneous.
The Petitioner also relies on K.P. Poulose vs. State of

15.

Kerala, AIR 1975 SC 1259. In this judgment the Hon'ble Supreme
Court held that misconduct under Section 30(a) of the Arbitration Act,
1940

comprises legal misconduct which is complete if after the

Arbitrator,

on the face of the award, arrives at an inconsistent

conclusion even on his own findings,

or arrives at a decision by

ignoring very material documents which throw abundant light on the
controversy to help a just and fair decision.
16.

It is argued that the question is not whether the petitioner

has accepted the variation in the price by effecting supplies.

It is

whether the respondent MTNL could have, in the first place, imposed
such a condition. By referring to the last two lines of paragraph 11 of
the award, counsel for the petitioner submits that the reduction in the
rates was unilateral on the part of the MTNL and merely because the

OMP 25/2003

Page 9 of 27

petitioner had acted upon the same, it could not be said that the
petitioner had waived the breach of the agreement by the MTNL in
reducing the price unilaterally, or that the petitioner had accepted the
said deduction once and for all.
17.

Counsel for the petitioner also relied on Section 55 of the

Contract Act to submit that from a reading of the contract, it is clear
that time was not of the essence of the contract, and, consequently
the contract did not become voidable upon the failure of the petitioner
to make the supplies within the specified time.

In the facts and

circumstances of the case, all that the MTNL was entitled to, was
compensation for any loss occasioned by the failure of the petitioner
to effect supplies within the stipulated time.

He also relied on a

decision of this Court in Titanium Tantalum Products Ltd v.

Shriram Alkali & Chemicals, (2006)(2) Arbitration Law Reports 366
(Delhi).
18.

He further submits that the Award passed by learned

Arbitrator is against the Public Policy of India. The award according
to the learned counsel for the petitioner, is not only in contravention
of the contractual term but also the law of the land. He relies on the
decision of the Supreme Court in ONGC vs. Saw Pipes Ltd., JT 2003
(4) SC 171 and particularly para 31 thereof, which states that an
award which is, on the face of it, patently in violation of the statutory

OMP 25/2003

Page 10 of 27

provision cannot be said to be in public interest. Such an award is
likely to adversely affect the administration of justice. The expression
'public policy' is required to be given a wider meaning and an award
could be set aside if it is patently illegal. He submits that “an Award
could be set aside 'if it is contrary to:(a)Fundamental policy of Indian law; or
(b)The interest of India; or
(c) Justice or morality, or
(d) In addition, if it is patently illegal.
19.

In Saw Pipes (supra), the Supreme Court explains

what is meant by a patent illegality by observing:“IIlegality must go to the root of the matter and if
the illegality is of trivial nature it cannot be held
that award is against the public policy. Award could
also be set aside if it is so unfair and unreasonable
that it shocks the conscience of the Court. Such
award is opposed to public policy and is required to
be adjudged void.”
Respondent's submissions:20.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent has

defended the award in question by arguing that the said award is well
reasoned and has been passed

after taking into consideration the

documents and submissions of the parties. The learned Arbitrator has
interpreted the contract in a reasonable manner by appreciating the
true intent of the parties as reflected in the terms of the contract. It

OMP 25/2003

Page 11 of 27

is also argued that the objections raised by the petitioner are entirely
on the merits of the case and beyond the scope of interference under
Section 34 of the Act. He contends that this Court is not sitting in
appeal over the award in question.

Learned counsel

for the

respondent relies on Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. vs. Global Hi

Fabs Ltd., 116(2005) DLT 1 (paragraphs 13 to 19) which states that if
an Arbitrator has interpreted a clause in the contract in a particular
manner and has taken a decision which is a plausible view, it is not
permissible for the Court to substitute its own evaluation or
conclusion of law or fact. By relying on Union of India Vs. Arctic

India, 125(2005) DLT 478, he submits that the Court while examining
an award of an Arbitrator will not substitute its opinion with that of
the Arbitrator. Even if the facts and circumstances of the case are
open to two plausible interpretations, it is legitimate for the Arbitrator
to accept one or the other available interpretation and even if the
Court may think that the other view is preferable, the Court will not
and should not interfere with the interpretation of the Arbitrator
unless and until the decision of the Arbitrator is manifestly perverse
or has been arrived on the basis of wrong application of law.

He

further submits that the scope of interference by the Court under the
1996 Act is narrower than the scope of interference by a Court in an
arbitral award governed by the 1940 Act.

For this proposition, he

relies

Housing

on a

OMP 25/2003

decision of

this Court

in

and

Urban

Page 12 of 27

Development

Corporation

Limited

vs.

Leela

Hotels

Ltd.,

FAO(OS) 59/2003 decided on 9.11.2004. In this judgment the Hon'ble
Division Bench relying on the earlier decisions of the Supreme Court
held that if the Arbitrator has interpreted a clause in an agreement in
a particular way and has taken a decision which is a plausible view, it
is not permissible for the Court to substitute its own evaluation or the
conclusion of law or fact. If the clauses in the contract are open to
two plausible interpretations, it is legitimate for the Arbitrator to
accept one or the other available interpretation and even if the Court
may think that if the other view is preferable, the Court will and
should not interfere

with the interpretation of the Arbitrator. To

support the contention that the objections to an award under Section
34 of the Act are not to be treated as an appeal from the award,
learned counsel for the respondent relies on DGS and D Vs.

Eupharma Laboratories Limited in OMP No.287/1999 decided on
9.3.2006. By relying on DDA vs. Emkay Construction Company in
OMP No.54/06 decided on 17.2.2006, counsel for the respondent
contends that it is not within the scope of scrutiny by the Court of an
arbitral award to reappraise the evidence or interfere with it merely
because the Court would come to a different conclusion on the same
set of facts. He submits that, no doubt, the arbitral award could be
set aside if it is patently illegal. Resultantly it could be set aside if it is
contrary to:-

OMP 25/2003

Page 13 of 27

(a) Fundamental policy of Indian laws; or
(b) The interest of India; or
(c) Justice or morality; or
(d) If it is patently illegal.
21.

However, the illegality must go to the root of the matter

and if illegality was of a trivial nature, it cannot be held that the
award is against the public policy. The award could be set aside if it
is so unfair or unreasonable that it shakes the conscience of the Court.
Such an award is opposed to public policy and is required to be
adjudged void. In support of the aforesaid proposition he also relies
on Arosan Enterprises Ltd Vs. UOI, (1999) 9 SCC 449;

Raipur

Development Authority v Chokhamal Contractors, AIR 1990 SC
1426 and various other decisions of this Court and the Hon'ble
Supreme Court.
22.

Learned counsel for the respondent further submitted that

the imposition of liquidated damages was challenged by the petitioner
before the learned Arbitrator on the ground that such imposition was
not

justified.

However,

the

petitioner

did

not

dispute

the

quantification thereof. He refers to paragraph 18 of the statement of
claims before the learned Arbitrator.

The imposition of liquidated

damages was challenged on the ground that the delay in supply of the
goods was not due to any factors within the control of the claimant,

OMP 25/2003

Page 14 of 27

but was on account of force majeure conditions. The challenge was
also on the ground that the respondent, in fact, did not suffer any loss
due to the delay in supply of the goods by the claimant. It was also
claimed that clause 15 contained in Section 3(General Conditions of
Contract) is a nullity. However, the claimant did not seek to challenge
the actual quantification of the liquidated damages. Learned counsel
also argued that while seeking extension of time for effecting supplies
of the goods in question, the petitioner did not plead force majeure
conditions.

He also refers to the award of the learned Arbitrator

wherein the Arbitrator has extensively dealt with the submission of
the petitioner based on force majeure and argues that these findings
of fact cannot be interfered with by the Court in these proceedings
since they are final and binding on the parties.
Discussion & Decision:23.

The first question that arises for consideration is, whether

the impugned award discloses a patent error in the interpretations of
the contractual terms with regard to the price of the goods payable to
the petitioner. The letter of intent issued by the respondent indicated
the rate of OFC at Rs.1,21,512.50 per km. The delivery of goods had
to be completed latest by 28-2-1995 and it also contained a condition
that “the above indicated rates or the rates finalised by the

Department of Telecommunications (DOT) for 1994-95 supplies,

OMP 25/2003

Page 15 of 27

whichever

are lower, shall finally be applicable for settlement

of

payments against LOI”. The petitioner accepted the terms of the LOI
by its letter dated 2.8.1994.

On 28.8.1994 the respondent MTNL

placed a purchase order on the petitioner for purchase of, inter alia,
49 kms length of Optical 12F Cables on the terms and conditions set
out in Annexure A to the order.

The special condition of the LOI

aforesaid was reiterated in clause 8.2 of the purchase order. Under
the purchase order as well, the supplies had to be completed by
28.2.1995. Clause 6.2 of the General Conditions of Contract annexed
to the purchase order stipulated that “ the delivery of the equipment

shall commence as specified and be completed within the time
schedule specified in schedule of requirements and this shall be the
essence of the contract.” Clause 12.2 stated that “the price fixed by
MTNL shall remain valid for the period of delivery stipulated under
the schedule of requirements by MTNL.”
24.

Admittedly, the petitioner was unable to deliver the goods

within the stipulated period.

To the request of the petitioner for

extension of delivery period made on 22.10.1994, the MTNL vide
letter dated 10.11.1994 agreed to late submission of the prototype for
approval. However it insisted for the delivery of the entire supply by
28.2.1995.

Petitioner successively sought extension of time for

delivery from time to time and upto 15.9.1995.

These extensions

were granted by the respondent vide memoranda dated 24.4.1995,
OMP 25/2003

Page 16 of 27

29.9.1995,

6.7.1995

and

16.8.1995

respectively

contained

in

amendment nos. 2,3 4 and 5 to the purchase order dated 28.8.1994.
The first extension of delivery period upto 31.3.1995 amended the
purchase order in respect of the price. The relevant extract of this
amendment is as follows:“Sub-clause 8.2 and Special Condition Clause at
Annexure `A'
The rates indicated in the abovesaid purchase order
are firm subject to the condition that the supplies
have been delivered as per the scheduled delivery
period before 31.03.95 and, therefore, the special
condition clause indicated in this purchase order
shall stand deleted.........Further, for the supplies not
completed upto 31.03.95, the delivery period
extension with liquidated damages on the revised
prices to be finalized for 95-96 supplies shall be
applicable for which the separate amendment shall
be issued for such cases after verifying the
requirement.
Vide Memoranda dated 29.5.1995, the delivery period was

25.
extended

upto 31.7.1995. The respondent, apart from levying

liquidated damages, for failure to supply the cables upto 31.3.1995 in
respect of applicable prices, stated as follows:“1. Applicable provisional prices for supplies
effected from 1.4.1995 onwards shall be as
follows:ITEM NEW REVISED UNIT (PROVISIONAL) PRICE
(ALL INCLUSIVE)
(IN RS.)
i) 12 Fibre Optical Cable

26.
OMP 25/2003

Rs.97,588.80 Rupees
Ninety Seven Thousand Five
hundred Eight Eight and
paisa Eighty PKM only

A similar pattern was followed in respect of subsequent
Page 17 of 27

amendments as well.
27.

The petitioner effected deliveries only on 26.9.1995. The

respondent also communicated the final rate for the supplies effected
during 1995-96 at Rs.97,588.80/- per km (all inclusive) since that was
the rate fixed by the DOT in respect of supplies effected during the
financial year 1995-96.
28.

The

learned

Arbitrator

rejected

the

petitioner's

submission that the prices under the contract were fixed and firm and
that the MTNL had no right to vary the prices stipulated in the
Purchase Order by giving his reasons. He interprets the contractual
clauses, including clause 5.1 (relied upon by the petitioner) to mean
that MTNL could always effect an adjustment of the price and /or
delivery date, “in accordance with the applicable provision of the

order”. The Purchase Order itself envisages the completion of the
delivery of the goods by 28.2.1995, and the rates will be those stated
in the Purchase Order, or those which are finalised by the DOT for the
1994-95 supplies. For deliveries not effected by that date, the rates
were not fixed.

Therefore, when the delivery of the goods got

postponed to a date after 28.2.1995, and well into the financial year
1995-96, the MTNL prescribed the rates, which were lower of the two
i.e the rate stated in the Purchase Order and the rates fixed by the
D.O.T for supplies in the year 1995-96. This, the learned Arbitrator
holds is in tune with the terms of the purchase order, and valid. He
OMP 25/2003

Page 18 of 27

further holds that, in truth, there is no variation in the purchase price
at all. The contract always envisaged that the price payable will be
that fixed in the purchase order or that fixed by the DOT for supplies
during the financial year in which the delivery is effected, whichever
is lower.
29.

This interpretation given by the learned Arbitrator to the

contractual terms is not only a

plausible interpretation, and

therefore, cannot be faulted with, but also appears to be the only
reasonable way to interpret the contract. There is nothing to suggest
that this interpretation can be called as perverse, or that the same has
been arrived at in ignorance of the contractual terms or is glaringly
at variance with any of the contractual terms. It is only reasonable to
interpret the question of applicable rate in the manner decided by the
learned Arbitrator, since a party cannot seek to derive an undue
advantage by its own default, of being paid a higher rate for supplies
effected well beyond the contractual date, when the prices of the said
goods are generally falling with each passing year.
30.

The learned Arbitrator has viewed the said reduction in

prices from another angle. He holds that the amendments of the
purchase orders to extend the delivery dates upon conditions
contained therein, with regard to the prices,

tantamounted to a

mutual revision of the purchase order within the meaning of clause

OMP 25/2003

Page 19 of 27

5.1 of the General Conditions of the Contract. He holds that though
the said clauses were unilaterally prescribed by the MTNL in the first
instance, they were acted upon and hence agreed to by the petitioner
by its conduct. The petitioner could not, therefore, now turn around
to assail the revision of the contractual terms.

This is also, to my

mind a reasonable and plausible view and therefore, does not call for
interference.

Pertinently, even the learned Arbitrator does not

consider the stipulation as to time of delivery to be of the essence of
the contract. The submission of the petitioner founded upon Section
55 of the Contract Act, therefore, looses force.
31.

It is always open to the parties to mutually vary the

contractual terms.

In case one of the parties to an existing contract

proposes a variation of the contractual terms, and the other party
accepts the suggested variation either expressly or by implication
evident from its conduct, the

second party cannot, subsequently,

complain about the variation in the contractual terms.

The learned

Arbitrator has, in the alternative, read a mutual variation of the
contract from the conduct of the parties. In my view, there is nothing
wrong with it.
32.

Coming to the contentions of the petitioner that the MTNL

– a public undertaking had imposed arbitrary and unreasonable terms
by stipulating alternative prices, I find that the learned Arbitrator has

OMP 25/2003

Page 20 of 27

exhaustively dealt with the same in para 12 of the impugned award.
The learned Arbitrator holds that there is nothing in the Sale of Goods
Act to prohibit a purchaser from specifying a fixed price or a price
that may be determined, by reference to, say, the prices prevailing in
the market for similar goods on the date of delivery, whichever is
lower.

Clause 8.2 of the General Conditions of Contract in the

Purchase Order does just that. The learned Arbitrator rejected the
petitioner's submission that the stipulation of alternative prices in the
contract thereby making the price liable to revision, as being illegal or
incidental.

The learned Arbitrator held that under the scheme

formulated in the NIT and the purchase order, the bidders

were

required to quote, firm and fixed prices and not to deviate therefrom
once an order is placed on them. The NIT did not specify the price
which MTNL would eventually pay, since the same would depend on
the terms of the purchase order. The NIT specifically authorised the
respondent MTNL to make price adjustment in the course of
implementation of a purchase order. This variation was based on a
reasonable criteria, i.e the prices fixed by DOT for the financial year
in which the supplies are made of similar goods. He further holds that
while the bidders were bound to quote, fixed and firm prices and not
to deviate therefrom, once an order was placed on them,

the NIT

permitted MTNL to quote its prices while placing an order, with a
right of variation during the implementation of the order so as to

OMP 25/2003

Page 21 of 27

entitle it to pay either the prices fixed in the purchase order, or the
DOT prices prevalent in respect of the supplies made during the
financial year in which the deliveries are effected.
33.

In my view the aforesaid interpretation given by the

learned Arbitrator, which is also based on an understanding of the
factual background in which the tenders for the goods in question
were invited and operated,

cannot be faulted and appears to be a

reasonable view considering that the NIT after being issued in the
year 1994 was again issued by MTNL only in the year 1997.

The

MTNL had consistently prescribed and practiced the formula of
paying the suppliers the prices prevalent under the DOT contracts at
the time when the supplies were effected. The learned Arbitrator held
that there is nothing arbitrary or unconscionable in a PSU providing
in its purchase contracts that only the standard prices fixed by a
established consumer of the goods in question will be paid by it as
well.

To hold otherwise will result in public funds being utilised to

make purchases of goods at prices much in excess of their
contemporary market value. This is, in my view, a reasonable and a
plausible view to take in the facts and circumstance so this case.
34.

The

learned

Arbitrator

deals

with

the

petitioner's

contention that it had accepted the price revision under protest, and
that it had also objected to the levy of liquidated damages by relying

OMP 25/2003

Page 22 of 27

upon the communication dated 9.6.1995 of the petitioner which only
sought waiver of liquidated damages. The communications set up by
the petitioner, whereby, the petitioner purportedly accepted the
purchase order under protest and without prejudice to their rights to
question the reduction in prices and imposition of liquidated damages
were not accepted by the learned Arbitrator.

Receipt of these

communications had been denied by the respondent.
35.

The learned Arbitrator finds that the purchase order dated

28.8.1995 itself authorised price variation. In case the petitioner was
not agreeable to supply the goods on the reduced prices, it had the
option not to supply the goods. However, having supplied the goods
and availed of the amendments to their advantage, they could not
later on seek to challenge the same to claim the higher price under
the contract.
36.

In my view, the learned Arbitrator was the sole judge of

the facts and there is nothing apparently wrong with the conclusions
drawn by him even on this aspect of the matter.
37.

Coming to the aspect of imposition of liquidated damages,

the petitioner had sought to invoke the force majeure clause to say
that the delay was on account of heavy snow and rain in the
Himalayan region at the relevant time.

However the learned

Arbitrator did not accept this submission by relying on clause 17.1,
OMP 25/2003

Page 23 of 27

which required the petitioner to give notice of the occurrence of force
majeure conditions within 21 days. In my view, whether or not force
majeure conditions prevailed and could be taken into account is again
an issue of fact and the finding of the learned Arbitrator cannot be
interfered with in these proceedings.
38.

The learned Arbitrator, I find, has discussed in detail the

case of force majeure set up by the petitioner and rejected the same
by giving his reasons. He has relied on the communications sent by
the petitioner itself on 22.10.1994, 22.3.1995, 15.5.1995 and in none
of these letters, while seeking extension of the delivery period, the
petitioner made out any case of force majeure conditions prevailing at
the relevant time.

The learned Arbitrator has held that adverse

weather conditions was introduced, as a cause for delay in effecting
the supplies, as an afterthought.

The letters of the petitioner

unmistakably show that it had other problems which led to seeking
extension of time repeatedly, but bad weather conditions were not one
of them. There are findings of fact and there is nothing brought to the
attention of the Court to assail the same.
39.

I may note that the respondent had imposed liquidated

damages of Rs.5,47,205/- on the basis that there was a delay of 25
weeks between 1.4.95 and 15.9.95, but at the maximum rate of 10%
of the total purchases, since the delay was in the delivery of the entire

OMP 25/2003

Page 24 of 27

quantity supplied.

Counsel for the petitioner could not point out

anything from the arbitral record to show that any such argument had
ever been raised before the learned Arbitrator.

In this view of the

matter, the petitioner is precluded from raising any such argument at
this stage.

I find no ground to interfere with these findings of the

learned Arbitrator, which appear to be totally fair and reasonable. In
the case of Titanium Tantalum Products Ltd (supra) relied upon
by the petitioner, the equipments supplied by the petitioner were
found to be defective. The respondent was held liable to refund the
cost paid to the petitioner.

The claim of the respondent for losses

suffered as a consequence of non-supply of the equipment as per
specifications was also allowed. The Court held that the petitioner did
not know the extent of damages that the respondent would suffer on
account of the failure to supply the equipment as per the agreement
and consequently reduced the damages to 5% of the contractual
value. This decision only dealt with the aspect of quantification of
damages and has no application in the facts of the present case. The
petitioner contended that what had been claimed

as liquidated

damages, were in fact in the nature of penalty, since the MTNL
suffered no prejudice or handicap because of the delay in supply of
the goods. This argument was rejected by the learned Arbitrator. In
doing so, he relied upon the affidavit

by way of evidence filed on

behalf of the respondent wherein the respondent had stated that it

OMP 25/2003

Page 25 of 27

had suffered heavy losses due to non-supply of cable due to which the
commissioning target of the respondent got affected for release of
new connections and since new connections could not be given or
installed, the respondent suffered loss of revenue. The witness also
confirmed that the cable ordered from the claimant was for specific
projects which were delayed.

The cable was needed for junctions

working and commissioning of remote lying units which are revenue
gathering. The learned Arbitrator held that it could not be said that
the damages suffered by MTNL due to delay in supply by the
petitioner was illusory,

and that the respondent should have

substantiated its claims for damages by actual proof of loss of revenue
suffered.
40.

In my view, the learned Arbitrator is the final judge of

the facts before him. The strict Rules of evidence do not bind him.
His findings of fact cannot be interfered with since it cannot be said
that they are wholly inconsistent with the facts of the case. Moreover,
it is only reasonable to assume that due to the delay in the supply of
the OF cable, the implementation of the projects of MTNL was
delayed, which in turn, caused some loss of revenue to the
respondent. The parties had agreed to the levy of liquidated damages
as a genuine predetermined estimate of loss caused due to failure to
supply the cable by the petitioner, and the same cannot be said to be
an imposition by way of penalty. The learned Arbitrator, in my view,
OMP 25/2003

Page 26 of 27

has correctly appreciated that the contract in this case safeguarded
the respondent MTNL against two situations, viz., the possibility of
delivery dates being dragged beyond the financial year in which they
were agreed to be supplied, and, the loss of revenue or loss in the
implementation of projects caused by delay in supply of goods. The
first was safeguarded by providing a variable price formula, and the
second by imposition of liquidated damages.
41.

Consequently, there is no force in the submissions of the

petitioner that the respondent

could not have, at the same time

subjected the petitioner to liquidated damages and to price reduction.
The argument based on Sections 73 and 74 of the Contract Act, in
view of the aforesaid discussion is also of no avail to the petitioner.
42.

For the aforesaid reasons, I dismiss the objections with

costs quantified at Rs.10,000/-.

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
September 05, 2007
as/P.K.BABBAR

OMP 25/2003

Page 27 of 27

