HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
C.M. (M) No. 169/2008 & C.M. Appl. No. 1752/2008
Order passed on on: February 5th, 2008
#
^

Dal Chand

.....
Through:

Petitioner
Ms. Pratibha, Advocate

versus
!

Raj Rani & Anr.

..... Respondents
Through: None.

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*
1.

This Petition has been filed under Article 227 of the

constitution of India to impugned the order dated 23rd November 2007
passed by the learned Additional Rent Controller Delhi whereby the
petitioner's application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC filed for
impleadment as a party Respondent in eviction Petition No.493/07/05
filed by the Respondent herein has been dismissed.
2.

The father of the petitioner Late Shri Bihari Lal was the

C.M. (M) No. 169/2008 & C.M. Appl. No. 1752/2008

Page 1 of 6

original tenant in respect of the suit premises. The Respondent is the
successor in interest of the original landlord. The Respondent filed the
eviction Petition impleading one of the sons of Late Shri Bihari Lal,
namely, Rajpal as the Respondent. This Petition was filed in the year
2005. While the eviction proceedings were progressing, the petitioner
filed an application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC seeking impleadment
on the ground that he is one of the legal heirs of the deceased tenant
and has therefore succeeded to the tenancy rights alongwith other
legal heirs of the deceased tenant. This application was filed only on
18th September 2007 on the ground that the petitioner became aware
of the pending eviction proceedings in the month of September 2007.
3.

The case of the petitioner is that he is too, apart from

his brother Shri Rajpal, is residing and also carrying on his business
from the suit premises. By the impugned order this application has
been rejected by learned Additional Rent Controller. The Additional
Rent Controller has accepted the contention of the Respondent
landlord that Rajpal was the only person who started paying rent to
the Respondent landlord after the death of the father/tenant Shri
Bihari Lal in the year 1990. Therefore, there was an implied surrender
of tenancy right in favour of Shri Rajpal. The learned Additional Rent
Controller has relied upon the written statement filed by Shri Rajpal
wherein he admitted that he has inherited the shop after the death of
his father and started paying rent to the Respondent landlord.
C.M. (M) No. 169/2008 & C.M. Appl. No. 1752/2008

Page 2 of 6

4.

The learned Additional Rent Controller relied upon a

decision of this court in 1989 (2) RCJ 629 wherein this court has held
as follows:
“It is settled principle of law that implied
surrender or surrender by operation of law
occurs firstly by creation of new relationship
or secondly by relinquishment of possession.
Implied surrender does not depend on the
intention of the parties, like express
surrender. It has to be implied from the
conduct of the parties. The principle
underlying section 111(f) of the Transfer of
Property Act is that whatever relationship
exists between two parties in respect of
particular premises and new relationship
arises, if two sets of relationships cannot exist
as being inconsistent and incompatible that is
to say, if the latter can come into effect only
on termination of earlier, that would be
deemed to have been terminated in order to
enable the latter can come into effect only on
termination of earlier, that would be deemed
to have been terminated in order to enable
the latter to operate. The essence of implied
surrender is not change of possession but the
doing of an act which is inconsistent with the
continuance of the lease or tenancy.
In view of the admitted facts that after the
death of Chaman Lal, Sushil Kumar alone was
issued rent receipts in respect of the premises
by the Respondents – landlords; other heirs
never asserted their tenancy rights and could
not produce any rent receipts issued by the
Respondents landlords in their favour; Sushil
Kumar was alone carrying on business in the
shop; and other facts, the only inevitable
conclusion which can be drawn is that the
conduct of the parties is inconsistent with the
continuance of lease of the other heirs of
Chaman Lal after his death and is in
conformity with creation of new relationship
of tenant and landlord between Sushil Kumar
C.M. (M) No. 169/2008 & C.M. Appl. No. 1752/2008

Page 3 of 6

and the Respondents. Therefore, I uphold the
contention of the learned counsel for the
Respondents – landlords and endorse the
finding of the learned Tribunal that Sushil
Kumar was alone attorned as tenant after the
death of Chaman Lal, and by conduct other
heirs would be deemed to have surrendered
their tenancy rights, if any, impliedly.”
5.

I am of the view that the learned Additional Rent

Controller was right in dismissing the application filed by the
petitioner since the petitioner did not bring before the court any
material to show that he had been tendering the rent to the
Respondent landlord. From the conduct of the petitioner it appears
that the application for impleadment was filed deliberately to delay
the disposal of the eviction Petition. Pertinently, the eviction petition
was pending since the year 2005 and the application for impleadment
was filed only in September 2007, after the pleadings were complete
and the parties were preparing to go to trial. Though it is stated that
apparently the Respondent No. 1 has filed the eviction petition in
collusion with Shri Rajpal, there is nothing pointed out from the
record, how such collusion can be inferred. As aforesaid, the eviction
petition is being contested by the petitioners brother since 2005,
which would not have been the case if there was collusion between
the two Respondents. Though it is claimed that Shri Rajpal did not
inform the petitioner of the pendency of the eviction petition in order
to deprive him of his claim towards the tenancy rights in the property,
there is nothing to show that the petitioner and Respondent No. 2
C.M. (M) No. 169/2008 & C.M. Appl. No. 1752/2008

Page 4 of 6

have any ongoing disputes with regard to inheritance of the
properties left behind by Late shri Behari Lal. Only a vague averment
has been made to state that the petitioner came to know from some
“reliable source” about the pendency of the eviction petition. NO
further details of the so called “reliable source” has been furnished
and the circumstances in which the petitioner allegedly learnt of the
said fact have not been disclosed. From these facts, I get the
impression that the collusion is not between the two Respondents,
but between

the

petitioner

and his

brother Shri Rajpal,

i.e.

Respondent No. 2. The aforesaid application for impleadment was
dismissed by the learned Additional Rent Controller on 23rd November
2007 and the certified copy was also obtained by the petitioner on 6th
December 2007. The present Petition has been filed merely a few
days before the matter is to come up before the learned Additional
Rent Controller for recording evidence. From the aforesaid facts, it
appears that the endeavour of the petitioner and the other
Respondent is to some how delay the disposal of the eviction petition.
Moreover, in my view no prejudice would be caused to the petitioner
in case he is not impleaded as a party since the interest of the tenant
is being sufficiently represented by the elder brother Shri Rajpal, who
is contesting the eviction Petition. However, this order and the
impugned order shall not impinge on the inter-se rights of the
petitioner and Respondent No. 2 Shri Rajpal in relation to the suit

C.M. (M) No. 169/2008 & C.M. Appl. No. 1752/2008

Page 5 of 6

premises.
6.

Dismissed.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
February 05, 2008
P.K. BABBAR

C.M. (M) No. 169/2008 & C.M. Appl. No. 1752/2008

Page 6 of 6

