*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No.6070 OF 2006

%

Judgment reserved on: September 17, 2007
Judgment delivered on: October 5, 2007
Shri Lakhi Ram
Through:

..... Petitioner
Ms. Meenu Maini, Advocate

versus
Union of India & Others
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. J. K. Singh, Advocate

CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*
1.

The petitioner was appointed as casual substitute bunglow

khalasi on 10.3.2003 and was performing the work of peon/telephone
attendant. He acquired temporary status on 5.7.2003. The temporary
status was extended for a further period of three months, as the
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 1 of 13

working of the petitioner was not found to be satisfactory.

He was

orally warned to improve his working style. A complaint of indecent
behaviour was also reported on account of which a memo dated
25.8.2004 was served upon the petitioner to improve his working and
behaviour.

He was also warned that disciplinary action would be

initiated against him in case he did not improve his working and
behaviour.

On 27.1.2005 a final opportunity was given to him

to

improve behaviour and work since there was no improvement despite
earlier notice. He was warned that if his behaviour and work does not
improve,

action

would

be

taken

to

terminate

his

services.

Eventually by order dated 14.2.2005 the services of the petitioner
were terminated by giving him one month's notice on the ground that
his work and behaviour were not found to be satisfactory despite
repeated oral warnings and warnings in writing dated 10.5.2004,
25.8.2004 and 27.1.2005.
2.

The

petitioner

filed

OA

No.450/2005

before

Central

Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (the Tribunal)
under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act to challenge his
termination on the ground that it was stigmatic and punitive and it was
not preceded by an enquiry.

It was contended that the termination

notice made reference to an earlier letters, inter alia, dated 25.8.2004
and 27.1.2005 where indecent misbehaviour/misbehaviour, which is a
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 2 of 13

misconduct, was alleged against the petitioner.

He contended that

without following the due process of law and holding an enquiry his
services could not be terminated.

The Tribunal by its impugned order

dated 11.4.2005 dismissed the original application.

The petitioner

preferred Review Application being RA No.124/2005 to challenge the
aforesaid order,

which has also been dismissed by the Tribunal on

1.6.2005.
3.

Against the order of dismissal of his OA dated 11.4.2005

and the dismissal of his RA dated 1.6.2005, the petitioner has filed the
present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
4.

The order of termination dated 14.2.2005, as translated,

reads as follows:
“Subject: Substitute bungalow Khalasi- Regarding
termination from service.
You were appointed as bungalow khalasi temporarily
for 3 months to work with Sh. Sanjay Goyal, Dy.CME
II in terms of this office letter No.COFMOW/IR/P172/Part II dated 10.03.2003.
Thereafter your
appointment
extended
by
3
months
from
07.06.2003 to work as temporary Bungalow Khalasi
with the condition that your services can be
terminated earlier also if your work is not found to
be satisfactory or your services are not required.
Now your work and behavior as Bungalow Khalasi
has not been found satisfactory. Despite oral and
written warnings dated 10.5.2004, 25.8.2004 and
27.1.2005 in this regard there has been no
improvement
in
your
work
and
behavior.
Consequently, your services as bunglow Khalasi are
dispensed with effect from 14.3.2005 by giving one
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 3 of 13

month's notice. “
5.

The

petitioner

emphasises

that

the

accusation

of

misbehaviour in the said termination notice, and also the statement
contained therein that despite verbal and written warnings there is no
improvement in the work and behaviour are stigmatic. The petitioner
argues that the order of termination cannot be treated as termination
simplicitor but is accompanied by a stigma which suggests that the
behaviour of the petitioner was objectionable and unacceptable.

The

petitioner contends that such accusations in the termination order
would, for all times, prejudice the petitioner, inasmuch as, his chances
in future of getting employment either with the respondent, or in any
other organisation would be marred when such a termination order
comes into the hands of his prospective employer. The termination, it
is argued is, therefore, punitive and it ought to have been preceded by
a departmental enquiry.

The Petitioner complains that he has been

condemned unheard. He submits that his termination is illegal and in
violation of the principles of natural justice.
6.

He also relies on a recent decision of this Court in WP(C)

No.18407/2006 Union of India v. Shri Vijay Kumar dated 7.8.2007
and another decision in WP(C) No.3263/2006 dated 8.3.2006 Union of
India v. Dharamender Kumar Yadav

& Ors.

in support of his

contentions.
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 4 of 13

7.

From the impugned order of the Tribunal dismissing the

Original Application, we find that the Tribunal has dismissed the same
by placing reliance on a Full Bench decision of the Tribunal itself in
Shyam Sunder v. Union of India, OA No.896/1995 dated 12.2.1999.
As per the impugned order of the Tribunal, in Shyam Sunder (supra)
the Tribunal has held that services of a Bunglow Khallasi even after
grant of temporary status, can be terminated on unsatisfactory work
without holding a departmental enquiry. The reasons of the Tribunal
for passing the impugned order are contained in paragraph 17 and it
reads as follows:“It is permissible for the respondents, in the light of
decision in the case of Shyam Sunder, which is
binding on me, to dispense with the services of a
Bungalow Khallasi even on acquirement of
temporary status. If it is founded unsatisfactory
performance in terms of conditions of appointment
and in that even holding of enquiry or an
opportunity is not obligatory.
Moreover, even
allegations of misbehaviour, to which the
respondents have not decided to enquire into and
no enquiry thereafter has been held, cannot be a
foundation of the order. However, due to otherwise
unsatisfactory performance, the reference to such
incident is only a motive. The aforesaid mention of
the warning where this alleged misbehavior is a
part would not convert the order into an order of
penalty a punitive one. From the reading of the
order as well as the annexures referred to, I do not
find the order as stigmatic one and reading of the
written warnings clearly shows the unsatisfactory
performance of the applicant. In that event no
reasonable opportunity to show cause is necessary
despite accord of sufficient opportunity to improve
upon his working. As the applicant has failed to
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 5 of 13

8.

improve his work and conduct and his work and
conduct remained unsatisfactory, it was within the
right of the Railway authorities to have dispensed
with his services on the basis of
condition
precedent and terms of conditions in his
appointment as Bungalow Khallasi.”
It is not in dispute that upon the grant of temporary status

the petitioner acquired the right of being dealt with under the
Discipline and Appeal Rules of the Railways. Therefore, if it is held that
the order of termination is stigmatic and therefore punitive, and not
one of termination simplicitor, it would follow that the order of
termination is bad since, admittedly, no departmental enquiry has
preceded the passing of the said order of termination. It would also
be in violation of the principles of natural justice.
9.

From the order of termination passed in the present case it

is apparent that the respondent did accuse the petitioner of not only
unsatisfactory work but also unsatisfactory behaviour. Accusation also
is that there was no improvement in the work and behaviour of the
petitioner despite verbal and written warnings given on various
occasions on 10.5.2004, 25.8.2004 and 27.1.2005.

Two of these

warnings have been placed on record and they are issued in Hindi in
Devanagiri script and the petitioner has filed English translations of the
same. On perusal of the termination order and the warning letters in
the language in which they were

passed, it transpires that the

translations are not accurate and therefore do not give a true and
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 6 of 13

complete picture. We have, therefore, relied on the actual language
used in the order and the other communications.
10.

Before dealing with the language of the order and the

preceding communications referred to therein, it may be useful to first
examine the meaning of the term `stigma' or `stigmatic' as judicially
determined. In Kamal Kishore Lakshman V Management of M/s.
Pan American World Airways Inc & Ors, (1987) 1 SCC 146, the
Supreme Court accepted the dictionary meaning of the term `stigma'
and noted:“7..........In the absence of a statutory
definition of the word `stigma', we shall refer
to its meaning as available in dictionaries.
8.
According to Webster's New World
Dictionary it is something that detracts from
the character or reputation of a person, a
mark, sign, etc, indicating that something is
not considered normal or standard. The Legal
Thesuras by Burton gives the meaning of the
word to be blemish, defect, disgrace,
disrepute, imputation, mark of disgrace or
shame. The Webster's Third new International
Dictionary gives the meaning as a mark or
lable indicating a deviation from a norm.
According to yet another dictionary `stigma' is
a matter for moral reproach.”
11.

While approving the above definition the Supreme Court in

Allahabad bank Officers' Assn. V. Allahabad Bank,(1996) 4 SCC
504 observed that “if the order of compulsory retirement casts a
stigma on the government servant in the sense that it contains a
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 7 of 13

statement casting aspersion on his conduct or character, then the
court will treat the order as an order of punishment” and Article 311(2)
of the Constitution would come into play. It further observed that in
order to judge whether the statement in the order is stigmatic or not
“the test of how a reasonable person would read or understand it”
would apply.

In Pavanendra Narayan Verma V. Sanjay Gandhi

PGI of Medical Sciences, (2002) 1 SCC 520, it was observed that in
order to amount to a stigma, the order must be in a language which
imputes something over and above mere unsuitability for the job.
Thus, firstly the “form” of the order has to be looked into and it is only
when the order survives this examination, the “substance” of

the

termination has to be found out. Thus, where an order is at the face of
it “stigmatic” no further enquiry is required.
12.

Reverting now to the order of termination and the

preceding communications referred to therein, it is clear that it refers
not just to the “work” but also to the “behaviour” of the petitioner,
and these two terms have not been used interchangeably. The order
specifically

refers

to the three written warnings issued to the

petitioner on 10.5.2004, 25.8.2004 and 27.1.2005. Therefore, in our
view, these warning letters are an integral part of the termination
order. (See para 35 of JT 1999 (1) SC 396) A perusal of the written
warning dated 24.8.2004 reveals that the said warning pertained to
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 8 of 13

“asantoshjanak karya” i.e. unsatisfactory work
vyavhara” i.e. indecent behaviour.

and

“abhadra

The said letter also warns the

petitioner that in case he failed to mend his ways, “anushasnatmak
karyavahi” i.e. disciplinary action would be initiated against him.
13.

The written warning dated 27.1.2005 which is a sequel to

the previous letter, is the last and final warning in reference to the
petitioner's work and behaviour and has to be read in the light of the
previous letter. It warns that action for removal from service would be
initiated against him.
14.

The impugned order of termination is thus necessarily

founded upon these letters and the reference to misbehaviour of the
petitioner is but a reference to his so called “indecent behaviour”
referred

in

the

previous

letters.

“Indecent

behaviour”

or

“misbehaviour” is definitely not in relation to his work, or performance
related to work, and casts aspersion on his conduct, character and
personality.
15.

Whether a termination order is stigmatic or not has to be

viewed from the point of view as to whether it has the effect of
showing the employee in poor light in the eyes of a reasonable man,
which would include a reasonable prospective employer.

When the

order dated 14.2.2005 would come into the hands of any prospective
employer, the same would prejudice the chances of the petitioner to
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 9 of 13

gain employment since he has been branded as being a person who
misbehaves and displays indecent behaviour.

No employer would,

while making his selection like to take in employment a person who
has been certified as being one whose behaviour is not acceptable,
and who has failed to improve his behaviour despite
warnings.

repeated

This, in our view, is clearly stigmatic since the accusation

against the petitioner is that not only his work but also his behaviour is
unacceptable and is such that it calls for termination of his services.
We, therefore, do not agree with the findings of the Tribunal that the
accusation of misbehaviour against the petitioner is not stigmatic.
16.

The

decision

rendered

by

this

Court

in

WP(C)

No.18407/2006 is squarely applicable in the facts of the present case.
That case also pertains to a Bunglow Khallasi whose services had been
terminated after he acquired temporary status.

In that case the

termination notice accused the employee, inter alia, of remaining
absent from duty without intimation.

The relevant extract from the

aforesaid decision is to the following effect:

“No doubt, if a person is holding temporary
status or is a temporary employee, his
service can be dispensed with by passing
an order of discharge simplicitor under
Rule 5(1) CCS Temporary Service Rule. In
case the Respondent's conduct was not
satisfactory, this rule could have been
invoked. However, a perusal of the
impugned order shows that it is stigmatic
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 10 of 13

in nature, inasmuch as, allegations have
been leveled against the Respondent that
his
working
report
was
found
unsatisfactory, he was not able to perform
his duties, he remained unauthorized
absent from duty, and was found
unsuitable.
The Railway Board has itself issued
instructions, which are contained in letter
No.803E/I/Pt.X/EIV, issued in January 1995,
which are to the following effect:
“ii) Person who has attained temporary
status cannot be discharged from service
without
applying
full
procedure
as
described in the D & A Rules. The grant of
ty. Status to Bungalow peons before 2
years service will create problems for the
officer in case Bungalow Peon indulge in
unwarranted activities. No officer will allow
his family members to be dragged,in
official D & A enquiring etc. Thus, condition
of two years service for grant of ty. Status
to Bungalow Khallasi is a must.
Iii. The above conditions are not included in
the IREC or IREM as Bungalow peons is a
special category as they are neither casual
labour nor substitute. Their service
conditions, until they attain Ty. Status after
completion of two years continuous
service,
are
governed
by
the
administrative orders issued from time to
time with the approval of competent
authority on Zonal Railways.”
(underlining supplied)
Thus, in a case like this, as per the
aforesaid
instructions,
procedure
as
contained in Disciplinary and Appeal Rules
was required to be followed. In another
writ petition(C)6070.06

page 11 of 13

case which arose in similar circumstances,
a Division Bench of this court upheld the
order of the Central Administrative Tribunal
vide judgment dated 8th March 2006, titled
as UOI s. Dharmender Kumar Yadav, in
W.P. (C) No. 3263/2006 and C.M. No. 282829/2006.”
17.

The termination order dated 14.2.2005 therefore could not

have been issued without affording an opportunity to the petitioner to
meet

the

accusations

of

indecent

behavior/misbehavour

in

a

departmental enquiry. In fact, the respondents had themselves, at one
stage, warned the petitioner that they would initiate disciplinary action
against him. However, instead of resorting to the same, they adopted
the short cut method of terminating his services by issuing the
impugned order of termination, which is illegal.
18.

In view of the above, we allow the present petition and

quash the orders of the Tribunal passed in OA

and RA.

However,

considering the fact that the petitioner has not worked from 14.3.2005
onwards, we are not inclined to grant any backwages to the petitioner.
He shall, however, be granted continuity of service for purposes of
seniority and pension.

The respondents should pass appropriate

orders of posting of the petitioner within two weeks from today.
Parties are left to bear their respective costs.

writ petition(C)6070.06

page 12 of 13

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE

(A.K. SIKRI)
JUDGE
October 5, 2007
aj

writ petition(C)6070.06

page 13 of 13

