*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

AA No. 302/06 & IA No. 7122/06
Judgment reserved on: 17th January, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: February 06, 2007

Rotarian Sidheshwar Dayal and Ors.
Through:

.....
Petitioners
Mr. Lala Ram Gupta, Senior
Advocate with Ms.Mamta
Mehra, Advocates

versus
Rotarian U.N. Maira and Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Girdhar Govind with Ms.
Noorun Nahar Firdausi, Advs.

CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

Petitioners are members of the Rotary Club of Delhi, Rotary

District 3010, comprising of Rotary Clubs in Delhi, parts of U.P and
Haryana. Respondent No.1 Shri U.N.Maira was, at the time of filing of
I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 1 of 18

the arbitration application the President and Respondent No.2, Shri
Pulin Trivedi, was the Hon. Secretary of Rotary Club of Delhi.
2.

Petitioners

have

filed

the

aforementioned

Arbitration

Application under S.11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
for the appointment of an Arbitrator. Petitioners claim that their
request for appointment of an arbitrator made on 25.4.2006 was
rejected by the Secretary of the Rotary Club Delhi, i.e., Respondent
No.2 herein, vide his letter dated 11th May 2006.
3.

The dispute relates to the election to the office of President

Elect of the Rotary Club of Delhi for the year 2006-07. The petitioners
claim that when the nomination process for the Elections to the office
of President Elect of the club for 2006-2007 was afoot, Petitioner No.
11 submitted her nomination proposal form on 8/12/05 at 1:55 P.M. to
the Respondent No 2 herein before the meeting was called to order.
The nominations, as per the deadline prescribed by the Respondent
No.1 for the same, could be submitted by 2:00 P.M. However, no
endorsement as to the time of receipt was made on the same. It is
further alleged that as per the norms the nomination form could have
been validly submitted till the meeting was called to order.
4.

It is also alleged that no other nominations were submitted and

Petitioner No. 11 was the sole candidate for the post. Even the club
bulletin dated 12/12/2005 containing the minutes of the meeting dated
I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 2 of 18

8/12/2005 reflected the Petitioner no. 11’s name in the list of
nominations
“scrutineers”

received.
were

It

is

appointed

alleged
by

that

the

on

14/12/2005

Respondent

No.

1,

two
in

contravention of Section 6 of the club’s Bye-laws, to scrutinize the
Petitioner’s form. The scrutineers rejected the nomination form on
grounds of it having been filed after 2:00 P.M. The General Body met
on 15/12/2005 and Respondent No.2 announced that he had not seen
his watch while receiving the form though the same was received
before the meeting was called to order. Thereafter, it is alleged that
the decision of the scrutineers rejecting the nomination form on
grounds of having been filed after 2:00 P.M. was conveyed by the
Respondent No 1 in the meeting held on 22.12.2005.
5.

On 23rd December 2005 Petitioner No.11 sent a letter to

Respondent No.1 appealing him to withdraw his decision but the same
was not received by him and subsequently it was couriered to the
Respondent. Thereafter various other letters were written.
6.

It is averred that on 29/12/2005 in the Annual General Meeting

before the elections took place, the petitioner was humiliated by the
Respondent No.1 and in protest the members of the club walked out
and refrained from voting. Only 30 members voted in the election out
of which 17 were candidates. On 4.1.06 a letter was sent to the
Respondents by several Rotarians demanding an urgent meeting of the

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 3 of 18

club to resolve this issue. However, no meeting was ever convened.
7.

On 1.2.06, it is averred, the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 sent a letter

to the petitioner No. 11 conveying to her the unanimous ratification
given by the Board to the decision of the Presiding Officer as to
rejection of her nomination form. To this also the Petitioners objected.
8.

The petitioner claims that Article XIV of the Constitution of the

Club contains an Arbitration Agreement in the following terms:
Article XIV Arbitration- Should any dispute arise
between any member or members, or a former
member or members and the club, or any officer or
the board of the club, relative to membership or to
any alleged breach of the constitution or bylaws, or
the expulsion of any member from the club, or on
any
account
whatsoever
which
cannot
be
satisfactorily settled under the procedure already
provided for such purpose, the matters in difference
shall be settled by arbitration. Each party shall
appoint an arbitrator and the arbitrators shall appoint
an umpire. Only members of a Rotary club may be
appointed as umpire or as arbitrators. The decision
arrived at by the arbitrators, or, in the event of their
disagreement, by the umpire, shall be final and
binding on all parties.”
9.

Apparently, the Arbitration clause was invoked vide letter dated

25/4/06 written by Petitioner No. 1 to Rotarian and past District
Governor, Shri K.K. Gupta requesting him to act as the Arbitrator
nominated by the petitioner. Shri K.K. Gupta vide his letter in reply
dated 26/4/2006 accepted his nomination to act as an Arbitrator. It
appears a letter invoking the Arbitration clause was sent on 26/4/06 to

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 4 of 18

the Respondents which was replied to vide letter dated 11/5/06. The
respondents took the stand that a decision of the 'Board' is not an
arbitrable dispute. It was also stated that, in any event, the nomination
of Shri K.K.Gupta by the petitioners was not acceptable. The
respondents also gave their own interpretation to the arbitration
agreement contained in clause XIV of the Constitution by claiming that
there would be 18 arbitrators.

The relevant extract from the

respondent's letter dated 11.5.2006 reads as follows:“In paragraph VII of your letter, you have started th
you are invoking the Arbitration Clause of the
Constitution and By-laws of the Rotary Club of Delhi.
May we make it clear that there is no dispute which
calls for Arbitration. There is no provision in the
Constitution of the Club which declares that the
decision of the Board of Directors is `a dispute'.
Without prejudice to what has been stated above
and without in any manner admitting that there is
any dispute, in any event your so-called nomination
of Rtn PDG K. K. Gupta is not in accordance with the
Constitution and By-laws of the Club and the same is
not acceptable. It may also be pointed out that PDG
K. K. Gupta himself is currently involved in some
disputes and controversies in his own Club, where
he was a PDG on earlier occasions and then become
the President of the same Club. It may be noted
that as per you submission in the letter under reply,
each and every member of the Board i.e. Office
Bearers and Directors are entitled to nominate their
own Arbitrators which comes to 18(eighteen) or
more arbitrators in the alleged `dispute' in the
letter.”
10.

Petitioners state that vide the bulletin dated 15/5/06 the name of

Respondent no. 30 was published as the new President Elect and it is
I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 5 of 18

averred that the same was done without resorting to elections, and it
was allegedly done unanimously by the board. The petitioners claim
that disputes and differences arose between the parties after the
nomination form of Petitioner No.11 was subjected to scrutiny
culminating in its rejection and appointment of Respondent No. 30 as
the President Elect. The contentious issues, that need consideration as
per the petitioner, have been formulated and laid out in para 60 of the
arbitration application. It is averred that these disputes fall within the
ambit of Article 14(arbitration agreement) of the club’s constitution
and are referable to arbitration.
11.

The Respondents entered appearance and moved the instant

Application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC praying for the rejection
of the arbitration application. The main thrust of the Respondents
objection is that the Arbitration Clause referred to by the Petitioner was
of 1999 vintage which got obliterated and amended vide a “direction”
of the Rotary International in the year 2004. According to

the

Respondents, the amended arbitration agreement in Article 15
provides as follows:
Article 15 Arbitration and Mediation
“Section 1 Disputes. Should any dispute, other than as
to a decision of the board, arise between any current or
former member(s) and this club, any club officer or the
board, on any account whatsoever which cannot be
settled under the procedure already provided for such
purpose, the dispute shall, upon a request to the
I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 6 of 18

secretary by any of the disputants, either be resolved
by mediation or settled by arbitration.”
Section 2 Date for Mediation or Arbitration. In the
event of mediation or arbitration, the board shall set a
date for the mediation or arbitration, in consultation
with disputants, to be held within twenty-one (21) days
after receipt of the request for mediation or
arbitration.”
12.

Respondents claim that the disputes sought to be raised are

primarily to challenge the decisions of the Board of Rotary Club of
Delhi and such a dispute is expressly excluded from the scope of
arbitration. The disputes raised cannot be referred to Arbitration, and
the petition is liable to be rejected.
13.

Petitioners dispute that the arbitration agreement as contained in

Article XIV of the Constitution has been amended as contended by the
Respondents. Vide order dated 9th November 2006 the respondents
were directed to state, by way of an affidavit, whether the so called
amended provision was circulated or made known to the members of
the club and whether the same was brought into force and made
applicable to the Rotary Club of Delhi, and if so, on which date. An
affidavit was filed by the Respondents on 30th November, 2006. After
examining the same, this Court vide order dated 13th December 2006
recorded that the Affidavit though filed did not conform to the direction
given by the Court. The respondents were given one more opportunity
to file the same or face consequences. Two affidavits has been filed on

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 7 of 18

2nd January 2007. They are of Mr. P.K.Verma, the President of Rotary
Club of Delhi, Respondent No.3 and Mr. U.N.Maira, Past President of
Rotary Club of Delhi, Respondent No.1, and are substantially the same.
14.

In

these

affidavits,

the

said

Respondents

state

that

the

membership of Rotary International consists of Rotary Clubs organized
and existing in accordance with the Constitution and Bylaws of Rotary
International.

A

club

admitted

to

the

membership

of

Rotary

International is required to function as per the “Standard Rotary Club
Constitution” and the bye-laws of Rotary International and as per
amendments carried out from time to time. The deponents' state that
it is not the practice or procedure that the manual of Rotary
International is given to each member individually but the same is
available for reference to members as and when they require or need
to update themselves. It is further stated that the deponents Mr. P.K.
Verma, the President of Rotary Club of Delhi and Mr. UN Maira, the
past President of Rotary Club of Delhi were not the Secretary of the
club in 2004 and they are not aware whether the amendments were
individually circulated or not.
15.

The aforesaid is not a satisfactory answer to the specific query

put by the Court. Even if Mr. P.K.Verma or Mr. UN Maira were not the
President in 2004, if the so called amendments had been circulated to
the members, there would have been a record of it with the Rotary

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 8 of 18

Club of Delhi. The deponents Mr. P.K.Verma and Mr. UN Maira do not
even claim that they, as members of Rotary Club of Delhi ever learnt
of the so called amendment due to its publication and circulation by
the Rotary Club of Delhi. It can, therefore, be safely inferred that the
so called amendment was in fact never circulated or made known to
the members of Rotary Club of Delhi.
16.

Now I proceed to deal with the submission of the respondents

that a Rotary club which is a member of Rotary International is bound
by

the directions issued by Rotary International such that the said

directions automatically get incorporated in the constitution of the
Member Rotary Club. Respondents rely upon the condition imposed
upon a club,

when it is admitted to membership in Rotary

International, which states that it must adopt, as its constitution, the
standard Rotary club constitution. This, according to him, means that
a direction of Rotary International issued to the member clubs,
subsequent to their admittance to membership

would automatically

get incorporated in the constitution of the member clubs. He refers to
Article 1 contained in part-I (Administration) of what is claimed to be
the Manual of Procedure of the year 2004 of Rotary International. The
said article, in so far it is relevant and relied upon by counsel for the
Respondents Mr. Girdhar Govind reads as follows:

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 9 of 18

“ADMINISTRATION OF CLUBS
Membership in Rotary International

17.

The members of RI consists of Rotary clubs
organized and existing in accordance with the RI
constitution and bylaws. When a club is admitted to
membership in RI, it is required to adopt as its
constitution the standard Rotary club constitution.
(RIB 2.030.) The standard Rotary club constitution
and the recommended Rotary club bylaws are
available in the yellow pages of the Manual of
Procedure and on the RI Web site (www.rotary.org.).
However, some clubs admitted to membership prior
to 6 June 1922 and clubs participating in RI pilot
projects are entitled to operate under the standard
Rotary club constitution and RI bylaws with
variations. (RIB 2.030.2.)”
Learned Senior Counsel for Petitioner, Mr. Lala Ram Gupta on the

other hand refutes the stand taken by the respondent and relies upon
Article XVII of the Constitution of the Rotary club of Delhi, which
prescribes the procedure for amending the constitution of the club.
Article XVII of the Constitution of Rotary Club of Delhi, in so far as it is
relevant reads as follows:
“Article XVII Amendments
Section 1- Time. Except as provided in section 4 of
this article, this constitution may be amended only
by the Council on legislation in the same manner as
is established in the bylaws of RI for the amendment
of its bylaws.
Section 2- Who May Propose. Amendments to this
constitution except as provided in section 4 of this
article, may be proposed only by a club, by a district
conference, by the general council or the conference
of RI in Great Britain and Ireland, by the council on
legislation, or by the board of directors of RI.
I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 10 of 18

Section 3 – Procedure
1. Any proposal to amend this constitution shall be
delivered to the general secretary of RI not later
than 30 June in the year preceding that in which
the council on legislation is to meet.
2. The general secretary of RI shall mail five copies of
all duly proposed amendments to each governor,
one copy to all members of the council on
legislation and one copy to the secretary of any
club that requests it, no later than 31 December in
the year the council shall be convened.
The
proposed amendments also will be made available
via the Rotary World Wide Web home page.
Resumes of all proposed enactments, with details
of the deletions and additions to the Manual of
Procedure omitted, shall be sent to each club.
3. The council shall consider and act upon each duly
proposed amendment transmitted to the council
and any duly proffered amendment thereof.
Section 4- Article I (Name) and Article II (Territorial
Limits) of this constitution shall be amended at any
regular meeting of this club, a quorum being present
by the affirmative vote of a majority of members
present and voting, provided that notice of such
proposed amendment shall have been mailed to
each member at least ten (10) days before such
meeting, and provided further, that such amendment
shall be submitted to the board of directors of RI for
its approval and shall become effective only when so
approved.
In the event of reconsideration of a
decision not to relinquish or share territory for the
organization of an additional club, as directed by the
board of directors of RI, as provided in subsection
2.020.4 of the bylaws of RI a two-thirds vote is
required to sustain the previous negative decision.”
18.

Similarly, for amendment of the Bye Laws of Rotary Club of

Delhi, he refers to Article XIV of the By Laws of Rotary Club of Delhi,
I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 11 of 18

which reads as follows:
“ These bylaws may be amended at any regular
meeting a quorum being present, by a two thirds vote
of all members present, provided that notice of such
proposed amendment shall have been mailed to each
member at least ten days before such meeting. No
amendment or the addition to these bylaws can be
made which is not in harmony with the club
constitution and with the Constitution and bylaws of
RI.”
19.

Petitioner contends that the procedure prescribed for

amendment of the Constitution of Rotary Club of Delhi has to be
resorted to before an amendment can take effect, and there is no
Article in the Constitution of Rotary Club of Delhi, which gives any
overriding effect to, what is claimed to be a direction of Rotary
International. He submits that no such amendment has been made to
the Constitution, and none is even claimed to have been made by the
respondents.
20.

The arguments of Mr. Girdhar Govind are, to my mind not well

founded. Even a perusal of Article 1 of the Manual Procedure, 2004 as
extracted above would show, that it is only at the time of admission to
membership of Rotary International that the member club is required
to adopt, as its Constitution, the standard Rotary Club Constitution.
Unless a club seeking admission to membership of Rotary International
frames its Constitution in accordance with the standard Rotary Club
Constitution, Rotary International may refuse to grant membership to

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 12 of 18

the club. That by itself does not mean that, as and when in future,
Rotary International issues “directions' in the Manual Procedures, the
said “directions” would automatically get incorporated as amendments
to the Constitution of every

club that is a member of Rotary

International. The Constitution of Rotary Club of Delhi lays down a
specific procedure to be followed for amending the Constitution. It is
not the case of the Respondents that any amendment to the
Arbitration Agreement contained in Article XIV was made by following
the procedure prescribed for amending the Constitution. Amendment
of the Constitution of any organised body is a serious matter and the
procedure prescribed therefor has to be complied with before it can be
claimed that an amendment to the Constitution has been brought into
force.

Consequently, in my view the so called amendments were

never circulated, nor were the same incorporated into the Constitution
of or became applicable to the Rotary Club of Delhi.
21.

Learned counsel for the petitioner, in the alternative also

submitted that, in any event, even if it were to be assumed that the
Arbitration agreement was the one contained in Article 15 as set up by
the respondents, even so the disputes raised by the petitioner were
referable to arbitration. He submits that the dispute in the present case
was not a dispute in relation to a decision of the board of Rotary Club
of Delhi. In fact the dispute is with regard to the rejection of the

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 13 of 18

nomination paper of petitioner No.11. The said rejection had taken
place at the hands of the scrutineers.

It is the decision to appoint

scrutineers, and the decision of the scrutineers to reject the
nomination of petitioner No.11, which is the primary dispute raised by
the petitioners. The dispute is between the petitioners on the one hand
and the President and Secretary of Rotary Club of Delhi on the other
hand.

Merely because the board passes a resolution accepting the

decision taken by the scrutineers, it would not cease to be a decision
of the scrutineers, and would not cease to be an arbitral dispute. The
right of the petitioner to raise the dispute in arbitration could not be
taken away by taking the said matter to the board.
22.

Since I am of the view that XIV of the Constitution of Rotary

Club of Delhi as propounded by the petitioners is in force, I am not
going into the alternate submission.
23.

Consequently, Article 14 of the Constitution of the Rotary

Club of Delhi which contains an Arbitration Agreement would govern
the parties. This arbitration agreement postulates the existence of
disputes between member (s) or a former member (s) on the one hand,
and the club, any officer or the board of the club on the other hand.
The dispute should relate to the issue of membership, or where there is
an allegation of breach of the Constitution, or by laws, or the expulsion
of any member of the club or, on any account whatsoever which

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 14 of 18

cannot be satisfactorily settled under the procedure already provided
for such parties. In my view, the dispute with regard to the invalidation
of the nomination of petitioner No.11 for the post of President Elect for
the year 2006-07 is a dispute which would be governed by the
Arbitration agreement contained in Article 14 of the Constitution of
Rotary Club of Delhi. The said Arbitration agreement is very wide in its
scope, since it covers all disputes relating to breach of the Constitution
or the bye-laws as well as to disputes that may arise “on any account
whatsoever”.
24.

The objection of the respondents that there is non-joinder of a

necessary party i.e. Rotary Club of Delhi in the arbitration application
also does not appear to be correct.

The arbitration agreement in

Article XIV applies to disputes, inter alia, between member(s)/past
member(s) and officers of the club. The petitioners have raised
disputes with the officers i.e. Respondent nos. 1 and 2, the then
President and Secretary of Rotary Club of Delhi.
application being I.A. No. 7122/06

Consequently the

filed by the respondents

under

Order 7 Rule 11 C.P.C is rejected being devoid of merit.
25.

It is settled law that in a case where Order 7 R. 11 CPC is

applicable, the issue of maintainability/bar of jurisdiction/lack of cause
of action has to be decided by reference only to the plaint.

In the

present case, the Respondents have, in effect, pleaded their defence
I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 15 of 18

by producing and relying upon documents, and by making submissions
in answer to the averments relevant to decide the question of
reference of disputes to arbitration. What has been styled as an
application under Order 7 R. 11 CPC by the respondents, is in fact a
reply to the petition itself.
26.

While deciding an application under Section 11 of the Arbitration

and Conciliation Act this Court has to determine primarily the existence
if its own jurisdiction, the existence of an arbitration agreement
between the parties before the Court, the existence of an arbitral
dispute and the fulfillment of the pre-conditions for exercise of
jurisdiction. (Kindly see SBP & Co. v. Patel Engineering Ltd., (2005)
8 SCC 618).

In my view, there is a valid and binding arbitration

agreement contained in Article XIV of the Constitution of Rotary Club of
Delhi, to which the parties before me are party.

The scope of this

arbitration agreement is wide enough to cover the disputes sought to
be raised by the petitioners. The existence of the dispute itself cannot
be questioned since the nomination of petitioner No.11 for the post of
President Elect for the year 2006-07 has been rejected by the
scrutineers, and the arbitration agreement is wide enough to cover the
said disputes. The territorial jurisdiction is not disputed by the
Respondents and the disputes, in any event, relate to the Rotary Club
of Delhi, operating in Delhi. Since a notice dated 26.4.2006 invoking

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 16 of 18

the arbitration agreement was evidently sent by the petitioners to the
respondents and the respondents have taken the stand that there is no
dispute which calls for arbitration (in the letter dated 11.5.2006) and
consequently

failed

to

nominate

the

Second

Arbitrator,

the

preconditions for the exercise of jurisdiction under Section 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 are satisfied,
27.

In view of the aforesaid, the present petition must succeed.

According to Article XIV, the Arbitral Tribunal is to consist of three
Arbitrators, one to be nominated by the two disputant groups and the
third to be appointed by the two nominated Arbitrators. The petitioners
have already nominated Rotarian K. K. Gupta, Past District Governor,
as on one of the Arbitrators. The respondents have failed to nominate
the second arbitrator. Consequently, they have lost their right to make
the nomination. I accordingly appoint Rotarian, Dr.Jagdish Chandna, D296, Defence Colony, New Delhi as the second arbitrator to adjudicate
upon the disputes arising between the parties. The two arbitrators viz,
Mr. K.K. Gupta and Dr. Jagdish Chandna shall appoint the third
arbitrator who shall act as the Chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal. The
arbitral Tribunal shall be free to fix its own fees, which shall be equally
shared by both the parties.
28.

Let a copy of this order be sent to the two Arbitrators Mr.

K.K.Gupta and Dr. Jagdish Chandna by the Registry of the Court, who

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 17 of 18

may mutually proceed to appoint the third arbitrator within thirty days
of the receipt of this order. The Arbitration Application No.302/2006 is
allowed with costs of Rs. 10,000/-. Dasti.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE
February 06, 2007
as/mw

I.A.7122/06 in AA No.302/06

Page 18 of 18

