*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P. (C) No. 7857 OF 2004
DATE OF DECISION : 6th August 2007
Dr. Rajesh Karol

.....
Through:

Petitioner

Mr. C. M. Mohan, Advocate.

versus
Union of India & Others

.....

Through:

Respondents

Mr. Anil Gautam with Ms. Jyoti
Singh, Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J. (Oral)
*
1.

The petitioner is a medical doctor having a decree in MBBS

with post graduate diploma in Dermatology and Venerology. The petitioner
has

been

working

with

the

respondent

Employee

State

Insurance

Corporation since 1980. In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India, he challenges the order dated 20 th November 2003 passed by

W.P(C)7857-04

Page 1 of 5

Central Administrative Tribunal (the Tribunal) in O.A. No.1887/2002,
whereby his aforesaid O.A. was dismissed by the Tribunal.
2.

The petitioner had approached the Tribunal to challenge the

order dated 16.7.2001 whereby the penalty of reduction of his pay by two
stages in the present scale of pay was imposed upon the petitioner. The
reduction was to remain for 2 years during which period, the pay of the
petitioner was to remain constant at the reduced rates. It was further
directed that the penalty will have cumulative effect. The petitioner also
challenged the order whereby his departmental appeal was dismissed on
30th October 2001 and the order dated 4.9.2001 whereby recovery of Non
Practicing Allowance (NPA) from 6.4.1999 to 30.6.1999 was affected.
3.

The petitioner was charge sheeted on the charge that while

functioning as Chief Medical Officer, IGEIS Hospital, he had indulged in
private practice at a Shop at Swati Complex, A-9, Acharya Niketan, Main
Patpar Ganj, Mayur Vihar, Delhi, (hereinafter called the Clinic). By his said
conduct he had violated Rule 15(1) of the CCS (Conduct Rules) 1964, which
were applicable to the employee of the Corporation by virtue of Regulation
23 of the Employee State Insurance Corporation (Staff & Conditions of
Service) Regulations 1959. The inquiry officer was appointed who in his
inquiry report exonerated the petitioner. However, the Disciplinary Authority
prima-facie did not agree with the findings of the inquiry officer. The
petitioner was provided the inquiry report along with the note of
disagreement, to which he filed his representation. After considering the
same, the aforesaid penalty order was passed by the Disciplinary Authority.
The departmental appeal of the petitioner was also rejected.
W.P(C)7857-04

Page 2 of 5

4.

The contention of the petitioner before the Tribunal was, and

before us is that there was no evidence on record to hold that he was
indulging in private practice. He contends that it has not been established
that the petitioner had charged any fee or given receipt in respect thereof.
The petitioner's case is that his wife, who is also a medical doctor, is a
private practitioner at the Clinic. He states that in the evening he normally
accompanies his wife to the said Clinic and he sometimes drops and picks
her up from the Clinic, while at other times he sits in Clinic with her. He
states that the clientele of his wife know that he is a skin specialist and
consult him for their skin related ailments. He provides his services to such
patients, however, without levying any charge.
5.

The case of the respondent, on the other hand, was that the

petitioner was not working as a specialist in the Corporation. He had not
been granted permission to give free consultation as a skin specialist. A
complaint had been received on 6.4.1999 alleging that the petitioner was
indulging in private practice in the Clinic. It was further complained that he
was habitual in leaving the hospital at 12.45 PM daily. Accordingly, the
Vigilance Department carried out an investigation into this complaint. A
Vigilance team visited the aforesaid clinic on 23rd July 1999. At that time,
the wife of the petitioner was not in the Clinic. However, the petitioner was
available with an attendant. Shri Ghanshyam Singh, one of the members of
the Vigilance team introduced himself as a patient. He was examined by the
petitioner and was charged Rs.80/- as consultation fee. On the aforesaid
facts, the Petitioner was charge sheeted and inquiry was conducted.

W.P(C)7857-04

Page 3 of 5

6.

The petitioner does not deny the fact that he treated Shri

Ghanshyam Singh in the clinic and he also issued a prescription of
medicines to Shri Ghanshyam Singh. It is his case that the receipt of Rs.80/was only given by his wife and it could not be said that he was indulging in
private practice.
7.

Before us, it is argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner

that admittedly at the clinic no sign board of the petitioner was found to
have been displayed. It is also argued that the investigation team did not
make any inquiries from the neighbours to ascertain as to whether the
petitioner was operating professionally from the clinic. The submission of
the petitioner even before us is that there is lack of evidence to hold him
guilty of the alleged misconduct.
8.

We are not impressed by the argument of the petitioner. To us

it is obvious that if the petitioner were to run or operate professionally from
the clinic, which is otherwise not permitted under the Service Rules, the
petitioner is unlikely to put his name plate or a sign board on the clinic. The
absence of the petitioner’s sign board or name plate therefore does not lead
to the conclusion that he was not indulging in private practice at that clinic.
The matter is to be viewed in the light of the evidence that was actually
produced in the inquiry proceedings and also in the light of the admissions
of the petitioner himself. He admits that he was at the clinic on 23.7.1999.
He also admits that Shri Ghanshyam Singh did visit the clinic on the said
date and that he did in fact examine Shri Ghanshyam Singh. He also admits
that a receipt for Rs.80/- as consultation fee was issued to Shri Ghanshyam
Singh, though in the name of his wife.
W.P(C)7857-04

Page 4 of 5

9.

We inquired from the Counsel for the petitioner as to for what

services the consultation fee of Rs.80/- was charged by the petitioner’s wife
when, according to the petitioner, she had not examined or treated Shri
Ghanshyam Singh at all. To this, the Counsel for the petitioner had no
answer.
10.

It appears that the petitioner was conscious of the fact that he

could not have charged the consultation fee in his own name on account of
his service conditions, and therefore the fee was charged in the name of his
wife, even though the medical consultation and advise was provided by the
petitioner and not by his wife. In view of the aforesaid, we find no infirmity
in the order of the Tribunal. The same does not call for interference.
Dismissed.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

A.K.SIKRI, J.
August 06, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P(C)7857-04

Page 5 of 5

