*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision: September 06, 2007

+
%

W.P ( C) No. 1260 of 2003
Feroz Ahmed
Through:

.....Petitioner
Mr. N.A. Siddiqui, Advocate

versus
Delhi Development Authority & Ors. ..... Respondents
Through: Ms. Anusuya Salwan, Advocate
CORAM:
HON”BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

A.K. SIKRI, J.(Oral)
1.

Learned counsel for the respondent has produced

before us a copy of the notification dated 25 th July, 2007 issued by
the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions, Department of Personnel and Training in exercise of
its power in sub Section (2) of Section 14 of the Administrative
Tribunals
wpc 1260.03

Act.

As

per

this

notification,

a

number

of

page 1 of 6

corporations/societies/other authorities have been brought within
the umbrella of Central Administrative Tribunal. The date on and
from which provisions of sub Section (2) of Section 14 of the said
Act would be applied is specified as 1st August, 2007. The Delhi
Development Authority is also included in the said schedule to the
said notification at serial no. 57. Thus, from 1st August, 2007, the
jurisdiction is now vested with the Central Administrative Tribunal
Act to deal with the service matters of the employees/officials of
the Delhi Development Authority.

Section 29 sub Section (2)

stipulates that all pending matters are to be transferred to the
Central Administrative Tribunal which are pending before a Court
or other Authority immediately before the date with effect from
which jurisdiction is conferred on the Central Administrative
Tribunal in relation to any local or other authority or corporation
or society, being a suit or proceeding, the cause of action,
whereon it is based, is such that it would have been, if it had
arisen after the said date, within the jurisdiction of the said
Tribunal. It cannot be disputed that an employee of the DDA who
has to bring such an action after the dates specified, i.e., 1st
August, 2007 has to approach the Central Administrative Tribunal.
Therefore by virtue of Section 29 (2) of the aforesaid Act, the
present proceedings which involve the service related disputes,
wpc 1260.03

page 2 of 6

are to be transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal.
2.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the

petitioner has challenged the vires of the Rules and therefore the
matter has to be considered by this Court only under Article 226
of the Constitution of India, as the Central Administrative Tribunal
does have any such power. This argument is wholly misconceived
in view of 7 Judges judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
L. Chandra Kumar vs Union of India AIR (1997) SC 1125.
Paragraph 90 from the said report is relevant and the same reads
as follows:“90. We may first address the issue of
exclusion of the power of judicial review of the
High Courts. We have already held that in
respect of the power of judicial review, the
jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article
226/227 cannot be excluded. It has been
contended before us that the Tribunals should
not be allowed to adjudicate upon matters
where the vires of legislations is questioned,
and that they should restrict themselves to
handling matters where constitutional issues
are not raised. We cannot bring ourselves to
agree to this proposition as that may result in
splitting up proceedings and may cause
avoidable delay. If such a view were to be
adopted, it would be open for litigants to raise
constitutional issues, many of which may be
quite frivolous, to directly approach the High
Court and thus subvert the jurisdiction of the
Tribunals. Moreover, even in these special
branches of law, some areas to involve the
consideration of constitutional questions on a
regular basis ; for instance in service law
wpc 1260.03

page 3 of 6

3.

matters, a large majority of cases involve in
interpretation of Articles 14, 15 and 16
of
the Constitution. To hold that the Tribunals
have no power to handle matters involving
constitutional issues would not serve the
purpose for which they were constituted. On
the other hand, to hold that all such decisions
will be subject to the jurisdiction of the High
Courts under Articles 226/227 of the
Constitution before a Division Bench of the
High Court within whose territorial jurisdiction
the Tribunal concerned falls will serve two
purposes. While saving the power of judicial
review of legislative action vested in the High
Courts
under
Article
226/227
of
the
Constitution, it will ensure that frivolous claims
are filtered out through the process of
adjudication in the Tribunal. The High Court
will also have the benefit of a reasoned
decision on merits which will be of use to it in
finally deciding the matter.”
Learned counsel for the petitioner also submitted that

in this case, Supreme Court has given specific direction in its
judgment dated 29th September, 2006 directing the Division
Bench of this Court to hear the present petition. We may note
that the present petition filed by the petitioner was dismissed by
a single Judge of this Court vide order dated 13 th January, 2004
and LPA was also dismissed by the Division Bench. Against this
judgment, the petitioner had appealed to the Supreme Court and
the Supreme Court set aside the judgments of this Court vide
aforesaid judgment dated 29th September, 2006 and remanded
the case back to this Court with direction that having regard to

wpc 1260.03

page 4 of 6

the

importance

of

the

question

involved,

the

matter

be

considered by the Division Bench. Following directions were given
in this behalf which are referred to by learned counsel for the
petitioner :-

4.

“We are, therefore, of the opinion that the matter
requires a fresh consideration at the hands of the
High Court. The Writ Petitioner – Appellant would
be entitled to file an application for amendment of
writ petition questioning the validity of the said
purported rules. Respondents shall file a counter
affidavit within two weeks form the date of filing
the said application.
Keeping in view the
importance of the question involved, we are of the
opinion that the matter should be considered by
the Division Bench itself. We, however, set aside
the impugned judgment of the of the Division
Bench and remit the matter for fresh
consideration in accordance with the directions
and observations made hereinbefore. For the
views we have taken, it is not necessary to deal
with the other contentions raised by the parties
herein at this stage. In view of the fact that the
matter is pending for a long time, we would
request the High Court to consider the desirability
of disposing of the matter expeditiously and
preferably within wight weeks from the date of
receipt of copy of this order.”
However, those directions were given as, at that time,

it was the High Court which could have dealt with such a matter
as there were no notification under Section 14(2) of the Central
Administrative Tribunal Act issued earlier, which is a subsequent
development as the notification aforesaid is dated 25th July, 2007.

wpc 1260.03

page 5 of 6

5.

Having regard to the legal position after the issuance

of the said notification, since the matter is now to be considered
by the Central Administrative Tribunal, the petitioner cannot rely
upon the aforesaid direction to contend that only this Court
should consider the Writ Petition and matter be not sent to
Central Administrative Tribunal.

Therefore, we reject this

contention of the petitioner.
6.

The matter is accordingly transferred to the Central

Administrative Tribunal. Registry should send the records of this
case to the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New
Delhi.

Parties shall appear before the Tribunal on 3rd October,

2007.
A.K.SIKRI, J.

September 06, 2007
aruna

wpc 1260.03

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

page 6 of 6

