*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M(M) No.897 of 2006

%

Date of decision: 08.01.2008
Sh. Devki Nandan Rasia
.....Petitioner
Through: Ms. Anamika Ghai, Advocate
versus
Shri Ram Nath Tomar
..... Respondent
Through: Ms. Chandrani Prasad, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J

1.

This petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India

is preferred against the order passed by the Additional Rent Control
Tribunal in RCA No.588/2004 dated 13.03.2006.

By the impugned

order the learned Rent Control Tribunal dismissed the appeal
preferred by the petitioner/landlord against the order passed by the
learned Additional Rent Controller (ARC) dated 16.11.2004, whereby
the ARC dismissed the eviction petition filed by the petitioner under

C.M(M) No.897.06

Page 1 of 7

Section 14(1)(a) of the Delhi Rent Control Act (for short the 'Act').
2.

The admitted position is that the respondent was inducted

as a tenant by one late Sh. Krishan Chand in respect of one shop
measuring 13 ft. X 8 ft. in premises No.15, Govind Puri Extension,
Kalkaji, New Delhi. The rent deed was executed on 06.12.1978. The
rate

of

rent

was

Rs.385/-

per

month.

Admittedly,

the

respondent/tenant had not paid a rent since February, 1996.

It is

submitted by learned counsel for the respondent that in pursuance of
the order dated passed under Section 15(1) of the Act, the arrears of
rent

were

deposited

from

February,

1996

onwards

and

the

respondent continued to deposit the same @ Rs.385/- per month from
time to time. However, upon the dismissal of the eviction petition by
the Additional Rent Controller on 16.11.2004, the respondent/tenant
was

permitted

to

withdraw

the

deposit

made

by

him

and

consequently he has withdrawn the said amount. Thereafter he has
admittedly not paid any rent to anyone.
3.

The petitioner filed the aforesaid eviction petition under

Section 14(1)(a) of the Act claiming to be the landlord of the property.
Admittedly he is the son-in-law of late Sh. Krishan Chand, the original
owner and landlord. The petitioner claimed right to recover the rent
from the respondent on the basis of a Will executed in his favour by
late Sh. Krishan Chand dated 06.04.1993, who passed away on
21.06.1994. The relevant portion of the said Will which was exhibited

C.M(M) No.897.06

Page 2 of 7

as Ex.PW-1/3 before the trial Court reads as under: “WHEREAS I am owner/in possession of
property bearing No.1666/1, Gobindpuri Extn.,
New Delhi, I have constructed a Mandir in the
portion of the aforesaid property on an area
20'X60' and said Temple is known as
“KRISHAN MANDIR”. Shri Devki Nandan is
acting as PUJARI of the Temple and looking
after the same properly. I have full faith in
him.
I willingly make this WILL that after my
demise the said portion the said portion of the
property where “KRISHAN MANDIR” is
constructed shall be the property of the said
Temple and Petitioner. Devki Nandan shall be
LEGATEE of that said property. He can get
the said portion transferred in the name of
Mandir in the records of all concerned
authorities on the basis of this Will and shall
act as executor till life of the said Mandir and
shall be competent to make a WILL in respect
of the said Temple to any other deserving
Pujari/Person. If unfortunately the said Pujari
predeceases me then I shall make another
Pujari.”
4.

The respondent sought to avoid its liability to pay the rent

to the petitioner on the ground that there was a dispute between the
heirs of late Sh. Krishan Chand with regard to the succession to the
property in question, which is a part of the Krishan Mandir built on an
area of 20' X 60'.

It was argued by the respondent that after the

demise of Sh. Krishan Chand his widow Smt. Rajkumari was realising
the rent and the petitioner did not stake any claim at that stage. It
was further argued that one of the sons of late Sh. Krishan Chand
namely Sh. Lalit Kumar was disputing the Will set up by the

C.M(M) No.897.06

Page 3 of 7

petitioner.
5.

As aforesaid, the eviction petition filed by the petitioner

was dismissed by the learned ARC and the Additional Rent Control
Tribunal has also dismissed the appeal by the impugned order. The
learned Tribunal accepts the Will Ex.PW-1/3 as duly proved since one
of the attesting witnesses had appeared and testified to prove the
Will.

My attention is also drawn to the averment made by the

respondent in his suit seeking permanent injunction against the
petitioner, one Rajiv Kalsi and the MCD, wherein the respondent had
himself stated that in an earlier suit filed by him seeking permanent
injunction against Smt. Rajkumari and her four sons the “said Raj
Kumari & her sons as defendant no.1 to 5 filed a written statement in
whch they said they are not keeping any concern with the property,
the property has already been declared in favour of defendant no.2
Pt. Devkinanda Rasia, however, said defendant no.2 never received
any notice to the plaintiff with regard of his becoming the owner in
the said property.”
6.

Consequently, so far as the respondent is concerned in

my view the issue with regard to the identity of the person entitled to
claim the rent was established beyond doubt. The learned ARC and
the learned Tribunal in my view rightly held that the property i.e.
Mandir had been bequeathed to the temple and the petitioner Sh.
Devki Nandan had been given the right of Pujari only. He had been

C.M(M) No.897.06

Page 4 of 7

authorised to get the property transferred in the name of Mandir in
the revenue records. No doubt he did not become the absolute owner
of the property and was only a Pujari. It is the deity/the Mandir, which
was the owner and beneficiary. However, it is clear from the 'Will'
that the petitioner was nominated as the manager who was to
manage the temple and its property. Obviously, the deity could not
have acted on its own and would have to act through a living person.
Consequently, it was the petitioner who was entitled to act for and on
behalf of deity and to recover the rent from the tenant. No doubt the
petition had been filed by the petitioner Sh. Devki Nandan in his own
name. However, to my mind is not fatal to the maintainability of the
petition since he had relied on the 'Will' the terms of which are
abundantly clear.
7.

In my view, the Tribunal erred in concluding that since the

petitioner had not served the notice on the respondent to recover the
rent soon after the demise of late Sh. Kishan Chand, he cannot be
considered to be the landlord. The widow of late Sh. Kishan Chand
was still alive, and the petitioner was the son-in-law of the deceased
late Sh. Krishan Chand and his widow. If he permitted Smt. Rajkumari
to recover the rent from the respondent, it cannot be take to mean
that he gave up his right to assert his claim to recover the rent as the
Manager/Pujari of the temple.

Merely because the petitioner had

never earlier recovered the rent, even in his capacity of the Pujari of

C.M(M) No.897.06

Page 5 of 7

the temple, it cannot be said that he was not entitled to do so in
future. It is not that the petitioner was claiming the rent even for the
period for which it stood paid to late Smt. Rajkumari. The petitioner
did in fact serve a notice of demand on the respondent and this is
evident from paragraph 18(b) of the written statement filed by the
respondent in the eviction petition, wherein he states that he has
received two notices one from Lalit Kumar and another from the
petitioner and both of them claimed to be the owners of the tenanted
premises.
8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner concedes that the

beneficiary under the Will is the temple, and that the petitioner Sh.
Devki Nandan Rasia is only the Pujari and manager and that the
petitioner would amend the cause title of the eviction petition to
reflect the said position.
9.

Learned counsel for the respondent has relied on the

following decisions: 1.
2.

Chunni Lal & Anr. Vs. Smt. Vidya Devi & Ors.
2007 II AD (DELHI) 523

3.

10.

Kamla Devi (Mrs.) Vs. M/s Haji Amir 2006 IV AD
(DELHI) 423

Kishan Chand (Sh.) Vs. Sri Chand 2006 VII AD
(DELHI) 285
The decisions in Kamla Devi (supra) and Kishan Chand

(supra) are totally irrelevant for deciding the present controversy, as
they deal with eviction on ground of sub-letting. As far the decision in
C.M(M) No.897.06

Page 6 of 7

Chunni Lal (supra) is concerned, I find that the said decision in fact
advances the case of the petitioner, inasmuch as, the Will in question
has already been proved to the satisfaction of the tribunal by calling
one of the attesting witnesses. The title of the landlord as concluded
in the court below cannot be questioned by the tenant. Moreover, the
Learned Single Judge in Chunni Lal (supra) held in the said decision
that section 14(1)(a) of the Act uses the expression 'Landlord', which
is defined in Section 2(e) of the Act, in contra-distinction to the word
owner and by attempting to raise a title dispute, the tenant cannot
avoid his liability.
11.

In view of my aforesaid discussion, I set aside the

impugned order passed by the Additional Rent Control Tribunal in
RCA No.588/2004 dated 13.03.2006 as well as the order passed by
the Additional Rent Controller dated 16.11.2004.

I permit the

petitioner to amend the cause title of the eviction petition as
aforesaid.

The respondent is directed to pay to the petitioner the

arrears of rent from February, 1999 onwards till date within one
month and to continue to pay the same in future regularly and
punctually. The amended memo of parties be filed by the petitioner
before the Additional Rent Controller within two weeks.
12.

Petition stands disposed of.

January 08, 2008
Rsk
C.M(M) No.897.06

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

Page 7 of 7

