*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M.(M) No.122/2008

%

Date of decision: 08.02.2008
Shashi Bala Jain
Through:

.....Petitioner
Mr. Ankur Singhal,
Advocate

versus
Rakesh Sapra

..... Respondent
Through:

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J
*
This petition has been filed to impugn the order passed by
the learned ARC, Delhi, whereby he has granted leave to defend to
the respondent to defend the petition filed under Section 14(D) read
with Section 25(B) of the Delhi Rent Control Act. The learned ARC has
granted leave to defend to the respondent by observing that in the
application seeking leave to defend the purpose of letting claimed to
be residential by the petitioner was under challenge.

According to

the respondent, the property in question was a shop. The petitioner
C.M.(M) No.122/2008

Page 1 of 2

is the owner of four shops on the ground floor of the building out of
which one shop is with the respondent and one other shop is with one
Sh. Sanjay Jain, whereas the other two shops are lying vacant and in
possession of the petitioner. The learned ARC observed that in the
reply filed by the landlord, the averment with regard to the two shops
and a hall in occupation of the petitioner lying vacant was not
specifically denied. Moreover, there was no reply to the contention of
the respondent that a portion of the property on the first floor had
been let out for residential purposes to another tenant, whereas the
room without any amenities, let out to the respondent was a shop.
Yet, the landlady had not sought to evict the said tenant on the first
floor and is going after the respondent.

Learned counsel for the

petitioner is not in a position to dispute the observations of the
learned ARC with regard to the pleadings contained in the application
filed by the respondent for seeking leave to defend the eviction
petition, and the reply thereto by the petitioner.

In the aforesaid

circumstances, in my view the learned ARC was right in granting
leave to defend to the respondent/tenant and I find no infirmity in the
impugned order. Dismissed.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
February 08, 2008
RSK

C.M.(M) No.122/2008

Page 2 of 2

