*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M.(M) No.188/2008

%

Date of decision: 08.02.2008
Hari Ram Sharma
Through:

.....Petitioner
Mr. Sumit Kumar Khatri,
Advocate

versus
Naraini Devi Sharma
Through:
CORAM:

..... Respondent

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J
*
CM No.1876/2008
Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
CM(M) No.188/2008 & CM No.1875/2008
1.

This petition has been filed to impugn the order passed by

the learned Additional Rent Controller (ARC), Delhi in E. 462, 463, 464
and 465/07/05 dated 06.10.2007, whereby the learned ARC has
rejected the leave to defend applications filed by the respective
tenants in the four petitions filed under Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi
Rent Control Act filed by the respondent. The petitioner before me
was the respondent/tenant in E. 463/07/05.
2.

Admittedly, the property in question was purchased by

C.M.(M) No.188/2008

Page 1 of 7

the respondent/landlady on 23.12.1999 from the previous owner Sh.
Ram Jot Vyas.

The petitioner and the other tenants were already

occupying the different portions in the property in question bearing
Ward No.IV, Kucha Latto Shah, Dariba, Delhi-06.

The petition was

filed in 2005 after waiting of the statutory period of 5 years from the
date of purchase. Learned ARC has taken note of the fact that the
respondent/landlord has four married sons, two of whom viz. Sh. R.K.
Sharma and Sh. Rajkumar Sharma are residing with the respondent
with their respective families, while two other sons are residing in
separate accommodation with their respective wives. The case made
out by the respondent/landlady was that she bona fide needs the
accommodation not only for meeting her present needs but also
claimed that her two married sons, who are residing in separate
accommodations also desire to live with her in her old age. The
learned ARC has examined the bonafide need of the respondent even
by ignoring the need of the respondent in respect of her two sons not
presently residing with her, and on the basis of the need made out
and founded upon the family members in fact residing in the portion
in her possession.

No dispute with regard to the ownership and

purpose of letting was raised by three of the tenants and only one
tenant raised a dispute with regard to the purpose of letting by
contending

that

commercial.

the

purpose

of

letting

was

residential-cum-

The petitioner is not the tenant, who had raised the

dispute about the purpose of letting being residential.
3.

The requirement of the respondent/landlord and the

C.M.(M) No.188/2008

Page 2 of 7

family was pleaded on the basis that she along with her husband, her
two married sons, five granddaughters aged 22 years, 20 years, 18
years, 17 years & 15 years and three grandsons aged 20 years, 18
years & 14 years were residing with her. The bonafide need of the
respondent and her family has been discussed in paras 6 to 10 of the
impugned order, which read as follows: “6. Now we come to the bonafide requirement
of the petitioner regarding qua size of her
family. Although the respondent cannot take
the plea that two sons, residing separately,
are not dependent upon the petitioner for
residence or that they cannot wish to live with
their old age mother, yet for the sake of
arguments even if it is considered that these
two sons namely Vijesh Sharma and Rakesh
Sharma have independent accommodation
with them let's consider the size of the family
of the petitioner who is residing at the suit
property with her. The family of the petitioner
consists of three couples i.e. petitioner and
her husband, her two married sons and apart
from them she has five grand daughters aged
22 years, 20 years, 18 years, 17 years, 15
years and three grand sons aged 20 years
and 18 years and 14 years, which makes the
total size of the family 14 persons.
7. Admittedly three bed rooms are required
for each couple and for eight grown up grand
sons the petitioner at least requires four
bedrooms as they consists of five grown up
grand daughters and three grown up grands
sons, so the petitioner at least require seven
bed rooms, one guest room, one drawing cum
dining room and one study room, which
makes out the total number of rooms to be
ten. Admittedly all these rooms should be
habitable i.e having the size of more than
100 sq.ft and should also have independent
entrances, reliance for which can be placed
on judgments reported in 1984 Delhi 1987
followed by 2000(1) RCR 87, 2006(91) DRJ
558 wherein it has been categorically held
C.M.(M) No.188/2008

Page 3 of 7

that a room having a floor area of less than
100 sq.feet and having no independent
entrance, can be counted as a habitable
independent room.
8.
Now as per the site plan, filed by the
respondent, though the same is in dispute,
the petitioner has two rooms on the ground
floor having the size of 13'X7' and 7'X6' and
on the second floor the petitioner has four
rooms having the size of 7'X6', 7'x11', 7'x6'
and 11x7'. Out of all these alleged rooms,
available with the petitioner, none of the
rooms is having the size of 100 sq.ft which
shows that none of them is a habitual room.
Apart from that the room on the first floor
having the size of 7'x6' have no independent
entrance, similar is the condition of two rooms
on the second floor having the size of 7'x6'
each.
Since none of these rooms have
independent entrance, they cannot be
counted as separate rooms. Even in the case
of the respondent is admitted to be correct,
the petitioner is not having even a single
habitable room in the entire premises owned
by her. Though the site plan filed by the
petitioner shows a different story. As per the
petitioner, she has only one room on the
ground floor, one room on the first floor and
one room on the second floor. Admittedly,
the room alleged by the respondents as a
room on the ground floor, is actually bath as
the counsel for the respondent; during the
course of the arguments, have not been able
to show a single bath room in the entire
premises consisting of three floors in the site
plan bath room in the entire premise
consisting of three floors in the site plan,
which means that the case of the petitioner
that there is only one bath room on the
ground floor seems to be the correct position,
which shows that only one room of 13'x7' is
available with the petitioner on the ground
floor and one room of 11'x7' on the first floor
and one room of 11'x7' on the second floor.
Even by the size given by the petitioner none
of these rooms is habitable and on the other
hand it has already been said that the
petitioner requires at least 10 habitable
C.M.(M) No.188/2008

Page 4 of 7

rooms for her family.
9.
Now, we come to the accommodation
available with each respondent.
The
respondent Ram Babu is having with him two
rooms on the ground floor having the size of
12'x6' and 7'x6', the respondent Hem
Chander is having two rooms with him on the
first floor having the size of 7'x6' and 11'x7'.
The respondent Hari Ram is having two rooms
with him the size of which has not been given
by any of the parties and respondent Durga
Ram is having one room on the first floor and
one room on the second floor the sizes of
which is not given by any of the parties. Even
the rooms in possession of the respondent,
the size is less than 100 Sq. feet and even
they are not considered to be habitable room,
however, in the calculation they comes to six
rooms in all. It means the entire property in
possession of the respondent collectively will
not be able to satisfy the bonafide need of the
petitioner. It has been held in the judgments
reported in 1983 (2) RCR 311, 1982(1)RLR
Delhi 332 and 1976 RCR Delhi 249 that the
landlord's requirement for one separate room
for each member of his family including
himself and his wife cannot be said to be
unreasonable.
It has further been held in
the judgment reported in 2000(10) RCR 439
that for the landlord's family consisting of 10
members including growing children, the need
for 11 rooms is a bonafide need. In the
judgment reported in 1999 (1) RCR, 152 the
accommodation of eight rooms, available for
the family of 12 members of the landlord, was
held to be insufficient. It was further stated in
this judgment that“It was illogical to hold that minor children
can be accommodated with the elders of the
family.
10. It has also been held in 2000(1) RCR 20
that the children between the age of 7 to 11
years cannot be asked to share the bed room
with their parents and therefore need
separate accommodation for themselves. It
has been held in the judgment reported in
C.M.(M) No.188/2008

Page 5 of 7

2000 RCR 463 that the Court has to consider
the entire material placed on record including
the supporting documents to take into
consideration the case of the parties and if
the tenant's plea did not make out any case,
leave to defend should be refused.”
4.

The first submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner

before me is that when the respondent purchased the property in the
year 1999, she was aware of the fact that the petitioner and the other
tenants

were

accommodation

already

in

occupation.

that

would

become

She

was

available

to

aware

of

the

her

for

her

occupation and for the occupation and her family members.
Therefore, it cannot be said that her need was bonafide.
submission, to my mind, has no force.

This

The petition has been filed

after the expiry of a period of five years from the date of purchase of
the property by the landlady.

The law puts an embargo that the

landlord, who has purchased the property, cannot sue for eviction on
the ground of bona fide requirement in the first five years from the
date of purchase of the property. Therefore, I reject this submission.
It cannot be said that the requirement of the landlady was not
bonafide for the aforesaid reason.

It is next contended that the

application seeking leave to defend filed by the petitioner could not
have been decided by a common order and the application filed by
each of the tenants in the different eviction petitions should have
been heard and decided separately. He submits that each tenant has
different accommodation and facts of each case were different. I do
not see any merit in this argument. Though the four eviction petitions
C.M.(M) No.188/2008

Page 6 of 7

have been decided by a common order, the learned ARC has taken
note of the accommodation available with all the tenants, separately.
In fact, if anything, it was to the advantage of the tenants that all the
petitions were decided simultaneously. Even after taking into account
the accommodation with all the tenants it cannot be concluded that
the respondent's needs are fully met. The learned ARC had all the
facts before him to decide that the accommodation that would
become available to the landlady upon eviction of all the tenants
would still be insufficient to meet all her needs. I see no merit in this
petition. Dismissed.
5.

On the request made by the petitioner, I direct that the that

the petitioner be not dispossessed till 06.05.2008.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
February 08, 2008
RSK

C.M.(M) No.188/2008

Page 7 of 7

