*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

%

Date of Order:
Shanti Devi Mehra.

March 10, 2008
.....

Through:

Petitioner
Mr. Sat Bhushan Jain,
Advocate

versus
Shri Vinod Kumar Jain & Anr. .....
Through:

Respondent
Mr. Naresh K. Thanai,
Advocate

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.(ORAL)
*
1.

This petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India

has been preferred to challenge the order dated 05.09.2006, passed
by the Additional Rent Control Tribunal (ARCT), Delhi in RCA
No.623/2003, filed by the respondent-landlord.

The said appeal had

been preferred by the respondent-landlord on account of the dismissal
of the eviction petition filed by him against the petitioner herein on the
ground of subletting of the tenanted premises by the petitioner herein
in favour of one Ashok Kumar.

C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

By the impugned order, the learned

Page 1 of 10

ARCT has allowed the application filed under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC by
the respondent-landlord subject to costs of Rs.3000/- and remanded
the matter back to the trial Court with the direction to redecide the
same after permitting the respondent herein to produce the witnesses
in terms of Order 41 Rule 27 CPC within three months, after giving an
opportunity, to the petitioner herein also to rebut the evidence.
2.

The case of the respondent-landlord was that the

premises had been let out to Smt. Shanti Devi Mehra, the petitioner
herein, and that she in turn sublet the same to Sh. Vinod Kumar Jain,
who was carrying out his business under the name and style of M/s
Ashoka Agencies.

Before the Rent Controller one of the witnesses

summoned by the respondent-landlord for M/s Pearl Drinks Limited i.e.
PW-5 had stated on oath that they supplied soft drinks to M/s Ashoka
Agencies, a proprietorship concern of Smt. Shanti Devi, the petitioner.
The case of the petitioner is that Ashok Kumar is an employee of the
petitioner, who is an old lady. Due to the aforesaid testimony of PW-5,
the eviction petition had been dismissed. During the pendency of the
aforesaid appeal before the learned ARCT, the respondent filed the
application under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC and submitted that the
respondent had filed an injunction suit against the petitioner herein
and in those proceedings certain records had been summoned by the
respondent-landlord from which it transpired that Ashok Kumar was
running the business of selling of cold drinks in a portion of the suit
premises.

It was further claimed that the respondent had come to

C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 2 of 10

learn the bank accounts being operated by Ashok Kumar showing the
address of the suit premises, in which the amounts received by him
from the business of M/s Ashoka Agency was being credited and
payments were being made from the said amount in relation to the
business of cold drinks.

The learned ARCT allowed the aforesaid

application. Paragraphs 7 & 8 of the impugned order are relevant and
read as follows: 7.
Ld. Counsel for the respondent had cited
the judgment as contended with the
application filed by the appellant was only to
fill up the lacuna that after few years in this
regard one can observe the presence of
subletee and his capacity is always to the
subject knowledge of the tenant. It is the
tenant who is supposed to explain the reasons
of the presence of the third party.
8.
I have gone through the provisions of
order 41 rule 27 of CPC in the facts of this
case, the additional evidence they want to lead
would clarify the real contradictions between
the parties which may throw light about the
presence of Sh. Ashok Kumar in the suit
premises.
Thus, the application is allowed
subject to payment of Rs.3000/- as costs. Trial
court is directed to re-decide the matter by
permitting the appellant to produce relevant
witness in terms of order 41 rule 27 of CPC of
which a copy of the application be filed on the
very first date of the appearance in the trial
court. Trial court is directed to decide the
matter within three months preferably after
giving an opportunity to the respondent also to
rebut the evidence, if any. Parties are directed
to appear in the trial court on 14.9.2006. Copy
of this order be sent to the trial court along
with Trial court record. Appeal file be
consigned to record room.

C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 3 of 10

3.

Before me it is submitted by learned counsel for the

petitioner, by relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court in
“Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay Vs. Lala Pancham”
AIR 1965 SC 1008 that the respondent-landlord could not have been
permitted to lead additional evidence to merely fill up the lacunas in
the evidence led by him and the retrial could not have been ordered
under the garb of leading additional evidence.

He submits that the

evidence that was available on record was sufficient to enable the
Court to pronounce judgment. Order 41 Rule 27 CPC does not entitle
the appellate Court to permit any fresh evidence to be led in only for
the purpose of pronouncing judgment in a particular way. He relies on
the following observations of the Supreme Court from the said
decision:“If the High Court, in making these
observations, was referring to the provisions of
O. XLI R. 27, Code of Civil Procedure is ought
not to have overlooked the mandatory
provisions of cl. (b) of sub-r. (1) of R.27. No
doubt, under R.27, the High Court has the
power to allow a document to be produced and
a witness to be examined.
But the
requirement of the High Court must be limited
to those cases where it found it necessary to
obtain such evidence for enabling it to
pronounce judgment. This provision does not
entitle the High Court to let in fresh evidence
at the appellate stage where even without such
evidence it can pronounce judgment in a case.
It does not entitle the appellate Court to let in
fresh evidence only for the purpose of
pronouncing judgment in a particular way.”

C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 4 of 10

4.

He further submits that the petitioner is an old lady and

the endeavour of the respondent is to drag her into litigation and
prolong her suffering.
5.

On the other hand, the submission of learned counsel for

the respondent is that the learned ARCT having exercised the
jurisdiction vested in it in a legal manner, it is not for this Court while
exercising jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India to
interfere with the same.

He relies on 2002 IV AD Delhi 221

“Management Committee of Montfort Sr. Sec. School Vs. Vijay
Kumar & Ors.” to submit that the power under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India is exercised to keep the Courts below and
tribunals within the bounds of their authority and to see that they do
what their duty requires and that they do it in a legal manner. The
jurisdiction of superintendence over Courts and Tribunals is exercised
in exceptional or special circumstances and where it would be
appropriate to interfere with the order. A mere wrong order without
anything more is not enough to attract this jurisdiction. He submits
that in the facts of this case, it cannot even be said that the impugned
order is in anyway wrong. He also relies on 118 (2005) DLT 117 “P.L.
Khatala Vs. K.C. Malhotra & Anr.” wherein this Court has observed
that the duty of the Court under Article 227of the Constitution is to see
whether the Trial Court has proceeded within its parameters and not to
correct an error apparent on the fact, much less of an error of law. On
this aspect he lastly relies on a Division Bench Judgment of this Court

C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 5 of 10

in

C.W.P.

No.4196

of

1998

decided

on

17.09.2002

“Delhi

Administration & Ors. Vs. Ex. Constable Inderjit & Anr.”, wherein the
Division Bench has observed that “a mere wrong without anything
more is not enough to attract jurisdiction of High Court under Article
227; the Supervisory jurisdiction conferred on High Court is limited to
seeing that Tribunal functions within the limits of its authority and that
its decisions do not occasion miscarriage of justice.”
6.

On merit his submission is that the real test to be applied

while examine the application under order 41 Rule 27 CPC by the
appellate Court is to see whether the additional evidence is required to
enable the Court to pronounce judgment. He relies on (2001) 1 SCC
309 “Mahavir Singh & Ors. Vs. Naresh Chandra & Anr.” wherein
the Court has held as under: “The expression "to enable it to pronounce
judgment" has been subject of several
decisions including Syed Abdul Khader v. Rami
Reddy (1979) 2 SCC 601, wherein it was held
that when the appellate court finds itself
unable to pronounce judgment owing to a
lacuna or defect in the evidence as it stands, it
may admit additional evidence. The ability to
pronounce a judgment is to be understood as
the
ability
to
pronounce
a
judgment
satisfactory to the mind of court delivering it. It
is only a lacuna in the evidence that will
empower the court to admit additional
evidence. (see: The Municipal Corporation of
Greater Bombay v. Lala Pancham AIR 1965 SC
1008). But a mere difficulty in coming to a
decision is not sufficient for admission of
evidence under this rule. The words "or for any
other substantial cause" must be read with the
word "requires", which is set out at the
commencement of the provision, so that it is
only where, for any other substantial cause,
C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 6 of 10

the
appellate
court
requires
additional
evidence, that this rule would apply as noticed
by the Privy Council in Kessowji Issur v. G.I.P.
Railway ILR (1907-08) 31 Bom 381: 9 Bom LR
671: 34IA 115 (followed in AIR 1931 PC 143). It
is under these circumstances such a power
could be exercised. Therefore, when the first
appellate court did not find the necessary to
allow, the application, we fail to understand as
to how the High Court could, in exercise of its
power under Section 115 CPC, could have
interfered with such an order, particularly when
the whole appeal is not before the court. It is
only in the circumstances when the appellate
court requires such evidence to pronounce the
judgment the necessity to adduce additional
evidence would arise and not in any other
circumstances. When the first appellate court
passed the order on the application filed under
Order XLI, Rule 27 CPC, the whole appeal was
before it and if the first appellate court is
satisfied that additional evidence was not
required, we fail to understand as to how the
High Court could interfere with such an order
under Section 115 CPC. In this regard, we may
notice the decision of this Court in Gurdev
Singh and Ors. v. Mehnga Ram (1997) 6 SCC
507 in which the scope of exercise of power
under Section 115 CPC on an order passed in
an application filed under Order XLI, Rule 27
CPC was considered. When this decision was
cited before the High Court, the same was
brushed aside the stating that the principle
stated therein is not applicable to the facts of
this case. We do not think so. The High Court
ought not to have interfered with such an
order.
7.

He submits that Mahavir Singh (supra) was a case

dealing with the power of the High Court under Section 115, as it stood
before amendment.

The Supreme Court took exception to the

interference by the High Court in the exercise of its discretion by the
Appellant Court while dismissing an application under Order 41 Rule 27
CPC. This was because the Appellate Court was seized of the appeal
C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 7 of 10

and the entire matter was at large before it, which was not the case
before the High Court while hearing the revision petition. He submits
that the scope of enquiry by this Court under Article 227 is not wider
that than under Section 115 CPC as it stood prior to amendment. He
submits that, therefore, this Court should not interfere with the order
of the Appellate Court when it has considered the present to be a fit
case for allowing the application under order 41 Rule 27 CPC, while
hearing the substantive appeal against the order of the learned ARC.
He submits that the decision cited by the petitioner in Mahavir Singh
(supra) has been noted by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid
authority.

He has also relied on two other decisions on the same

aspect namely JT 2002 96) SC 16 “Wadi Vs. Amilal & Ors.”, wherein
the Supreme Court has held that the requirement or need (for
permitting additional evidence to be led in at the appellate stage) is
that of the appellate court bearing in mind that the interest of justice is
paramount. If it feels that pronouncing a judgment in the absence of
such evidence would result in a defective decision and to pronounce an
effective judgment admission of such evidence is necessary, clause (b)
enables it to adopt that course.

Invocation of clause (b) does not

depend upon the vigilance or negligence of the parties for it is not
meant for them.

It is for the Court to resort to it when on a

consideration of material on record it feels that admission of additional
evidence is necessary to pronounce a satisfactory judgment in the
case.

In (2005) 2 SCC 476 “Adil Jamshed Frenchman (dead) by

LRs Vs. Sardar Dastur Schools Trust & Ors.” the Supreme Court
C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 8 of 10

permitted the leading of additional evidence by the tenant by
observing that the evidence was material and if substantiated, would
have a material effect on the case of the landlord of their bona fide
need of the suit premises.

The tenant in that case had sought to

adduce two documents, which came into existence after the passing of
the eviction decree and the third document relating to correspondence
of landlord with third parties.
8.

Having considered the rival submission, I am not inclined

to interfere with the impugned order passed by the learned ARCT.
First and foremost, it cannot be said that the learned ARCT has not
acted within the bounds of its jurisdiction while passing the impugned
order. He was hearing the first appeal under Section 38 of the Delhi
Rent Control At, and was empowered to deal with an application under
Order 41 Rule 27 CPC. Moreover, the impugned order cannot be said to
be either perverse or even erroneous.

The learned ARCT has

appreciated the background in which the respondent desired to adduce
additional evidence and the evidence that was sought to be led in. He
has observed that the additional evidence would clarify the real
contradictions between the parties and would throw light about the
presence of Sh. Ashok Kumar in the suit premises.

Admittedly, Sh.

Ashok Kumar is working from the suit premises and, therefore, it is for
the petitioner to explain the capacity in which Sh. Ashok Kumar is
occupying the premises. It is, therefore, not within the scope of the
jurisdiction of this Court to interfere with the impugned order passed

C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 9 of 10

by the Appellate Court in the exercise of its discretionary power while
appreciating the need for permitting additional evidence to be led in.
9.

The decisions cited on merit as aforesaid, by the

respondent also show that the test laid down by the Supreme Court in
Mahavir Singh (supra) applies in the facts of the present case. To be
able to pronounce judgments satisfactorily, in my view, the learned
ARCT has rightly concluded that it is necessary that the documents
that the respondent desires to lead in evidence are permitted to be so
led. No prejudice would be caused to the petitioner since her rights
have been adequately protected in the impugned order. In view of the
aforesaid, I dismiss this petition.

It goes without saying that the

petitioner shall not only be entitled to cross-examine the witnesses
produced by the respondent, but shall also be entitled to lead further
evidence to meet the additional evidence that may be led in by the
respondent. Parties may appear before the concerned Rent Controller
on 24.03.2008.
10.

Trial Court record be returned back forthwith. Parties

shall bound to comply with the time schedule fixed by the learned
ARCT in the impugned order.

March 10, 2008

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

RSK

C.M. (M) No.1505/2006

Page 10 of 10

