*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006
Judgment reserved on: April 03, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: August 10, 2007
Hindustan Lever Limited
Through:

.....
Plaintiff
Mr. Sudhir Chandra,
Sr.Advocate with
Mr.Praveen Anand, Advocate

versus
Mr. Lalit Wadhwa & Anr.
Through:

..... Defendants
Mr. C.Mukund with
Ms. Neeraj, Advocate

CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this order I propose to deal with I.A. No. 9649/2006 filed

under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC and I.A. No.9648/2006, filed under Order 1
Rule 10 CPC by the defendants.
2.

By the aforesaid application under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC, it is

contended that the plaint is liable to be rejected since it does not
disclose a cause of action; that the suit has not been filed by a duly
authorised person, and; that this court has no territorial jurisdiction to
IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 1 of 20

entertain this suit.
3.

I.A. No. 9648/2006 has been filed to say that defendant No.

1 is neither a necessary nor a proper party to the present suit and that
he has been impleaded as defendant No. 1 merely to avoid the
proceedings being noticed by the defendants in the cause list and with
a view to obtain an ex-parte ad interim order of injunction behind the
back of the defendant No. 2 and 3.
4.

Taking up the application under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC first, I

proceed to deal with the objections that the plaint and the documents
filed with it, do not disclose a cause of action against the defendant.
5.

While dealing with an application under Rule 11 of Order 7,

in order to decide whether the plaint discloses any cause of action or
not, the Court has to examine only the allegations made in the plaint
and the documents filed with it. Where the allegations made in the
plaint, prima facie, disclose a cause of action, the plaint cannot be
rejected. [See 60 (1995) DLT 271, AIR 2002 Bombay 151].
6.

The plaintiff states that it is carrying on the business of

manufacture of various consumer products. The present suit has been
filed by the Plaintiff seeking the relief of permanent injunction, rendition
of account and damages on the basis of the alleged infringement of its
patent in respect of a gravity fed water purification system, by the
defendants.
7.

The plaintiff, it is averred, had in the year 2002 developed

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 2 of 20

and invented a gravity fed water purification system assuring a high
degree of microbiological purity in the drinking water it delivers. The
plaintiff made application No. 539/MUM/2003 for patent registration in
India in June 2002.

The said application was notified for opposition

purposes on 13th May 2005. It is averred that no opposition was raised
by any third party within the prescribed period and consequently the
plaintiff were granted patent number 198316 on January 9, 2006 which
is still valid and subsisting. Corresponding International Application was
also made with the European Patent Office on 31st December, 2003.
8.

The claim in the patent of the plaintiff's product reads as

follows:
1. “1) A gravity fed water purification system
comprising a filtration unit adapted to filter
particulate material, and a chemical purifying
unit containing a chemical purifying agent, in
which the chemical purifying unit is house in a
sealed chamber and is in fluid communication
with the filtration unit such that water treated
by the filtration unit is then gravity fed into the
chemical purifying unit and retained therein for
a predetermined period, after which the water
exits the system via a scavenger means which
is adapted to recover leached chemical
purifying agent.
2)
A water purification system according to
claim 1, which comprises a purification unit
comprising a top chamber and a bottom
chamber, which are separated by a partition,
and in which the filtration unit is secured to the
partition and housed in the top chamber, and
the chemical purifying unit is housed in the
bottom chamber.
3)

A water purification system according to

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 3 of 20

claim 1 or claim 2, in which the filtration unit
comprises a carbon block.
4)
A water purification system according to
any one of claims 1 to 3, in which a water exit
passage from the chemical purifying unit is
provided in a configration such that water
cannot exit through the water exit passage
until it has resided for a defined time in the
chemical purifying unit.”
9.

It is further averred that the plaintiff had invested over

Rs.50 crores over the last two years, immediately preceding the filing of
the suit in manufacturing, marketing and other activities related to its
launch. It is further averred that the defendant No.2 company is also
involved in making water purification systems. The defendant have
launched, around September 2004, their water purification system
under the name "Forbes Aquasure”. It is averred that the defendant's
product directly infringes the substance of the plaintiff's patent claim.
The plaintiff has also produced a comparative chart of the components
of both products in paragraph 13 of the plaint. It is alleged that upon
enquiry it transpired that a patent application was filed in the name of
defendant No.3, on or about 29th March, 2004 and notified in the official
Journal dated 11th February, 2005. Since the Journal was published late,
the plaintiff learnt of this application only sometime in July, 2005.
Plaintiff carried out an inspection of patent journals and found that there
was no notification of a grant of patent on the said application.
Thereupon the plaintiff promptly made a representation of opposition to
the Controller of Patents, Chennai under section 25 (1) of the Patents
IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 4 of 20

Act which was filed on 18th August, 2005.
10.

It is averred that the patent office did not notify the

application of the defendant's patent. It proceeded to grant a patent to
the defendant, and by a letter dated 30th September, 2005 and
informed the plaintiff of the same.

The plaintiff pointed out this

omission on part of the Controller of Patents by a letter dated the 18 th
October 2005 followed by reminders dated the 29th December 2005 and
3rd January 2006.

It is further averred that the Controller’s office not

only refused to act on the said representations, but also refused to
acknowledge the same. It is further averred that defendant No.3 failed
to file their reply statement to the post grant opposition filed by the
plaintiff within the statutory period of two months which expired on 18 th
January, 2006 upon which the patent of the defendants is deemed to be
revoked.

However, the plaintiff was informed by a letter dated 21 st

April, 2006 that the patent office had condoned the delay, and granted
a further period of two months to the defendants to file their reply
statement and evidence.
11.

The phrase “does not disclose the cause of action” as used

in order 7 Rule 11(a) has to be very narrowly construed. This power of
rejection of the plaint ought to be used only when the court is
absolutely sure that the plaintiff does not have an arguable case at all.
[See AIR 2000 Bombay 161].

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 5 of 20

12.

In the plaint as filed by the plaintiff, it asserts infringement

of its patent by the Defendant which is a matter that requires
examination.

For the purpose of examination of the present

application, the averment that the plaintiff has a valid patent and that
the defendant is infringing the patent of the plaintiff have to be
assumed to be true. It cannot be said that the plaint on its reading does
not disclose a cause of action against the Defendants. This argument of
the Defendant is therefore rejected.
13.

The other limb of the defendant's argument to content that

the plaint does not disclose a cause of action is that no action for
infringement of patent can lie against another patentee. It is argued
that a patent for a particular product/process is granted only for an
invention which involves an inventive step, and only when there is a
new invention. The patent Act itself provides for rigorous mechanism for
the examination of all claims of new invention for grant of patent. The
rights granted to a patentee under Section 48 of the Patents Act can be
enforced against a third party but not against another patenteee whose
new invention is recognised by the fact that the patentee has been
granted a patent. It is argued that the Patent Act is a complete Code in
itself which empowers the Controller of Patent to effectively and
judiciously determine whether or not to grant a patent in a particular
case. It is argued that the remedy available to the plaintiff against
another patentee is not by way of a suit for permanent injunction, since

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 6 of 20

the defendant patentee has absolute and unhindered right to market
and sell its products. It is argued that the right of the plaintiff, if any, to
institute a suit for infringement under Chapter XVIII of the Patents Act
cannot be superior to the protection afforded to the defendant
patentee, who has an equally valuable patent in its favour. It is argued
that if the defendant is not in a position to enjoy the privileges arising
out of its own patent, then the right of the defendant patentee to enjoy
and exploit its patent would become illusory. Since the right to institute
a suit for infringement originates from the right of the patentee to
exploit its patent, it is argued that a patentee can under no
circumstances be an infringer. The Patents Act provides for both pre
grant opposition as well as post grant opposition under Section 25. So
long as the defendant's patent subsist he cannot be called an infringer
and consequently, a suit for infringement by another patentee is not
maintainable. Reliance is placed on a couple of decisions of this court,
Tobu Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. V. Megha Enterprises & Anr. (1983) PTC 359
(paras 3.5.9-11), Indo Asahi Glass Co. Ltd. Vs. Jai Mata Rolled Glass Ltd.
& Anr., 1995 (33) DRJ 317 (Delhi) and S.S. Products of India v. Star Plast,
(2001) 21 PTC 835 (Delhi) (Paras 5-10), wherein courts have refused to
grant interim injunction against the defendant on the ground that the
defendant also possessed registration of its design. The same position,
it is argued, should prevail in respect of the defendant who has a
registered patent.

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 7 of 20

14.

On the other hand, it is argued by learned Counsel for the

Plaintiff that the grant of a patent to a person does not entitled that
patentee to infringe another patent. It is argued that the right of a
patentee is an “exclusionary right” in the sense that it confers upon the
patentee an exclusive right to prevent infringement of its patent by
another. It does not confer the right to practice or use the invention.
The plaintiff relies on the wording of section 48 of the Patents Act 1970
and contrast the same with section 28 of the Trademarks Act, 1999.
While a patentee has the exclusive right to prevent third parties from
infringing the patent, a registrant of a trademark has the exclusive right
to use the trademark. The grant of a patent to the defendant gives no
immunity or defence in an action for infringement of the plaintiff's
patent.

Reliance

is

placed

on

“Patents

For

Chemicals,

Pharmaceuticals and Bio Technology' (IV Edition) by Phillip W.
Grubb on page 4 of the said commentary, the learned author states
that:
“Exclusionary Right
It is important to realise that the rights given by the patent
do not include the right to practise the invention, but only to
exclude others from doing so. The patentee's freedom to
use his own invention may be limited by legislation or
regulations having nothing to do with patents, or by the
existence of other patents.For example, owning a patent for
a new drug clearly does not give the right to market the
drug without permission from the responsible health
authorities, nor does it give the right to infringe an earlier
existing patent. In the very common situation where A has a
patent for a basic invention and B later obtains a patent for
an improvement to this invention, then B is not free to use
IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 8 of 20

his invention without the permission of A, and A cannot use
the improved version without coming to terms with B. A
patent is not a seal of government approval, nor a permit to
carry out the invention. We very often hear 'This patent
allows Company X' to do something or other. It does not, it
only allows them to stop someone else from doing it. The
right to prevent others from carrying out the invention
claimed in a patent may be enforced in the courts; if the
patent is valid and infringed the court can order the
infringer to stop his activities, as well as providing other
remedies such as damages.”
15.

The

plaintiff

argues

that

the

defendant

is

guilty

of

infringement of its patent, as the defendant's product is clearly covered
by the claims contained in the plaintiff's patent. The plaintiff also argues
that the defendants patent is subsequent to that of the plaintiff. The
plaintiff, by relying upon section 45 of the Patents Act contents that the
patent dates back to the date of publication of the patent. The plaintiff's
application was published in December 2003, though granted in the
year 2006, while the defendant's application was published in March
2004, though granted in May 2005. The plaintiff claims priority from 19th
June 2002 whereas, according to them, the defendant's patent is of 29th
March 2004. Plaintiff also relies on Alert India vs. Naveen Plastics &
Anr., 1997 PTC (17) 15, which holds that a prior proprietor of copyright
in a

design has a preferential right over a later proprietor of the

copyright in design.
16.

I find no merit in the aforesaid submission of the defendant

that no action for infringement of patent can lie against another
patentee. As submitted by the plaintiff, section 48 of the Act grants the

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 9 of 20

exclusive right to a patentee to prevent third parties, who do not have
his consent, from undertaking the making, using, offering for sale,
selling etc. the patented product in India. There is no exclusive right in
the patentee to make use of, offer for sale, sell or otherwise exploit the
patented product in India. I find myself in agreement with the statement
of the law in the tretise of Philip W. Grubb wherein he states that the
right of a patentee is an “Exclusionary Right”.
17.

Section 107 of the Act, inter-alia, states that “In any suit for

infringement of a patent every ground on which it may be revoked
under Section 64

shall be available as a ground for defence”

(emphasis supplied). Section 64 of the Patents Act enlist the various
grounds on which the patent may be revoked. The first ground on which
the patent may be revoked, in substance, is that the patent of which
revocation is sought is in respect of an invention which is the subject
matter of an earlier valid patent. This means that even when a
subsequent patentee

brings an action for infringement against an

earlier patent holder, based on clause (a) of Section 64(1) of the Act, all
that the defendant (earlier patent holder) can contend ‘as a ground
for defence’ in the suit, is that the defendant has a valid patent of
earlier priority date. That can only be his defence on merits but not a
ground to seek rejection of the plaint at the threshold on the basis that
no suit is maintainable for infringement of patent against another
patentee.

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 10 of 20

18.

Section

107A

innumerates

the

acts,

which

are

not

considered as an infringements of a valid patent. The manufacture of a
patented product by the patentee is not considered as an act which
would not infringe the patent of another patentee. Had the Parliament
intended to protect the patent holder against an action for infringement
by another patentee, the same would have, in all probability found
mention in section 107A or in some other provision of the Patents Act.
19.

Section 108 enumerates the reliefs available to a plaintiff in

a suit for infringement and states that the reliefs that a court may grant
in a suit for infringement may include an injunction and, at the option of
the plaintiff, either damages or on account of the profits.
20.

If the argument of the defendant is accepted, it would mean

that first the plaintiff should pursue its opposition to the patent of the
defendant under Section 25(2), or seek the revocation of the
defendant's patent under Section 64, and only after the plaintiff has
succeeded in such proceedings finally, would be plaintiff be entitled to
seek the relief of injunction and damages or accounts of profits, or any
other relief such as seizure, forfeiture or destruction of the infringing
goods. Such an interpretation would lead to absurd results. By the time
the defendants patent is revoked /cancelled, the plaintiff’s suit may
itself become barred by limitation, if the plaintiff is first relegated to
proceedings under Section 25 or 64 before he is permitted to file a suit

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 11 of 20

for seeking the reliefs under Section 108 of the Patents Act. It also
means that in the interregnum, the plaintiff should continue to suffer
without any remedy. In my view, the interpretation canvassed by the
defendant cannot be accepted for the reasons aforesaid.
21.

Reliance is placed by the defendant on the decisions of this

court in Tobu Enterprises Vs. Megha Enterprises and Others,
1983 PTC 359, and SS Products of India Vs. Star Class (2001) 21
PTC 835 (Delhi), in support of the aforesaid submission. In my view,
these decisions do not advance the submission of the defendant, I may
first deal with the decision in Tobu Enterprises (Supra). Firstly, it may be
noticed that this is a decision under the Designs Act 1911 and not under
the Patents Act. Under the Designs Act 1911, the proceedings for
cancellation of registration of Design lay before the High Court under
Section 51 A of that Act, whereas under the Patents Act, a revocation
petition lies before the Appellate Board under Section 64. Tobu
Enterprises (Supra) was a case, where the plaintiff had not sought any
relief for cancellation of the registration of the Design of the defendant,
whereas the defendant had already applied to have the registration of
the design of the plaintiff cancelled. Morever, the court was considering
the plaintiffs application under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 CPC for grant of
interim relief. The court vacated the order of injunction earlier passed
and proceeded with the hearing of the suit. This is evident from the last
paragraph of the judgment. Had the court considered the issue of
IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 12 of 20

maintainability of the suit and decided the same against the plaintiff,
the plaint itself would have been rejected. Furthermore, the right of a
patentee are governed by the specific provisions of the Patents Act.
Unlike the Designs Act, 1911, the Patents Act contains specific
provisions such as sections 107 and 107A discussed above, which are
relevant to decide the issue raised by the defendant. Tobu Enterprises
(Supra) proceeded on the basis; (a) that the earlier registration of a
design does not prevail over a subsequent registration of design, and,
(b) that Section 53 of the Designs Act, 1911 does not provide the
remedy of injunction etc. to a registrant of an earlier Design over a later
registrant of another Design.
22.

As noticed hereinabove, the claims under a patent having

an earlier priority date have specific protection against any claim for
patent having a later priority date. This is a fundamental difference in
the present case, when compared to the statement of law contained in
Tobu

Enterprises

(Supra)

pertaining

to

the

Designs

Act,

1911.

Consequently, the decision in Tobu Enterprises (Supra) in any case
cannot be relied upon in a case governed by the Patents Act. I may
notice that Tobu Enterprises (Supra) has been disagreed to by another
single bench decision of this Court in Alert India (Supra). However, I am
not getting into the controversy, as to which of the two views is correct,
and whether the earlier or the later view is per in curium, since in my
view it is unnecessary for me to do so far the purposes of the present
IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 13 of 20

case. Moreover, being only a tentative view on a prima-facie evaluation
of the merits of the case, interim orders do not constitute binding
precedents, not even in the same case in which they may be passed,
much less in the facts of another case.
23.

Since S.S. Products of India (Supra) is also a decision on an

application under Order 39 Rule 1 & 2 CPC, and not on the issue of
maintainability of the suit, and it relies on Tobu Enterprises (Supra), I
need not separately consider it. Therefore, this decision is also of no
assistance to the defendant.
24.

So far as objection to the territorial jurisdiction of this court

is concerned, the submission of the defendants/applicant is that a false
averment has been made that defendant No. 2 is manufacturing the
water purifiers in question. It is asserted that to the knowledge of the
plaintiff it is defendant No. 3 which is the inventor of the product, holder
of the patent and manufacturer of the impugned product. Defendant No.
3 is situated in Bangalore and is not residing or working for gain within
the territorial jurisdiction of this court. The patent has been granted to
the defendant by the Patent Office in Chennai. It is also claimed that
defendant No. 2 neither has its registered nor its corporate office within
the territorial jurisdiction of this court. Defendant No. 1 has been roped
in only with a view to create jurisdiction in this court, apart from
preventing the defendants from noticing the matter in the cause list in
advance. It is also stated that the averment that the defendants are
IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 14 of 20

selling their product within the jurisdiction of this court is of no avail
since

the

plaintiffs

are

not

marketing

their

products

in

Delhi.

Consequently, the plaintiffs are in no way suffering by the sale of the
impugned product in Delhi and no cause of action has arisen within the
jurisdiction of this court.
25.

In

reply,

Counsel

for

the

Plaintiff

has

argued

that,

admittedly, the Defendants are selling their impugned product within
the jurisdiction of this court. This raises a cause of action in favour of
the plaintiff, and this would give jurisdiction to this court. Reliance has
been placed by the Plaintiffs upon Pfizer Products Inc. Vs. Rajesh
Chopra,

(2006)

32

PTC

301;

L.G.

Corporation

&

Anr.

Vs.

Intermarket Electroplasters (P) Ltd., & Anr. (2006) 32 PTC 429; S.
Oliver Bernd Freier GmbH & Co. K.G. V. Karni Enterprises & Anr.
(2006) 33 PTC 574.
26.

It is contended that under Section 20(c) of the CPC a suit

can be instituted in a court within the local limits to whom jurisdiction
the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises. Therefore, if the sale of its
products by the Defendant constitutes an infringement of the Plaintiff's
patent, that conduct of the defendants would constitute a part of the
cause of action, which has arisen in Delhi, and this court would have
jurisdiction to entertain the present suit.
27.

The submission of the Defendants that no cause of action

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 15 of 20

arises within the jurisdiction of this court because, according to the
Defendants, the Plaintiff has no sales in Delhi, is to my mind
unacceptable. Under Section 24 of the Patents Act, every patent shall
have effect throughout India. Under Section 48 of the Patents Act, the
patentee of a product has the exclusive right to prevent other parties,
who do not have its consent, from making, using, offering for sale,
selling or importing for those purposes, the product in India which is the
subject matter of patent. Consequently, the patentee is entitled to
prevent other parties from offering for sale or selling the products
which infringe the patent in any part of India wherever they may be
sold. Admittedly, the Defendants are selling their products in Delhi. The
infringement of the Plaintiff's rights under Section 48 of the Patents Act
has therefore, taken place in Delhi, assuming that the plaintiff has a
valid patent and that the defendants product infringes the same. It is
this infraction of the Plaintiff's rights which would give the Plaintiff the
cause of action to sue the Defendants to prevent the infringement of its
patent. Consequently, I have no hesitation in holding that a part of
cause of action has arisen within the jurisdiction of this court and that
this court has the territorial jurisdiction by virtue of section 20(c) CPC to
entertain the present suit. The decisions of this court in LG
Corporation (Supra), Pfizer Products Inc. (Supra), S. Oliver
Bernd Freier GmbH & Company KG (Supra), are on the same lines.
28.

Reliance placed by learned Counsel for the Defendant on a

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 16 of 20

Full Bench decision in Girdhari Lal Gupta vs. M/s. K. Gian Chand
Jain & Co. AIR 1978 Delhi 146 (FB) is misplaced. In Girdhari Lal
Gupta (Supra) the court was considering the question of territorial
jurisdiction in respect of an application under Section 51-A of the
Designs Act, 1911 for cancellation of the registration of the designs.
Firstly, the present is not an action to seek cancellation of the
registration of the defendants patent. In any event, and even if the
ratio of that decision is applied, the same does not help the defendants
argument. The Full Bench held that an application under Section 51-A
could be made to a High Court within the local limits of which, a part of
the cause of action and/or subject matter of the application may arise.
The sale of the impugned products in Delhi by the defendant does form
part of the cause of action as already noticed above. Consequently, the
Full Bench decision is of no avail. The Division Bench decision of this
court in Ajay Industrial Corporation, Delhi Vs. Mr.Shiro Kanao of
Ibarak City, Osaka, Japan, 1983 PTC 245 is also a case relating to
cancellation of a patent. It holds that an action would lie within the
jurisdiction of the court, inter-alia, where the applicant (i.e., the
applicant for revocation of patent) is made liable for infringement of the
patent. The court held that even though the applicant was facing action
for infringement only in Ahmedbad, since he was selling the goods in
Delhi, the Delhi High Court would have jurisdiction to entertain the
application for revocation since there was a possibility that the

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 17 of 20

applicant may face a similar action (by the patent holder) in Delhi. The
other decisions cited by the defendants on this aspect also do not
appear to be of any relevance in the facts of the present case.
29.

The last submission of learned Counsel for the Defendant in

support of his application under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC is that the suit has
not been filed by a duly authorized person. The plaint has been verified
by Mrs. Madalsa Srivastava. However, no power of attorney nor a Board
Resolution authorising the said signatory to institute the present suit
has been filed on record.
30.

This submission of the Defendants is also without any merit

for purposes of deciding the defendants application. As aforesaid, there
is a categorical averment in the plaint itself which states that Mrs.
Madalsa Srivastava Product Development Manager, Water, of the
Plaintiff has signed the plaint and instituted the present suit being duly
authorised and competent to do so on behalf of the Plaintiff. This
statement of the plaintiff has to be accepted as correct for the present.
This is also an issue which can only be decided one way or the other
after a trial and the plaint cannot be rejected at this stage.
Consequently I dismiss I.A. No. 9649/2006 with costs of Rs.20,000/-.
I.A. No. 9648/2006
31.

The Defendants seek deletion of Shri Lalit Wadhwa from the

array of Defendants since it is claimed that he is neither the
IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 18 of 20

manufacturer, nor seller of impugned products and he does not hold
the patent which is alleged to have been infringed by the defendants.
It is asserted that his impleadment as a party Defendant has been
resorted to merely with a view to suppress the noticing of the case in
the cause list and to obtain an ex-parte ad interim order of injunction
behind the back of the Defendants and also to vest territorial
jurisdiction in this court. It is further averred that neither any cause of
action has arisen against Shri Lalit Wadhwa, nor any relief is sought
against him. Furhter, no relief sought by the Plaintiff can be personally
enforced against Shri Lalit Wadhwa.
32.

In response learned Counsel for the Plaintiff refers to

section 124 of the Patent Act to contend that Defendant No. 1 is a
necessary party since the said section states that where an offence
defined under the said Act is committed by a company, the company as
well as every person in-charge of the company for the conduct of its
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly.
33.

In my view, reliance placed from section 124 of the Patent

Act by the Plaintiff is fallacious since the said provision deals with penal
liability under the said Act. The company is a juristic entity and where
the infringement of the patent has been alleged against the company,

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 19 of 20

its officers would not normally become personally liable in a civil action.
A reading of the plaint shows that no clear or specific averment has
been made against Defendant No. 1 about his role in the alleged
infringement of the Plaintiffs patent. In my view, Defendant No. 1 is
neither necessary nor a proper party to the suit and consequently he is
liable to be deleted from the array of Defendants.
34.

I.A. No. 9648/2006 is therefore allowed.

35.

Let amended memo of parties be filed within one week.

August 10, 2007

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

P.K. BABBAR

IA 9648-49/06 in CS (OS) No. 740/2006

Page 20 of 20

