*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M(M) No.1686 of 2007 CM No.17812/2007

%

Date of decision: 10.01.2008
M/s Narayan Service Station
...Petitioner
Through: Mr.Asutosh Lohia, Advocate
versus
North Delhi Power Limited
..... Respondent
Through: Mr.Sudhir Nandrajog &
Mr.Diwakar Sinha,Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J
1.

Notice. Mr. Sudhir Nandrajog accepts notice on behalf of

the respondent.
2.

Admit.

3.

With the consent of the parties the appeal is taken up for

hearing today.

This petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of

India has been preferred against the order dated 17.12.2007 passed
by the learned

Civil Judge, Delhi in Suit No.646/2007 filed by the

petitioner seeking permanent injunction. The dispute raised in the suit
pertains to the electricity connection bearing K No.31200287552. The
respondent,

pursuant

CM(M) No.1686.07

to an inspection report dated 19.10.2006
page 1 of 5

followed by a show cause notice of the same date, passed a reasoned
order dated 1.12.2007 against the final assessment bill for an amount
of Rs.15,00,433/- with due date

of payment

of 17.12.2007.

The

plaintiff filed the suit to challenge the said bill and sought interim
protection against the payment thereof. During the pendency of the
suit the impugned order has been passed by learned trial judge at the
stage when the defence of the defendant was yet to come on record.
The learned trial court has, prima facie, examined the contentions of
the plaintiff and on the basis of the inspection report, the show cause
notice and the reasoned order he found in favour of the plaintiff that
the conclusive evidence establishing DAE is lacking.

The trial court

also took note of the fact that the defendant has not segregated the
connected load into heating load, cooling load and lighting load. The
bill had been raised on the basis of the entire connected load for all the
12 months for 20 hours a day. Credit for recorded consumption had
also not been given.

Various other apparent infirmities were also

noted by the learned trial court. However, on the other hand, the trial
court also considered the aspects that the plaintiff had not specifically
averred as to what his connected load was on the date of the
inspection.

The court also took into account the

recorded

consumption vis-a-vis the connected load found in the premises on
the date of inspection and the nature of activities being undertaken
by the plaintiff, that is, running of petrol pump.

Balancing these

considerations, the trial court has directed the plaintiff to make a
deposit of an amount of Rs.3.75 lakhs and subject to deposit being
CM(M) No.1686.07

page 2 of 5

made in two equal monthly instalments, the electricity connection in
question is not to be disconnected.
4.

Learned counsel for the plaintiff states that in the facts of

the present case the plaintiff was entitled to grant of complete stay of
the impugned demand and restraint
electricity.

against disconnection of

He has relied on the decision of this Court in Jagdish

Narayan vs. North Delhi Power Limited & Anr., 140(2007) DLT
307. He submits that from the perusal of inspection report it is clear
that no case of dishonest abstraction has been made out. He relies on
paragraph 25 of the the said decision wherein this Court has held that
an

automatic presumption of DAE, on the basis of the

external

symptoms of tampering together with the analysis of the consumption
pattern, would not be a safe or error free method.

Some other

tangible evidence must be shown to have existed. The analysis of the
consumption pattern in terms of the
corroborative

Regulation 26(ii) is merely

and not by itself substantive evidence of DAE.

He

submits that on the perusal of the inspection report it is clear that no
case of dishonest abstraction of energy is made out.
5.

On the other hand learned counsel for the respondent

has drawn my attention to the decision of the Supreme Court in W.B.
State Electricity Board vs. Fakir Chand Rice Mills & Ors. (1996) 8
SCC 647. This was a case of alleged pilferage in the meter reading.
The Supreme Court held that normally in matters of money claims at
least half of the amount would be directed to be deposited. The Court
observed that just like there is an obligation on the licencee to supply
CM(M) No.1686.07

page 3 of 5

electrical energy to the consumer, equal obligation is caste on the
consumer to pay the amount subject to determination of the
controversy in suit.

In the facts of that case the Court direct the

deposit of Rs.12 lakhs as against the demand notice of Rs.28 lakhs.
Learned counsel for the respondent has also relied on Sahil Singh
Maniktala & Ors. vs. Harpreet Singh & Ors. 118(2005) DLT 350
(DB) wherein a Division Bench of this Court held that an appeal cannot
be taken against the grant of a part relief by the learned trial judge
where the remaining part

remains under consideration

for

ascertaining the stand of the defendant. The plaintiff has no absolute
right to the grant of ex parte interim relief, nor is the Court obliged
to grant it for asking and on the very first hearing. It is a prerogative
of the trial judge to feel satisfied on the requirements which govern the
grant of a temporary injunction and to proceed in the matter
accordingly.

The Court held

an appeal would not be maintainable

where part relief had been granted at the stage of issuing notice and
the application for ad interim relief is pending. An appeal on that stage
would have serious consequences of pre-empting the consideration by
the learned trial court and by-passing his jurisdiction.
6.

Having considered the rival submissions I am of the

view that the order passed by the learned trial court is sound and does
not call for interference by me in exercise of jurisdiction under Article
227 of the Constitution of India. The learned trial court has justly
balanced the equities at this stage and it is open to him to pass further
orders once the pleadings are complete and both parties have
CM(M) No.1686.07

page 4 of 5

produced the documents they seek to rely upon. After all, the interim
application is still pending for further consideration. At the same time,
I am of the view that in case it is found that the demand raised by the
respondent is found to be unsustainable, it would be open to the Court
to consider the grant of interest on the amount deposited by the
plaintiff. Similarly in case the demand

raised by the respondent is

found justified in its entirety or in excess of the amount directed to be
deposited at this stage the Court could consider granting interest in
favour of the respondent on the remaining amount found due.
7.

The first instalment of 50% of Rs.3.75 lakhs will be

deposited within 15 days from today and the remaining 50% will be
deposited within one month from the date of the first deposit.
8.

With these observations the petition stands disposed

of.
Dasti.

January 10, 2008
aj

CM(M) No.1686.07

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

page 5 of 5

