*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06
Judgment reserved on:

August 21, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: September 10, 2007

1.

Union of India & Anr.
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Jitender Kumar Singh,
Advocate

versus
Rakesh Kumar & Ors.
Through:

2.

..... Respondent
Mr. B.S. Mainee with
Ms. Meenu Mainee,
Advocates

WP(C) No. 4539-41/2006
Union of India & Anr.
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Jitender Kumar Singh,
Advocate

versus
Ashok Kumar & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. B.S. Mainee with
Ms. Meenu Mainee,
Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

NO

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

NO

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

NO

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*
1.
By this common judgment, we propose to dispose of the

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 1 of 12

aforesaid writ petitions since their facts are similar and they raise the
same issues. The petitioner, Union of India assails the order passed by
the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench (the Tribunal) in
OA No. 1041/05 and MA No. 940/05 dated 6 th February, 2006 in W.P.
(C) No. 8515-17/2006, and the Order of the Tribunal in

O.A.

No.1669/2005 dated 16th December 2005, whereby the Tribunal has
allowed the aforesaid OA and directed the petitioner herein to
consider the case of the respondents' for promotion to the post of
Loco Inspector, and has allowed them to appear in the examination to
be conducted for making promotions to the said post, as and when
they are held.
2.

The respondents, 33 in number in W.P. (C) No. 8515-

17/2006 and two in number in W.P. (C) No. 4539-41/2006, were
initially appointed as Diesel Assistants/Fireman Grade 'A' in the grade
of Rs. 950-1500/3050-4590.

Over the years they earned several

promotions including as Goods Driver in the grade of Rs.5000-8000.
In the years 1999-2000, some of the respondents had been further
promoted as Passenger Driver in the grade of Rs.5000-9000.
3.

The respondents, who had been initially appointed in the

year 1988-1991 had put in about 8 to 10 years' of service on Footplate as Diesel Assistant/Drivers. It appears that before they could be
promoted as Goods/Passenger Drivers and/or could gain Foot-Plate
experience in that capacity, they were screened and were posted in

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 2 of 12

Stationary posts of Power Contoller/Crew Controller/Traction Loco
Controller (hereinafter collectively referred to as Controllers) which
was a non-running duty in the years 2000-2002.

These posts of

Controllers are in the same scale of pay as Drivers. The respondents
retained their lien in the cadre of Drivers and were also being granted
running allowance.

They were allowed to avail of benefits of

selection/promotion in the cadre of Drivers in terms of a circular of
the Railway Board dated 9.1.1998.

According to this circular, the

petitioner had represented to the Drivers, including the respondents,
that those who applied for the post of Controllers will be screened and
will be put to work as such Controllers in the Control Office and would
continue to progress in the running cadre.
assignment was fixed at 3 years.

The tenure of the said

However, it appears that the

respondents were continued as Controllers in public interest.
4.

It appears that the eligibility criterion for promotion to the

post of Loco Inspector was changed from time to time.
Board's

circular

dated

25.11.1992

prescribed

Railway
that

Mail/Express/Passenger Drivers and Goods Drivers with at least 5
years experience as Drivers were eligible to appear for selection to
the post of Loco Inspector.

Amendments were carried out to the

aforesaid circular on 16.5.1996, 9.11.1998 and 9.10.2002. The last of
these circulars dated 9.10.2002 stipulated a condition of 3 years FootPlate experience as Drivers for promotion to the post of Loco

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 3 of 12

Inspector.
5.

The

petitioners

initiated

the

selection

process

promotion to the post of Loco Inspector in April, 2005.

for
The

respondents, who were Passenger/Goods Driver though posted as
Controllers in the year 2000, (who further continued to work in that
capacity for more than 3 years) were not included in the panel drawn
for the post of Loco Inspectors.
6.

Some

of

the

Passenger/Goods

Drivers

posted

as

Controllers challenged their exclusion from being empanneled for the
post of Loco Inspector by preferring OA No. 533/HR/2003, titled Dilraj
Singh & Ors. vs Union of India & Ors., before the Chandigarh
Bench of the Tribunal, challenging the circular dated 7.10.2002 and
the letter of the Railway Board by which they were barred from
appearing in the written test as well as viva voce test. The said OA
was allowed by the Chandigarh Bench of the Tribunal vide judgment
dated 20th January, 2004 and the petitioner was directed to consider
their tenure as Contoller for the purpose of counting Foot-Plate
experience required for the post of Loco Inspector and they were
allowed to participate in the departmental examination for selection
to the post of Loco Inspector, as and when such departmental
examinations are held.
7.

The aforesaid decision of the Tribunal was upheld by the

High Court of Punjab and Haryana which dismissed the petitioner's

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 4 of 12

writ petitions.
8.

The respondents approached the Tribunal by filing the

aforesaid OA being aggrieved by the orders dated 27.4.2005 and
7.10.2002 passed by the petitioner whereby, while initiating the
process of selection for filling up vacancies to the post of Loco
Inspector in the grade of Rs.6050-10500, the petitioner imposed a
restriction that only those goods/passenger drivers who have 3 years
of Foot-Plate experience as are eligible to appear in the said
selection. However, the respondents did not have the requisite Footplate experience as goods/passenger Drivers.
9.

The respondents herein relied upon the aforesaid decision

of the Tribunal and of the Punjab and Haryana, High Court.
10.

The respondents further contended that, in fact, some of

them had been promoted as Loco Inspectors on adhoc basis in
February, 2005. The argument was that the stand of the petitioner
was

arbitrary

and

rather

absurd.

While

the

respondents,

Passenger/Goods Driver who were working as Controllers were
considered fit for adhoc promotions to the post of Loco Inspector,
when it came to regular promotion they were sought to be denied
the said promotion on the ground that they lacked the requisite 3
years Foot-Plate experience as Drivers.
11.

The petitioners countered the claim of the respondents

before the Tribunal by contending that with the induction of a new

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 5 of 12

policy under Railway Board's letter dated 7.10.2002, 3 years FootPlate

experience

had

been

made

mandatory

for

all

Drivers

irrespective of the fact whether they were Mail/Passenger/Goods
Drivers.

It was contended that the category of Loco Inspector is

extremely important for safe running of trains as they are supposed
to counsel the train Drivers about safe running of trains.

The

condition of 3 years Foot-Plate experience had been introduced
considering the safety aspect of running of trains, and that the
respondents had no experience on Foot-Plate working as Drivers and
consequently they did not fulfill the requisite qualification for the said
post.

Foot-Plate experience as Drivers was practical experience in

running the trains and it did not matter if the respondents who were
ignored, were senior to those who had the experience and were
therefore considered for empanelment to the promotional post of
Loco Inspectors, since the respondents admittedly lacked foot plate
experience as Drivers.
12.

The petitioner sought to brush aside the judgment of the

Chandigarh Bench of the Tribunal and the fact that the same had
attained finality with the dismissal of the writ petition preferred by the
petitioner before the Punjab and Haryana High Court by contending
that since the policy formulated by the Railway Board had been
framed for purpose of ensuring safety in running of the trains, the
said decision should not come in their way.

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 6 of 12

13.

The Tribunal referred to the earlier decision of the

Chandigarh Bench in the Dilraj Singh and Ors. vs. Union of India
and Ors. (Supra) which decision was binding upon it, and wherein all
the submissions of the parties were considered, and held that since
the same was a binding precedent, merely because the petitioner
desired to re-agitate the matter, it was not a good enough reason not
to follow the same. Paras 9 and 10 of the impugned judgment of the
Tribunal are relevant and are reproduced here-in-below :
“9. It is an undisputed fact that an identical issue
had been agitated before the Chandigarh Bench of
this Tribunal, which rejected the respondents'
contentions and allowed the OA, which in turn, has
been up-held by the Hon'ble High Court of Punjab
and Haryana. Learned counsel for the applicants
brought to our notice that this Bench of the
Tribunal also allowed a similar OA, being OA
No.1669/2005, Ashok Kumar & Ors vs. UOI & Ors.
The law is well settled that the Order and Judgment
rendered by a co-ordinate Bench is binding on the
benches of equal strength. In case the latter Bench
disagree with it, the matter will have to be referred
before a larger bench, as a theory of “precedent”
has to be followed. On perusal of the judgment
rendered by the Chandigarh bench of this Tribunal
as well as this Bench, as noticed hereinabove, we
find that all the contention raised by the parties
were duly considered and the respondents' stand
that the applicants did not satisfy the experience
required on footplate was rejected. It would be
expedient, at this stage, to note the observations
made in paragraph 10 in OA No.553/HR/2003 (Dilraj
Singh & Others vs. Union of India & Others), which
reads thus:“10. It may be pertinent to mention that vide
this Tribunal's interim order dated 10.6.2003,
the respondents were directed to allow the
applicants to appear in the Departmental
WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 7 of 12

Examination which was proposed to be held
on 14th June, 2003 or thereafter, subject to the
ultimate outcome of this OA. The learned
counsel for the respondents has informed us
that the said examination has not yet been
held. The applicants, as mentioned above,
had reverted to their substantive post of
Drivers Goods in January, 2002. Thus they
have almost completed another 2 years
against this post. Even if, for argument sake,
their experience as Power/Crew Controller is
not taken into consideration, their combined
experience as drivers good before and after
being drafted against the above post, will be
more than 3 years and as such they are
eligible to participate in the departmental
examination which is yet to be held. In any
case, the post of Loco Inspector is a selection
post for which the candidates are required to
appear in a written test and viva-voce. In
case the applicants reach the required merit
vis-a-vis other candidates, only then they
would be appointed to the post. Merely by
counting their experience on the post of
Power/Crew Controller, they would not be
finally selected for the post.
Taking into
consideration the facts and circumstances of
the case, we are of the view that the tenure of
the applicants on the post of Power/Crew
Controller, cannot be excluded for the purpose
of counting 3 years' foot plate experience
required for the post of Loco Inspectors,
especially when they were retaining their lien
on the post of Drivers Goods. (emphasis
supplied).”
10. Since the issue raised in the present OA stands
concluded by the aforesaid judgments, which have
not been either superseded, set aside or over-ruled
by higher court till date, we being a co-ordinate
Bench, are bound by the said findings. We do not
find any justification in the contention raised by the
respondents that merely because they want to reagitate the matter, we should differ with the
findings recorded by the co-ordinate Bench of this
Tribunal.
In our considered view, such a plea
WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 8 of 12

14.

cannot be accepted under any circumstances.”
Before us, the orders of the Tribunal are challenged

primarily on the ground that the Tribunal has underplayed the
importance of safety in the running of trains.

Loco Inspectors are

supposed to counsel train Drivers about safe running of trains. Such
counselling can be given by Loco Inspectors who are having both
experience and practical knowledge of running trains safely and
hence Foot-Plate experience has been made an essential requirement
for post of Loco Inspector. It is argued that the Tribunal had wrongly
interfered with the policy decision taken by the petitioners to ensure
safe running of trains and that the same would have very large
implications. The experience gained as Controllers does not involve
practical running of trains and therefore does not give Foot-Plate
experience. Experience has to be earned and cannot be implied.
15.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents

contend that it is wrong to say that the respondents did not have the
requisite Foot-Plate experience.

The respondents were in fact

working as Passenger/Goods Drivers and had experience of 8 to 10
years on Foot-Plate as Diesel Assistant/Drivers. Moreover, even the
petitioner recognised the sufficiency of their experience, inasmuch as,
some of them had been given adhoc promotion as Loco Inspectors in
February, 2005.
16.

Having given out consideration to the matter, we are

inclined to agree with the view taken by the Tribunal.
WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 9 of 12

17.

Firstly, we find that the respondents had gained Foot-Plate

experience for about 8 to 10 years since they were working as Diesel
Assistants/Drivers since their appointments in 1988-1991.

The

Tribunal has specifically dealt with, and rejected, the submission of
the petitioner herein in this respect in Dilraj Singh (Supra). The
respondents would have to participate in the selection process
consisting of a written test and a viva-voce, and only on their coming
out meritorious, would they be promoted as Loco Inspectors. Even the
petitioner considered that experience as sufficient for granting adhoc
promotions to some of the respondents as Loco Inspectors. It cannot
be said that for purposes of granting adhoc promotions, and working
as Loco Inspectors on adhoc basis, the respondents need not have
satisfied the requirement of experience, while the said requirement of
experience is necessary for granting regular promotions. The nature
of duties and responsibilities remain the same whether one works in
adhoc capacity or in substantive capacity. It is not even the
petitioner's case that those Controllers who had been granted adhoc
promotions, and who did not have the requisite three years Foot-Plate
experience as Drivers, were in any way found deficient in discharge of
their duties as Loco Inspectors. From the aforesaid, it appears that
the claim of the petitioners that the experience of three years on
Foot-Plate as Drivers is non negotiable, does not appear to be
justified.

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 10 of 12

18.

We may also note that the action of the petitioners in

excluding the respondents from being considered for promotion to the
post of Loco Inspectors was also not fair and equitable to the
respondents.

When the respondents were represented that they

could apply for, and be appointed as Controllers while they were still
working as Diesel Assistants/Drivers, they were not informed that at a
later stage they would be denied the right to be considered for
promotion to the post of Loco Inspectors on the ground that they did
not

have

the

requisite

3

Mail/Goods/Passenger Drivers.

years

Foot-Plate

experience

as

In fact the representation made to

them was to the contrary. It was represented to them that once they
are posted as Controllers, they would retain their lien in the cadre of
Drivers and would also be granted running allowance. They were also
informed that they would avail the benefits of selection/promotion in
the cadre of Drivers in terms of Railway Board's circular dated
9.1.1998. Moreover, even though their tenure as Controllers was only
3 years, it is the petitioner who continued to take work from them as
Controllers even after the period of 3 years in public interest. Had
they been relieved to go back and work as Drivers after the expiry of
their respective fixed tenure of 3 years, in any event, they would
have

gained

the

necessary

Foot-Plate

experience

as

Drivers.

Respondents were, therefore, being subjected to a disadvantage for
no fault of theirs, and only because they had cleared the screening

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 11 of 12

process and got postings as Controllers.
19.

Considering the fact that no specific material has been

brought on record by the petitioners to substantiate their claim that
the lack of Foot-Plate experience as Goods/Passenger Driver is having
an adverse impact in the functioning of such Loco Inspectors on the
aspect of safety in running of trains, we are not inclined to accept the
same.
20.

In view of the aforesaid, we find no error in the judgment

of the Tribunal and we accordingly dismiss this petition.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

September 10, 2007

A.K.SIKRI, J.

aruna/P.K. BABBAR

WP(C) No. 8515-17/06

Page 12 of 12

