*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

IA Nos. 525/07 and 1632/07 in
CS (OS) No. 82/2007
Judgment reserved on: April 21, 2007.

%

Judgment delivered on: July 10, 2007
Canon Kabushiki Kaisha
Through:

..... Plaintiff
Ms. Bihu Sharma, Advocate

versus
B.Mahajan & Ors.
Through:

..... Defendants
Mr. M.K. Miglani and
Mr.Gaurav Miglani, Advocates

CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this order I propose to dispose off IA No. 525/2007

under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 CPC filed by the plaintiff and IA No.
1632/2007 under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC filed by the defendant. Counsel
for both the parties have addressed their arguments and have relied
upon the record and various judicial pronouncements.
2.

The

plaintiff,

Canon

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Inc.,

is

a

Japanese

company
Page 1 of 23

manufacturing professional and consumer Imaging Equipment and
Information Systems. The plaintiff company has filed the instant suit
for seeking the relief of a perpetual injunction restraining infringement
of trademark Canon and infringement of their copyright in the stylised
manner in which the said mark is used, and for passing of, delivery up
and rendition of accounts.
Plaintiff's contentions:
3.

The plaintiff

company, under the trademark Canon,

started its operations around 70 years ago and has, over the years,
earned itself the reputation of manufacturing and selling cameras and
multimedia machines which are a benchmark in the industry. Plaintiff
company has offices in almost all major countries of the world and
manufacturing units in America, Germany, France, Taiwan, Korea,
Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore, Vietnam, China. It has been adjudged
as one of the 'Best Global Brands of the Year' for the year 2005. The
turnover of the company for the financial year 2005 was US dollar
21,017 million. The mark Canon, as adopted and used by the plaintiff,
is an arbitrary word in relation to its business and is distinctive of the
plaintiff. The plaintiff adopted and commenced the use of the
trademark Canon in the year 1935. The plaintiff are the registered
proprietors of the mark Canon in classes 6 and 20 in India. The mark
is registered in over 180 countries and regions world over.
4.

The plaintiff also has copyright in the unique, stylised,

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 2 of 23

original and artistic manner in which the word Canon, being the
trademark of the company, is depicted.
5.

Defendant No.2, Canon Fasteners, is engaged in the

business of selling fasteners, nuts, bolts, screws etc. The Defendant
No.1 is the Manager (Operations) of Defendant No.2. Defendant No.3
is the owner of the showroom where the products of defendant No.2
are displayed and sold.
6.

Plaintiff's received information, sometime in the month of

December 2006, that the products of the defendants are being sold
under the mark Canon, identical to that of the plaintiff. The plaintiff
conducted a trademark search in the registry and found out that the
mark, Canonhold was registered in the name of defendant No.3 in
classes 6 and 20. However, a perusal of the defendants product, as
filed by plaintiff revealed that not only it was using the plaintiffs
registered trade Mark Canon, the symbol of trademark registration, ie,
®, appeared next to the infringing user on the packaging. This act of
the defendants also constitutes an offense under Section 107 of the
Trade Marks Act, 1999. The legislative intent is to come down heavily
on any such violation, since the penalty has been raised from 6
months, (under the 1958 Act) to 3 years under the new Act.
7.

In its user of the mark Canonhold the words hold appears

inconspicuously and insignificantly on top of the mark Canon. The
said word hold is descriptive of the defendants products, and has no

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 3 of 23

significance to the mark adopted by the defendant. The entire effort
and intention of the defendants is to ride upon the reputation and
goodwill of the plaintiff's famous and well-known mark Canon. This is
clear evidence of the defendants dishonesty and mala-fide and
constitutes infringement of the plaintiff's trademark. Since the
defendants are seeking to ride on the goodwill of the plaintiff, that is
sufficient reason to reject any defence being set up by the defendants.
The suit is for infringement as well as passing off, and in an action for
passing of, registration of the mark in question by the defendant is not
a defence.
consider

Deception and confusion are relevant considerations to

the

grant

and

continuance

of

injunction.

Identical

reproduction of the artistic copyright comprised in the logo of the
plaintiff company being adopted by the defendants is an imitation
constituting infringement of the copyright of the plaintiff in the
logo/mark Canon.

Mere use of Canon by third parties is not a

defence available to the defendants in an action against them. The
charge of concealment of relevant and material facts (that the
defendant is using the mark Canonhold) is denied, as documents
showing the use of mark Canonhold by the defendants have been
filed on record.

Though defendants claim use of Canon and

Canonhold since 1985, no documents of that vintage have been filed
on record.
8.

Since the plaintiff has obtained registration of the mark

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 4 of 23

Canon for the class of goods sold by the defendants, confusion and
the deception is not only imminent, but also inevitable. The defendant
ought to be completely injuncted from using the mark Canon in any
form and even in conjunction with other words such as hold which the
defendant has been using.
Proceedings so far:
9.

Summons were issued to the defendants and an ex parte

ad interim order of injunction was also passed in IA No.525/2007 on
17.1.2007 restraining the defendants from using the mark Canon as a
trade or service mark and from reproducing the artistic copyright
comprised in the logo/mark Canon as depicted in the certificate
bearing number 241647 dated 19th January, 1990 bearing registration
number 523079.
10.

The defendants No.2 & 3 entered appearance and filed

their written statement along with IA No. 1632/07 under Order 39 Rule
4 CPC.
Defendant's contentions
11.

The marks Canon and Canonhold were adopted by

Defendant No.3 (Predecessor of defendant No.2) as far back as in the
year 1985 and was put to commercial use since then. Canon is a
dictionary word, which means “standard”, rule, “principle”, “law” and
is also a derivative of the Greek word Canon meaning 'Rule', the same
is used as a trademark by numerous entities across the world for

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 5 of 23

varied products and services.
12.

Defendant No.3 had filed an Application No. 427509 in

class 20 for the Registration of Mark Canonhold in respect of
fasteners made of plastic. The said mark was advertised in the Journal
No. 967 dated 16.9.1989 at page 774. In the absence of any
opposition from any entity including the

plaintiff, the same was

registered and the said registration has been renewed from time to
time and is valid and subsisting even till date.
13.

The

predecessor

of

defendant

No.2

had

also

filed

Application No. 433122 in Class 06 for registration of the said
Trademark Canonhold in respect of

bolts, rivets, nuts and screws

and the same was advertised in the T.M. Journal No. 985 dated
16.6.1990 at page 376.

The same was also registered and the

registration is valid and subsisting till date. Another application No.
524609 in class 06 for registration of trademark Canonhold in respect
of expansion fasteners was filed and and advertised in the Journal No.
1233 (Suppl/) dated 21.10.2000 at page 66 with associated Mark
No.431122 and was not opposed by the defendant.

Registration

thereof is however still awaited.
14.

In the year 2000, defendant No. 2 also filed an application

for registration of trademark Canon under application number 978131
in class 06 in respect of nuts, bolts, washers, rivets, fasteners and
expansion fasteners.

The said application was advertised in the

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 6 of 23

trademarks Journal number 1350 dated August 16, 2006 at page
1067. Plaintiff deliberately concealed from this Court the said
advertisement

of

defendants

application.

The

predecessor

of

defendant No. 2 has been using the said trademarks Canonhold and
Canon openly, continuously and extensively in respect of the
abovesaid goods, and from the year 2000 onwards defendant No. 2
has been using the same.
15.

The defendants have substantial sales of their products

under the marks Canon and Canonhold and these trademarks have
become distinctive of the defendant's goods owing to their long and
continuous use. The plaintiff never raised any objection to the open,
continuous and extensive use of these trademarks by the defendants
during the past 22 years.
16.

The plaintiff has also never used the trademark Canon in

respect of nuts, bolts, expansion fasteners etc. or any other goods of
the defendants.

Therefore it is not entitled to seek the injunction

sought for.
17.

The defendant No.2 is a registered concern and assessable

to tax and maintains its books of accounts and is not a fly by night
operator. It has been in business for considerable length of time and
its sales figures are in crores. Thus, the continuation of the injunction
order is causing irreparable harm to the defendants, and if the same is
vacated, no irreparable loss would be caused to the plaintiff, while its

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 7 of 23

continuance

would

cause

grave

and irreparable

injury

to the

defendant.
18.

In the Trade Mark Journal Vol.1228 dated 1.8.2000 the

application filed by the plaintiff for registration of Trade Mark Canon
under Class 06 vide application No. 523079 dated 19.1.1990 was
advertised, proposing to use the same for various items including
locksmith works except locks, nuts and bolts. The Registration
granted to the plaintiff vide Trade Mark No. 5233079 is also in respect
of various items, including locksmith works except locks, nuts and
bolts. This registration specifically excluded locks, nuts and bolts
since the defendants had already adopted the same mark in respect of
the said items since 1985. The search results generated from the
database of the Trademarks Registry filed by the plaintiff in relation to
the mark Canon in class 6 show its extensive user by several other
entities as well, and adoption of the said mark by some of them also
goes back to the 1980's. The defendants also rely upon an inspection
report filed by them, in respect of classes 1 to 25 and internet search
result showing a large number of business entities, the world over,
using Canon as a part of their trademark or a part of their trading
style.
Discussion & Decision:
19.

I have gone through the documents filed on record and the

averments made in both the applications before me.

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

I find

Page 8 of 23

considerable merit in the grievance of the plaintiff that the defendants
have infringed the plaintiff's trade mark Canon by using the said mark
per se, or as a part of mark Canonhold wherein the mark Canon is
depicted prominently as opposed to the word hold and also infringed
the plaintiffs copyright in the mark Canon by depicting the same in
the identical and similar artistic and stylised form in which the plaintiff
has always used its said mark. The same is evident from the manner
in which the trade mark Canon and Canonhold is depicted on the
packaging material of the defendant filed by the plaintiff, and in the
catalog and price list of the defendants, as filed by the defendants at
various places, (except the catalog at page 208 to 211 of the
defendants documents). Such user is most likely to cause deception
and confusion.
20.

During the course of arguments, the defendants have not

disputed the aforesaid position. Their defence is that the adoption of
mark Canon in the same style as that of the plaintiff was
unintentional. In any event, Counsel for defendant submits that the
defendants have changed their packaging and are not using Canon in
the same artistic manner and stylised form as that adopted by the
plaintiff any longer and that the defendants would not use the mark
Canon with the same artistic form and stylised manner as that of the
plaintiff in future.
21.

The aforesaid user of the mark Canon by the defendant

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 9 of 23

can, by no stretch of reasoning be described as bona fide or
unintentional. The use of the symbol ® further compounds the wrong
doing of the defendants, since it is sought to be projected that the
mark Canon is their registered trademark, which admittedly is not a
case.
22.

Plaintiff has filed with the suit the infringing packaging

material used by the defendant for its products, which appears
identical with or similar to the plaintiff's mark. There is nothing to
suggest that the said packaging material is not of recent origin. To me,
it appears that having been caught red handed and in a defenseless
situation, the defendant is now trying to take the winds out of the sails
of the plaintiff's case by conceding that it would not, in future, use the
plaintiff's mark in the same artistic and stylised manner as adopted by
the plaintiff. That to my mind, would not absolve the defendants of the
liability that they might have incurred on account of the prima facie
infringement of the plaintiff's mark by the defendant and the
infringement of their copyright.
23.

In Gujarat Bottling Company Ltd. & Others v. Coca

Cola Co. Ltd. And others, AIR 1995 SC 2372, it was pointed out that
the decision whether or not to grant interlocutory injunction has to be
taken at a time when the existence of a legal right assailed by the
Plaintiff and its alleged violation are both contested and uncertain and
remain uncertain till they are established at the trial on evidence.

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 10 of 23

Relief by way of interlocutory injunction is granted to mitigate the risk
of injustice to the Plaintiff during the period before the uncertainty is
resolved. The Supreme Court also pointed out that the object of the
interlocutory injunction is to protect the Plaintiff against injury by
violation

of

his

right for

which he

could not be

adequately

compensated in damages recoverable in the action if the uncertainty
were resolved in his favour at the trial. It was, however, pointed out
that the need for such protection has to be weighed against the
corresponding need of the defendant to be protected against injury
resulting from his having been prevented from exercising his own legal
rights for which he could not be adequately compensated. The court
must weigh one need against another and determine where the
balance of convenience lies.
24.

The purpose of grant of injunction is not to penalise the

defendant. It is to protect the interest of the plaintiff to the extent it is
justified. The court would have to consider the extent of restraint to
which the defendants should be subjected to in future to safeguard the
plaintiff's rights and interest and to prevent the infringement of the
trademark and copyright of the plaintiff and also the passing of, of the
goods and products of the defendant as that of the plaintiff. At the
same time, the Court would also address the defences raised by the
defendants. In this case the defences relate to – (i) delay and laches;
(ii) acquiescence on the part of the plaintiff; (iii) bona fide and

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 11 of 23

concurrent user of the mark by the defendant; (iv) the injury and loss
that would be caused to the defendant in the event of grant of a
complete injunction, and other relevant considerations.
25.

Before I advert to the plethora of case laws cited by the

parties, it has to be kept in mind that a decision, ordinarily, is a
decision on the case before the Court. It is the principle underlying the
decision that would be binding as a precedent in a case which comes
up for decision subsequently.
“Therefore, while applying the decision to a later
case, the court dealing with it should carefully try to
ascertain the principle laid down by the previous
decision. A decision often takes its colour from the
decision involved in the case in which it is rendered.
The scope and authority of a precedent should
never be expanded unnecessarily beyond the needs
of a given situation. The only thing binding as an
authority upon a subsequent Judge is the principle
upon which the case was decided. Statements
which are not part of the ratio decidendi are
distinguished as obiter dicta and are not
authoritative. The task of finding the principle is
fraught with difficulty as without an investigation
into the facts, it cannot be assumed whether a
similar direction must or ought to be made as
measure of social justice. Precedents sub silentio
and without argument are of no moment. Mere
casual expression carry no weight at all. Nor every
passing expression of a Judge, however, eminent,
can be treated as an ex cathedra statement having
the weight of authority.”
(see AIR 2003 SC 4172, The Divisional Controller,
K.S.R.T.C v. Mahadeva Shetty & Anr.)

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 12 of 23

25A.

Reliance has been placed by the plaintiff upon Century

Travels vs. Roshan Lal Duggal PTC (Suppl) (1) 720 (Del) (DB) to
contend that priority in use is superior to priority in registration in a
passing off action. Therefore, even if the predecessor in interest of
defendant No. 2 was an earlier registrant of the mark Canonhold in the
particular classes, the prior user of the mark canon by the plaintiff
would get priority. The Court held that the mere registration of the
mark without proof of actual concurrent user was not relevant unless
such evidence was available or led before the Court. The Court in this
case did not find material to support a plea of actual concurrent user.
However, in the present case, actual concurrent use of the mark
Canonhold

and

the

trading

style

“Canon

Fasteners”

by

the

defendants is prima facie established on record.
26.

Reliance is also placed upon Ellora vs. Banarasi Das

1981 PTC 46 and Honda Motors vs. Charanjit Singh 2003 (26) PTC
1 to submit that injunction can be granted where the mark is being
applied by the defendant to different class of goods than the one for
which the plaintiffs mark was registered. In Ellora (supra) the parties
before the court were both dealing with clocks, watches and time
pieces. The defendant was using Ellora as a part of its business name.
The Court upheld the order of injunction assailed before it on the
ground that the field of activity of both parties was common and
therefore there was real and tangible risk of damage resulting from
I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 13 of 23

confusion. The court was also guided by the fact that the plaintiffs had
already obtained registration in respect of time pieces also, though it
had not started manufacturing the same. The possibility of plaintiff
engaging in the enterprise could not be ruled out. However, this case
is distinguishable on facts, as in the case before me, registration
obtained by the plaintiff in respect of goods in class 6 specifically
excludes the goods manufactured by the defendant herein, and, in
fact, there is no similarity in the goods manufactured by and dealt with
by the plaintiff on the one hand and the defendants on the other hand.
27.

In Honda Motors (supra) the defendants application for

registration of trademark “Honda” already stood rejected, due to
opposition by plaintiff before the Registrar. Honda is a proper noun
being a name of a person as opposed
having a dictionary meaning.

to Canon which

is a noun

In that sense Canon cannot be

considered to be as strong a mark as Honda in the Indian context,
where Honda is not a known name/surname. In the cited case, there
was no justification for the defendant to have adopted Honda as its
mark. In that light of the matter the Court granted injunction in favour
of the plaintiff. Moreover, the aspect of actual concurrent user did not
come up for consideration before the Court in Honda (Supra) as
prominently as it has come up in this case. Similarly, Fedders North
American V. Show Line and others, 2006 (32) PTC 572 (Del) was a
case where there could be no justification given for adoption of the
I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 14 of 23

same mark as that of the plaintiff, which was derived from the
plaintiffs name and had no connection with the defendants name.
Fedders is not a dictionary word and earlier was being used by the
predecessor of defendant under licence from the plaintiff. The kind of
goods being dealt with by both the parties was also same and
obviously there was likelyhood of confusion in that case. The
defendant was admittedly not using the mark for a few years before
injunction was sought from the court.
28.

While considering the matter of grant of interim injunction

in a passing of action, the cumulative effect of all relevant
consideration would have to be assessed.

In a passing off action,

inter-alia, similarity in the kind of goods and line of trade is an
important consideration, though as noticed in Honda (Supra), it is not
necessary that the defendant should be engaged in the manufacture
or trade of the same kind of goods, or engaged in the same line of
trade. This is no to say that the fact that there is dissimilarity in the
goods/services of the litigating parties is wholly irrelevant. What has
to be assessed is whether there is likelihood of confusion. If there is
dissimilarity in the kind of goods/services, the possibility of confusion
or deception would normally be less. In my view, it cannot be said in
this case that an unwary purchaser of average intelligence and
imperfect recollection is likely to mistakenly buy the goods of the
defendants as that of the plaintiff, since the plaintiffs are not at all
I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 15 of 23

dealing in the same kind of goods, or in the same line of trade, as the
defendants i.e. one relating to manufacture and sale of nuts, bolts,
rivets and screws. Cameras and professional and consumer imaging
Equipments are high end products having a different market and
consumer base as opposed to nuts, bolts, rivets and screws. This case
is, therefore, clearly distinguishable on facts and is not applicable to
the case before me.
29.

The reliance placed on section 29(4) of the Trade Marks

Act, 1999 by the plaintiff is of no avail, since the defendants are also
the registered owners of the trademark Canonhold.
30.

In N.R. Dongre Vs. Whirlpool Corporation, 1996 PTC

(16) 476 (SC), the defendant was earlier carrying on business in some
other name and the adoption of plaintiff's mark was discovered to be
of recent origin. The defendants application for registration of the
mark in question was promptly opposed by Whirlpool. Consequently,
it was held that it could not be said to be a case of acquiescence.
However, in the present case, the defendants/their pre-decessor in
interest have been in business with their mark Canonhold and trade
name Canon Farstners at least since 1990 and 1989 respectively. As
aforesaid, the mark Canon had been adopted by different entities
since the 1980s and it cannot be said, prima facie, that the adoption of
the said mark/part of trading style was mala fide, when it was so
adopted initially. The decision in Mrs. Ishi Khosla v. Anil Aggarwal
I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 16 of 23

& Anr in I.A.Nos. 1854/05 & 2761/05 in CS(OS) No.309/2005 decided
on 25.01.2007 is of little assistance since the products of the plaintiffs
and the defendants were similar, and therefore there was likelihood of
confusion.
31.

The defendants have also cited various precedents in

support of their case. In Intel Corporation versus Anil Handa &
Ors. 2006 (33) PTC 553, injunction was refused to the plaintiff Intel
Corporation on the ground that the defendants were found using the
trademark Intel for over 15 years.

The court observed “when

existence of a prima facie case is established, the court has to
consider the relevant factors, namely, balance of convenience and
irreparable injury. While considering the latter, conduct of the parties
becomes relevant. If a party has been acting in a particular manner
for a long time and has allowed the other to do likewise, the same
would have to be weighed.”
32.

In Vishnudas Trading as Vishnudas Kishandas vs.

Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. Ltd. Hyderabad & Another, AIR 1996
SC 2275, it was observed “if a trader or manufacturer actually trades
in or manufactures only one or some of the articles coming under a
broad classification and such trader or manufacturer has no bona fide
intention to trade in or manufacture other goods or articles which also
fall under the said broad classification, such trader or manufacturer
should not be permitted to enjoy monopoly in respect of all the
I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 17 of 23

articles which may come under such broad classification and by that
process

preclude

the

other

traders

or

manufacturers

to

get

registration of separate and distinct goods which may also be grouped
under the broad classification.”
33.

In Creative Travels (P) Ltd. V. Creative Tours and

Travels (P) Ltd. 2006 (33) PTC 430, this court while taking
cognizance of the fact that the plaintiff was the prior and registered
user of the mark in question also took note of the fact that defendants
too had been using the mark for quite a long time and had built up
their reputation by doing huge business. If an injunction was granted,
the defendants would suffer irreparable loss and injury. While, “prior
user favoured plaintiff long user favoured the defendants”. The court,
therefore held that the defendants could not be stopped from doing
their business under the disputed mark.
34.

In Honda Motors (supra) it was laid down that, whether

there is a mis-representation by the defendant amounting to passing
off, or likelihood of passing of is in each case a question of fact. No
previous case can therefore be an authority for another case. Each
case must depend upon the facts applicable to that case alone.
35.

The matter is still at the interlocutory stage and grant of

injunction during the pendency of the legal proceedings is a matter
requiring exercise of discretion of the Court.
36.

Plaintiff places reliance on Madhukar Holiday Inn v.

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 18 of 23

Holiday Inn 2002 (25) PTC 308 (Del), Automatic Electric v. R.K.
Dharan & Anr., 1999 (19) PTC 81 (Del) and Honda (Supra) to contend
that third party user of the plaintiff's mark is no defence in an action
for infringement of the plaintiff's registered mark. However, in the
present case, the defendants are also the registered users of the
trademark Canonhold, and the registration of the plaintiff specifically
excludes Locks, Nuts and Bolts. Moreover, Madhuban Holiday Inn
(Supra) and Automatic Electric (Supra) are cases, where the
goods/services of the defendant were also of the same kind as that of
the plaintiff. Honda (Supra) was a case where the plaintiff Honda
(Supra)

had

contended

that

it

had

taken

action

against

all

infringements. Moreover, in Honda the court held that “illegal” use by
others was not relevant to deny relief to the plaintiff.
37.

One thing is clear. Wide spread user of the mark Canon

does show that the said mark is not associated only with the plaintiff.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the use of the said mark by the
defendants would necessarily lead to the confusion that the goods of
the defendant originate from the plaintiff. In fact, wide spread user of
the same mark would be a reminder to a customer that there are
various users of the mark in question in relation to different products
and services and would reduce the possibility of his associating the
particular product/service with any other user of the same or similar
mark.
I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 19 of 23

38.

The said search results filed by the plaintiff show that the

mark Canon was adopted by one Best Engineering Company since
March 1980 in respect of Locks. Thereafter, Canonhold was adopted
by the defendants in January 1985 in respect of Nuts, Bolt, Rivets and,
Screws. It is only thereafter, the plaintiff obtained the registration of
its mark Canon in January 1990 in classes 6. The inspection report
filed on record only pertains to Classes 1 to 25 and there are in all 42
classes. If search inspection is done in respect of other classes, there
may be other users of the mark Canon in respect of other products
and services. The plaintiff has not, in fact, used its registered
trademark Canon in respect of goods falling in Classes 6 of 20. There
seems to be force in the defendants submission that the registration
obtained by the plaintiff is liable to be taken off the register under
Section 47 of the Trademarks Act. The defendants, it appears have
been using the mark Canon as a part of their trademark and trade
name since 1995 and Canonhold since 1989. This is evident from the
various invoices of Munni Lal Krishan Kumar and Canon Fasteners
placed on record and the advertisement in the Trademark Journal in
1990 based on user.

The defendants apparently have been

participating in various exhibitions and openly using Canon as a part
of its trading name and style and the plaintiffs do not even claim to
have objected to the same. M/s. Hindustan Pencils Pvt. Ltd. vs.
M/s. India Stationary Products Co. and Anr., 1989 PTC 61 (Del)

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 20 of 23

relied upon by the plaintiff differs from the present case on this
material aspect, inasmuch as, in that case, the plaintiff had been
agitating the adoption of the similar mark by the defendants before
the Registrar of Copyright.
39.

A large number of entities, the world over are apparently

using Canon as a part of their trading style and trademark. The
Canon Group claims to be world leading suppliers of polyurethane
and plastic technologies. Then there is “David Canon Construction”
in Kansas, USA. There is another entity “ITT Industries, Canon”,
which is an international suppliers of Connectors, inter connects, Cable
Assemblies, Switches, etc. which is a part of a USA based 4.8 billions,
Globe Engineering and Manufacturing Company. “Canon Foods” is
an entity in Australia, engaged in the business of providing meals
solutions. There is “Canon International Constructing Inc” in the
United States of America and Canada, “Canon Construction” was
founded in 1978 in USA. These are only few illustrative cases where
“Canon” is adopted as a trading style around the globe. Thus the
mark “Canon” is not distinctive of the plaintiff's good alone, though
with respect to the class of goods in fact dealt with by the plaintiff, it
may be so.
40.

It cannot be ignored that the Plaintiff though has obtained,

Registration of the mark Canon in respect of the goods in class 6 but
it has till date not used the said mark on any goods falling under class
I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 21 of 23

6 and the defendant's submission that the plaintiff is holding on to the
said mark merely to block the adoption and user of the said mark by
other entities needs consideration. Even otherwise the registration
obtained by the plaintiff of the mark Canon in Class 6 specifically
excludes the goods manufactured by the defendant. No objection was
apparently raised by the plaintiff to such exclusion in the registration
awarded to them. In my view, the plaintiff cannot after more than a
decade, now turn around and seek to prevent a registered user of the
mark in respect of goods (excluded in its own registration) from using
the said mark.

Prima facie, there has been considerable delay and

laches on part of the plaintiff, in as much as, the registration of the
mark Canonhold has not been challenged or revoked.
41.

In view of my aforesaid discussion, plaintiff, in my view, is

entitled to partial relief. Continuing the blanket order of injunction
earlier at the ex-parte stage may sound the death knell of the
defendant.
42.

I therefore refrain from continuing the injunction earlier

granted restraining the defendants from using the mark Canon or
Canonhold in its entirety.
43.

Accordingly, the restraining order dated 17.1.2007 passed

against the defendants, injuncting the use of mark Canon either as a
trademark, service mark or as a trading style by itself, or in
conjunction with any other words by reproducing the same in the
I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 22 of 23

same artistic manner and stylised form as that of the plaintiff and as
depicted

in

plaintiffs

trademark

registration

certificate

bearing

No.241647 dated 19.1.1990 bearing the registration number 523079
shall continue till the disposal of the suit.
44.

The defendants are free to use the trade mark “Canon”,

“Canonhold” and the trading style “Canon Fasteners”, subject to
the condition that the said mark/trading style or any part of it is not
depicted in the same or deceptively similar artistic and stylised form in
which the plaintiff uses its mark “Canon”.
45.

I further direct the defendants to maintain and preserve

their accounts including ledgers, account books, vouchers, invoices,
income tax returns, sales tax and excise returns etc., regularly, in
future and also for a period of three years prior to the date of the filing
of the suit.

Copies of the aforesaid records pertaining to the past

period should be filed by the defendant on record within a period of
two months.
46.

I.A.Nos. 525/07 and 1632/07 stand disposed off in the

above terms.
VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE
July 10, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

I.A.Nos.525 &1632/07 in CS(OS)82/2007

Page 23 of 23

