Page 1 of
23

*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

I.A. No. 1320/2007 in CS (OS) No. 229 of 2007
Judgment reserved on: 3rd April, .2007

%

Judgment delivered on: 11th May, 2007

TSG International Marketing Pvt. Ltd.
.....
Plaintiff
Through:
Mr. Navin Chawla with Mr. Bhanu
Pant, Advocate.
versus
Arvind Murjani Brands Pvt. Ltd. & Others ..... Defendant
Through:
Mr.A.S.Chandhiok and Mr. Sandeep
Sethi, Senior Advocates with Mr.
Dhiraj Nair, Mr. Shankj Sengupta,
Advocates for defendant no.1.
Mr. Manmohan, Senior Advocate
with Mr. Darpan Wadhwa, Adv for
defendant nos. 2 and 3.
CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this order I propose to dispose of the aforesaid

application filed under Order XXXIX Rule 1 & 2 CPC by the plaintiff,

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 1 of 23

along with the suit.
Introduction
2.

The plaintiff TSG International Marketing Pvt. Ltd. and

defendant No. 1 Arvind Murjani Brands Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to
as AMB) entered into two Franchise Agreements, both dated 23 rd
January 2004, (collectively referred to as the agreements) substantially
identical in terms, whereunder the plaintiff agreed to buy, display and
sell merchandise under the trademark ‘Tommy Hilfiger’ at two retails
stores, one under each of these agreements, in the National Capital
Region of Delhi. These two stores were located at F-46, New Delhi
South Extension Part I, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the South
Extension Store and the agreement in respect thereof is referred to as
the Delhi Agreement) and shop Nos. 75&76, ground floor, of the
Metropolitan Mall on Mehrauli-Gurgaon Road, Gurgaon, Haryana
(hereinafter referred to as the Gurgaon Store and the agreement in
respect thereof is referred to as the Gurgaon agreement).
Plaintiff’s Submissions
3.

Under clause 2.1 of the said agreements, defendant No. 1

granted to the plaintiff, the exclusive first right of refusal to buy,
display and sell, merchandise, ‘up to a maximum of 4 (four)
Stores in the National Capital Region of Delhi’.

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 2 of 23

4.

As per clause 3.6 of the said agreements, leasehold rights

to the to the Real Estate on which the stores were to be situated, were
to be obtained by AMB, i.e., defendant No.1, or its affiliates etc. and
the franchisee was to be allowed to use the Real Estate for the
purpose of operating the Store in accordance with the terms of the
agreements. However, the same was, in fact, partly obtained by the
plaintiff and partly by defendant No. 1 in respect of the South
Extension store. In terms of clause 5.5 of the Delhi agreement, the
plaintiff was obliged to make a deposit of Rs.12 lakhs as Management
Deposit with the defendant No.1, which was repayable upon expiry, or
sooner termination of the agreement.
5.

The plaintiff expended huge amounts of money towards

the costs on décor, interior and exterior-decoration, air-conditioning,
etc. to set up the South Extension Store, and even after the opening of
the said outlet the plaintiff expended a lot of time, money and energy
in popularizing the brand ‘Tommy Hilfiger’ in the National Capital
Region of Delhi.
6.

The trouble started when, on account of the orders passed

by Hon’ble Supreme Court, the South Extension Stores was sealed on
account of misuser of residential property for commercial purposes.
Upon sealing of the said store, the lease was surrendered by a notice
dated 10.11.2006 and the possession offered back to the lessors both

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 3 of 23

by the plaintiff and defendant No. 1. With this, in terms of the clause
3.6 read with 13.1 (c)(iii), the Delhi Agreement stood terminated.
7.

Some disputes arose between the plaintiff and defendant

No. 1 with regard to the condition in which the South Extension Store
was being restored to the lessors, and obligation of the respective
parties to hand over the same in its original style and shape. The
plaintiff claimed refund of the management deposit in terms of clause
5.5 of the Delhi Agreement, while defendant No. 1 sought to link the
refund of the management deposit to the refund of the security
deposit

by

the

lessors.

Disputes

also

arose

regarding

the

reimbursement claimed by the plaintiff from defendant No.1 towards
the depreciated cost of décor, signs, displays, etc. in terms of clause
14.1(c) of the Delhi Agreement.
8.
Store,

The plaintiff, even after the closure of the South Extension
was taking steps to promote sale of defendants products.

Plaintiff was helping in identifying new locations for setting up stores
and was also negotiating deals with Claridges Hotel, New Delhi to hold
temporary sales.
9.

The plaintiff filed the present suit since the defendant No.

1 issued an advertisement in daily newspapers on the 2nd February
2007 whereby they advertised the sale of their merchandise at two
showrooms of defendant No. 2 and 3 respectively. Defendant No. 1
CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 4 of 23

was obliged to offer the first right of refusal to the plaintiff before
opening any new store in the National Capital Region of Delhi.
10.

The plaintiff had the first right of refusal to buy, sell,

merchandise up to a maximum of 4 (four) stores in the National Capital
Region of Delhi under Article 2.1 of each of the two agreements. Upn
the execution of fresh Franchise Agreements for each new Store, the
plaintiff would get a similar first right of refusal in respect of four
Stores in each of the Franchise Agreements. No notice was ever given
to the plaintiff by defendant No. 1 before opening the two new stores
as aforesaid and that defendant No.1 was in breach of the terms of the
Gurgaon Agreement. The two showrooms of defendant No. 2 and 3 are
in the process of being made fully operational though, on the date of
filing of the suit they were still not fully ready. The agreements
between defendant No. 1 and 2 as well as the agreements between
defendant No. 1 and 3 are fraudulent, involve and imply injury to the
plaintiff, are immoral and that the same are void and un-enforceable
and not binding upon the plaintiff.

Under Article 14.5 (b) of the

Agreements, the plaintiff has the right to seek relief by way of
injunction in case the defendant violates Article 2.1 by refusing to
grant the first right of refusal to the plaintiff.
Proceedings so far
11.

When the matter came up before this court on 8 th February

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 5 of 23

2007 at the ex-parte stage, I passed the following order:
“IA No.1370/07
Issue notice of this application
defendants returnable on 09-03-2007.

to

the

The plaintiff states that he has entered into two
identical agreements with defendant No.1
whereunder the plaintiff was appointed as
franchisee of defendant No.1.
Under the
agreement, the plaintiff had to undertake sale
of the products with brand name “Tommy
Hillfiger” manufactured and supplied by
defendant No.1 at the showrooms opened for
the said purpose.
One of the showrooms
situated at South Extension was shut down on
account of the activity not being permitted
there.
However, the other showroom at
Gurgaon is still functional.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff submits that
neither none of these agreements has been
terminated. In any case, under Clause 2.1 of
both the agreements, defendant No.1 granted
the franchise to the plaintiff with exclusive first
right of refusal to buy, display and sell the
merchandise at upto a maximum of four stores
in National Capital Territory of Delhi.
Defendant No.1 was required to give a notice in
writing to the franchisee in case the said
defendant intended to open additional stores in
National Capital Territory of Delhi and the
franchisee was to communicate its response in
writing to defendant No.1 within 45 days of
receipt of the notice. Thereafter, defendant
No.1 had the right to open the store either
directly or through other franchisees.
Plaintiff states that no such notice has been
given by defendant No.1 to the plaintiff. The
plaintiff is ready and willing to open other
franchise stores.
Plaintiff also relies upon
Article 14.3(d) which states that in the event of
defendant No.1 breaching or threatening to
CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 6 of 23

breach franchisees exclusive right of refusal to
buy, display and sell merchandise upto a
maximum of four stores in National Capital
Territory of Delhi, the plaintiff would have the
right to seek injunction relief from a court.
Based on this, plaintiff submitted that he has
made out a prima facie case for grant of an
injunction to restrain defendant No.1 from
granting franchise to any other entity. It is
stated that defendant No.1 is supplying goods
to defendants No.2 and 3 temporarily and the
same is in breach of the plaintiff’s franchise
agreements.
In my view, plaintiff has made out a prima facie
case for grant of an ex parte ad interim
injunction to restrain defendant No.1 from
supplying its products with the trademark
“Tommy Hillfiger” to defendants No.2 and 3 till
the next date. Injunction granted accordingly.
Compliance of order 39, rule 3 CPC be made
within three days. Dasti.”
12.

The defendant entered appearance and filed their reply to

the application. Thereafter, the parties have advanced their respective
submissions and I reserved orders on 3.4.2007.
Defendant’s Submissions:
13.

Preliminary objections have been raised to the effect that

the reliefs sought by the plaintiff are barred in law. In effect the
plaintiff is seeking to enforce an agreement, which if given effect to
would result in restraint of trade and be violative of Section 27 of the
Indian Contract Act. The relief claimed is barred under Section 14 of
the Specific Relief Act since the agreement is commercial in nature
and

monetary

compensation

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

for

non-performance

thereof,

Page 7 of 23

if

established, will provide adequate remedy to the plaintiff. The plaintiff
has not come to the Court with clean hands and has misled this Court
by suppressing vital and material facts. The plaintiff had terminated
the Delhi Agreement vide letters dated 16.11.2006, 118.12.06 and
27.12.2006. The claim of the plaintiff based on Article 2.1 of the Delhi
Agreement therefore does not survive.
14.

Under the Gurgaon agreement, the defendant had offered

the exclusive first right of refusal to buy, display and sell the
merchandise of the defendant to the plaintiff at two stores at Saket
and Noida vide letter dated 6.2.2007. This offer made by the
defendant, has been suppressed by the plaintiff. This offer was
accepted by the plaintiff on 10.2.2007. Even during the pendency of
the suit, a further offer has been made to the plaintiff for one more
store in M Block Market, Greater Kailash I, New Delhi on 12 th March
2007.
15.

Even though the first right of refusal pertains only to the

running of a store, the defendant had offered the plaintiff to conduct
the end of season sale at two locations in the National Capital Region
in order to liquidate the remaining stocks of South Extension Store as
early as in January 2007. However the plaintiff declined this offer and
the defendant was therefore entitled to extend the offer to another
party. Only after the plaintiff had refused to conduct the end of season

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 8 of 23

sale, defendant nos. 2 and 3 were offered to conduct such sale.
16.

The picture painted by the plaintiff that large amounts are

outstanding from the defendant No. 1 to the plaintiff is also false. The
claim for Rs.70 lakhs towards cost of décor etc. is not made out. On a
bare perusal of Article 14.5 of the Delhi agreement, which inter-alia
states – “In case of equipments, décor, furniture, fixture or other
tangible items used in the operation of the Store, AMB may at its sole
option by the same at its written down value calculated at a
depreciated @ 20% per annum.” It is clear that firstly it is within
discretion of the defendant No. 1 whether or not to take over the
equipment, décor, furniture and fixture etc, and secondly the value of
the same is to be calculated with a depreciation of 20% per annum. In
fact, there are outstanding dues owed by the plaintiff and the
defendant No.1 to the tune of Rs.60 lakhs pertaining to the Gurgaon
Store. Reference is made to the correspondence exchange by them
with the plaintiff between February 5, 2007 and February 6, 2007. The
said liability was not liquidated by the plaintiff and the plaintiff is
denying the same. As opposed to the management deposit of Rs.12
lakhs prescribed in Clause 5.5 of the Delhi Agreement, the plaintiff had
made a deposit of only Rs. 2 lakhs. There is no equity in favour of the
plaintiff for grant of the discretionary relief of injunction, since the
plaintiff has not come with clean hands, having itself failed to filfil its

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 9 of 23

obligations under the Gurgaon agreement. The defendant has referred
to and placed reliance on various communications exchanged between
the parties to justify its conduct and to say that the plaintiff has not
made out a case for grant of injunction for continuance thereof.
My decision and reasons thereof:
17.

I have heard counsels for the parties at length and having

given my thoughtful consideration to all the submissions and the
materials placed on record, I am of the view that the ex parte order of
injunction passed by me on 8th February 2007 ought to be vacated
since the plaintiff has failed to make out a prima facie case for the
continuance thereof, apart from the fact that the conduct of the
plaintiff also disentitles it from grant of the discretionary relief of
injunction.
18.

A perusal of the agreements show that defendant No.1

granted franchise to the plaintiff wherein exclusive first right of refusal
was given to the plaintiff to buy, display and sell merchandise with the
brand of defendant No.1 viz, Tommy Hilfiger, in the National Capital
Region of Delhi. This exclusive first right of refusal was in respect of
“upto maximum of four stores”. The term of the agreement was
stated to be five years.
19.

It is the admitted position that under Article 3.6, the

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 10 of 23

agreements would terminate in case the lease of an approved location
terminates without the fault of the defendant, or if the store covered
by the said agreements are destroyed, condemned or otherwise
rendered unusable or if the landlord/lessor requires the store to be
moved within the mall or shopping center.
20.

The expression ‘store’ is defined in Article 1.10 to mean

the comprehensive real estate where the ‘franchisee’ i.e (the plaintiff)
is

authorized

by

AMB(the

defendant)

to

buy,

display

or

sell

merchandise upon the terms of the agreement, more fully described in
Exhibit A to the agreement. Exhibit ‘A’ to the Delhi Agreement
pertaining to the South Extension Store describes the ‘store’ as the
premises situated at Ground Floor of F-46, South Extension-I, New
Delhi-110049, having super area admeasuring about 4200 sq.ft. It is
also the admitted case that upon sealing of the South Extension store,
the Delhi Agreement stood terminated. This is not only the case of the
defendants but also that of the plaintiff as is evident from para 12 of
the plaint which reads as follows:“12. That on such surrender, the Franchise
Agreement, so far as the store in South Extension
area of Delhi is concerned also terminated in terms
of Clauses 3.6 read with Article 13.1(c) (iii) of the
same.”
21.

Article 14.4 states that in the event of expiry or

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 11 of 23

termination of the agreement or receipt by AMB (the defendant) of a
notice of termination from the franchisee, AMB shall be free to grant to
third parties, the right to buy, display and sell merchandise in
connection with the operation of the Store.
22.

To my mind what this means is that defendant no.1 was

entitled to grant rights to third parties to sell the stocks of
merchandise that were to be sold at the South Extension store. The
aforesaid position becomes even more clear from Article 14.5 of the
Agreement, which states that on expiry or termination of the
agreement, franchisee shall if so desired by AMB sell to AMB any
merchandise on hand at such discounts on the billing value as is
prescribed by AMB. Consequently the option to purchase

the

merchandise with the plaintiff franchisee, upon expiry or termination of
the Delhi Agreement relating to the South Extension Store, lay with
defendant no.1. The mechanism provided by the parties was, that in
case of expiry or termination of the franchise agreement, defendant
no.1 would be entitled to repurchase the merchandise from the
plaintiff and to engage any third party to sell the same.
23.

In fact, after the termination of the Delhi Agreement

pertaining to the South Extension Store, the plaintiff had itself sought
to invoke Article 14.1 (c) thereof vide its letter dated 18.12.2006,
requiring defendant no.1 to

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

reimburse the plaintiff for the décor,

Page 12 of 23

interiors, exteriors etc etc. The plaintiff also requested defendant no.1
to nominate their representative for taking physical delivery and to
settle their account.
24.

Upon the termination of the Delhi Agreement pertaining to

South Extension Store, the exclusive first right of refusal of the plaintiff
to buy, display and sell the merchandise at upto a maximum of four
stores in the National Capital Region of Delhi as contained in that
agreement also perished. The Delhi Agreement does not save the right
of the plaintiff underArticle 2.1 whereunder the exclusive first right of
refusal was given to the plaintiff for setting up of a maximum of four
stores in National Capital Region of Delhi. Article 14.6 contraindicates
any such intention of the parties, since it specifically ennumerates the
surviving obligations upon the termination of the Delhi Agreement, and
Article 2.1 is not one of the surviving obligation mentioned therein. In
my view the plaintiff cannot base its right to exclusivity on the basis of
the Delhi Agreement. The plaintiff it appears realizes this position and
the same is evident from para 17 of the plaint which reads as follows:“That is most respectfully submitted that the Store of the
Plaintiff at Gurgaon mentioned above still continues to
remain operational and the defendant no.1 therefore,
remains bound by the terms thereof, including Article 2.2
thereof. Article 2.2 clearly provides that the Plaintiff shall
have the first right of refusal to buy, display and sell the
Merchandise, upto a maximum of Four (4) Stores in the
National Capital Region of Delhi.”

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 13 of 23

25.

The plaintiff has therefore claimed exclusivity on the basis

of Article 2.2 of the Gurgaon agreement.
26.

After the surrender of the lease of the South Extension

Store the plaintiff vide email dated 10th November 2006, informed
defendant No.1 that they were dispatching all the merchandise to the
respective licensees and that the apparels would be returned to the
said defendant by early next week. To this communication, the
defendant No.1 responded on 13th November 2006 requesting the
plaintiff not to return the stocks since the said defendant had some
plans for dealing with the same, which would be discussed in a
meeting between the parties. Soon thereafter, on the same day, the
plaintiff sent another email stating that the plaintiff has no place to
stock the merchandise, and that the same be taken back. It was
further stated that as and when defendant No.1 has plans for the said
stock, the same could be re-sent. On 16th January 2007, defendant
No.1 sent an email communication to the plaintiff. From this
communication,

it

appears

that

the

parties

were

discussing

organization of end of seasons sales activity in multiple locations in
Delhi, viz, west Delhi/ Noida etc. The defendant No.1 records that the
plaintiff had shown reluctance of managing the end of seasons
activities on the ground that its sales staff had left. Defendant No.1
stated that it had been able to find two locations in Delhi/Noida where

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 14 of 23

they would be conducting the end of season sales activities. It appears
that there was no response to this communication from the plaintiff.
27.

On the other hand the plaintiff places reliance on an email

communication of 13th December 2006 received by the plaintiff from
the Food and Beverages Manager of Claridges regarding availability of
Hall. To my mind this is of no avail since the communication of
defendant No. 1 is of 16th January 2007, i.e., well after a month of the
communication dated 13th December 2006 from the Claridges Hotel. It
could be that at some stage in December 2006, the plaintiff was
interested in carrying out end of seasons sales of the merchandise of
the South Extension Store, but the situation had changed by the
middle of January 2007 and it appears, they did not retain their
interest in carrying out such sales. Otherwise it is difficult to
understand as to why the plaintiff did not respond to the email of
defendant No. 1 of 16th of January 2007 as aforesaid. The denial by the
plaintiff of the receipt of email dated 16 th January 2007 prima-facie
does not appears to be correct for the reason that the email address of
the plaintiff ‘charu@thesachdevgroup.com’ has been correctly shown
in the said mail. The printout of the email gives the day and time of its
dispatch as also the name and identity of the person who had sent the
mail. I find on record some other email communications sent by/to
Kavindra Mishra including those dated 20th November 2006 sent at

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 15 of 23

10.39 AM by the plaintiff, dated 20th November 2006 at 4.15 PM from
Shailesh Chaturvedi to the plaintiff as well as to the said Kavinder
Mishra and a few others. The email address is the same of the said
Kavinder Mishra.
28.

It appears to me that the plaintiff has misled the court by

stating that the defendant No. 1 was in the process of opening two
new Stores at the Showrooms of defendant No. 2 and 3. The argument
of the plaintiff that they had not suppressed the fact that defendant
nos. 2 and 3 were carrying out end of season sales, since, the
advertisement inserted in the Daily Newspaper by the defendants and
photographs, themselves show that at the locations of defendant No.
2 and 3, merely end of seasons sales were organized, is without merit.
When the said advertisements are seen in the light of the averments
made in paras 19 and 20 of the plaint, and without this disclosure of
the

emails

dated

10.11.2006,

13.11.2006

and

16.11.2006,

as

aforesaid, the only interpretation that one is left with is that defendant
no.1 appointed defendant nos. 2 and 3 as its franchisees, who are
conducting the said end of season sales at their showrooms/stores.
29.

I have no hesitation in holding that the plaintiff appears to

have mislead this court by completely withholding the fact that firstly,
it was the plaintiff who insisted on the return of the merchandise on
the ground that there is no space to store the same, and, secondly that

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 16 of 23

the defendant No.1 had put the plaintiff to notice that it would be
conducting end of seasons sales activity at 2 locations and that the
defendant No. 1 had claimed that the plaintiff had shown its reluctance
to manage the same on account of its sales staff leaving.
30.

Moreover, in terms of Article 14.4 and 14.5 of the Delhi

Agreement, defendant No. 1 was well within its rights to grant to third
parties the right to buy, display and sell merchandise in connection
with the operation of the South Extension Store. The plaintiff with a
view to circumvent Articles 14.4 and 14.5 of the agreement claimed
that two new stores were being opened by defendant No. 1 at the
locations of defendant No. 2 and 3. In fact, the two locations of
defendant No. 2 and 3 do not even meet the definition of a “Store”
under the Agreements since defendant No. 2 and 3 have not been
appointed as franchisees by defendant No. 1, and no

Franchise

Agreement has been executed with either of them wherein the
locations of defendant No. 2 and 3 have been described or defined as
“Stores”.
31.

The conduct of the plaintiff in mis-stating the facts and in

suppressing the aforesaid relevant facts, the disclosure of which would
have certainly disuaded this court from passing the ex parte ad interim
order of injunction on 8th February 2007 deserves to be condemned,
and it disentitles the plaintiff from the grant of, or of the continuance

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 17 of 23

of the discretionary relief of injunction. In my view, on this short
ground, the ex parte ad interim order of injunction dated 8.2.2007
deserves to be vacated.
32.

Independent of the aforesaid consideration, as aforesaid,

even under the terms of Delhi Agreement, namely Article 14.4 and
14.5, the defendant No. 1 was entitled to grant to third parties rights
to sell the merchandise in connection with the operations of the South
Extension Store. Defendant No. 1 was fully justified in arranging to sell
its merchandise in association with defendant Nos. 2 and 3.
33.

I also find merit in the submission of defendant No. 1 that

there is no equity in favour of the plaintiff for grant of the discretionary
relief of injunction, in the facts of this case. Prima facie it does appear
that there are outstanding dues of the plaintiff, payable to defendant
No. 1 under the Gurgaon agreement, though it is not for me, at this
stage to give a definite finding on this aspect.
34.

On 5th February, defendant No. 1 sent an email stating that

they were still awaiting the clearance plan from the plaintiff.
Dispatches from Bangalore will happen only after the plan for
clearance of outstanding dues is shared and actioned. On 6 th February
2007, defendant No.1 had communicated to the plaintiff that with
outstandings of Rs.60 lakhs it would not be possible to sell stocks till

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 18 of 23

these outstandings are cleared. The plaintiff responded by stating that
they are restructuring their finances and sorting out their issues. The
plaintiff also stated that they are sending a cheque of Rs.5 lakhs and
requested for resumption of supplies as soon as possible. From this,
prima facie, it appears that there were outstanding dues owned by the
plaintiff to the defendant in respect of Gurgaon Store.
35.

It also appears that the defendant No.1 has made offers for

two more stores in the NCR of Delhi to the plaintiff on 6 th February
2007. These two stores are proposed in DLF Malls under development.
One Store is proposed in DLF Courtyard at Saket and another Store in
DLF Town Square, Noida. The plaintiff has accepted the offer made by
the defendant No. 1 in respect of the aforesaid Stores vide their letter
dated 10th February 2007 which has been filed on record. Yet another
Store has been offered to the plaintiff on 12 th March 2007 proposed to
be situated in Greater Kailash Part I, M Block Market, New Delhi. The
said offer has been placed on record by the plaintiff alongwith its
rejoinder. Consequently under the Gurgaon agreement, the plaintiff
has been offered the exclusive first right to buy and sell the
merchandise at 4 stores and the four stores are as follows:
1. The existing store in Gurgaon situated at Shop
No.75-76, Ground Floor of the Metropolitan Mall on
Mehrauli
Gurgaon
Road,
Gurgaon,
Haryana,
measuring 2200 sq. ft.

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 19 of 23

2. Shop No.280 and 281, DLF Court Yard at Saket,
having separated built up area of 7983 sq. ft and
Carpet area 3969 sq.ft.
3. Shop No. UG-1156 and UG-1173 at DLF Town
Square, Noida, having separated built up area 2434
sq.ft. and Carpet area of 1712 sq.ft.
4. Shop No. M-40, Greater Kailash I, M Block Market,
New Delhi having Carpet area 2700 sq.ft.
36.

Therefore, in any event, the rights of the plaintiff under

Article 2.2 of

the Gurgaon Agreement stand exhausted and the

plaintiff cannot have a claim that defendant No. 1 is, even at this
stage, obliged to grant the exclusive first right of refusal for setting up
any other Store to the plaintiff.
37.

I also find no force in the submission of the plaintiff that

end of seasons sales can only be undertaken by a franchisee. This
argument is not only opposed to the Article 14.4 and 14.5 of the
Franchise Agreement, it is also not supported by Article 2.1 read with
Article 4.9 of the Franchise Agreement. No doubt, an existing
franchisee would also be entitled to hold end of seasons sales under
Article 4.9. However, that does not mean that defendant No. 1 is not
entitled to grant rights to third parties to buy, display and sell
merchandise in connection with the operation of the Store, in respect
of which the Franchise Agreement has expired or has been terminated.
38.

The end of seasons sales undertaken by defendant No. 2

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 20 of 23

and 3 in fact are not covered by Article 4.9, inasmuch as, apparently
there is no Franchise Agreement entered into between defendant No.
1 and defendant No. 2 and 3 respectively and the locations of
defendant No. 2 and 3 do not fall within the definition of a ‘Store’. The
plea that the plaintiff is entitled to exclusive first right of the refusal in
respect of 8 Stores is also not correct. The Delhi Agreement admittedly
stands terminated and consequently Article 2.1 thereof also perishes
with that agreement. It is the Gurgaon Agreement which alone
survives and grants the exclusive first right of refusal of the plaintiff.
The submission that the intention of the parties was that in respect of
each Franchise Agreement to be executed in respect of each Store, the
plaintiff would be giving exclusive first right of refusal in respect of four
stores is totally absurd and I reject the same.

If what the plaintiff

contends is taken to be correct, it would mean that the plaintiff would
see exponentional widening of its exclusive first right of refusal with
the setting up of each Store under a Franchise Agreement and it would
become

never

exhausting

right.

Such

an

interpretation

would

completely militate against the clear words used by the parties in
Article 2.1 which uses the expression “up to a maximum of 4
stores”. The intention of the parties was to limit the exclusive first
right of refusal to at most four stores and not to have an exponential
widening of the said exclusive right of the plaintiff with each new
Store.

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 21 of 23

39.

Since the activity undertaken by defendant No. 1 to hold

end of seasons sales in conjunction with defendant No. 2 and 3 does
not amount to the setting up of Store, the argument that the plaintiff
was not served with notice of 45 days in terms of Article 2.1 is also of
no avail and is rejected. The plaintiff has also tried to contend that the
management fee deposit demanded by defendant No. 1 in respect of
the

offers now made

by

defendant No.

1 is

exorbitant and

unreasonable. This submission to my mind cannot be gone into by me
at this stage. Firstly there is no averment in relation to the fairness or
validity of the offers made to the plaintiff by defendant No. 1.
Secondly, I find that even in respect of two Franchise Agreement,
pertaining

to

South

Extension

Store

and

Gurgaon

Store,

the

management deposit fees was not a constant. It is really for the
parties to negotiate such financial aspects and it is not for the court to
pronounce upon such aspects, particularly at an interim stage, unless
some legal basis is made out. The contention that in case the plaintiff
does not accept the offers made by defendant No. 1, defendant No. 1
may make better offers to others is neither here nor there. There is no
basis for such an argument and this argument is based on
imponderables and imaginations.
40.

For the reasons stated herein above, in my view, the ex-

parte ad interim order of injunction deserves to be vacated and I

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 22 of 23

hereby vacate the same. In view of the conduct of the plaintiff in not
disclosing relevant and material fact to this court and mis-stating the
relevant facts at the ex-parte stage, and misleading this court to pass
the ex-parte ad interim injunction by suppression of relevant and
material facts, the plaintiff is burdened with costs of Rs.50,000/-.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE
May 11, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

CS (OS) No.229 of 2007

Page 23 of 23

