*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

CM(M) No.1393 of 2007

Judgment reserved on: 14.02.2008
Judgment delivered on: 11.03.2008

%

Shri Darshan Lal Vohra
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. A.K. Singla, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Pankaj Gupta &
Mr. J.K. Sharma, Advocates

versus
S.Bhagwant Singh
(Deceased represented through LRs)
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.B.L. Chawla, Advocate
AND
CM(M) No.1396 of 2007
Shri Inder Pal Malhotra
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. A.K. Singla, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Pankaj Gupta &
Mr. J.K. Sharma, Advocates

versus
S.Bhagwant Singh
(Deceased represented through LRs)
..... Respondents
Through: Mr.B.L. Chawla, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J.

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 1 of 16

CM No. 14062/2007 in CM(M) No. 1393/2007
CM No. 14081/2007 in CM(M) No. 1396/2007
1.

Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.

CM(M) No. 1393/2007 & CM No. 14061/2007
CM(M) No. 1396/2007 & CM No. 14080/2007
2.

These petitions under Article 227 of the Constitution of

India have been preferred by the respective petitioners viz. Sh.
Darshan Lal Vohra (petitioner in C.M. (M) No.1393/2007) and Sh. Inder
Pal Malhotra (petitioner in C.M.(M) No.1396/2007) to impugn the
common order dated 12.9.2007 passed by the learned Additional Rent
Control Tribunal, Rohini, Delhi (ARCT for short) whereby the ARCT has
dismissed the appeals filed by the petitioners bearing RCA No.62/2007
and RCA No.63/2007 respectively. The petitioners had filed the said
appeals before the Rent Control Tribunal against the common order
dated 25.4.2007 passed by the Additional Rent Controller (ARC for
short), Rohini, Delhi whereby he had dismissed the objections filed by
the petitioners in Execution No.94/2006 filed by the deceased landlord,
S. Bhagwant Singh, who is represented through his legal heirs in the
present petition.

This execution was in respect of an eviction order

obtained by S. Bhagwant Singh against the judgment debtors, namely,
Smt. Jeet Kaur, Sh. Mahinder Pal Vohra, Sh. Vijay Kumar Vohra and Sh.
Mahindra

Malhotra, inter alia, on the ground contained in Section

14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act (the Act) i.e. on account of
subletting of the suit premises consisting of shop No.B-2 (ground floor)
CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 2 of 16

and B-4 (basement) forming part of property No.2/4 Tilak Nagar, New
Delhi by the tenant Smt. Jeet Kaur, to Shri Mahinder Pal Vohra, Shri
Vijay Pal Vohra and Shri Mahindra Malhotra. The eviction order passed
in E-93/96 dated 20.3.2004 was confirmed in appeal before the RCT
and challenge thereto before this Court in a petition under Article 227
of the Constitution of India also failed.

The said eviction order has,

therefore, attained finality and it stands established that the aforesaid
premises wherein Smt. Jeet Kaur was the tenant had been sublet to
the other three judgment debtors, namely, Shri Mahindra Pal Vohra,
Shri Vijay Pal Vohra and Shri Mahindra Malhotra.
3.

The petitioners in the present petition, namely, Shri

Darshan Lal Vohra and Shri Inderpal Malhotra preferred objections
before the executing court claiming independent title in respect of the
tenancy premises.

While Shri Darshan Lal Vohra claimed to be in

physical possession of shop No.B-2 on the ground floor of the property
bearing No.2/4, Tilak Nagar, New Delhi by virtue of a rent agreement
dated 24.7.1990 executed between him and M/s Ace Associates Private
Ltd. through its director Shri Gurpreet Singh, the objector Shri Inder Pal
Malhotra claims to be in physical and exclusive possession, use and
occupation of shop bearing No.B-4 (basement) in the aforesaid
property by virtue of a rent deed dated 10.8.1990 executed between
him and M/s Ace Associates Private Ltd. through its director Shri
Gurpreet Singh.

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 3 of 16

4.

At this stage it would be relevant to give a few

background facts on which there can be no dispute.
5.

Late S. Bhagwant Singh, the owner of property bearing

No.2/4, Tilak Nagar, New Delhi entered into a collaboration agreement
with M/s Ace Associates Private Ltd. acting through its director Shri
Gurpreet Singh in respect of the aforesaid property.

Under the

collaboration agreement it was agreed that M/s Ace Associates Private
Ltd shall construct and develop the said property.

Out of the

developed property, a few shops were allowed to be let out by M/s Ace
Associates Pvt Ltd. as per the terms and conditions contained in the
agreement. The relevant clauses of the collaboration agreement read
as follows:
“8. That in consideration of the second party,
building and constructing the entire premises
situated at 2/4 Tilak Nagar, consisting of 17
shops as well as residence of the second floor
and mumty the first party shall pay the second
party by granting him leasing rights in respect
of 6 shops and the space under the staircase
particularly marked as `B' in the approved plan
and specifications attached as Annexure I and
the second party shall be allowed to lease/rent
these premises on behalf of the first party and
recover
his
consideration
out
of
the
advance/security deposit received.
It is
expressly provided that the second party will
be entitled to recover his dues only from the
security advance received in respect of the
above shops and the monthly rent as well as
ownership rights will vest in the first party who
will receive the monthly rent. First party has
the right to appoint, a full time engineer to
supervise the constructions.
9. That thus the arrangement arrived at
CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 4 of 16

between the parties is summarised as under:
i) The advance amount/security deposit
received upon letting out of shops
marked `A' on the ground floor and first
floor shall be taken by the first party and
the advance amount/security deposit
received upon the letting out of the
shops marked `B' on the ground floor
and first floor of the said premises shall
be taken directly by the second party.
ii) That after the completion of the entire
building and letting out of the shops so
constructed on the said plot and receipt
of the security deposit for letting out the
shops, the construction project shall be
deemed to have been completed.
iii) That after completion of the building and
letting of the shops in the manner as
above and after the settlement of
accounts in the manner detailed above, it
shall be the sole and exclusive
responsibility of the first party to deal
with the occupants of the said shops and
to deal with the MCD, DDA, L & DO or
such other
authorities and statutory
corporations and the party of the second
part shall have no right to interfere in the
same in any manner.
iv) The rent shall be Rs.900/- per shop on
the ground floor and Rs.300/- per shop
on the first floor.
v) That the first party shall pay house tax
and other tax as may be applicable or
payable to the statutory authorities etc.
10.
That after the construction has been
completed and the shops have been let out in
the manner as detailed hereinbefore the first
party shall have a right to deal without the
occupants of all the shops and the rent and any
other amount receivable in respect of the said
shops, shall be received by the first party upon
which the second party shall not have any right
to claim any amount or to deal with the tenants
after the letting out the said shops.”

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 5 of 16

6.

Broadly

speaking

the

agreement

between

late

S.

Bhagwant Singh and M/s Ace Associates Pvt. Ltd. was that in
consideration of the latter constructing the entire property situated on
2/4, Tilak Nagar, the latter shall be entitled to lease out 6 shops and
the space under the staircase, on behalf of the owner S. Bhagwant
Singh on the quantum of rent, which was specifically set out in the
agreement itself. It is evident that the said transaction was entered
into to enable the builder, M/s Ace Associates Pvt. Ltd. to realise the
premium (pugree), if any, at the time of first letting of the said 6 shops
and the space under the staircase. However, the letting had to be on
behalf of the owner S. Bhagwant Singh.

This meant that the

relationship of landlord and tenant that was to come into existence
upon letting as aforesaid areas, was to be between S. Bhagwant Singh
as the landlord and the persons inducted as tenant by M/s Ace
Associates Pvt. Ltd.

Once a tenant had been inducted in the said

shops/area, he became a direct tenant under the landlord S. Bhagwant
Singh and the builder M/s Ace Associates Pvt. Ltd. had no further right
to deal with the tenant and only S. Bhagwant was entitled to deal with
the tenant.
7.

After the development of the property M/s Ace Associates

Pvt. Ltd. let out the aforesaid two shops bearing No.B-2, the ground
floor and B-4, the basement to Smt. Jeet Kaur. The rent of shop No.B2 was Rs.900/- per month and that of B-4 was Rs.300/- per month

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 6 of 16

besides other charges.
8.

Late S. Bhagwant Singh filed a suit for injunction against

Smt. Jeet Kaur and on 18.6.1992 orders directing maintenance of
status quo were passed against her.

However, it appears she

committed breach of the same and sublet, assigned and parted with
possession of the shops in favour of judgment debtors No.2 to 4. As
aforesaid, the said eviction petition was allowed by the learned ARC
and that order has attained finality.
9.

The objectors who are the two petitioners in these

petitions claim that each of them was the respective tenant and that
M/s Ace Associates Pvt. Ltd. had inducted each of them as a tenant in
respect of the two shops. They relied upon their respective rent deeds
in support of their objections to establish their independent title.
10.

The learned ARC, and thereafter the learned ARCT

dismissed the objections of the petitioners by firstly observing that the
two rent deeds respectively set up by the objectors were not
registered documents, though they purported to create leases for
periods beyond one year, and therefore, they could not be looked into
by the Court in view of the bar contained in Section 49 of the
Registration Act for any purpose, including for the purpose of
determining the relationship of landlord and tenant, and secondly and
even more importantly, on account of the glaring and damning
admissions made by the petitioners during their cross-examination

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 7 of 16

before the executing court.
11.

The submission of learned counsel for petitioners in

both the petitions is that the Courts below have erred in invoking the
bar under Section 49 of the Registration Act. It is argued that the rent
deeds could have been produced before the executing Court and the
executing

Court

was

obliged

to

look

into

them

even

though

unregistered, for a collateral purpose viz. to establish the nature of
occupation of the objectors of the suit premises, and their status qua
the suit premises. It is argued that the establishment of relationship
between each of the petitioners and M/s Ace Associates Pvt. Ltd. is a
collateral purpose and that it has wrongly been held by the Courts
below that the purpose was not a collateral purpose.
12.

Learned counsel for the respondent has placed reliance

on “Ganpat Ladha Vs. Shashikant Vishnu Shinde” AIR 1978 SC
955 to contend that unless a finding as to whether circumstances
justify the exercise of a discretion or not, unless clearly perverse and
patently unreasonable is, after all, a finding of fact only, which could
not be interfered with either under Article 226 or under Article 227 of
the Constitution.
13.

The respondent has also relied upon a decision of this

Court in 135 (2006) DLT 90, wherein this Court in paragraph 9 has
observed as follows: “9. An important aspect which cannot be lost
sight of is that the Legislature in its wisdom
CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 8 of 16

has amended the said Act whereby the appeal
to the Tribunal under Section 38 of the said Act
has been confined to only a question of law
and second appeal to this Court has been
abolished. In view thereof the scrutiny by this
Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India is not to review or reweigh the evidence
upon which the determination of the inferior
court or tribunal purports to be based. The
Apex Court in Mohd. Yunus v. Mohd.
Mustaqim and Ors. AIR 1984 SC 38 had in
fact observed that a mere wrong decision
without anything more is not enough to attract
the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article
227 of the Constitution of India as the
supervisory jurisdiction conferred on the High
Courts is limited to seeing that an inferior court
or tribunal functions within the limits of its
authority and not to correct an error apparent
on the face of the record much less an error of
law. The legal position has been once again
expounded in Surya Dev Rai v. Ram
Chander Rai and Ors., IV (2003) SLT
810=III(2003) CLT 133(SC)=JT 2003 (6) SC
465”.
14.

The respondent has also relied on 2000 RLR 50, wherein

this Court has held that the compulsion of registration of a lease deed
of more than 11 months is not an empty punctilio or formality. Where
the fulcrum of the tenants defence is the document alone which is not
registered, it cannot be read in evidence at all. This Court further held
that it is incumbent on the Court to sternly deal with frivolous
defences.
15.

Though

there

appears

to

be

substance

in

the

submission of the petitioners that the rent deeds set up by each of
them ought to have been looked into, even though unregistered, to

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 9 of 16

examine the nature of their respective occupation (in view of the
decisions of the Supreme Court in Rana Vidya Bhushan Singh V.
Rati Ram, 1969 VJ(SC) 86, Satish Chand Makan V. Goverdhan Das
Byas, AIR 1984 SC 143 and Anthony V. K. C. Ittoop & Sons &
Others, (2006) 6 SCC 394), the aforesaid submission of the
petitioners, however, becomes immaterial in view of the statements of
Sh. Darshal Lal as extracted by the learned RCT as well as the analysis
of the statement made by Sh. Inder Pal Malhotra found in the
impugned order. The relevant extract from the impugned order reads
as follows:“11. I have also examined the statement of
OW1 Shri Inder Pal Malhotra and OW2 Shri
Darshan Lal (appellants).
Shri Inder Pal
Malhotra has tested in the cross-examination
that I have not placed on record any rent
issued by M/s ACE Associates Pvt. Ltd. He paid
rent to the landlord from August, 1990 up to
December, 1991.
He cannot show any
document to prove that the rent was paid. The
rent receipt was never issued.
M/s ACE
Associates Pvt. Ltd. is a private limited
company and such company cannot accept any
amount including the rent, without proper
account and receipts. The appellants never
issued any letter/notice to the landlord for not
issuing the rent receipts. OW2 Shri Darshan
Lal also testified that he has not filed any proof
of payment of rent to the landlord, nor he has
maintained any record of such payment. Thus,
from the oral statements of the two appellants,
they have not been able to convince that the
rent was ever paid by them to M/s ACE
Associates Pvt. Ltd. Though, the payment of
rent by the tenants to the landlord was matter
between the two, but such payment of rent to
the landlord could have helped the appellants
CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 10 of 16

to establish such relationship to claim merit in
their objections. Interestingly, Shri Inder Pal
Malhotra has even testified that he rent to late
petitioner, Shri Bhagwant Singh on 2-3 times,
but he cannot give the details of such
payment. Since, there was no relationship
between Bhagwant Singh and Inder Pal
Malhotra, then it is highly unbelievable that the
rent was paid to Shri Bhagwant Singh.
12. It is also interesting to note that the
appellant failed to examine any authorized
person from M/s ACE Associates Pvt. Ltd., nor
have summoned any record from that
company.
Such oral and documentary
evidence could have strengthened the case of
the appellant to establish that they are tenants
under M/s ACE Associates Pvt. Ltd. On the
record, there are statements of only the
alleged tenants of M/s ACE Associates Pvt. Ltd.
Those very tenants have filed the objections to
claim independent right in the property. Their
statements are just like one way traffic and
without the statements/record from the said
landlord, M/s ACE Associates Pvt. Ltd., there
cannot be two way traffic to establish the
relationship of landlord and tenant between the
two.
13. The learned trial court has also rightly
found that the objections under section 25 of
DRC Act have got no merit and perhaps, the
same have been filed just to defeat the fruit of
the eviction order, passed against Smt. Jeet
Kaur etc. The statement of Darshan Lal is very
interesting. He has admitted that JD Nos.2 and
3, namely, Mahinder Pal Vohra and Vijay Kumar
Vohra are his real brothers. They all residing
together and have cordial relations.
The
business in the shops in question is being
carried out under the name and style of “Mini
Gaffar”. Amit Vohra, son of JD Mahinder Pal
Vohra is running the business. He has also
admitted that “it is correct that in the suit
premises, the business under the name M/s
Jeet Shoes, was being carried out. Mrs. Jeet
CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 11 of 16

Kaur was the proprietor/owner of the said
business. Her son, Manjeet Singh was looking
after the business.” He has further admitted
that “it is correct that Smt. Jeet Kaur was
tenant in respect to the shop in question..........
It is correct that Smt. Jeet Kaur sublet and
parted with the possession of shop to JD Nos.2
to 4, i.e. Mahinder Pal, Vijay Kumar and
Mahinder Pal Malhotra, who are my brother and
cousin. It is correct that petitioner, Bhagwant
Singh then filed eviction case against the JDs. I
do not know whether eviction case was deiced
in favour of petitioner and against the JDs. It is
correct that I have filed my objections against
the eviction order, passed against the JDs. It is
correct that the eviction proceedings against
the JDs went on for about 9-10 years. It is
correct that the JDs filed appeal against the
eviction order. I do not know whether appeal
of JDs was dismissed. I do not know whether
JDs filed a petition before the Hon'ble High
Court and the same was also dismissed. It is
correct that I filed the objections after
termination of the litigation between the
petitioner and the JDs................... It is correct
that the documents filed by me on record have
been obtained after filing of the present
objection. It is correct to say that I have filed
the present objections at the instance of JD
Nos.2 to 4 in order to save eviction from the
shops.”
During the cross-examination, the appellant
has also admitted that Shri S.K. Gulati,
Advocate, is known to him. Shri Gulati was
advocate of Smt. Jeet Kaur and also of the
objector.
14. The other appellant, Inder Pal Malhotra
has testified that the business of “Mini Gaffar”
is a shop of ready-made garments and it is
being run by Shri Amit Vohra, son of Mahinder
Pal Vohra, who is brother of the appellant. He
does not know whether the above-named
persons had taken the shop from Smt. Jeet
Kaur. The appellant, Shri Inder Pal Malhotra
CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 12 of 16

has deposed that the business of M/s Mini
Gaffar is a partnership business. He and Mr.
Darshan Lal Vohra are the partners. However,
he has not placed on record any partnership
deed. He says that there is no bank account of
M/s Mini Gaffar. This appellant also does not
know whether he filed the present objection
after the litigation was over between Bhagwant
Singh and Smt. Jeet Kaur.
15. From the statements of the two
appellants which they have made on oath,
there is no doubt that they are closely related
with the JDs. They have filed the objections
just to defeat the eviction order and to help the
JDs to avoid the eviction. They are neither
tenant under M/s ACE Associates Pvt. Ltd., nor
they have any independent right or interest in
the property.”
16.

From the aforesaid it is evident that the petitioners

were set up by the judgment debtor Nos.2 to 4/sub tenants and in fact
they had no independent title to the tenanted premises.
17.

In my view, in this case it cannot be said that the Courts

below have not functioned within the bounds of

their jurisdiction.

Even if the view taken by the Courts below had been erroneous, the
same could not be interfered with unless it was clearly perverse or
patently unreasonable.

As aforesaid, the view taken by the Courts

below is perfectly justified and legally sustainable, in the facts stated
hereinabove.

Moreover, it cannot be said that the exercise of their

jurisdiction by the Court below is perverse or that it has resulted in any
injustice to the petitioners.
18.

The issue whether the respective rent deeds set up by

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 13 of 16

both the petitioners ought to have been looked into by the Courts
below for establishing the relationship of landlord and tenant between
them and M/s Ace Associates Pvt. Ltd. has no relevance, not only for
the reasons recorded by the Courts below, but also for the reason that
even these rent agreements, even if they were to be looked into,
purport to create tenancies in their respective favour with M/s Ace
Associates Pvt. Ltd. being shown as the landlord. M/s Ace Associates
Pvt. Ltd. admittedly did not have any such rights under the
collaboration agreement, since it had the right to create a tenancy only
once in respect of the specified shops for and on behalf of the owner S.
Bhagwant Singh, and not by claiming itself to be a landlord. M/s Ace
Associates could not have created a better title in the suit premises in
favour of the petitioners than it was itself possessed of. Moreover, it
already stands established that the suit premises had earlier been let
out to Smt. Jeet Kaur,

who had attorned to the landlord Shri S.

Bhagwan Singh, and that she had sublet the premises to the judgment
debtors. How then, the petitioners could have suddenly sprung up to
claim tenancy rights is not established by them.

It is evident that the

present petitions are a gross abuse of the process of the court. The
petitioners were evidently set up by the judgment debtors to somehow
delay and defeat the execution of the eviction decree passed on
20.03.2004. In Ravinder Kaur vs. Ashok Kumar & another (2003)
8 SCC 289, the Supreme Court observed:

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 14 of 16

“Courts of law should be careful enough to see
through such diabolical plans of the judgmentdebtors to deny the decree-holders the fruits of
the decree obtained by them. These type of
errors on the part of the judicial forums only
encourage
frivolous
and
cantankerous
litigations causing law's delay and bringing bad
name to the judicial system.”
The Supreme Court in Salem, Advocate Bar Association vs. Union
of India, AIR 2005 SC 3353, while dealing with the aspect of costs that
a Civil Court may award, in such like situations held as follows:
“Section 35 of the Code deals with the award
of cost and Section 35-A with award of
compensatory costs in respect of false or
vexatious claims or defences. Section 95 deals
with grant of compensation for obtaining
arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient
grounds. These three sections deal with three
different aspects of award of cost and
compensation. Under Section 95 cost can be
awarded upto Rs.50,000/- and under Section
35-A, the costs awardable are upto Rs.3,000/-.
Section 35-B for award of cost for causing
delay where a party fails to take the step which
he was required by or under the Code to take
or obtains an adjournment for taking such step
or for producing evidence or on any other
ground. In circumstances mentioned in Section
35-B an order may be made requiring the
defaulting party to pay to other party such
costs as would, in the opinion of the court, be
reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other
party in respect of the expenses incurred by
him in attending the court on that date and
payment of such costs, on the date next
following the date of such order, shall be a
condition precedent to the further prosecution
of the suit or the defence.
Section 35
postulates that the cost shall follow the event
and if not, reasons thereof shall be stated. The
award of the cost of the suit is in the discretion
CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 15 of 16

of the Court. In Sections 35 and 35-B, there is
no upper limit of amount of cost awardable.
Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that
many unscrupulous parties take advantage of
the fact that either the costs are not awarded
or nominal costs as awarded on the
unsuccessful party.
Unfortunately, it has
become a practice to direct parties to bear
their own costs. In large number of cases, such
an order is passed despite Section 35(2) of the
Code. Such a practice also encourages filing of
frivolous suits. It also leads to taking up of
frivolous defences. Further wherever costs as
awarded, ordinarily the same are not realistic
and are nominal. When Section 35(2) provides
for cost to follow the event, it is implicit that
the costs have to be those which are
reasonably incurred by a successful party
except in those cases where the Court in its
discretion may direct otherwise by recording
reasons thereof. The costs have to be actual
reasonable costs including the cost of the time
spent
by
the
successful
party,
the
transportation and lodging, if any, or any other
incidental cost besides the payment of the
court-fee, lawyer's fee, typing and other cost in
relation to the litigation. It is for the High
Courts to examine these aspects and wherever
necessary make requisite rules, regulations or
practice direction so as to provide appropriate
guidelines for the subordinate courts to follow.”
19.

I, therefore, dismiss both the petitions with costs

quantified at Rs.50,000/- in each case.

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
March 11, 2008
aj

CM(M) No.1393/07 & CM(M) No.1396/07

page 16 of 16

