HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003 & CM No.7527/2003
Judgment reserved on: October 24, 2007
Judgment delivered on: December 12, 2007

#
!

Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan & Ors
...Petitioners
Through: Mr. S. Rajappa with H.Jayaraman,
Advocates.
versus

$
^

Gauri Shankar

...Respondent
Through: Mr.R.K.Saini, Advocate.

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI,J.
:
1.

Kendriya Vidyalya Sangathan has filed this writ

petition challenging the order dated 10.4.2003 passed by the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi in T.A.
No.33/1999 whereby the Tribunal has allowed the aforesaid
application of the respondent and quashed the order dated
W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 1 of 13

5/8.5.1995 and 10.5.2002 whereby the Disciplinary Authority
terminated the service of the respondent and the Appellate
Authority confirmed the said termination respectively.

2.

The respondent was working as a Group D employee

of Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan since October 1984. In August
1994, he was working in Kendriya Vidyalaya, Masjid Moth. On
3.8.1994, after school hours at about 4.30 p.m, two students of
Class IX, a girl and a boy approached him to have the classrooms
opened for taking out their books. They took the keys from the
Chowkidar after they were directed by the respondent to him, and
went inside the main School building. It appears that after some
time the Head Clerk came to the site. He desired to

have his

lunch box taken out and when he found the main building door
locked from inside, he enquired from the Chowkidar for the keys.
Thereafter, the respondent, the Chowkidar and the said employee
tried to enter the school building but found that the said two
students had bolted the building from

inside. Apparently, the

respondent entered the premises through a broken toilet window
and discovered the two students after some search. They were
questioned by him separately. It appears that after sometime the
girl student left, but the boy student stayed back to request the

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 2 of 13

respondent not to report the matter to the Principal.

In the

meantime, the Head Clerk, Shri Bhat also left and the boy student
was left in the school premises with the respondent.

3.

On 5.8.1994, the boy student made a complaint

against the respondent that when he was with the respondent on
3.8.1994, the respondent had made him touch his private parts.
On the basis of the complaint, an inquiry committee was set up by
the Principal of the School consisting of two PGT teachers and
three TGT teachers, three of whom were females and two were
males. The inquiry report came out with, inter-alia, following
findings:
“From the evidence recorded and statement
submitted by the boy and Gauri Shankar, it is
established that Gauri Shankar has misbehaved
with the children. Gauri Shankar and the boy
are equally guilty.”
4.

The inquiry Committee found that the respondent

took the girl student to a different classroom while asking the boy
student to wait and made inquiries from her about what they were
doing.

She was threatened

that

she would

be

medically

examined. She consistently stated that nothing has happened and
told respondent to leave her alone.

5.

During the course of hearing we asked the Petitioner

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 3 of 13

to produce the original records, which were perused by us. The
Petitioner has also placed on record the copies of the statements
forming the original record relating to the case.

6.

In view of the nature of the allegations made against

the respondent about his misbehaviour with both the students in
question, which amounted to moral turpitude involving exhibition
of immoral sexual behaviour towards the two students, the
Chairman of the Petitioner issued an order dated 5/8.5.1995
whereby it was held that it would not be fair to the students and
their parents to hold a regular inquiry for major penalty since they
have

already

undergone

a

traumatic

experience,

and

consequently the holding of the inquiry under CCA (CCS) Rules
was dispensed with. On the basis of the evidence already on
record the Commissioner, Kendriye Vidyalaya Sangathan held
that the same established the guilt of the respondent and that the
continuance of the respondent in a Co-educational Institution like
Kendriye Vidyalaya Sangathan, was held to be prejudicial to the
interest of the students of the Sangathan. Consequently relying
upon Article 81(b) of the Education Code of Kendriye Vidyalaya
Sangathan, the services of the respondent were terminated with
immediate effect.

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 4 of 13

7.
detailed

On appeal, the Appellate Authority by even a more
order

dated

10.5.2002

dismissed

the

same.

The

Appellate Authority held that there was no reason to suppose that
the students had any enemity with the respondent and the
respondent had even not established that any of his colleagues
who were members of the Inquiry Committee, were enimically
disposed towards him. In fact, the respondent had himself made a
statement that he had taken the boy student inside the school
building a second time, and bolted the door from inside which
proves his immoral behavriour.

8.

Aggrieved by his termination by resort to Article

81(b) of the Education Code, the Respondent approached the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (the
Tribunal) under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act,
which has been allowed by the Tribunal by its impugned judgment.

9.

Article 81(b) of the Educational Code reads as

follows:

“Termination of service of an employee
found guilty of immoral behaviour towards
students”
Wherever the Commissioner is satisfied
after such a summary enquiry as he deems
W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 5 of 13

proper and practicable in the circumstances
of the case that any member of the
Kendriya Vidyalaya is prima facie guilty of
moral turpitude towards any student, he
can terminate the services of that employee
by giving him one months' or three months
pay and allowanceds accordingly as the
guilty employee is temporary or permanent
in service of the Sangathan. In such cases,
the procedure prescribed in holding enquiry
for imposing major penalty in accordance
with CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 as applicable to
the employees of the Kindriya vidyalaya
Sangathan, shall be dispensed with,
provided that the Commissioner is of the
opinion that it isnot expedient to hold
regular inquiry on account of serious
embarrassment to the student or his
guardians
or
such
other
practical
difficulties. The Commissioner shall record
in writing reasons under which it is not
reasonable practicable to hold such enquiry
and he shall keep the chairman of the
Sangathan informed of the circumstances
leading to such termination of service.”
10.

The Tribunal in its impugned judgment has held

that the Petitioner should hold a fresh in-camera inquiry to avoid
difficulties all around. The reasoning of the Tribunal is as follows:
“Commissioner cannot be faulted on
procedure. The fact, however, is that the
circumstances of the case per se would not
justify the above finding. The main reason
indicated in Commissioner's order for
dispensing with the enquiry is that the
same would embarrass the students or their
parents. However, the perusal of the file
makes it clear that it is not a case where
the applicant alone is at fault but both the
students were also blameworthy to some
W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 6 of 13

extent. It is also on record that the parents
of the children are aware of their
relationship.
Question
of
any
embarassment to the children could not,
therefore, have been invoked. In this case,
the services of the applicant have been
dispensed with on the basis of some
allegation made by two students, whose
conduct also left much to be desired. Only
on enquiry would have brought the truth
and therefore, invoking of Article 81(b) of
the Education Code was not sufficient.
Decision thus taken was faulty as principles
of natural justice have been violated and
the same has therefore to be set aside.
This, however, is a case where the
applicant's conduct appears to be tainted
and therefore a fresh enquiry is called for
by holding an in-camera enquiry to avoid
difficulties all around.”
11.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submits that the

impugned order passed by the Tribunal is laconic inasmuch as the
Tribunal has shifted its focus from the conduct of the Respondent
to that of the two students. The Tribunal has also completely
failed to appreciate that the conditions prescribed for invoking of
Article 81(b) of the Education Code, in the opinion of the
Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan stood fulfilled and
that it was not a case where the satisfaction of the Commissioner
could be said to be without any basis or cogent material. On the
other hand, learned counsel for the Respondent argued that the
guardians/parents of those two students involved in the incident

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 7 of 13

were also aware of their relationship and he also suggested that,
most likely, they have even got married on attaining adulthood.

12.

In our view, the Tribunal has fallen in grave error

bordering on perversity in making the aforesaid observation and
allowing the O.A. in the facts of the present case. The question
was not whether the conduct of the students involved in the
incident was blameworthy or not. It is not their conduct and
relationship which was to be examined, if an inquiry were to be
held. It was the conduct of the Respondent in relation to the two
students

which

was

in

question

and

was

the

cause

of

embarrassment to them and the parents of the students. The boy
student had very clearly made the allegation that the respondent
had made him touch his testicles 2-3 times, and thereafter even
given him a hug. Admittedly the Respondent had bolted the door
from inside, while he was with the boy student. There was
absolutely no justification for the respondent to have taken the
boy child inside the building and bolted the door from the inside.
Furthermore, the conduct of the respondent in relation to the girl
student was also not above board. She has stated that the
Respondent has threatened her with exposing her to medical
examination when she denied any wrong doing with the boy

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 8 of 13

student. From the record we also find that the respondent had
even touched her body while he took her away to a different
room.

13.

The guidelines prescribed under Rule 81(b) for

dispensing with holding of a regular inquiry under the CCS(CCS)
Rules, 1965, is that the Commissioner should be of the opinion
that it is not expedient to hold a regular inquiry on account of the
serious embarrassment that may be caused to the student or his
guardians or such other practical difficulties. This decision/opinion
has to be that of the Commissioner on whatever preliminary
inquiry he might have got contacted and on the basis of the
complaint/responses before him. In a case like the present, it can
hardly be said that it would not have been highly embarrassing
for both the students in question as well as their guardians to
have faced an inquiry into the conduct of the respondent wherein
he is stated to have physically abused the two students. The
Commissioner, in his impugned order has recorded the reasons as
to why it is not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry in the
present case. The Appellate order is even more clear which
records detailed reasons of the Appellate Authority for rejecting
the departmental appeal against the respondent.

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 9 of 13

14.

It was not for the Tribunal to have sat in judgment

over the subjective satisfaction of the disciplinary authority and
the appellate authority, which were based on cogent reasons and
materials brought on record. Merely because the parents of the
two students might have been aware of their relationship as
noticed by the Tribunal (a fact, which is not borne out from the
record), that by itself also was not enough to say that there was
no question of any embarrassment to the students or their
guardians in the holding of an inquiry. In our view, the present
was a fit case where article 81 (b) of the Educational Code was
rightly invoked by the Petitioner. This appears to us to be a case
where the Respondent tried to exploit the vulnerable situation in
which the two students found themselves. We are sorry to say
that the Tribunal has acted with complete indifference and lack of
sensitivity in making its aforesaid observations and we have no
hesitation in setting aside the impugned order.

15.

In such like matters, the School administration is

entitled to show zero tolerance. Parents send their children to
school on the trust and belief that their wards are safe from such
exploitation at the hands of teachers and other staff of the school
and that the school administration shall protect them against such

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 10 of 13

exposure. If such conduct is tolerated or overlooked and treated
with leniency, it would not only encourage others to indulge in
similar misadventures, but also erode the confidence of the
parents who send their young boys and girls to school.

16.

Our attention has also been drawn to a decision of

the Supreme Court in Director, Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti &
ors vs. Babban Prasad Yadav and Anr. 2004 (2) SCALE 400 in
Special Leave Petition (C) No.9808/2002. Though this case was
related to Navodaya Vidyalaya Samity, Rule identical with Rule
81(b) was invoked by Navodaya Vidyalaya Samity to terminate
the services of the Respondent in that case. The Supreme Court,
in relation to the said rule observed:
“All that is required for the court is to be
satisfied that the pre-conditions to the
exercise of power under the said rule are
fulfilled. These preconditions are (1)
holding of summary inquiry; (2) a finding in
such summary inquiry that the charged
employee was guilty of moral turpitude; (3)
the satisfaction of the Director on the basis
of such summary inquiry that the charged
officer was prima facie guilty; (4) the
satisfaction of the Director that it was not
expedient to hold an inquiry on account of
serious embarrassment to be caused to the
students or his guardians or such other
practical difficulties; and finally (5) the
recording of reasons in writing in support of
the aforesaid.”

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 11 of 13

17.

The Supreme Court also referred to its earlier

decision in Avinash Nagra vs. Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti
and Others, reported as 1997 (2) SCC 534 wherein the court has
observed as follows:
“With a view to ensure safety and security
to the girl students, to protect their
modesty and prevent their unnecessary
exposer at an enquiry in relation to the
conduct of a teacher resulting in sexual
harassment of the girl student etc. involving
misconduct or moral turpitude, resolution
prescribing special summary procedure was
proposed and published by notification
dated December 23, 1993, after due
approval of the Executives of the
respondent-Samiti. The Minister of Human
Resources and Development, Government
of India is its Chairman. It is seen that the
rules wisely devised have given the power
to the Director, a highest authority in the
management of the institution to take
decision, based on the fact situation,
whether a summary enquiry was necessary
or he can dispense with the services of the
appellant by giving pay in lieu of notice.
Two safeguards have been provided,
namely, he should record reasons for his
decision not to conduct an enquiry under
the rules and also post with facts the
information with Minister, Human Resources
Department, Government of India in that
behalf.”
18.

The Court further observed “In our considered view, the Director has
correctly taken the decision not to conduct
any enquiry exposing the students and
modesty of the girl and to terminate the

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 12 of 13

services of the appellant by giving one
month's salary and allowances in lieu of
notice as he is a temporary employee under
probation. In the circumstances, it is very
hazardous to expose the young girls for
tardy process of cross- examination.”
19.

Accordingly, we quash the impugned order dated

10.4.2003 passed by the Tribunal in TA No.33/1999 and dismiss
the said TA filed by the respondent while upholding the order of
termination and appellate order passed by the Petitioners. In
C.M.No.7527/03, interim stay of operation of the impugned order
was granted on 26.8.2003. The same was continued from time to
time.

The same stands disposed of in terms of this judgment.

Parties are left to bear their own costs.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

A.K. SIKRI
JUDGE
December 12, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 4400/2003

Page No. 13 of 13

