HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Judgment reserved on: October 04, 2007
Judgment delivered on: December 12, 2007
W.P. (C) No. 8435/2003
#
!

Ex. Const. Suresh Kumar (Dvr)

...Petitioner
Mr. Arun Bhardwaj, Advocate

Through:

versus
$
^

Commissioner of Police & Ors.
...Respondents
Through: Mr. Rattan Lal, Advocate

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J.
:

1.

The

Petitioner

was

a

Constable

(Driver)

with

the

Respondent Delhi Police. On 21.10.1998 while he was detained for
reserved duty in Security/MT lines he did not turn up to attend to his
duties. He was marked absent and remained absent for 150 days, 11
hours and 30 minutes, unauthorizedly. He was issued an absentee
notice on 23.2.1999 and he reported for duty only on 20th March 1999.
The Petitioner was issued summary of allegations in respect of the said
W.P. (C) No.8435/2003

Page 1 of 6

absence. It was further alleged that there were 12 cases in the past
when he had remained unauthorizedly absent for which he was
awarded PDs and censured on some occasions while on other
occasions his absence was treated as leave without pay. It was further
alleged that he was a habitual absentee and incorrigible type of
person. An inquiry officer was appointed. It appears that the Petitioner
did not cooperate and the additional DCP/PCR, i.e. the Disciplinary
Authority, passed an order dated 6th November 2002 recording that
despite the best efforts of the Inquiring Officer he has not been able to
make any progress due to non-cooperation of the Petitioner as he has
not joined

the

inquiry

despite

repeated

notices

sent to

him.

Consequently, the Disciplinary Authority ordered that the departmental
inquiry be conducted ex-parte under Rule 18 of the Delhi Police
(Punishment and Appeals) Rule, 1980. Despite the aforesaid order, the
Inquiry Officer with a view to provide a fair opportunity to the
Petitioner time and again sent notices to the Petitioner calling him to
join the proceedings. However, the Petitioner failed to join the
proceedings. The prosecution witnesses were produced, who produced
the relevant record to substantiate the charge about the various acts
of absentism and the past conduct of the Petitioner. The Inquiring
Officer vide his report dated 25.2.2000 concluded the charge to have
been proved beyond any reasonable shadow of doubt and the
Disciplinary Authority after giving an opportunity to the Petitioner to
represent against the findings of the Inquiring Officer, to which there
W.P. (C) No.8435/2003

Page 2 of 6

was no response, passed an order of penalty thereby dismissing the
Petitioner from service. The Departmental Appeal filed by the
Petitioner was also dismissed vide order dated 7th February 2001.
Thereafter, the Petitioner approached the Central Administrative
Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (The Tribunal) by filing O.A. No.
3157/2002 challenging the aforesaid order of the Appellate Authority.
The Tribunal, after considering the various grounds taken by the
Petitioner before it, has dismissed the OA filed by the Petitioner and
the said order is now impugned before us.
2.

The first submission of the Petitioner is that the

Disciplinary inquiry had been ordered against the Petitioner and the
order of penalty was passed by the Additional DCP who was not
empowered to punish the Petitioner in disciplinary matters. We find
that the said ground was not taken by the Petitioner either before the
Disciplinary Authority, or the Appellate Authority and not even before
the Tribunal. Consequently, the Respondents have had no occasion to
deal with the said ground. Since we are sitting in judicial review of the
order passed by the Tribunal, the said order has to be tested primarily
on the strength of the averments made and submissions advanced
before the Tribunal. We cannot permit the Petitioner to raise such
submissions at this stage and therefore reject the same.
3.

It is further contended that the said authorities while

passing the order of dismissal have relied upon and have been

W.P. (C) No.8435/2003

Page 3 of 6

influenced by the fact that the Petitioner had again absented from
13.11.1999 onwards. This argument was advanced by the Petitioner
before the Tribunal as well and the observation of the Tribunal in this
regard reads as follows:
“Another limb of the argument was that the
subsequent conduct of the applicant had been
considered which would vitiate the action
taken against him. Our attention has been
drawn towards the report of the inquiry officer
who indeed had taken the subsequent conduct
into the consideration. But the perusal of the
impugned order reveals that the disciplinary
authority and the appellate authority had not
taken into consideration the subsequent
conduct. Once the concerned authorities had
not taken into consideration the subsequent
conduct of the applicant, this particular
argument so much though of loses its
significance and thrust.”
4.

We have also, on our own gone through the final order

passed by the Disciplinary Authority as well as the order passed by the
Appellate Authority and find that the punishment inflicted upon the
Petitioner is only in respect of the charge made against him which was
duly proved in the course of departmental Inquiry. The relevant extract
from the order of penalty passed by the Disciplinary Authority reads as
follows:
“I have carefully gone through the DE file,
finding of the EO and other material available
on record. The E.O. Has proved the charge of
willful and unauthorized absence. There is no
reason to differ with the E.O. about his findings.
The previous record of absence of the defaulter
Ct. (Driver) is also not good and it also goes
against him. There is history of absenting
W.P. (C) No.8435/2003

Page 4 of 6

unauthorizedly and willfully during his entire
service career on as many as on 12 occasions
prior to ordering the present departmental
enquiry. This shows that he is habitual
absentee and he did not mend his ways
despite being given ample opportunities. The
punishment awarded to him in the past has not
impact which proves that he is an incorrigible
lot. He was given ample opportunity to defend
his case but he neither submitted his
representation nor attended the O.R. This
shows that he does not want to say anything in
his defence. Such kind of frequent absentism
can not be tolerated in the disciplined force.
Keeping in view over all facts, it is clear that
Ct. (Dvr) is not fit to be retained in the
disciplined force. Therefore, I.P. Dass, Addl.
DCP/PCR, Delhi hereby order to dismiss
Ct.(Dvr. ) Suresh Kumar, No.4423/PCR from the
force with immediate effect. His above
mentioned willful and unauthorized absence
period is decided as 'Dies-non' on the principle
of 'NO WORK NO PAY'.”
5.

Similarly there is nothing in the appellate order to

suggest that the resumed absent of the Petitioner from 13.11.1999 has
been taken into account while punishing the Petitioner.
6.

The next submission of the Petitioner was that the

medical certificates produced by the Petitioner were not taken into
consideration by the concerned authorities. The Tribunal has held, and
in our view rightly so, that the same is of no relevance since the
charge against the Petitioner was about his absence from duty without
any intimation and unauthorizedly. Admittedly,the Petitioner's leave
had not been sanctioned. Moreover, the Petitioner himself had not
participated in the inquiry proceedings despite repeated opportunities

W.P. (C) No.8435/2003

Page 5 of 6

and requests to set up his defense or substantiate the same. In view of
the aforesaid, we find no merit in the submission of the Petitioner.
7.

It was lastly contended that Rule 16 of the Delhi Police

(Punishment and Appeals) Rule, 1980 is ultra virus, inasmuch as, the
said rule provides for the preparation of list of witnesses by the
Inquiring Officer. The Tribunal rejected the said argument by placing
reliance

in

its

earlier

decisions

in

S.I.

Rajesh

Aggarwal

vs.

Commissioner of Police and others, O.A. No. 3414/2001 decided on
4.12.2002 and Om Pal Singh vs. Union of India and others, O.A. No.
2098/2001 decided on 5.2.2002. In Om Pal Singh vs. Union of

India, 2006 (4) AD (Del) 461, this court has already considered
validity of Rule 16 of the Delhi Police (Punishment and Appeals) Rule,
1980 and has negated the challenge to the said rule, inter-alia, on the
aforesaid ground taken by the Petitioner.
8.

In view of the aforesaid we find no merit in the Petition

and dismiss the same leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

A.K. SIKRI
JUDGE
December 12, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No.8435/2003

Page 6 of 6

