*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+
%

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002
Judgment reserved on: January 15, 2008
Judgment delivered on: February 12, 2008
Mrs. Suman Sodhi & Ors.
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. A.S. Chandhiok, Sr.
Advocate with Mr. V.K. Malik
and Ms. Vibha Bhatnagar
Advocates
versus
Yogender Sharma
..... Respondents
Through: Ms. Vandana Bhatnagar,
Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

1.

On account of the ingenuity and, what appear to

be the unscrupulous ways of the petitioner and her late
husband, even after nearly 34 years of its passing, the
eviction order passed in favour of the respondent on 7.5.1974
by the then Additional Rent Controller, Delhi (on the ground
of, inter alia, bona fide requirement of the landlord) has not

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 1 of 33

been fully executed till date, and the Petitioner continues to
retain possession of a substantial portion of the tenanted
premises till date. As would be presently seen, this has
happened on account of complete abuse of the process of the
Court by the petitioner and her predecessor-in-interest and
husband, late Shri Saranjeet Singh, who was not even the
tenant in the premises.

2.

Late Pt. Bhim Singh had filed an eviction petition

against the tenant, Inderjit Singh, the brother-in-law of the
petitioner, (i.e., the brother of the husband of the petitioner)
way back in the year 1968.

After a trial, the petition was

allowed, inter alia, on the ground of bonafide requirement of
the landlord by the then Additional Rent Controller, Sh. Mohd.
Shamim (as he then was), by a detailed order dated
7.5.1974. The appeal filed by the tenant was also dismissed.
Time was sought by the tenant/judgment debtor to vacate the
premises by 31.10.1977, which was granted. Thereafter
Saranjit Singh, the late husband of the petitioner, sprung up
and claimed interest in the property in question on the
strength of an alleged agreement to sell.

He filed a suit

seeking specific performance of the alleged agreement dated
24.12.1974 with the landlord in respect of the premises

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 2 of 33

situated in property No. C-1/155 on 17.7.1978.

After a

protracted trial this suit was dismissed by the learned ADJ, Sh.
S. N. Dhingra (as he then was), holding that the agreement on
which the suit was based was a forged and fabricated
document and that the possession of no portion of the
property bearing No.C-1/155 was ever delivered to Shri
Saranjit Singh in pursuance of the so-called agreement.
However, the said move of Shri Saranjeet Singh had paid of,
since the execution of the eviction order dated 7.5.1974
remained stayed during the pendency of the suit and also in
appeal in this court, which came to be vacated only on
4.8.1999.

3.

The Petitioner was not one to give up that easily,

and she put her fertile and devious mind to work to once
again drive a wedge in the execution proceedings before the
Rent Controller. On 16.9.1999, the petitioner preferred
objections in the execution proceedings before the learned
Additional Rent Controller/Executing Court. For the first time
in these objections, the petitioner sought to contend that she
was in occupation of a hall measuring 20' x 70' besides WC
and bathroom, claimed to be part of the premises bearing
No.C-1/150 Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi and adjoining to the

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 3 of 33

tenanted property

bearing No.C-1/155 Lajpat Nagar-I, New

Delhi. It was claimed that there is an access from the
drawing-cum-dining room to the two bed rooms in the
tenanted property.

She contended that she is also in

occupation of WC and bath room and staircase being part of
the premises bearing No.C-1/150 Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi.
It was claimed that the said portion of property bearing No.C1/150 Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi is and was in her/her
predecessor's possession and occupation since 1960 and that
they are not part of the premises subject matter of the
eviction order obtained by the predecessor-in-interest of the
respondent.

4.

The petitioner further claimed that she is in

occupation and possession of one room measuring 25' X15'
and one store measuring 10' x4-1/2' and an open space of 17'
x17' on the back portion of the property bearing No.C-1/150
Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi and the first floor of property
bearing No.C-1/155 Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi since 1986.
She claimed an independent entry from the back portion of
property bearing No.C-1/150 Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi
without any obstruction

or interference of the decree

holder/respondents herein.

It was stated that the tenanted

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 4 of 33

premises has an access from the front side of the property i.e.
the two rooms and a kitchen.

It was claimed that the

respondent could not dispossess the petitioner from the
portions which are not the subject matter of the eviction order
in execution proceedings under the garb of warrants of
possession

which

may

be

issued

in

the

execution

proceedings. The warrants of possession could not be issued
or executed in respect of any area beyond the subject matter
of adjudication in the eviction proceedings and no portion
beyond the site plan can be forcibly be got evicted from the
petitioner.

So, the Petitioner projected that there are two

distinct but adjoining and interconnected properties viz.
bearing No.C-1/155 & C-1/150; what was leased out to Inderjit
Singh was only a portion of property No.C-1/155, comprising
of two rooms and kitchen; the interconnected portion which
fell in property No. C-1/150 did not form part of the tenanted
premises; even the bathroom, the WC and the staircase did
not fall in property No.C-1/155, and it fell in property No.C1/150 and it did not form part of the tenanted premises. She
also claimed to be in possession of the First Floor of both C1/150 and C-1/155. Pertinently, no such plea was ever raised
by the tenant in his defense to the eviction petition, or even
by Late Shri Saranjit Singh, the husband and predecessor in
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 5 of 33

interest of the Petitioner.

5.

The petitioner, who is the appellant in the

aforesaid R.F.A. (arising out of the judgment in the suit for
specific performance) also filed two applications in those
proceedings pending in this Court, one under Order VI Rule 17
CPC dated 27.10.1999 and another application under Section
151 CPC dated 17.11.1999. The application for amendment
was moved to incorporate the plea that the petitioner herein
was also in possession of back portion of property No.C-1/150
and first floor of property No.C-1/150 and C-1/155.

In the

application filed under Section 151 CPC, the petitioner herein
sought

clarification

that

the

order

dated

04.08.1999,

dismissing the stay application of the Petitioner pertained to
the tenanted portion of property No.C-1/155 and not to the
other portions of which the appellant was in occupation. Both
these

applications

were

dismissed

on

19.11.1999

as

withdrawn and as not maintainable, respectively. Pertinently,
in para 6 and 7 of the application under Order 6 Rule 17 CPC,
the petitioner set up the following case:

“That the applicant states and submit
that at the time of delivery of
possession, there existed only two
rooms on the Ground Floor and two
rooms, kitchen and bathroom were the
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 6 of 33

subject
matter
of
the
eviction
proceedings,
and
the
said
accommodation was since short to
meet
the
requirements
of
the
Appellants and his family members, the
Appellant's husband had also been let
out the back portion of the adjoining
property i.e. C-150, Lajpat Nagar I, New
Delhi since 1969-70, which consisted of
a hall and a toilet/bathroom which had
an absolute independent entrance and
access from the back lane and for both
the properties i.e. C-150, Lajpat Nagar I,
New Delhi and C-155, Lajpat Nagar I,
New Delhi (Back Portions) are in
possession of the Appellant and thus
have an independent access from the
back portion i.e. through property No.
C-150, Lajpat Nagar I, New Delhi and
incidentally the respondents are the
landlords of the property bearing No.C150, Lajpat Nagar I, New Delhi also.
That due to the growing children there
was need for more accommodation, the
Appellants with the consent of the
Respondents constructed a hall on the
First Floor of property bearing No.C-155,
Lajpat Nagar I, New Delhi i.e. above the
existing 2 rooms of the suit property
and the terrace was also partitioned
with a para feet wall of 3-1/2 feet
approximately.”
6.

From the aforesaid, it is seen that the case now

set up by the petitioner herein was that (i) the husband of the
petitioner herein was let out the back portion of property
No.C-1/150, Lajpat Nagar-1, New Delhi since 1969-1970
consisting of a hall and a toilet/bathroom with an independent
access from the back lane; (ii) the
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

appellant, that is the
Page 7 of 33

petitioner

herein

with

the

consent

of

the

respondent

constructed a hall on the first floor of property bearing No.C1/155, Lajpat Nagar-1, New Delhi above the existing two
rooms of which the tenancy was admitted even by the
petitioner.

7.

While the aforesaid objections of the petitioner

were pending consideration before the additional Rent
Controller, some relevant developments took place in another
related proceeding. It appears that before preferring the
execution Petition before the Additional Rent Controller the
landlord filed an execution application No.174/1999 in the
dismissed suit of the petitioners Late husband in the Court of
Sh. S.N. Dhingra, ADJ, as he then was. Notice of this
application was issued to the petitioner.

The petitioner

preferred CR No.1169/1999, before this Court to challenge the
entertainment of the execution application by the Civil Court
in respect of an eviction order passed by the Rent Controller
and this Court stayed the execution proceedings before the
learned ADJ, Delhi.

In the said Civil Revision, the following

order was passed by the Court on 08.09.2000: “08.9.2000
Present: Mr. V.K. Malik for the
petitioners.
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 8 of 33

Ms Vandana Bhatnagar for
the respondents.
C.R. 1169/99 & C.M.56/1999
Petitioner's case is that the deceased
husband's brother Inder jeet Singh was
a tenant of property C-155, Lajpat
Nagar, Part I consisting of two rooms,
kitchen and a bath room. Respondent's
father (Landlord) initiated eviction
proceedings against him and obtained
an eviction decree. It is claimed that
during
eviction
proceedings
he
executed an agreement to sell with her
husband and symbolic possession of the
premises was delivered to him on
15.10.1970 and her husband also
constructed a hall and a store on the
first floor of the back portion of the
adjacent property No.C-1/155, Lajpat
Nagar of respondents. Petitioners were
later given tenancy rights of the
property also which was never the
subject matter of eviction proceedings
launched against Inder jeet Singh.
Meanwhile petitioner's husband filed a
suit no.222/97 for specific performance
against respondents father which was
dismissed by judgment and decree
dated 26.7.1997.
an appeal (RFA
No.75/98) was taken against it which
was admitted and wherein stay was
declined and respondents were allowed
to execute the eviction decree against
Inder jeet Singh. It is further submitted
that
respondents
took
execution
proceedings before Rent Controller to
which petitioners filed objections.
But they were surprised to receive
notice of another execution application
No.174/99 from the court of Additional
District Judge, Shri S.N. Dhingra to
which they also filed objections which
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 9 of 33

were over ruled by impugned order
dated 12.11.1999.
It is this order which is under challenge
in this petition. Petitioners case is that
ADJ
entertained
this
execution
application
in
contravention
of
provisions of Order 21 Rule 10 CPC
because eviction decree was passed by
Rent Controller where execution was
pending and not by the Court of ADJ.
Respondents, on the other hand, submit
that petitioners had frustrated the
eviction decree obtained by them 25
years ago by resort to one stratagem or
the other.
While
this
matter
was
under
consideration
parties
agreed
for
disposal of this petition by the following
consent order, consent whereof was
accorded by rival counsel on the
instructions of parties.
Petitioners shall vacate two rooms, one
kitchen and one bath room in C-155
within three months from today and
deliver the possession to respondents.
As regards the other premises C-1/155,
it shall be open to respondents to take
any appropriate remedy to seek and
claim its possession, “if so advised”.
This shall have no bearing in the
pending execution proceedings before
Rent Controller”.
B.A. Khan, J.
September 08, 2000.”
8.

This order was corrected on 08.12.2000 and the

said order reads as follows: “08.12.2000
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 10 of 33

Present:

Mr. Girdhar Govind for
petitioners.
Ms Vandana Bhatnagar for
respondents.

CM No.2752/2000 in CR 1169/99
This petition was disposed of by
consent
order
dated
8.9.2000.
Petitioner has filed this application for
review/correction of the order regarding
description of the dispute premises.
According
to
her
the
premises
comprised of only two rooms and a
kitchen in property No.C-155, Lajpat
Nagar and not a bathroom but
bathroom stands wrongly included in
the order. Similarly the other property
was wrongly described as C-1/155 when
it should have been C-1/150.
Even though description of the property
was picked up from the petitioner's
review petition, still requisite correction
is made on the no objection of the other
side.
Hence consent order dated
8.9.2000 shall related to only two rooms
and a kitchen in C-155 (Sic 151),
excluding bathroom. Similarly in 5th line
of order, C-1/150 shall be read in place
in C-1/155.
CM is disposed of
accordingly.
B.A. Khan, J.
December 8, 2000”
9.

In view of the aforesaid, it appears that the

petitioner delivered possession of only two rooms and a
kitchen in property No.C-1/155, Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi, to
the respondent.

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 11 of 33

10.

In the light of the controversy raised by the

objector, it fell for the learned Additional Rent Controller to
determine whether property Nos. C-1/150 and C-1/155 are
separate and distinct properties and whether the objectors
are in possession of any part of C-1/150 and C-1/155 in their
independent capacity and, therefore, outside the purview of
the execution petition. The question about the independent
title of the petitioner arose in the light of Section 25 of the
Act, which states that where the interest of a tenant is
determined under the Act, and any order is made by the
Controller for recovery of possession, subject to provisions of
Section 18 (with which we are not concerned in this case), the
same shall be binding on all persons who may be in
occupation of the premises, and vacant possession thereof
shall be given to the landlord by evicting all such persons
therefrom: provided that “nothing in this Section shall apply
to any persons who has an independent title to such
premises”.

The learned Additional Rent Controller after

considering the rival submissions of the parties came to the
conclusion that property bearing No.C-1/150 and C-1/155 are
not two separate properties but built on a single plot of land
bearing Nos.C-1/150 and C-1/155. The objections as well as
the application filed under Section 151 CPC filed by the
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 12 of 33

petitioner were dismissed as being devoid of merit.

11.

The first submission of Mr. A.S. Chandhiok,

learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioner was
that the tenanted premises in respect of which the eviction
petition was filed was demarcated in “red” in the site plan
Ex.AW-7/1, which comprised of two rooms and a kitchen.
Admittedly, possession of this portion had been delivered to
the respondent in pursuance of the order passed by this Court
on 08.09.2000, as modified on 08.12.2000. Consequently, he
argued that the execution filed by the respondent ought to
have been dismissed by the learned ARC as satisfied. He also
referred to the undertaking filed by the petitioner No.1 in this
Court in C.R. 1169/1999 wherein she had stated that the
respondent shall withdraw the execution petition pending
before the Court of Sh. T.S. Kashyap and also before the Court
of Sh. S.N. Dhingra, Additional District Judge, Delhi and that
the respondent shall not cause any harassment to the
petitioner in respect of her possession of a hall and bath room
in premises bearing No.C-150, Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi, and
also the First Floor portion of premises bearing No. C-1/155
Lajpat Nagar,New Delhi, which consists of two rooms and a
store and also an open terrace on C-150, Lajpat Nagar-I, New

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 13 of 33

Delhi.

12.

Before

proceeding

further,

I

consider

it

appropriate to deal with these submissions here and now. A
perusal of the eviction petition shows that in column 8 while
giving details of accommodation available, the landlord late
Pandit Bhimsen had described the same as under: “Two rooms, one store used as kitchen
as well by the respondent and joint use
of courtyard, bathroom and latrine,
staircase and terrace above the
premises. Plan attached. The premises
in dispute are marked as red”.

13.

The submission of Mr. Chandhiok that the

tenanted premises consisted only of two rooms and the store
used as kitchen bounded in red in the plan Ex.AW-7/1,
therefore, is not entirely correct. The plan Ex. AW-7/1 cannot
be seen in isolation and has to be read in conjunction with the
details provided by the landlord in column 8 of the eviction
petition.

It appears that the landlord coloured only those

portions in red in the plan, which were given to the tenant for
exclusive use and occupation, and that the other portions
namely the courtyard, bathroom latrine, staircase and terrace
above the premises, which were stated to be in joint use were
not so bounded and shown in the plan in red colour.
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 14 of 33

A

perusal of the eviction order dated 07.05.1974 shows that the
petition was allowed and the tenant was granted six months
time to vacate the “disputed premises”. To determine as to
what was the disputed premises one has to fall back on
paragraph 8 of the eviction petition.

Pertinently, there is

nothing on record, and nothing has been pointed out by the
petitioner to show that the tenant Shri Inderjit Singh ever
disputed the extent of tenanted premises described in column
8 of the eviction petition, or that he claimed that the portions
aforesaid shown as in joint use were not a part of the tenancy
premises. It is, therefore, clear that the eviction order was in
respect of entire premises as described in para 8 of the
eviction petition and not merely in respect of two rooms and
one store, which was used as a kitchen, as contended by the
petitioner. I, therefore, do not find merit in the submission
that merely upon delivery of possession of the two rooms and
the store, being used as a kitchen bounded in red in Ex.AW7/1 it amounted to satisfaction of the eviction decree.
Consequently, the learned ARC was right in not accepting this
submission of the petitioner and in proceeding to examine the
objections of the petitioner on merits.

14.

The argument of Mr. Chandhiok based on the

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 15 of 33

undertaking filed by the petitioner in this Court in CR
No.1169/1999 is neither here nor there. The said undertaking
was a self-serving undertaking given by the petitioner herself
and the obligations attributed to the respondent in that
undertaking obviously did not bind the respondent.

In my

view, therefore, no reliance can be placed on the said
undertaking given by the petitioner, and it is not open to the
petitioner to contend that in view thereof the execution filed
before the learned ARC could not have proceeded.

15.

It was next contended by Mr. Chandhiok that

the learned ARC had no jurisdiction to determine the
controversy namely, whether property No.C-1/150 and C1/155 are separate and distinct properties and whether the
objectors are in possession of any part of C-1/150 or C-1/155
in their independent capacity i.e. on the basis of an
independent title. This submission of Mr. Chandhiok is also
merit less. Section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure states
that all questions arising between the parties to a suit in
which the decree is passed, or their representative and
relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the
decree shall be determined by the Court executing the decree
and not by a separate suit. It further provides that where a

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 16 of 33

question arises as to whether any person is or is not a
representative of the party, such question shall, for the
purpose of this Section be determined by the Court.

The

scope of the said Section is wide. For instance it covers even
the disputes about the purchase of a property at a sale and
execution of a decree and all questions relating to the
delivery of possession of such property to such purchaser or
his representatives are also deemed to be questioned relating
to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree
within the meaning of that Section.

Consequently, the

question whether there had been discharge or satisfaction of
the decree, as claimed by the petitioner, and whether the
petitioner/her predecessor-in-interest and late husband were
the representatives of the tenant or they had an independent
title were questions, which arose for consideration by the
learned ARC in the execution proceedings.

It is also

important to note that it was the petitioner who herself
approached the executing Court by filing objections to the
execution. Consequently, it does not lie in the mouth of the
petitioner to now contend that the learned ARC, acting as the
executing Court, ought not to have gone into the said issues,
which even otherwise squarely fell within his jurisdiction to
decide.
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 17 of 33

16.

Mr. Chandhiok further contended that the

impugned order is contrary to the aforesaid order dated
08.09.2000 passed in CR No.1169/1999, as corrected on
08.12.2000. He submits that the said order dated 08.09.2000
was passed with consent of parties; the respondent/landlord
had accepted the position that the tenanted premises
consisted of only two rooms and one kitchen in property
bearing No.C-155, since the consent recorded in the said
order pertains only to that portion; not only the respondent
landlord, but even the Court was conscious of the fact that
the other premises bearing No.C-150 did not form part of the
eviction decree and, consequently, it was left upon to the
respondent/landlord to take appropriate remedy to seek and
claim its possession.

17.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the

respondent/landlord submitted that on account of the fact
that the petitioner was raising a dispute, though a frivolous
one, with regard to the scope and ambit of the eviction
decree by belatedly setting up a case of there being two
different properties bearing No.C-150 and C-155, and also on
account of the fact that, admittedly, so far as two rooms and
a kitchen situated in property No.C-155 was concerned there

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 18 of 33

was no dispute raised even by the petitioner that the same
formed part of the tenancy premises, it was agreed that so far
as that portion consisting of two rooms and one kitchen is
concerned, the petitioner would deliver possession within
three months. She also argues that at the relevant time the
execution proceedings for execution of the eviction decree
were pending before the Additional Rent Controller and even
this Court was conscious of the pendency of the said
execution petition and the pendency of the objection raised
therein by the petitioner. In those circumstances, this Court
with the consent of parties observed that the consent as
aforesaid

“shall

have

no

bearing

on

the

pending

execution proceedings before the Rent Controller.”

18.

I find myself in agreement with the aforesaid

submission of the learned counsel for the respondent. Had it
been the admitted position between the parties that the
eviction order pertained only to two rooms and one kitchen in
premises No.C-1/155, Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi, there was no
question

of

the

petitioner

consenting

to

the

pending

execution proceedings before the Rent Controller being
continued, and it being recorded that the consent given as
aforesaid would have no bearing on those proceedings.

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 19 of 33

Obviously, the petitioner would have insisted that the
execution proceedings should simultaneously be dropped by
the respondent.

There is no admission of the respondent

discernible from the order dated 08.09.2000 and 08.12.2000
that the tenanted premises consisted of only two rooms and a
kitchen in property No.C-1/155, Lajpat Nagar-I, New Delhi. In
fact, that was the precise issue that was vehemently being
litigated between the parties in the execution proceedings
before the Additional Rent Controller.

It is clear that the

consent given by the respondent was only to be able to
obtain possession of that portion, which was admitted by the
petitioner to comprise of the tenanted premises, without the
landlord in any way conceding that the other portions did not
form part of the tenanted premises, or that he was not
entitled to recover their possession under the eviction order.

19.

The next submission of Mr. Chandhiok is that

the learned Additional Rent Controller could not have arrived
at his finding with regard to the number of the property
without a full-fledged trial. No trial was conducted by him
before deciding the objections filed by the petitioner. This
submission of the petitioner is also in my view, devoid of
merit. It is clear from paragraph 4 of the impugned order itself

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 20 of 33

that a large number of documents were produced before the
executing court and thereafter arguments were heard at
length from both the sides. It is not the case of the petitioner
that she had expressed the desire to lead any further
evidence in support of her objection and that the executing
court had prevented the petitioner from leading such
evidence. The petitioner does not dispute the authenticity or
veracity of any of the documents/statements recorded in
earlier proceedings between the parties which were produced
before the Learned ARC. These statements are anyway
relevant as per section 33 of the Evidence Act. Pertinently,
Mr. Chandhiok had no answer to the observations of the
learned ARC contained in paragraphs 5 to 7 of the impugned
order wherein the materials produced before the executing
court have been discussed.

These paragraphs contain the

reasoning of the learned ARC and read as follows:
“Admittedly, the eviction order of
which, the execution is filed, was
passed in the year 1974. It is also not
disputed
that
suit
for
specific
performance, based on agreement to
sell, on the basis of which the execution
proceedings
were
stayed
stands
dismissed. Though the appeal against
the said judgment was pending before
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi, but stay
application in respect of the same has
been dismissed by Hon'ble High Court
vide order dated 4.8.1999 holding that
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 21 of 33

present objectors have absolutely no
right to resist the execution of the said
eviction order. The crux of the
controversy now lies in determination of
a single fact that whether property
No.C-150 and C-155 are separate and
distinct properties and whether the
objectors are in possession of any part
of C-150 of C-155, in their independent
capacity which is outside the purview
of this execution.
It is also an
established and undisputed fact that as
per eviction petition, the suit premises
comprised of two rooms, one kitchen,
one bathroom and one open courtyard.
As per the site plan proved on record,
and exhibited before the court, the
Bathroom and the courtyard are not in
property No.C-155, but in the portion,
which is now claimed to be marked as
C-150, by the objectors. If the portion
marked by the objector as suit premises
is taken to be correct, just for the sake
of argument, there is no bathroom or
open courtyard as such in portion
marked as C-155 whereas it was part of
tenancy. The eviction petition was filed
in 1968 which was hotly contested. It
was always the case of the respondent
first and thereafter even of Sharanjeet
Singh, predecessor in interest of the
objector that Shri Sharan Jeet Singh was
residing in the suit premises alongwith
the respondent only as his family
member. Never was it claim of Shri
Sharanjeet Singh, or objectors prior to
these objections that they were in
possession of any part of C-155 or C150 in their independent capacity. As
pointed out by ld. Counsel for DH, in the
entire objection petition, it is nowhere
disclosed by the objectors as to in what
capacity, they were put in possession of
any part of C-150 or C-155. In the
objection, it is their claim that they are
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 22 of 33

in
continuous
and
uninterrupted
possession of back portion of C-150
since 1960 but the amendment
application, and in application under
Section 151 CPC filed before Hon'ble
High court of Delhi, their claim was that
they are in possession of these portions
since 1969-70. This gap of 10 years,
remains unexplained till date. It is also
not clarified as to where was the
bathroom or open courtyard which
formed part of tenanted premises as
described in the original petition and
admitted by the objector Sharanjeet
Singh, in his objections filed before Shri
J.D. Kapoor, the then Ld. ARCT. As
observed above, these portions were
part of the premises now marked as C150 by the objector. At the cost of
repetition, it is also observed that the
amendment
application
dated
27.10.1999 filed by the present
objector, seeking indulgence of the
court to amend the grounds of appeal
was got dismissed by them as
withdrawn while another application
under Section 151 CPC for clarification
that order dated 4.8.99 pertains only to
two rooms and kitchen was dismissed
as not maintainable. This shows that
the objectors are trying to raise this
plea belatedly, in every forum but
without success. Even in the objections
presently under consideration, the
description of the premises in property
No. C-150 is contradictory. No site plan
has been filed to clarify as to what was
the portion originally in tenancy and in
what portion they were in possession in
their independent right. Admittedly,
these objectors are successors in
interest of Shri Sharan Jeet Singh and
they step into his shoes. Said Shri
Sharan Jeet Singh in civil suit admitted
that he was in possession of the suit
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 23 of 33

premises only in his capacity as brother
of the respondent/JD and never in his
independent capacity. He nowhere,
claimed any independent right in
respect of any portion of C-150 either in
rent proceedings or in the civil case. In
his objections dated 5.5.78, he admitted
the
same
facts.
In
his
cross
examination, in the civil suit, as PW-4 in
page 6 of his cross, he categorically and
unequivocally made an admission that
the tenanted premises, comprise of
portion of C-150 and C-155. The present
objectors being successor of said Shri
Sharan Jeet Singh cannot wriggle out of
this admission made by him.
In addition to these facts, the
documents placed on record by learned
counsel for DH i.e. copy of the lease
deed executed in favour of petitioner.
Bhim Sen by L&DO, letter dated
2.11.1966 issued by MCD again, to the
DH Bhim Sen, the property tax receipt
dated 4.12.1992 and 15.10.91 go a long
way to establish that property C-150
and 155 are not two separate
properties but built on a single plot of
land bearing a dual No.C-150-155.
Last but not the least, the affidavit of
Shri Sharan Jeet Singh as well as Suman
Sodhi, one of the objectors speak for
themselves. In all these affidavits, the
objectors as well as their predecessor in
interest, are shown as resident of C-155
and not of C-150. These affidavits are
sworn by them to be correct and now
they cannot say that they are in
possession of any property No.C-150
different from the suit premises in their
individual capacity or that it does not
form part of eviction order. The
property was admittedly single storey
having portion being in possession of
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 24 of 33

the JD and thereafter the objectors
being successor of Sh. Sharan Jeet
Singh, brother of the JD, if any
construction is raised by them on the
first floor, that will form subject matter
of the eviction order and the present
execution proceedings. They never
came into possession of these portions
except through the tenanted premises
nor it is their claim. Hence, the
objections as well as application under
Section 151 CPC devoid of any merits
and same are dismissed.”
20.

The procedure adopted by the executing court

cannot be said to have caused failure of justice and there is
no irregularity, much less a material irregularity, in the
proceedings as conducted by the learned Additional Rent
Controller.

21.

The contention

of the petitioner that the

tenancy premises fell exclusively in property No.C-1/155 and
that property bearing No. C-1/150 was a separate and distinct
property and that it did not form part of the tenanted
premises is also patently false and is belied by the admission
made by her husband (through whom she claims) as far back
as on 16.12.1978, during his cross-examination, wherein
Sh.Saranjeet Singh, husband of the petitioner had stated,
inter alia, as follows: “Pt. Bhim Sain Sharma never
delivered me possession rather my
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 25 of 33

brother Inderjit Singh delivered me
the possession and he so delivered
the possession after institution of
the petition u/s 45 but I do not
recollect as to how much after the
said possession was given to me.”
“No writing about the delivery of
possession was executed.
I do not
know that Bhim Sain Sharma gave any
writing to my brother or not that the
possession be delivered to me. I have
not made any inquiries from my brother
regarding it until today. I did give a
receipt to my brother about taking
possession from him. I did not tell my
counsel before institution of the suit
regarding that writing. I do not know
that my brother produced that receipt
in the court or Rent Controller or
Tribunal or not. I did file objections in
the court of Rent Controller when the
execution application was filed by the
defendants but that receipt was not
filed in those proceedings. Notice of
that execution was served on my
brother and who told me about this and
then I filed the objections.
I did
mention in my objections that I had
taken possession but there was no
mention about receipt of possession in
those objections. I have not mentioned
about the receipt any where uptil today.
This agreement to sell relates to House
No.C-1/155. I have not purchased
any part of property No.C-1/150. In
tenancy of my brother in addition
to
property
No.C-1/155
some
portion of C-1/150 was included. I
did not at the time of agreement to sell
that the tenancy premises of my
brother Inderjit Singh was comprised of
some portion of property C-1/155 and
some portion of property C-1/150. I did
mention in my objections in the
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 26 of 33

executing
possession
premises
agreement

court that I had taken
of whole of the tenanted
as
owner
under
the
to sell.”

“I did not confirm that the property
included in the agreement to sell
was whole of House No.C-1/155. It
was mentioned in the agreement to sell
that I was to purchase vide this
agreement, half portion of House
No. C-1/155 and C-1/150.
The
property in tenancy of Inderjit Singh is
shown by green in this plan EX-1.”
(emphasis supplied)
22.

The objections dated 05.05.1978 by the said

Sh.Saranjeet Singh categorically state to the effect that the
present objector who is related to the judgment debtor as his
brother, had entered into an agreement with the decree
holder for purchase of House No.C-1/155, Lajpat Nagar, New
Delhi, of which the suit premises are a part.

23.

Therefore, the stand of the petitioner's husband

had been that the agreement to sell was in respect of
property No.C-1/155 and that the tenancy in favour of his
brother late Inderjit Singh comprised of portions of both C1/150 as well as C-1/155. At the same time, the husband of
the petitioner had also stated that possession qua whole of
the tenanted premises was handed over by his brother to
him. However, late Bhim Sen did not handover possession of
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 27 of 33

any portion of the premises to the husband of the petitioner.
These admissions are made by the predecessor-in-interest of
the petitioner, through whom she claims her rights and are
binding upon the objector/petitioner (see Section 18 of the
Evidence Act; also see ILR 1964 Cut 274; AIR 1943 PC 83; AIR
1974 Bom 12). Therefore, it is amply clear that the tenancy
created was comprised of the

property having No.C-1/150

and C-1/155 and not only in respect of property No.C-1/155.

24.

The petitioners have also contended that there

were two rooms constructed on the First Floor and since the
same did not form part of the eviction order, possession
thereof could not be taken in execution of the said eviction
order. Admittedly, the stand of the petitioner as pleaded in
para 9.1 and 9.2 of the proposed amended Memorandum of
Appeal dated 21.10.1999 sought to be placed on record by
way of an application for amendment under Order 6 Rule 17
was that the construction of these rooms was raised by
her/her predecessor-in-interest in 1987. This was clearly an
admission made by her, for an admission may be in any form
(see

AIR

1974

SC

471).

Though

the

application

was

withdrawn, the admissions made therein can be used against
the petitioner and bind the petitioner. (See AIR 1956 Cal 577).

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 28 of 33

How her predecessor came in possession is clearly discernible
from

his

statement

as

reproduced

above.

No

other

explanation as to how the objector came in the possession of
first floor has been put forth. Merely because a tenant/subtenant or an unauthorized occupant, on his own, without the
express consent and authority of the landlord/owner raises
construction in a portion of the tenanted premises, he cannot
object to the delivery of possession of the same in the
execution of the eviction order on the ground that the said
unauthorized construction did not form part of the eviction
order. If such an argument is accepted, it would be putting
premium on an illegality. The tenant/sub-tenant or other
occupant cannot take advantage of his own wrong.

25.

In view of the aforesaid I find absolutely no

merit in this Petition and the same deserves to be dismissed.

26.

However, that is not the end of the matter. As

aforesaid on account of the unscrupulous conduct of the
petitioner and her late husband the Respondent has been
denied the complete fruits of the eviction order passed as
early as on 7.5.1974 on the ground of bonafide requirement.
Even the part possession was delivered only after passing of
the order dated 8.9.2000 and 8.12.2000. Learned counsel for
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 29 of 33

the res pointed out that in all these years not a penny has
been paid by the petitioner and her late husband for the use
and occupation of the premises. It is clear to me that the
petitioner has grossly abused the judicial process by setting
up a totally dishonest case, which she has been altering from
time to time, to some how thwart the execution of the
eviction order. It is litigants like the petitioner who give a bad
name to our judicial system. In this case, the cause of justice
has suffered manifestly and this is a deserving case where
the petitioner should be subjected to exemplary and punitive
costs. In Ravinder Kaur vs. Ashok Kumar and another,
(2003) 8 SCC 289, the Supreme Court observed as follows:

“Courts of law should be careful enough
to see through such diabolical plans of
the judgment-debtors to deny the
decree-holders the fruits of the decree
obtained by them.
These types of
errors on the part of the judicial forums
only
encourage
frivolous
and
cantankerous litigations causing law's
delay and bringing bad name to the
judicial system.”.
The aforesaid, observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
squarely apply in the facts of the present case. In Salem,
Advocate Bar Association vs. Union of India, AIR 2005
SC 3353, while dealing with the aspect of costs that a Civil
Court may award, the Apex Court held as follows:
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 30 of 33

“Section 35 of the Code deals with the
award of cost and Section 35-A with
award of compensatory costs in respect
of false or vexatious claims or defences.
Section 95 deals with grant of
compensation for obtaining arrest,
attachment or injunction on insufficient
grounds.
These three sections deal
with three different aspects of award of
cost and compensation. Under Section
95 cost can be awarded upto
Rs.50,000/- and under Section 35-A, the
costs awardable are upto Rs.3,000/-.
Section 35-B for award of cost for
causing delay where a party fails to
take the step which he was required by
or under the Code to take or obtains an
adjournment for taking such step or for
producing evidence or on any other
ground. In circumstances mentioned in
Section 35-B an order may be made
requiring the defaulting party to pay to
other party such costs as would, in the
opinion of the court, be reasonably
sufficient to reimburse the other party
in respect of the expenses incurred by
him in attending the court on that date
and payment of such costs, on the date
next following the date of such order,
shall be a condition precedent to the
further prosecution of the suit or the
defence. Section 35 postulates that the
cost shall follow the event and if not,
reasons thereof shall be stated. The
award of the cost of the suit is in the
discretion of the Court. In Sections 35
and 35-B, there is no upper limit of
amount of cost awardable.
Judicial notice can be taken of the fact
that many unscrupulous parties take
advantage of the fact that either the
costs are not awarded or nominal costs
as awarded on the unsuccessful party.
Unfortunately, it has become a practice
C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 31 of 33

to direct parties to bear their own costs.
In large number of cases, such an order
is passed despite Section 35(2) of the
Code. Such a practice also encourages
filing of frivolous suits. It also leads to
taking up of frivolous defences. Further
wherever costs as awarded, ordinarily
the same are not realistic and are
nominal. When Section 35(2) provides
for cost to follow the event, it is implicit
that the costs have to be those which
are reasonably incurred by a successful
party except in those cases where the
Court in its discretion may direct
otherwise by recording reasons thereof.
The costs have to be actual reasonable
costs including the cost of the time
spent by the successful party, the
transportation and lodging, if any, or
any other incidental cost besides the
payment of the court-fee, lawyer's fee,
typing and other cost in relation to the
litigation. It is for the High Courts to
examine these aspects and wherever
necessary
make
requisite
rules,
regulations or practice direction so as to
provide appropriate guidelines for the
subordinate courts to follow.”
27.

Considering the fact that in this case the order

of the eviction was passed in the year 1974 i.e. nearly 34
years ago, and even part possession was delivered only some
time in December 2000 or thereafter and also the fact that
the Respondent has been subjected to absolutely frivolous
and

unnecessary

litigation

by

a

totally

unscrupulous

petitioner, and the respondent has had to defend these
proceedings for nearly six years. I award costs at Rs.2 lakhs,

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 32 of 33

which shall be paid by the petitioner to the Respondent. The
said costs may be recovered through execution by the
executing court before which the Respondent's execution is
pending. I further direct that the executing court should now
forthwith proceed to execute the eviction order.

February 12, 2008

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

RSK/P.K. BABBAR

C.M. (M) No. 648/2002

Page 33 of 33

