HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
+

AA. No.137/2006
Judgment reserved on: February 05, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: February 13, 2007

Sunehari Bagh Builders Pvt. Ltd
Through:

.....
Petitioner
Mr. Bharat Bhushan, Advocate.

versus
Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan,
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. S. Rajappa, Advocate.
CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
The applicant has filed this arbitration application under Section 11 of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (the Act) seeking reference of its claims
to arbitration in terms of clause 25 of the General conditions of contract. In para
7(x) the petitioner has set out its various claims that it wishes to get adjudicated
by an Arbitral Tribunal. It is stated that vide legal notice dated 1.10.2005 the
AA.137-06

Page 1 of 5

petitioner had invoked the arbitration agreement requiring the respondent to
appoint the Arbitrator within 30 days. However the said notice has been ignored
by the respondents and consequently the petitioner has approached this Court for
appointment of an independent Arbitrator. The defence taken by the respondent
is that the contract between the parties does not contain any arbitration
agreement.
In view of the aforesaid defence, it is necessary to set out in some
detail the mechanics by which the agreement was entered into between the
parties.
The respondents floated a tender for construction of gymnasium cum
boxing ring at Tagore Garden, New Delhi. The petitioner, it appears, applied for
the tender forms.

To this the respondent vide their communication dated

18.3.2004 replied by stating that the petitioner may contact their office
immediately for obtaining the tender form.

It was further stated “the terms of

the contract are the same as in the CPWD”.

The petitioner obtained the

tender forms which were also in the prescribed proforma of CPWD bearing
No.CPWD-7/8 for “percentage rate tender/item rate tender and contract
for works”. It was specifically required of the tenderer to make a declaration
that “I/we have read and examined the notice inviting tender, schedule,
A, B, C, D, E & F. Specifications applicable, Drawings & Designs, General
Rules and Directions, Conditions of Contract, clauses of contract, Special
conditions, Schedule of Rate & other documents and Rules referred to in
the conditions of contract and all other contents in the tender document

AA.137-06

Page 2 of 5

for the work.”
Schedule 'F' of the proforma contained the reference to general
conditions of contract. It is implicit from a reading of the last line of page 1 of
Schedule 'F' that “standard CPWD contract form CPWD form 7/8 as modified and
corrected upto date.” was applicable. In clause No.11 against “specifications to
be followed for execution of work” it was stated “CPWD PNS Vol.I to VI with upto
date C/(illegible). Revised CPWD Spns 2002 for sub head 3,4 & 5”. Perusal of this
form also shows that various clauses of the general conditions of contract of
CPWD were also referred to such as clause 12.1.2, 12.2 and 12.3.
A bare perusal of the communication dated 18.3.2004 and the tender
forms supplied to the petitioner, which he duly submitted, negates the submission
of the respondent that the contract in question is not governed by the CPWD
general conditions of contract.

It is the respondent which clearly stated and

represented to the petitioner that the terms and conditions of the contract are the
same as in CPWD. It is the respondents which required the petitioner to make a
declaration that the petitioner had read and examined, inter alia, the conditions of
contract.

This declaration was sought in respect of CPWD specifications and

conditions of contract, since the form itself was the one prescribed by CPWD.
Obviously the said form, wherever necessary would have to be read as modified
since the tender in question was in fact not invited by CPWD but by the
respondent, Kendriya Vidalaya Sangathan. Consequently the acceptance of the
contract possibly could not have been given by the President of India. However
the acceptance of the tender is contained in the communication dated 23.3.2004

AA.137-06

Page 3 of 5

whereby the works were awarded to the petitioner by the respondent. In the light
of the aforesaid discussion, I reject the defence of the respondent that there is no
binding and valid arbitration agreement between the parties.

The parties are

bound by the arbitration agreement contained in the general clauses of contract
of CPWD in Clause 25. There is no dispute that the General Conditions of Contract
of the CPWD contain an arbitration agreement in clause 25.
The

respondent

awarded

the

contract

to

the

petitioner

vide

communication dated 23rd March, 2004 for an amount of Rs.31,21,853/-, which
worked out to 18.33% above the estimated cost put to tender for Rs.26,38,211/-.
The time allowed for carrying out the work under the contract was three months.
The petitioner claims that it executed the works and raised the second bill
amounting to Rs.19.67 lakhs on 15.12.2004.

Thereafter the contractor further

executed works amounting to more than Rs.3 lakhs. However the respondent did
not make payment.

With its rejoinder the petitioner has also filed a

communication dated 21.2.2005 wherein the respondent admitted to nonpayment of the amounts due under the Second RA bill due to shortage of funds.
Admittedly the petitioner has carried out works under the contract
though there may be dispute about its quantification, quality and value.

The

respondents have, despite the legal notice dated 1.10.2005 failed to appoint an
Arbitrator to adjudicate upon the claims made by the petitioner within the
statutory period. Consequently the respondents have lost their right to make the
said appointment. The existence of dispute arising out of and in relation to the
contract cannot be questioned.

AA.137-06

Even according to the respondent, the works

Page 4 of 5

were left incomplete by the petitioner. All such disputes including the claims of
the petitioner are liable to be adjudicated by an Arbitrator.
Accordingly I appoint Mr. Preetesh Kapur, Advocate, Supreme Court,
having his office at M-143, Greater Kailash-II, New Delhi-49 as the Sole Arbitrator
to adjudicate upon all the claims of the petitioner and counterclaims, if any, that
may be made by the respondents in relation to the contract in question.

Fee of

the Arbitrator is tentatively fixed at Rs.60,000/-, to be shared by both the parties.
Let a copy of this order be forwarded to the Sole Arbitrator by the
Registry of this Court.

The parties are directed to appear before the Sole

Arbitrator for a preliminary meeting at his office on 23.2.2007 at 5 p.m.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
February 13, 2007
as

AA.137-06

Page 5 of 5

