*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of reserve : September 17, 2007
Date of decision: November 13, 2007

+
%

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006
S.K. Zaman

...Petitioner
Through: Mr. (Dr.) Madan Sharma and
Mr.Nalin Jain, Advocates
versus

Ministry of Urban Development
& Others
...Respondents
Through: Mr. Dinesh Agnani, Advocate for
Respondent No. 2.
Ms.Prasanthi Prasad, Advocate for
Respondent No. 3.
AND
W.P. (C) No. 1185/2006
%

Rajeev Malhotra
Through:

...Petitioner
Ms.Prasanthi Prasad, Advocate
versus

Union of India & Others
Through:

...Respondents
Mr. Dinesh Agnani, Advocate for
Respondent No. 2.
Mr. (Dr.) Madan Sharma and
Mr.Nalin Jain, Advocates for
Respondent No. 3.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 1 of 27

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this common order and judgment we propose to dispose

of Writ Petition Nos. 1206/2006 and 1185/2006 filed against the order
dated 13.9.2005 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal,
Principal Bench, New Delhi whereby the O.A. No. 2093/2004 (preferred
by Shri S.K. Zaman, the petitioner in W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006), was
disposed of by holding that Respondent No. 3 Shri Rajeev Malhotra was
illegible, having the requisite qualification and experience prescribed
under the Recruitment Rules for being appointed to the post of Chief
Regional Planner in the NCR Planning Board and with the directions to
treat the appointment of Shri Rajeev Malhotra, (the petitioner in W.P.
(C) No. 1185/2006) to the post of Chief Regional Planner in the NCR
Planning Board as on deputation with effect from 25.11.2003 for a
specific term, and the same was directed not to be treated as an
appointment by way of promotion. The claim of the Petitioner Shri S.K.
Zaman, that Shri Rajeev Malhotra, Respondent No. 3, did not have the
necessary qualification and experience to be considered for the post
of Chief Regional Planner was rejected. For the convenience, we shall
be referring to Shri S.K. Zaman as the petitioner and to Shri Rajeev
Malhotra (petitioner in WP No.1185/2006) as respondent No.3.
2.

On 16.4.2003, the Respondent No. 1 invited application for

filling up the post of Chief Regional Planner in National Capital Region
Planning Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) on deputation
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 2 of 27

basis from the candidates having the following qualifications and
experience:
Qualification:
Essential

:

P.G. Degree in Urban or Regional Planning or
equivalent

Desirable

:

FITP (India)

Experience :

3.

At least 15 years experience in Planning,
execution and monitoring of projects etc.

More than 15 candidates had applied for the said post

including the Petitioner Shri S.K. Zaman. For the purposes of interview
candidates were short listed by a screening committee.
4.

The petitioner contends that the name of Shri Rajeev

Malhotra, respondent No.3 was not included in the list of short listed
candidates, being an internal candidate having only a graduate degree
in Civil Engineering and lacking the essential qualification of Post
Graduate in Town and Regional Planning, as well as the desirable
qualification of fellow of Institute of Town Planning and the minimum
experience of 15 years in planning, execution and monitoring of
projects. However, after the replacement of the Chairman of the
Selection Committee by Shri N.N. Khanna, Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development, Government of India, the name of respondent No. 3 was
included in the list of candidates short listed for interview. The name
of the petitioner was on the top of the said list and he was possessed
of the essential and desirable qualifications as well as the requisite

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 3 of 27

experience in the relevant field, as at the relevant time he was posted
as Chief Coordinator Planner, NCR (UP).

The interviews were

conducted in November, 2003 under the Chairmanship of Shri N.N.
Khanna. Respondent No. 3 was selected for the post of Chief Regional
Planner.
5.

Against the selection of Respondent No. 3, the petitioner

made a representation to the Chairman of the Selection Committee on
20th November, 2003. Vide office order dated 8.12.2003, Respondent
No. 3 was appointed to the said post with effect from 25.11.2003.
Aggrieved by these acts, the petitioner sent another representation.
However, no response was received and the petitioner filed OA No.
2093/2004 before the Principal Bench, Central Administrative Tribunal,
New Delhi challenging the aforesaid appointment of Respondent No. 3
and also making a claim for being considered for the said post. The
Petitioner contended before the Tribunal that since the recruitment
rules prescribed the essential qualification as a Post Graduate Degree
in Urban or Regional Planning or equivalent, mere passing of
Associateship examination of the Institute of Town Planning India
(which Respondent No. 3 had) was not sufficient for the purposes of
recruitment to the said post. After the enactment of All India Council
for Technical Education Act, 1987, no other authority has power to
recognize any technical examination, degree, certificate or diploma.
Reliance has also been placed on a certificate dated 14.12.2004 issued

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 4 of 27

by the All India Council for Technical Education indicating that
associateship examination has not been recognized by the said
Council. The Petitioner also contended that under the Rules, the post of

Chief Regional Planner had to be filled by direct induction, and that
too preferably by deputation. Consequently, it could not be filled by a
appointing

a

departmental

candidate.

We

may

note

that

this

submission of the Petitioner was accepted by the Tribunal and
accordingly directions were given to treat the appointment of
Respondent No. 3 as being on deputation.
6.

Before the Tribunal, the original application was opposed

by Respondent No. 3 by placing reliance on a letter dated 4.4.1963
whereby the Ministry of Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs has
accorded recognition to the Associateship examination of Institute of
Town Plannner, India for recruitment to superior posts and services
under the Central Government in the field of Town Planning.
7.

The

Tribunal

while

relying

on,

inter-alia,

the

said

Government of India Letter dated 4.4.1963 held that the Associateship
Examination of the Institute of Town Planners India had received
recognition for the purpose of recruitment to the superior posts and
services under the Central Government in the field of town planning
and that the post of Chief Regional Planner being a superior post under
the Central Government in the field of town planning, the Associateship
Examination of the Institute of town planner could be treated as

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 5 of 27

`equivalent' qualification prescribed by the recruitment rules.

The

Tribunal held that as far as desirable qualification was concerned, the
same are not essential and only lead to additional weightage being
given to the candidature of the candidate possessing it and is barely of
any consequence.

Respondent No. 3 was also found to be having

relevant experience of approximately 25 years by the Tribunal.
However, the Tribunal found that instead of being appointed on
deputation, Respondent No. 3 was appointed on promotion basis. This,
according to the Tribunal, was in violation of the Rules. The Tribunal,
however, held that this defect did not go to the root of the matter and
was not sufficient to set aside the appointment of Respondent No.3
and the defect could be cured with retrospective effect by directing the
respondents to treat the appointment as being on deputation for a
specific term and not on promotion basis. Appropriate directions were
passed accordingly. Respondent No. 3 has impugned this part of the
direction

of

the

Tribunal

in

his

writ

petition

being

W.P.

(C)

No.1185/2006.
8.

Before us, the Petitioner challenges the finding of the

Tribunal whereby Respondent No. 3 has been held to be sufficiently
qualified to hold the post of Chief Regional Planner. Apart from
advancing the arguments taken by the Petitioner before the Tribunal, it
is also submitted that the Tribunal relied on a document being a letter
dated 18.11.2004 written by one Shri B.C. Datta, Secretary of Institute

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 6 of 27

of Town Planners India giving his personal views in respect of OM
Dated 4.4.1963, without the said document having been taken on
record and without confronting the petitioner with the same, thereby
denying him an opportunity to deal with it. The Petitioner submits that
the Tribunal erred in treating the associateship examination of Institute
of town planners as 'equivalent' to a Post Graduate Degree in urban
regional planning and in failing to appreciate that respondent No.3 had
only 8 years experience working as a Joint Director with National
Capital Region Planning Board and he cannot be said to be having the
requisite 15 years experience as provided by the Rules. The finding of
the Tribunal that Respondent No.3 could not have been appointed to
the said post on promotion has been supported by the Petitioner.
9.

The Respondent No. 3, while defending the findings of the

tribunal in so far as it holds that he had the essential qualifications and
experience for being considered for the post of Chief Regional Planner,
has relied on the Establishment Manual, Chapter on Recruitment by
absorption/deputation, para 1.2, to assail the direction of the Tribunal
in so far as it directs that his appointment be treated as a Deputation
for a fixed period of three years. In the said para 1.2 it is provided that
in cases where the field of promotion consists of only one post, and if
the departmental candidate is selected for appointment to the post, it
is treated to have been filled by promotion, otherwise the post is filled
on deputation for the prescribed period and at the end of expiry of the

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 7 of 27

said period, departmental officers are again afforded an opportunity to
be considered for appointment to the post. It is contended that there
was only one post of Chief Regional Planner in the NCR Planning Board
under Section 31 of the NCRPB Act, 1985. Since the post of Chief
Regional Planner is an isolated post, the departmental candidates are
considered along with the outsiders, and their absorption is considered
as promotion.

On this ground, the said order has been assailed by

Respondent No. 3.
10

The Respondent No. 3 has also contended that the office

memorandum dated 21.8.2001 issued by Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pension, whereby exemption has been granted to the
post of Regional Planner from the Rule of immediate absorption, does
not affect his case since that exemption was granted only for a period
of 3 years from the date on which the post was first filled up, i.e.
31.12.1999. The exemption became invalid after 30.12.2002.
Discussion & Decisions
11.

The following questions arise for consideration before us :(a)

Whether Mr. Rajeev Malhotra, Respondent No. 3

possessed the essential qualification to be appointed to the
said post of Chief Regional Planner in the NCR Planning
Board?
(b)

Whether he had the requisite experience prescribed

under the Recruitment Rules?
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 8 of 27

(c)

Whether

the

appointment

of

the

petitioner

on

promotion, instead of deputation was correct, and its
consequences.
12.

The relevant Regulations, called “Recruitment Rules and

Assessment, scheme for NCR Planning Board Staff”, framed under the
NCR Planning Board Act, 1985, for the post of Chief Regional Planner
reads as follows:
“2.2 Recruitment to these posts will be made on
direct induction basis.

2.3 Qualifications, experience etc. for Recruitment
2.3.1 The minimum qualifications and experience
etc. for recruitment at various levels are as follows:
(1)
Chief
Regional Essential: (i) Post Graduate
Planner scale 5100- Degree
in
Urban
or
5700.
Regional
Planning
of
equivalent (ii) At least 15
years
experience
in
planning, execution and
monitoring of projects, etc.
Desirable: FITP (India)
Note: The post may be preferably filled up on
deputation from amongst candidates fulfilling the
prescribed qualifications and experience as above.”

13.

Therefore, the post of Chief Regional Planner has to be

filled on direct induction basis, preferably on deputation basis. The

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 9 of 27

Essential qualification prescribed under the Recruitment Rules is Post
Graduate Degree in Urban or Regional Planning or equivalent.
14.

The notification of the vacancy of the post of Chief Regional

Planner issued by the Board reads as follows:
S.No.

Name of Post

Chief Regional Planner

2.

Number of Posts

One Post

3.

Mode of Recruitment

Deputation

4.

Scale of Pay

Rs.16,400-450-20,000

5.

Age Limit

Not exceeding 56 years

6.

Essential Qualification and (a) Post Graduate Degree in Urban or Regional
experience
Planning or equivalent from a recognized
University/Institute. *
(b) At least 15 years experience in Planning
execution and monitoring of projects etc.

7.

Desirable qualification

F.I.T.P (India)

8.

Period of deputation

3 years extendable by two years

9.

Emoluments

The selected officers will be entitled to DA,
HRA, CCA, TA etc. as applicable to officers of
the Govt. of India in addition to the permissible
deputation allowance.

10.

Job requirement

The incumbent is required to head the Planning
Wing of the Board involving inter-alia
preparation
of
Regional,
Sub-Regional,
Functional and Project Plans etc.

* The qualification for planning as recognized by the Institute of
Town Planners/All India Council for Technical Education would only
be admissible.”
15.

The Astrix (*) clearly provides that only those qualifications

in 'planning', which are recognized by the Institute of Town Planners/All
India Council for Technical Education as equivalent to Post Graduate
Degree in Urban or Regional Planning, would be admissible.

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 10 of 27

Regarding question (a) above;
16.

The case of Respondent No. 3 is based on his claim that he

had a qualification, which is equivalent to Post Graduate Degree in
Urban or Regional Planning. For this purpose, he, inter-alia, relies on
the office memo dated 4th April 1963 of the Government of India,
Ministry of Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs, which states that it
had

been

decided

by

Government

of

India

to

recognize

the

Associateship Examination of the Institution of Town Planners, India for
the purpose of recruitment to superior posts and services under the
Central Government in the field of Town Planning. The said office
memorandum dated 4.4.1963 reads as follows:
“Office Memorandum
Sub: Recognition of Technical and Professional
Qualification.
The undersigned is directed to state that on
the recommendations of the Board of
Assessment for Technical and Professional
Qualifications, Government of India have
decided to recognise the Associateship
Examination of the Institute of Town Planners,
India, for purposes of recruitment of superior
posts and services under the Central
Government in the field of Town Planning.
Sd/(L.S. Chandrakant)
Deputy Education Advisor.”
17.

In our view, the reliance placed by the Respondent No. 3 on

the said Office Memo is misplaced. The said OM dated 4.4.1963 no
where postulates equivalence between the qualification of Post
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 11 of 27

Graduate Degree in Urban or Regional Planning on the one hand and
Associateship Examination of the Institute of Town Planners, India on
the other. The Office memorandum dated 4th April 1963, in our view,
merely enables the Government to prescribe in the Recruitment Rules
for making recruitments to posts and services in the field of town
planning, the Associateship Examination of the Institute of Town
Plannner, India, India as an essential qualification. However, it cannot
be said that even where the Recruitment Rules prescribe a different
essential qualification, such as in the present case, the essential
qualification

can

be

read

so

as

to

include

the

Associateship

Examination of the Institute of Town Plannner, India even though it is
not so included in the Recruitment Rules. Pertinently, the Recruitment
Rules are statutory in nature having been framed in exercise of powers
conferred upon the National Capital Region Planning Board under
Section 37 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
The said Recruitment Rules were framed in the year 1997 i.e. much
after issuance of Office memorandum dated 4.4.1963. The Recruitment
Rules have been framed with the previous approval of the Central
Government. Had it been the intention of the Board and the Central
Government to treat the Associateship Examination of the Institute of
Town Planner, India as a qualification equivalent to a Post Graduate
Degree in Urban or Regional Planning, nothing prevented the Board
and the Central Government to specifically so provide in the
Recruitment Rules.
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 12 of 27

18.

As to what qualification is considered 'equivalent' to the

qualification of Post Graduate Degree in Urban or Regional Planning
has been prescribed by the Respondent No. 2 Board by stating that
'The qualification for Planning as recognized by the Institute of Town
Planners/All India Council for Technical Education would only be
admissible”. Therefore, apart from Post Graduate Degree in Urban or
Regional Planning from a recognised University/Institute, only those
qualifications obtained from recognized Universities/Institute, which
are recognized as equivalent by the Institute of Town Planners/All India
Council for Technical Education, qualification. It is not the Respondent's
case that the Associateship Examination of the Institution of Town
Planning, India has been recognized by the Institute of Town
Planners/All India Council for Technical Education as a qualification
equivalent to a Post Graduate Degree in Urban or Regional Planning
from a recognised University/Institute.
19.

In fact, so far as All India Council for Technical Education is

concerned, the Associateship Examination conducted by the Institute
of Town Planners has not even been approved by it, as evidenced from
its letter dated 14th December 2004. Similar is the position with regard
to the said Associateship Examination in so far as Association of Indian
University is concerned. It has been stated by the Association of Indian
University in their communication dated January 6, 2005 that they
have not granted equivalence to the said Associateship Examination of

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 13 of 27

the Institute of Town Plannners, India for admission to higher course.
The Indira Gandhi National Open University in their letter dated
31.1.2005 have also stated that the Associateship Examination
Correspondence Course was being conducted by the Institute of Town
Planners, New Delhi is not recognized by the Distance Education
Council. It is also pertinent to note that in the eligibility condition for
taking the Associateship Examination conducted by the Institute of
Town Planners, New Delhi there is no requirement that the examinee
should have a Post Graduate Degree in Urban or Regional Planning.
20.

The primary purpose of conducting the said Associateship

Examination appears to be to elect Associate members of the
Association of the Institute of Town Planners, India. It is not even
necessary to take the said examination and a candidate seeking
election as an Associate could be exempted from taking the
examination by the Council, provided he has experience as Town
Planner for one year. In the case of a Graduate with Bachelor in
Planning Degree, two years experience in Town Planning subsequent to
his passing the qualifying examination is all that is required for being
exempted from taking the Associateship Examination. In our view, the
aforesaid provision itself shows that there is no requirement of any
formal training, study or research required to be undertaken by a
candidate, who is seeking election as an Associate Member of the
Institute

of

Town

Planners,

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

India

by

taking

the

Associateship

Page 14 of 27

Examination. On the other hand, a candidate obtaining a Post Graduate
Degree in Urban or Regional Planning or another equivalent degree
from a recognized University or Institute necessarily would have to go
through a regular course of study with a prescribed syllabus,
instructions, class rooms or long distance classes and training and
research.
21.

So far as the communication dated 18th November 2004,

issued by the Secretary General of Institute of Town Plannner, India is
concerned, which is relied upon by Respondent No. 3, the same
appears to be a self serving interpretation given by the Secretary
General of the said Institute to the aforesaid OM dated 4 th April 1963
when he states: Thus, it is amply clear that as far as Town Planning
discipline in concerned Associateship Examination of ITPI is at par with
Post Graduate Degree in Town/ Urban and Regional Planning of various
Universities/Institutions.
22.

Pertinently, the so called equivalence of the Associateship

Examination is inferred on the basis that the said examination is one
of the Technical and Professional qualifications recognised by the
Government of India for recruitment to superior posts and services.
The five qualifications mentioned are :
“1. Degree
awarded
by
Indian
Universities established by an Act of the
Central or State Legislature Institutions
of National Importance set up under an
Act
of
Parliament
and
Institutions
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 15 of 27

deemed as Universities under Section 3 of
the U.G.C. Act.
2.
Diploma in town and Country Planning
awarded by the School of Town and Country
Planning (Now School of Planning and
Architecture), New Delhi.
3.
M. Tech. In Regional Planning awarded by
the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur.
4.
Association Examination of the Institute
of Town Planners, India (ITPI)
5.
P.G. Diploma in Planning awarded by the
Center for Environmental Planning and
Technology (CEPT), Ahmedabad to the students
of School of Planning, Ahmedabad from 1975.”
(emphasis supplied)
23.

Even according to Shri B.C. Dutta, the Associateship

Examination of the Institution of Town Planning, India is at par with
degree awarded by Indian Universities, and not at par with Post
Graduate Degree awarded by Indian Universities. Merely because the
Government of India has recognized various degrees and diplomas
awarded by Indian Universities, School of Town and Country Planning,
Indian Institution of Technology, Kharagpur, Institute of Town Planners
India and others for recruitment to superior posts and services under
Town Planning, that by itself does not lead to the inference that the
said decrees/diplomas are equivalent to a Post Graduate Degree from
a recognized University or Institution, or even to one another. As
aforesaid, such notifications are merely to enable the Government to
prescribe in its Recruitment Rules in relation to a particular post one or
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 16 of 27

more of such qualifications as a sufficient essential qualification for
recruitment. It does not follow that even where the Recruitment Rules
do not recognize the said qualifications as essential qualifications, or
qualifications equivalent to the prescribed essential qualifications, they
can be read as equivalent to the prescribed essential qualification.
Since the said communication is founded upon the Office Memorandum
dated 4th April 1963, which in our view, does not create any
equivalence between the Associateship Examination of the Institute of
Town Planners, India and a Post Graduate Degree in Urban or Regional
Planning, we reject the interpretation given by the Secretary General
of the Institute of Town Planners, India in the said communication. The
qualification of Associateship Examination of the Institute of Town
Planners, India cannot be considered as equivalent to the qualification
of Post Graduate in Urban or Regional Planning rom a recognised
University/Institute.
24.

In our view, therefore, the Tribunal has erred in concluding

that Respondent No. 3 had the requisite qualification equivalent to a
Post Graduate Degree in Urban or Regional Planning from recognized
University/Institute.
25.

We may also notice that one of the grievances of the

Petitioner is that the said communication dated 18.11.2004 was
produced by Respondent No. 3 before the Tribunal only at the time of
hearing without the same being formally placed on record and that the

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 17 of 27

Petitioner was not given an opportunity to meet the same. However, in
view of the fact that the Petitioner has had ample opportunity to deal
with the said communication in his Writ Petition and has himself
produced subsequent communications including those issued by All
India Council for Technical Education

on December 14, 2004,

Association of Indian University on January 6, 2005 and Indira Gandhi
National Open University on 31.1.2005, we have considered the effect
of the communication dated 18.1.2004 and the said communications in
the interest of justice.
26.

Now coming to the aspect of the professional experience of

Respondent No. 3 in Planning, Execution and Monitoring of project, we
find from the record that Respondent No. 3 in his own curriculum vitae
states that he was working as a Planning Engineer in the scale of
Rs.10,000 to Rs.15200 from 18.9.19988 to 26.3.1993. He states that
he was associated with appraisal of various documents received from
Ministry of Urban Development and to provide material relating to
Urban Habitat and its environment whenever it was required by the
Ministry. He further claims experience in other related fields during the
said period. From 26.3.1993 to 31.1.1999 he states that he worked as
Additional Director (Scientist 'SF') on deputation basis in the scale of
Rs.14300-18300 when he was associated with project planning,
appraisal implementation and monitoring of pollution abatement
project and other fields.

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 18 of 27

27.

A perusal of the record of Respondent No. 2 pertaining to

the consideration of the candidature of, inter-alia, Respondent No. 3
shows that Respondent No. 3 was considered as having the experience
in Planning from the year 1995 onwards only on the basis that he
cleared the Associateship Examination of the Institute of Town
Plannners, India in the said year. The note of the Director (A&F) dated
28.11.2003 in relation to Respondent No. 3 reads as follows:
“The essential qualifications for the post of
Chief Regional Planner are:
(a)
'Post Graduate degree in Urban or
Regional Planning or equivalent:
Shri Rajeev Malhotra has acquired Associate
Member of Institute of Town Planner (AITP) in
1995, which is equivalent to post graduate
degree. He has experience of urban and
regional planning from 1995 onwards.
(b)
'At least 15 years experience in
planning, execution and monitoring of
projects':
Shri Rajeev Malhotra has experience as Urban
Regional Planner from 1995 onwards (after
AITP and prior to 1995 (since 1979), he has
been working on execution and monitoring of
projects. The details are placed below at flag-a.
As per the Recruitment Rules total 15 years
experience is required in planning, execution,
and monitoring of projects. The total
experience of 15 years cannot be taken in
isolation for planning or for project execution
and monitoring. It is the total number of years
of experience in the two areas of work which
has been taken into account by the Board in
the past also. Therefore, it was on the basis
total number of experience of Shri Malhotra in
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 19 of 27

planning and in project execution and
monitoring that he was short listed by the
Screening Committee for the interview.
Regarding the Desirable qualification it is
mentioned that Shri Malhotra has not yet
acquired FITP but has applied for it. The
candidates,
who
fulfill
the
essential
qualifications had been short listed by the
Screening Committee. The then Member
Secretary vide his note at page 8-9/ante had
desired
to forward names of only those
candidates for interview to the Chairman of the
Personnel Group, who fulfilled the desirable
qualifications also. Therefore, names of only
three candidates were sent for the post of
Chief Regional Planner (excluding Shri
Malhotra) out of total six short listed by the
Screening Committee. The Ministry vide their
DO
No.
K-14011/7/2003-DDIB,
dated
27.10.2003 from Smt. Nisha Singh, Director,
Delhi Division, conveyed the approval of the
Chairman of the Personnel Group for
conducting interview on 14.11.2003 and also
conveyed his directions that 'all eligible
candidates i.e. those eligible as per Screening
Committee's recommendations may be called
for interview'.
Hence, all the candidates short listed by the
Screening Committee were called for interview.
Submitted for kind perusal and orders please.
Director (A&F)
28.11.2003”
28.

Merely because Respondent No. 3 cleared the said

examination in the year 1995, it could not be assumed that he started
gaining the requisite experience of Planning from the time he acquired
the said qualification, since “experience” in a particular field has to be
gained by actually working in the said field and that depends on the
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 20 of 27

job profile and the duties and responsibilities discharged by the
incumbent, and not on his acquiring a particular qualification. Between
1993-99 Respondent No. 3 was working as Additional Director
(Scientist 'SF') on deputation basis with the Ministry of Environment
and Forest, Government of India. Whether or not this posting involved
discharge of responsibilities in planning, has not been considered or
addressed by Respondent No. 2 while considering the candidature of
Respondent No. 3. This shows that the Respondent authorities have in
fact mislead themselves by assuming that Respondent No. 3 had the
experience in planning, from 1995 onwards merely because he cleared
the Associateship Examination conducted by Institution of Town
Planning, India in the said year. The experience gained by Respondent
No. 3 between 26.3.1993 to 31.1.1999, or even prior to that may or
may not be relevant to consider him as having the requisite
experience, and we are not commenting on that aspect of the matter.
However, we do not agree with the conclusion drawn by Respondent
No. 2 that Respondent No. 3 acquired the relevant experience in
Planning, execution and monitoring projects from 1995 merely on
account of his having cleared the Associateship Examination conducted
by Institution of Town Planning, India in the said year.
29.

Since respondent No. 3 was not eligible to be considered

for appointment to the post of Chief Regional Planner, and he has been
treated to have the requisite experience in Planning on a wrong and

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 21 of 27

unsustainable premise it would follow that his appointment to the said
post itself was illegal and accordingly we quash the same.
Regarding question (c) above:
30.

However, since Respondent No. 3 has also preferred the

aforesaid Writ Petition being W.P. (C) No. 1185/2006 in respect of the
directions issued by the Tribunal, though the same has become
infructous, we proceed to consider whether the said direction, to the
effect that the Respondent authorities should issue a 'corrigendum' to
the appointment letter of Respondent No. 3 dated 8.12.2003 treating
his appointment to the post of Chief Regional Planner as on deputation
for a specific term and not on promotion, is valid or not.
31.

Under the Recruitment Rules, the post of Chief Regional

Planner was required to be filled on direct induction basis and
preferably filled up on deputation from amongst candidates fulfilling
the prescribed qualification and experience. Consequently, the method
of recruitment prescribed under the Rules is by “Direct Induction” and
even within that method, the first preference is to fill up the post on
deputation basis. Promotion to the said post as a method of
recruitment is conspicuous by its absence. It appears that the intention
behind the said recruitment rule is to bring in fresh blood into the
organization, i.e., from outside the existing cadre of the said Board.
Admittedly, Respondent No. 3 belongs to the same Board, namely,
Respondent No. 2. His appointment to the post in question, whether it

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 22 of 27

is called “deputation” or “promotion”, would therefore defeat the
purpose that the recruitment rule seeks to achieve. Moreover the term
“deputation” itself connotes that 'an officer from outside is appointed
for limited period by the end of which he will have to revert to his
parent cadre. Under deputation or absorption, suitable officers having
the requisite qualification and experience working in other Central
Government, department or State Government are considered for
appointment'. [See Chapter 19 of Swami's complete manual of Central
Government offices, para 1.1 under the heading 'induction' that
recruitments by absorption /deputation); also See State of Punjab
vs. Inder Singh, (1997) 8 SCC 372.]
32.

Reliance placed by respondent No.3 upon paragraph 1.2 of

the said Chapter 19 is misplaced since it deals with cases where the
method of recruitment is composite, i.e., by 'deputation (including
short term contract)/promotion'. In the present case, the said
composite method is not provided for recruitment to the post of Chief
Regional Planner since the Recruitment Rules stipulate for filling up the
said post on “direct induction basis” and preferably on deputation basis
from amongst the candidate fulfilling the requisite qualification and
experience. Consequently, promotion as a manner of filling up the said
post cannot be considered, unless there is a power to relax the said
rule and the same has been so relaxed by the competent authority. We
may hasten to add that there is no case of relaxation of the Rules

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 23 of 27

made out in this case. The appointment of respondent No.3 to the post
of Joint Regional Planner cannot be considered to be as on deputation
also for the reason that the post earlier held by him of Joint Director in
the pay scale of Rs.12000-16500 in the Board cannot be said to be an
analogous post to the post of Chief Regional Planner, which is in the
pay scale of Rs.16400-20000. We may refer to paragraph 5 of Chapter
19 of Swami's complete manual of Central Government offices, which
reads as follows:
“5. Analogous posts
5.1 Whenever the Recruitment Rules for a post
prescribe “deputation/absorption” as a method
of filling up the post, they generally contain an
entry in Column 12 of the standard form of
schedule
stating
inter-alia,
that
the
'deputation/absorption” shall be made from
amongst the officers holding analogous posts
on regular basis under the Central/ State
Government. This Department has been
receiving
references
from
various
Ministries/Departments asking for the definition
of 'analogous posts'. It has, therefore,been
considered appropriate to lay down the
following criteria for determining whether a
post could be treated as analogous to a posts
under the Central Government:
(i) Though the scale of pay of the two posts
which are being compared may not be
identical, they should be such as to be an
extension or a segment of each other,
e.g., for a post carrying the pay scale of
Rs.3,000-5,000
(pre-revised
scale),
persons holding posts in the pay scale of
Rs.3,000-4,500 (pre-revised scale) will be
eligible.

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 24 of 27

(ii) Both the posts should be falling in the
same Group of posts as defined in the
Department
of
Personnel
and
Administrative
Reforms
Notification
No.13012/2/87-Estt.(D), dated the 30th
June 1987, viz., Group 'A', Group 'B', etc.
(iii)The levels of responsibility and the duties
of the two posts should also be
comparable.
(iv)Where
specific
qualifications
for
deputation/absorption have not been
prescribed,
the
qualifications
and
experience of the officers to be selected
should be comparable to those prescribed
for direct recruits to the post where direct
recruitment has also been prescribed as
one of the methods of appointment in the
Recruitment Rules.
Where promotion is the method of filling
up such posts, only those persons from
other Departments may be brought on
deputation whose qualifications and
experience are comparable to those
prescribed for direct recruitment for the
feeder grade/post from which the
promotion has been made.
5.2 As far as the post under the State
Government/ Public Undertakings, etc., are
concerned, it is quite likely that even posts with
identical
designations
may
not
have
comparable scales of pay and they may also
differ with reference to the extent and stage of
merger of Disciplinary Authority with pay. The
levels in the hierarchy and the nature of duties,
may not also be comparable. These posts may
not also be classified into four groups as has
been done under the Central Government.
Taking these factors into consideration, the
selection authorities may have to be guided
more by the nature of duties performed by the
candidates in their parent organization vis-a-vis
W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 25 of 27

those in the posts under selection and
qualifications and experience required for the
posts under the Central Government for making
selection
for
appointment
by
absorption/deputation (including short term
contract) from outside the Central Government
service. Since details of the Recruitment Rules
for
the
posts
under
the
State
Government/Public Undertakings, etc., may not
be available, bio-data sheets, signed by the
officers themselves and certified/countersigned
by their employer indicating their qualification,
experience, assignments held in the past,
contributions made by them in the field of
research, publications to their credit and any
other information which the officers might
consider relevant for assessing their suitability
for the post in question may be obtained in the
Presenting Officer forma at Annexure-A.”
33.

We find that the Tribunal, while issuing the said directions

for amending the appointment letter of respondent No.3 to treat him
as having been appointed on deputation, has failed to even notice this
aspect of the matter. Consequently, the direction issued by the
Tribunal to treat the appointment of respondent No.3 as being on
deputation is laconic and is set aside.
34.

The Tribunal was right in its conclusion that since the post

in question has to be filled up by Direct Induction method, preferably
by deputation, respondent No.3 could not have been promoted to the
said post. That is another reason why we feel that the appointment of
respondent No.3 to the post of Chief Regional Planner cannot be
sustained.
35.

Accordingly, we allow W.P. (C) No.1206/2006 filed by Shri S.K.

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 26 of 27

Zaman while we dismiss the

W.P. (C) No.1185/2006 filed by Shri

Rajeev Malhotra and quash the appointment of respondent No. 3 to the
post of Chief Regional Planner in respondent No. 2 while holding that
he did not have the requisite qualification for being considered to the
said post. The parties are left to bear their own respective costs.

VIPIN SANGHI, J

A.K. SIKRI, J.
November 13, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 1206/2006 & 1185/2006

Page 27 of 27

