*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M(M) No.1679 of 2007

%

Date of decision: 14.01.2008
Chattar Singh & Anr.
Through:

.....Petitioner
Mr. S.S. Hora, Advocate

versus
The Muntgumari Co-operative
..... Respondent
Transport Society Ltd.
Through:
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J
1.

This petition has been preferred under Article 227 of the

Constitution of India to impugn the order passed by the Additional
Rent Control Tribunal in RCA 137/2007 dated 29.09.2007.

The

eviction petition had been filed by the respondent/landlord on the
ground of sub-letting of the tenanted premises by petitioner No.1 in
favour of petitioner No.2. The petitioner/tenant moved an application
for amendment of the written statement after the evidence of the
respondent/landlord has been concluded and after having taken more
C.M(M) No.1679/2007

Page 1 of 5

than 10 opportunities to conclude their evidence.

The amendment

was sought to incorporate a plea of partnership between the
petitioners herein for carrying on business of godown keeping in a
portion of the tenanted property and by producing documents which
were not even filed on record till the application was moved after
more than 5 years of the filing of eviction petition.

The learned

Additional Rent Controller rejected the application for amendment
filed by the petitioners on 19.05.2007 and the appeal preferred by the
petitioners before the Rent Control Tribunal, Delhi, has been
dismissed by the impugned order.
2.

The petitioners did not plead that there was any

partnership between then, when the written statement was originally
filed.

The plea originally taken by them was entirely different.

A

specific averment was made in paragraph 18 of the eviction petition
by

the

respondent/landlord

that

petitioner

No.1

herein

has

sublet/parted with the entire first floor to petitioner No.2 herein (and
the erstwhile respondent No.3), though petitioner No.1 was using it
for residential purpose.

It was further pleaded that the petitioner

No.2 had started using the portion as a godown. In response to the
said averments, the petitioners herein responded with the following
averments:
“18(a)(1) para 18(a)(1) of the petition is
wrong and denied. The respondent no.1 has
not subletted or parted with the entire first
floor to respondent nos.2 & 3. It is wrong and
C.M(M) No.1679/2007

Page 2 of 5

denied that respondent no.2 started using
portion of the property as godown but it is
submitted that the respondent no.1 is using
the portion as godown and the petitioner was
was receiving and has received the rent as
godown charges. The part of the premises
i.e., 8710/15 is used as residential by
respondent no.2 being the member of joint
family of respondent no.1 as respondent no.1
is now residing in a separate house due to
increase of members in the family.
The
allegation of subletting by respondent no.1 to
respondent no.2 & 3 is wrong and denied and
the site plan annexed by the petitioner is also
wrong and denied.
Para no.19 of the petition is wrong and
denied. The premises are not being misused
as alleged.
The respondent no.1 though
shifted to other residence due to increase of
members in the joint family and also the
marriage of respondent no.1 and his sons but
a portion of the premises is used as godown
by respondent no.1 and the petitioner
accepted the rent of the same as godown
charges and the part of the portion is
occupied by the respondent no.2 for
residential purposes as being the member of
the joint family and brother of the respondent
no.1 since the days of inception of the
tenancy. (emphasis supplied)
3.

Therefore, the case of the petitioners as originally pleaded

was that petitioner No.1 was running a godown in a part of the
premises, and petitioner No.2 was residing in a portion of the
premises being a member of the joint family of petitioner No.1. There
was absolutely no mention of any partnership business between the
two petitioners.

C.M(M) No.1679/2007

Page 3 of 5

4.

The learned Rent Control Tribunal further records that

even though the respondent/landlord has closed his evidence before
21.10.2003 and the case was fixed for the petitioners' evidence on
that day, they though took 14 opportunities to complete their
evidence and the application seeking amendment was filed only on
05.09.2005 when the matter was fixed only for recording the
statement of one more witness of the petitioners herein.

The

witnesses produced by the petitioners had not made any statement
with regard to the partnership as a defence to the plea of sub-letting.
The learned tribunal has also taken note of the fact that by
introducing the said amendment the petitioners were also seeking to
plead that the purpose of letting was not just residential, but also
commercial. In my view, the petitioner has rightly not been permitted
to set up an entirely new case at this belated stage of the
proceedings.
5.

From the impugned order I find that the learned Rent

Control Tribunal has dealt with the submissions of the petitioner
exhaustively and no infirmity in the said order has been pointed out
by the learned counsel for the petitioners.

I find no error of

jurisdiction or otherwise in the said order which calls for inference by
this Court.
6.

For the aforesaid reasons, I find no merit in this petition

and dismiss the same with costs of Rs.5,000/- to be deposited with

C.M(M) No.1679/2007

Page 4 of 5

the Delhi Legal Services Authority.
7.

Petition stands disposed of.

January 14, 2008
Rsk

C.M(M) No.1679/2007

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

Page 5 of 5

