*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

%

Date of decision: August 14, 2007.
Union of India & Others
Through:

.....

Petitioner

Mr. R.V.Sinha, Advocate

versus
Khamman Singh

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. D.N. Sharma, Advocate

CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
A.K.SIKRI, J. (Oral)
*
Rule D.B.
With the consent of the parties, the matter is finally
heard.
The Respondent had applied for the post of Messenger
with the Petitioner No.3 who was permitted to locally recruit against
one existing vacancy with it i.e., at Military Hospital, Mathura Cantt.,

WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

Page 1 of 8

UP. Name of the Respondent was sponsored by the employment
exchange and his name was recommended for selection. He was
medically examined on 6.11.1996 by Medical Officer of the Military
Hospital, Mathura. However the respondent was found to be unfit due
to

'SPLENOMEGALY'

disease.

This

was

communicated

to

the

Respondent and on this ground he was not given the appointment.
However, thereafter in December 1996 the Respondent produced a
fitness certificate dated 4.12.1996 issued by the CMO, Mathura and
on that basis he made a request for appointment, which was not
acceded to. Respondent at this stage filed O.A. No.706/97 before the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi. This O.A.
was disposed of vide order dated 2.12.1997 directing re-examination
of the Respondent either by Civil Surgeon or any other specialist. The
Petitioner, in compliance with the aforesaid directions, called the
Respondent for second medical examination in July 1998, which was
conducted but again the report was that he was unfit to join duties in
view of the same disease, namely, 'SPLENOMEGALY'.
The Respondent again made a request, and in December
1998, he was directed to be examined a third time at an outstation
hospital i.e. Military Hospital, Agra. According to the Petitioner, on this
examination, he was advised further investigations, but thereafter, he
did not turn up for the said medical examination at Military Hospital,
Agra on the date fixed for this purpose i.e. 29.12.1998. Instead,

WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

Page 2 of 8

Respondent sent legal notice to the Petitioner. The matter was again
considered and the Petitioner decided to get the Respondent
medically examined again by another specialist. Respondent was
thus, examined on 12th August 1999, but this time again, he was
declared unfit because of the same ailment from which he was
allegedly suffering, as per the medical certificate.
The Respondent filed a Contempt Petition No.317/1999
alleging that directions of the Central Administrative Tribunal
contained in order dated 2.12.1997 passed in O.A. 706/1997 were
violated by the Petitioners.

This

petition was

dismissed with

observation that there was no violation of the directions, inasmuch as,
Respondent was examined by the medical specialist and in case
Respondent was aggrieved by the medical report, he had a separate
remedy in respect thereof, in accordance with the law.
In

these

circumstances,

Respondent

filed

O.A.

No.752/2001 in which he made following prayers:
“i)
his fitness by CMO, Mathura be accepted by
the Petitioners herein
ii)
he may be appointed
Messenger held vacant at
Mathura, which was said to
1.10.2000.”
He also sought declaration that

to the post of
Military Hospital,
be vacant w.e.f.
he be declared fit and he

may also be awarded costs of the O.A.
This O.A. was disposed of vide order dated 15.3.2002 and
direction was given to the Petitioner once again to constitute a
WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

Page 3 of 8

medical board consisting of not less than 3 Specialists in any Central
Government Hospital at Delhi and based on the said report, the
Petitioners were to be considered the case of the Respondent herein.
The operative part of this order reads as under:
“In the interest of justice and having regard to the
fact that applicant is a poor person whose very
livelihood is at stake, we dispose of the OA with a
direction to the respondents to constitute Medical
Board consisting of not less than three specialists
in any Central Government Hospital in Delhi,
before where applicant will present himself, who
will then medically examined him and report to the
Respondents whether he is fit for employment in
Government service or not. These directions
should be implemented within three months from
the date of receipt of a copy of this order.”
It is clear from the aforesaid order that influenced by the
fact that the Respondent was a poor person and his livelihood was at
stake, he was examined by the Medical Board, consisting of doctors of
Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi which declared him fit to take
up the employment. On the basis of this medical report, the
Respondent was offered appointment vide appointment letter dated
16th February 2003.
Not satisfied with the said appointment and blaming the
Petitioners for delaying the appointment, the Respondent now filed
O.A. 717/2004 in which he sought the relief of antedating his
appointment to 6.12.1996 when others were appointed and also
prayed for all consequential benefits including pay and allowances for
this period. Vide judgment dated 11th March 2005, Tribunal has

WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

Page 4 of 8

allowed this O.A. and has directed the Petitioners to ante-date the
appointment of the Respondent fixing the date of appointment as
6.12.1996

with

all

consequential

benefits.

Aggrieved

by

this

judgment, Petitioners have preferred the present Writ Petition.
We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties and
have gone through the records. The learned Tribunal while allowing
the said O.A. has mainly been influenced by the fact that CMO had
given the certificate dated 6.12.1996 declaring the Respondent as fit
and therefore there was no occasion for the Petitioner not to give him
the appointment after the production of the said certificate. It is
further observed that for appointment to a Group D post, the only
requirement as per OM No.5(1)-E-V(B)63 dated 30.3.1963 is that
medical certificate from authorized medical attendant possessing
medical qualification is to be produced which is a competent
authority. Therefore, in the opinion of the learned tribunal the delay in
according the appointment to the Respondent could not be attributed
to him, but was an outcome of some sort of bias of the authorities
towards the applicant, as successively, he was directed by the
Tribunal to be medically examined at a Government hospital but was
declared unfit by the Board of Specialist of Military Hospital.
We are of the opinion that the approach adopted by the
Tribunal is clearly erroneous and cannot stand judicial scrutiny. The
Tribunal has proceeded on the premise that because the Respondent

WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

Page 5 of 8

had earlier produced a medical certificate of CMO, declaring him 'fit',
the Petitioner should have given him appointment from 6.12.1996. In
the process, the Tribunal lost sight of the fact that on the basis of the
same medical certificate, the Respondent had filed O.A. 706/1997.
However the Tribunal at that time did not grant any relief on the basis
of the said certificate but instead issued directions for re-examination
of the Respondent. Thus, at that stage Tribunal was of the view that
the Respondent should be medically examined again and if found 'fit'
he should be given appointment. Not only this, even in the O.A.
752/2001 filed by the Respondent specific prayer was made for
accepting the fitness certificate given by the CMO, Mathura. This time
again, the Tribunal did not grant any relief of this nature as prayed for
by the Respondent, instead in its order dated 15th March 2002,
relevant portion whereof is already extracted above, the direction was
given to constitute a medical board and based on the said report
suitability of the Respondent

for appointment was directed to be

considered.
Another aspect which the learned Tribunal has ignored is
that by the very nature of the disease, it could be a case where the
condition of Respondent improved with the passage of time and after
getting the treatment. At no stage, the medical examination
conducted by the Military Hospital or other Doctors appointed by the
Petitioners for this purpose was questioned. To put it otherwise, it is

WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

Page 6 of 8

unsettled question whether the Respondent was not suffering from
the said disease and false certificate of unfitness were given by the
authorities. The bona fides of the Petitioner authorities cannot be
disputed, inasmuch as, the Respondent was successively examined
by the Medical Board of different hospitals but was declared unfit on
each occasions. Merely because the CMO, had given a certificate
dated 6.12.1996, which was not at the instance of the Petitioner, but
on the Respondent's approaching the CMO of his own, one cannot
jump to the conclusion that there was a bias on the part of the
Petitioner when there was hardly any material to come to this
conclusion.
On the basis of medical examination conducted earlier,
when the Respondent was declared unfit, Petitioner could have closed
the Chapter without giving any further indulgence to the Respondent.
However, request of the Respondent were considered favourably and,
may be on compassionate ground, and therefore he was successively
examined by the Medical Board. Even the order dated 15.3.2002
passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal in O.A. 752/2001
pursuant to which the Respondent was examined again is based on
compassion rather than any legal right in favour of the Respondent.
Thus, the result of the said order and medical examination of the
Respondent is that Respondent has been able to get the appointment
even after his repeated failure before the Medical Board, on the basis

WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

Page 7 of 8

of the same selection held in the year 1996 without undergoing any
further selection process.
We, therefore, do not agree with the conclusion arrived at
by the learned Tribunal in the impugned judgment which, in fact, goes
contrary to what the Tribunal have ordered on earlier occasions. The
Respondent, in these circumstances, cannot be given appointment,
pay and allowance and other consequential benefits based thereon,
from a back date which is neither permissible under the law nor
justified in the facts of this case.
The

Rule

is

accordingly

made

absolute.

Impugned

judgment dated 16.2.2006 of the Tribunal is set aside as a result of
which O.A. filed by the Respondent stands dismissed.

A.K.SIKRI, J.
VIPIN SANGHI, J.
August 14, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

WP(C) No. 12276-78/2006

Page 8 of 8

