HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
O.M.P. No. 401/2006
Judgment reserved on: May 2nd, 2007
Judgment delivered on: November 14, 2007.
#
!

Sh. Jagatjit Jaiswal & Anr.
..... Plaintiffs
Through:
Mr. P.V. Kapur, Mr. Shyam Divan,
Sr. Advocates with Mr. Asim Vachher
and Mr. Achal Gupta, Advocates
versus

$
^

Karmajit Singh Jaiswal & Anr. ..... Defendants
Through:
Mr. Arun Jaitley, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Rajiv Endlaw, Ms. Malini Sud,
Mr. Aman Leekha and Ms. Ashu,
Advocates.

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

In this petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration and

Conciliation Act, 1996 (referred to as `the Act’ hereinafter), the preliminary objection raised by the respondents before me that needs to be
determined is, whether Clause 9 of a Memorandum of Family Settle-

OMP 401/2006

Page 1 of 43

ment (MOFS) dated 3.3.2000 entered into between the parties tantamount to an arbitration agreement. If it contains an Arbitration Agreement, as contended by the petitioners, the present petition would be
maintainable, but if it does not contain an Arbitration Agreement as argued by the Respondents, the present petition would fail as not being
maintainable.
2.

The facts giving rise to the present petition insofar as

they are necessary to determine the preliminary issue may be noted.
The Petitioner No. 1 and the Respondent No. 1 are brothers and the
sons of Late Mr. L.P. Jaiswal. Further, Petitioner No. 2 and Respondent
No. 2 are the wives of Petitioner No. 1 and Respondent No. 1 respectively.
3.

Late Mr. L.P. Jaiswal founded M/s Jagatjit Industries Ltd. in

the year 1944. The petitioner being one of the sons of late Shri L.P.
Jaiswal headed the management of the said company since 1977. However, it appears that in the year 1999 disputes arose between the family members of late Shri L.P. Jaiswal including petitioner No.1 and respondent No.1. Litigation was initiated in this Court as well as courts in
Kapurthala in the year 2000. However, these suits came to be withdrawn in November, 2003. The petitioners state that the withdrawal of
the suits was prompted by, inter alia, an oral agreement reached between the parties herein on 2.3.2000 which was later reduced to writing as the MOFS on 3.3.2000. Petitioner No.1 Mr. Jagatjit Jaiswal and
OMP 401/2006

Page 2 of 43

his wife on the one hand, and respondent No.1 Mr. Karamjit S. Jaiswal
and his wife on the other hand, represented themselves and their family members respectively in the MOFS and were referred to as JJ Family
Group and KSJ Family group respectively.
4.

As per the recitals contained in the MOFS, as per an oral

settlement within the L.P. Jaiswal family, 14 companies scheduled
therewith had fallen to the share of the parties, which included M/s Jagatjit Industries Ltd. The same was entered into with an object to avoid
disputes and litigation among the parties and to maintain peace, harmony and good relations among them. The MOFS records that the parties would hold equal shares in the 14 companies listed in the MOFS.
They would jointly manage these companies and would enjoy equal
benefits, rights and privileges. Neither party would exclude the other,
either directly or indirectly from the joint management or equal benefits. The public limited companies were to be managed professionally
with the assistance of professional managers, who were to be appointed by the mutual agreement of petitioner No.1 and respondent No.1.
Even their duties and responsibilities were to be assigned by mutual
agreement of petitioner No.1 and respondent No.1. They also agreed
to formation of an Audit Committee, of which both of them would also
be members, to jointly supervise and control the management of the
said companies. The MOFS provided for the equal representation of the
parties on the Board of Directors of the companies, appointment of in-

OMP 401/2006

Page 3 of 43

dependent directors, and put restrictions on the two groups to mortgage, pledge, transfer or dispose off the shares of the companies or to
do any act which would result in the dilution of the equal control of the
two group in the companies listed in the MOFS.
5.

The MOFS also contained clause 9 whereby a Dispute

Resolution Committee (DRC) was to be constituted. The said clause
which calls for interpretation, reads as follows:
9. The Parties agreed to nominate and constitute a committee hereinafter to be referred to
as the Dispute Resolution Committee comprising of persons acceptable to them. It is agreed
that the Parties shall be bound to refer all disputes between them relating to any matter or
dealings between the Parties that have any
connection to the affairs of any of the Companies or otherwise and the decision of the Committee shall be final and binding on the Parties.
The Parties agreed and undertook to abide by
all decisions of the Committee whether the
Committee chooses to act as arbitrator or as
umpire or referee. Accordingly, the Parties
have agreed not to take recourse to litigation
to resolve disputes or differences between
them.
6.

It appears that late Shri L.P.Jaiswal, who was the majori-

ty stake holder in Jagatjit Industries Ltd. decided to divest Petitioner
No.1 from the management of the said company and to institute Respondent No.1 at the helm

of its affairs. He wrote a letter dated

10.8.2001 expressing his decision in this regard. The petitioner No.1
thereafter gave up the stewardship of the said company. A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was also executed between Shri L.P.
OMP 401/2006

Page 4 of 43

Jaiswal and Respondent No.1 on 7.10.2003, whereby it was agreed to
reconstitute the Board of Directors of Jagatjit Industries Ltd. Petitioner
No.1 was not in the reconstituted Board of Directors, while Respondent
No.1 became the Managing Director of the said company. According to
the

petitioners, the continued status quo with regard to their rights

and privileges till sometime in the year 2006, and they did not apprehend that the Respondents would not honour the MOFS dated
3.3.2000.
7.

However, thereafter it appears that aggrieved by the

threatened withdrawal of the various rights, privileges and benefits being enjoyed by petitioner No.1, which he was enjoying while in the
management of M/s Jagatjit Industries Ltd and also threatened by various subsequent developments which had the effect of unsettling the
equilibrium sought to be established by the MOFS dated 3.3.2000, the
petitioner filed this petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act to seek various interim protections and reliefs.
8.

Since the objection to the maintainability of this petition

has been raised by the respondent I may first notice the same.
Respondents Contentions
9.

This Court acting under Section 9 of the Act can only ex-

ercise jurisdiction once it is satisfied as to the existence of a valid Arbitration Agreement. Reliance has been placed by Mr. Jaitley, learned seOMP 401/2006

Page 5 of 43

nior counsel appearing for the respondents on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in S.B.P and Company v. Patel Engineering Limited
2005 (8) SCC 618. The Court in para 19 held as follows:
“.....Similarly, Section 9 enables a court, obviously, as defined in the Act, when approached
by a party before the commencement of an arbitral proceeding, to grant interim relief as contemplated by the section. When a party seeks
an interim relief asserting that there was a dispute liable to be arbitrated upon in terms of
the Act, and the opposite party disputes the
existence of an arbitration agreement as defined in the Act or raises a plea that the dispute
involved was not covered by the arbitration
clause, or that the court which was approached
had no jurisdiction to pass any order in terms
of Section 9 of the Act, that court has necessarily to decide whether it has jurisdiction,
whether there is an arbitration agreement
which is valid in law and whether the dispute
sought to be raised is covered by that agreement....”
10.

The said clause 9 of the MOFS does not constitute an

Arbitration Agreement, as it does not specifically require the appointment of an Arbitrator(s). The said clause envisages the appointment of
a Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC) and it is upto the Committee to
decide whether to function as arbitrators, or as Umpires or Referees.
For it to be an arbitration agreement, the agreement should be clear
and unequivocal, and the intention should only be to finally settle the
disputes only through the route of arbitration. The choice to act as arbitrators or as umpires or referees can only be with the parties and
not vest with the appointees, as provided for in clause 9.

OMP 401/2006

Page 6 of 43

11.

The expressions in the said clause 9 of the MOFS name-

ly “Arbitrators” on the one hand and “Umpire” and “Referee” on the
other hand have different meanings and connotations in law. When the
DRC has been vested with the discretion to choose to act as “Arbitrators” or as “Umpires or Referees”, then it cannot mean that the three
expressions have one and the same meaning i.e. to act as “Arbitrators”
alone. Parties consciously used different expressions, i.e., “arbitrators”
on the one hand and “umpires and referees” on the other hand to provide a “choice” to the DRC to either act as “arbitrators” or in the contradistinction as “umpires or referees”. The term “Referees” has a settled meaning and is said to mean a person to whom parties to a dispute refer the matter for admission and whose statement on the dispute is binding on the parties as an admission. The concept of a “Referee” as elucidated by the Supreme Court in Hira Chand Kothari v.
State of Rajasthan (1985) Supp SCC 17 is relied upon. It is argued that
the term “Umpire” though has been used extensively under the Arbitration Act, 1940 but an “Umpire” is not an “Arbitrator” in the sense
that he is not required to undertake
The expression “Umpire or

any quasi-judicial proceedings.

referee” has to be understood as in a

game, i.e. where they are trusted to come up with a fair and honest
decision on the basis of their expertise of the game and observations
on the conduct of the parties and the ground realities.

OMP 401/2006

Page 7 of 43

12.

Since the DRC had the freedom to choose whether to

act as Arbitrator, or as

Umpires or Referees in the event they chose

to act as Arbitrators, then the provisions of the Act would be applicable, whereas in case they choose to act as Referees then provisions of
Section 20 of the Evidence Act would apply, and if they decide to act
as Umpires, then the parties agree to be bound by their decision.
13.

Respondents also place reliance on clauses 10 and 12

of the MOU dated 03.03.2000, to contend that from the clauses it is apparent that the scope of the decisions of the DRC was not to finally resolve all disputes between the parties arising under the MOFS. The said
clauses read as follows:
“10. In the event of a breakdown of relationship between the parties representing the two
family groups, it is agreed that all the companies shall be equally divided between the parties in a manner as agreed and finalized by the
Dispute Resolution Committee. The decision of
the Committee to divide the companies equally
between the parties, either by reorganization
of the companies or such other manner as it
deems fit, shall be binding on the parties and it
shall not be challenged in any court of law or
otherwise.
12. The parties confirmed that they had entered into the above settlement with good intentions and will accordingly make all endeavours to conduct the affairs on the terms hereof.
In the event of breakdown between the parties
representing the two family groups and in the
event of they are unable to resolve their differences amicably, it is agreed that the companies as also all assets and liabilities shall be
split equally between the parties. For facilitatOMP 401/2006

Page 8 of 43

ing such split the parties agreed to be entitled
to get independent valuations from two reputable firms of Chartered Accountants. The parties agreed to be bound by the scheme of arrangement for split as determined by such experts. The decisions of the experts shall be final and shall not be subject to being challenged in any form or manner.”
14.

If the decision of the DRC was meant to be binding on

the parties, then there would be no reason to provide for clauses 10
and 12, since there would be no occasion of a breakdown. The question of division of assets would only arise if the decisions of the DRC
were not to be binding on the parties which could lead to a deadlock
and a consequential breakdown. If the Committee’s decision were
binding, then the affairs of the companies would be run as per its decisions and the question of a breakdown would never arise. It is argued
that it is only the manner of division which was to be finalized by the
DRC under clause 10 and not the decision to divide the assets equally.
Such a decision was already taken by the parties themselves. Furthermore, there exists an inconsistency in this regard also because even
the manner of division by the DRC was not final, as clause 12 provides
that for the facilitation of the split, the parties were entitled to get independent valuations from chartered accountant firms. It also provides
that the parties agree to be bound by the scheme of arrangement for
split as determined by such experts and that the decisions of experts
shall be final and shall not be subject to being challenged in any form
or manner. The only inference that one can draw from the said clauses

OMP 401/2006

Page 9 of 43

is that the Committee was to be a body entrusted with the task of suggesting solutions to iron out the day to day differences between the
two groups.
15.

A DRC comprising of one Mr. Gidwani, Mr. Majitha and

Mr. Rajive was duly constituted and was know as the “well-wishers
committee”. The said “well-wishers committee” was formed for the
purpose of resolving disputes, not as arbitrators, but, as mediators or
conciliators. The said “well-wishers committee” was formed with the intent to guide the parties with regard to issues connected with the management of the 14 companies and cannot be considered as an Arbitral
Tribunal. There is nothing to show that the “well-wishers committee”
intended to act in a quasi- judicial manner. This Committee, once established, had worked itself out and consequently it abandoned its efforts after the execution of the letter dated 10.08.2001 by the Late Mr.
L.P. Jaiswal wherein he handed over the management of Jagatjit Industries Limited to Respondent No. 1. Clause 9 had been invoked and it
stood exhausted and a fresh DRC could not be constituted much less
as an arbitral tribunal as there no longer existed an agreement much
less an arbitration agreement between the parties.
16.

The MOFS dated 03.03.2000 purporting to be a family

settlement cannot be construed as one, as it was not signed by the
Late Mr. L.P. Jaiswal, his wife Surjit Jaiswal and the major children of
the parties namely Nishaat, Ruheen or Roshni. The premise on which
OMP 401/2006

Page 10 of 43

the MOFS was entered into was that the 14 companies were to fall to
the share of the parties. At the relevant time, the companies were controlled and largely owned by the Late Mr. L.P. Jaiswal and that the Petitioners and Respondents held barely 5.3% of the shareholding of Jagatjit Industries Limited. Furthermore, in light of the letter dated
10.08.2001 handing over control and management of Jagatjit Industries Limited to Respondent No. 1 and subsequently the MOU dated
07.10.2003 executed between Late Mr. L.P. Jaiswal and Respondent
No. 1 wherein the Respondent No. 1 was given exclusive management
of Jagatjit Industries Limited, the MOU dated 03.03.2000 was never
acted upon and was given a complete go by from 10.08.2001 onwards.
17.

The said clause 9 is vague and cannot be the basis of

an arbitration or an interim order of protection under Section 9 of the
Act. Reliance has been placed upon (2000) 4 SCC 272; Section 573;
1999 JT(1) SC 97; AIR 1955 Nag 126. Various other decisions have also
been relied upon by the respondents and they would be referred to in
the course of my discussion and decision in the matter.
Petitioners' contentions
18.

Under the said MOFS in clause 9 the parties in order to

avoid litigation agreed to establish a DRC comprising of persons who
would be mutually acceptable to them. This is clear from the language
of the said clause which provides “the parties shall be bound to refer

OMP 401/2006

Page 11 of 43

all disputes relating to any matter or dealings between the parties that
have any connection to the affairs of any of the companies or otherwise”. Furthermore, finality was to attach to the decision of the Committee so constituted. Thus, the intention of the parties was to resort to
alternate dispute resolution method by way of arbitration proceedings.
The wordings of the said clause do not leave room for any ambiguity
inasmuch as, it uses the words “whether the committee chooses to act
as arbitrator or as umpire or referee”. It is the Petitioners stand that
the term “arbitrator” is synonymous with the terms “referee” or “umpire”. The said clause 9 of the MOFS has to be read to mean that the
DRC has to function as an arbitral tribunal.
19.

The Committee was to have a continuous existence for

deciding disputes as and when they arose and was not to be exhausted
by a one-time reference. Thus, all future disputes as and when they
were to arise between the parties were necessarily to be referred for
settlement by way arbitration to the DRC.
20.

In his rejoinder, learned senior counsel for the petition-

er, Mr. Shyam Deewan submitted that under Section 9 only a prima facie determination on existence of arbitration agreement is required. It
was further submitted that the “well wishers Committee” was constituted by “Rajive” and not by the parties. A “Well Wishers Committee”
is not contemplated by the said clause 9 and hence, the same cannot
be said to have been constituted under the said clause. Even otherOMP 401/2006

Page 12 of 43

wise, the right to refer disputes to a DRC does not

get exhausted

merely because one committee had been formed under the clause.
The said clause covers to all disputes which may arise between the
parties in future under the MOFS. Since, the words used in the said
clause unequivocally proscribe resort to litigation, and mandates that
the parties are bound to refer their disputes to the Committee, whose
decision is final and binding on the parties, the decisions relied upon
by the respondent were distinguishable on facts. The petitioners have
also relied on various decisions which would be referred to and dealt
with by me presently.
Discussion and Decision:21.

Before proceeding to deal with the issue pertaining to

existence of arbitration agreement between the parties, it may be
pointed out that Mr. P. V. Kapur, learned senior counsel appearing for
the petitioner had initially argued that this court while dealing with a
petition under Section 9 of the Act cannot go into the question of
existence/validity of the arbitration agreement. That determination
can be made by the Court only while dealing with an application under
Section 11 or Section 8 of the Act. Reliance had been placed upon para
12 of the judgment in SBP (supra) to contend that since the
jurisdiction of the tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction and existence of
arbitration clause under Section 16 is not taken away, except when the
Tribunal has been constituted by intervention of the court, the court
OMP 401/2006

Page 13 of 43

while dealing with a petition under Section 9 cannot go into these
issues which are for the Tribunal to decide.
22.

However, subsequently,

this submission was not

pressed and request was made to decide the preliminary issue on the
premise that the court is so empowered. Be that as it may, I am of the
view that said contention was in any case fallacious, being in teeth of
the observations of the Supreme Court in para 19 of the judgment in
SBP(supra), the relevant portion of which has been reproduced
hereinabove, which envisages that the court has to decide upon the
existence of the arbitration clause even while entertaining a petition
under Section 9 of the Act, in case the existence of the arbitration
agreement is challenged by the opposite party. This contention is,
therefore, devoid of any merit and is rejected.
23.

Clause 9 of the MOFS in

effect states that

the DRC

may choose to act as an arbitrator or as umpire or referee. If the
expression “umpire or referee” was also intended to be used to mean
only an “arbitrator”,

Clause 9 would

constitute an arbitration

agreement. On the other hand, if the said expression was intended to
enable the DRC to act in some other capacity, other than as an
“arbitrator”, the question would be, whether the said clause is vague
and uncertain and therefore, not a

binding arbitration agreement. I

may add that it is not the Respondents contention that the expression
'arbitrator' used in clause 9 of the MOFS was intended not to mean an
OMP 401/2006

Page 14 of 43

arbitrator as understood in the law of Arbitration. Therefore, it is
important to construe the expression “umpire or referee” used in
clause 9 of the MOFS to decide the issue raised before me.
24.

So, what are the rules of interpretation governing an

arbitration agreement or an agreement which is claimed to be an
arbitration agreement? In Ram Lal Jagan Nath V. Punjab State
through Collector, AIR 1966 Punjab 436 the court expressed the rule
of interpretation of arbitration agreements as follows:
“It is in this connection worth remembering
that there is nothing peculiar or extra-ordinary
about arbitration agreements and the same
rules of construction and interpretation apply
to such agreements as apply to agreements
generally. The Court has thus to seek to give
effect to the intention of the parties as
evidenced by the agreement itself, without
being over-technical in its interpretation. In
endeavouring to collect the intention of the
parties, the Court must consider the whole
context, even though the immediate object of
the inquiry be the meaning of an isolated
clause. This basic legal position has not been
controverted at the bar before us.”
25.

In

Ranjeet

Combine

vs.

B.N.

Khanna

2000

(6)AD(Delhi) 647 it was observed that the rules of construction and
interpretation of arbitration agreement are the same as apply to
agreements generally. The effort must be to give effect to the intention
of the parties as evidenced by the agreement itself without being overtechnical in its interpretation. In Union of India vs. D.M. Ravri & Co.

OMP 401/2006

Page 15 of 43

AIR 1976 SC 2257 for interpretation

of agreements generally, the

Apex Court recommended the adoption of a common sense approach
to interpretation, in contradistinction to a narrow pedantic and
legalistic interpretation. In Polymat India(P) Ltd. vs. National
Insurance Co. Ltd. (2005) 9 SCC 174 the Court interpreted the
expressions used in the contract in question in the light of the context
in which the expressions were used. Applying these principles, I
proceed to examine clause 9 of the MOFS.
26.

The plain grammatical construction first.

The parties

have consciously used the expression “...whether the committee
choses to act as ...” and the expression “... as Arbitrator or as
Umpire or Referee”. If in clause 9, the expression “umpire or Referee”
is substituted with the expression “Arbitrator”, then it would follow that
the parties intended to empower the DRC to choose to act as
“arbitrator” or “arbitrator”. This does not make good sense. If the
expression”umpire or referee” was used in the same sense as an
'arbitrator', there was no purpose of using the said expression at all,
since the expression “arbitrator” had already been used and the same
is clear enough to mean an arbitration under the law of arbitration, i.e.,
the Act. Moreover, what would happen to the 'choice' available to the
Committee? The said choice would be rendered nugatory and
meaningless if word 'Arbitrator' and 'umpire or referee' were to mean
one and the same thing i.e. 'Arbitrator'. The expression 'as arbitrator

OMP 401/2006

Page 16 of 43

or as umpire or referee' also shows that the parties intended to treat
'Arbitrator' as once species and 'umpire or referee' as the other. Since,
the expression 'umpire or referee' is preceded by the expression 'or
as', the expression 'as arbitrator or as umpire or referee' cannot be
read as '”as Arbitrator or as umpire or as referee”. Therefore, the DRC
has the choice to function either as 'arbitrator' or as 'umpire or
referee'. To understand the meaning of expression 'umpire or referee'
as used in the clause 9 of the MOFS, one must also look to the
dictionary meanings ascribed to the words 'umpire' and 'referee'.
27.

No doubt

the expression `umpire' and `referee'

are

also defined as synonyms of the expression `arbitrator'. However, that
is not

the only a dictionary meaning ascribed to these terms.

For

instance the word “referee” has been defined in the Websters Third
New International Dictionary in the following manner.
referee: one to whom a thing is referred: as a
: a person to whom a matter (as a private bill)
is referred by parliament to examine and
report upon b(1): a person orig. in equity
practice a master to whom a matter in dispute
has been referred that he may settle it (2) : an
attorney at law appointed to act as an officer of
the court in determining or reporting on an
issue referred to him in a pending proceeding
or suit with or without the consent of the
parties – distinguished from arbitrator (3) : a
qualified person appointed by a judge in a
juvenile or domestic relations case to
investigate and report the facts and often to
make recommendations 2 : an official in a
sports contest usu. having final authority for
administering the game. - compare Umpire
OMP 401/2006

Page 17 of 43

referee 1. to administer (as a match, a game)
as referee 2: to arbitrate (a dispute) as a judge
or third party: to act as referee.
28.

The same word in the Random House Dictionary of

the English Language has been given the meaning:
ref.er.ee:1.one to whom something is
referred, esp. for decision or settlement;
arbitrator. 2(in certain games and sports) a
judge having functions fixed by the rules of the
game or sport; umpire.
3.Law. a person
selected by a court to take testimony in a case
and
return
it
to
the
court
with
recommendations as to the decision.-v.t. 4/ to
preside over as referee; act as referee in.- v.t.
5. to act as referee. Syn.1.arbiter, See judge.
4. judge, umpire, arbitrate.l

29.

Similarly the word “Umpire” has been described in the

Websters (supra) in the following way:
Um-pire: 1: one having authority to arbitrate
and make a final decision: as a (1): an attorney
at law appointed to judge a legal matter
disputed by arbitrators (2)an impartial third
party chosen by labor and management to
arbitrate disputes arising under the terms of a
labor agreement b: an official in a sport (as
baseball or cricket) who rules on the plays 2: a
military officer who observes and evaluates
training maneuvers....
Umpire: to supervise and decide in the
capacity of umpire <differences have to be...
umpired by the president-Anthony Leviero>
<can see... policemen umpiring the roughest
games- Margaret Mead> ~ vi : to act in the
capacity of umpire : Arbitrate <appointed to ~
in the labour disputes> <umpired for the
California league -Darrell Berrigan>.

OMP 401/2006

Page 18 of 43

30.

The Random House Dictionary defines the word

“umpire” in the following way:
“Um.pire: -n 1. a person selected to rule on
the plays in a game. 2.one selected to settle
disputes about the application of settled rules
or usages; a person agreed on by disputing
parties to arbitrate their differences- vt to act
as umpire in (a game). 4. to decide or settle (a
controversy, dispute, or the like) as umpire;
arbitrate -vi 5. to act as umpire.”
31.

One cannot loose sight of the fact that the MOFS was

drawn up in the year 2000, i.e., much after the Act came into force in
the year 1996. The expression “umpire” in the context of Arbitrations
had therefore lost its significance, since, unlike the Arbitration Act,
1940, the Act did not provide for appointment of an “umpire”. The
parties, who are seasoned businessman, must have known the same,
and this also points to use the expression “umpire” in a manner
different from an “Arbitrator”.

32.

Consequently

both

the

expressions

'umpire'

and

'referee' have meanings which at times are different from 'arbitrator'
as generally understood. They do not necessarily mean an arbitrator.

33.

If the expression 'umpire or referee' does not mean

'arbitrator', and that expression has a different connotation, then the
question arises as to what is the nature and scope of the functions of
the DRC when it functions as 'umpire or referee'. I may now turn to

OMP 401/2006

Page 19 of 43

guidelines laid down and applied by the courts, containing the tests to
be applied by the courts to determine whether the agreement is to
refer the disputes to an arbitrator or to an expert.
34.

In K.K.Modi v. K.N. Modi (1998) 3 SCC 573 the

Supreme Court referred to commercial Arbitration, 2nd Edn. by Mustill
and Boyd, wherein the learned Author has observed that apart from
arbitral Tribunals, in the complex modern state, there exist persons
entrusted by consent with the power to affect the legal rights of two
parties inter se in the manner creating legally enforcible rights, but
intended to do so by a procedure of ministerial and not a judicial
nature. Learned author lists some of the attributes which must be
present for the existence of an arbitration agreement.

The Supreme

Court observed that the various listed considerations, that go into the
making of the decision on the issue about the existence of the
arbitration agreement, are not conclusive on the point. In paragraph 17
the Supreme Court listed some of the attributes, which must be
present for the agreement to be considered as an arbitration
agreement. The said paragraph reads as follows:
“17. Among the attributes which must be
present for an agreement to be considered as
an arbitration agreement are:
(1)The
arbitration
agreement
must
contemplate that the decision of the tribunal
will be binding on the parties to the agreement,

OMP 401/2006

Page 20 of 43

(2)That the jurisdiction of the tribunal to decide
the rights of parties must derive either from
the consent of the parties or from an order of
the court or from a statute, the terms of
which make it clear that the process is to
be an arbitration,
(3)The agreement must contemplate that
substantive rights of parties will be determined
by the agreed tribunal,
(4)That the tribunal will determine the rights of
the parties in an impartial and judicial manner
with the tribunal owing an equal obligation of
fairness towards both sides,
(5)That the agreement of the parties to refer
their disputes to the decision of the tribunal
must be intended to be enforceable in law and
lastly,
(6)The agreement must contemplate that the
tribunal will make a decision upon a dispute
which is already formulated at the time when a
reference
is made to the tribunal.”
(emphasis supplied)
35.

The Supreme Court also observed that other factors

which are relevant to determine the aforesaid issue include, whether
the agreement contemplates that the Tribunal will receive evidence
from both sides and hear their contentions or at least give the parties
an opportunity to put them forward. Another relevant factors noted by
the Apex Court is whether the wording of the agreement is consistent
or in consistent with the view that the process was intended to be an
arbitration.

OMP 401/2006

Page 21 of 43

36.

The issue as to

whether a clause in an agreement

constitutes an agreement to refer

disputes to an Arbitrator or an

expert has vexed the courts for long. In Hormusji V. Local Board,
Karachi, AIR 1934 Sind 200 this dilemma, as expressed by Lord Esher
M.R. in 56 LJQB 530 (3), was quoted and the proposition that merely
because an agreement speaks of reference of dispute, it does not
automatically become an Arbitration Agreement,
approval. Lord Esher M.R.

was cited with

in the aforesaid English decision had

observed :
“If it appears from the terms of the agreement,
by which a matter is submitted to any person,
that that which he is to do is to be in the
nature of a judicial inquiry, and that the object
is that he should hear the parties and decide
the matter upon evidence to be led before him,
there the person is an arbitrator. But if it
appears that the object of appointing the
person was not to settle differences after they
had arisen, but to preclude differences from
arising, there the person appointed is not an
arbitrator. There is an intermediate class of
cases in which a person is appointed to
determine disputes after they have arisen, but
is not bound to hear evidence or argument. In
those cases it may be more difficult to say
whether the person is a valuer or an arbitrator.
They must be determined according to the
circumstances in each particular instance by
the intention of the parties. “
37.

In Bharat Bhushan Bansal V. U.P.Small Industries

Corporation Ltd. (1999) 2 SCC 166 the Supreme Court interpreted
clauses contained in a contract which reads as follows:

OMP 401/2006

Page 22 of 43

“23. Except where otherwise specified in the
contract, the decision of the Executive
Engineer shall be final, conclusive and binding
on both the parties to the contract on all
questions relating to the meaning, the
specification, design, drawings and instructions
hereinbefore mentioned, and as to the quality
of workmanship or materials used on the work
or as to any other question whatsoever in any
way arising out of or relating to the designs,
drawings,
specifications,
estimates,
instructions, orders or otherwise concerning
the works or the execution or failure to execute
the same whether arising during the progress
of the work, or after the completion thereof or
abandonment of the contract by the contractor
shall be final and conclusive and binding on the
contractor.
24. Except as provided in clause 23 hereof,
the decision of the Managing Director of the
UPSIC shall be final, conclusive and binding on
both the parties to the contract upon all
questions relating to any claim, right, matter or
thing in any way arising out of or relating to the
contract or these conditions or concerning
abandonment of the contract by the contractor
and in respect of all other matters arising out
of this contract and not specific ally mentioned
herein.”
The Apex court relied upon its earlier decision in K.K.Modi (supra)
wherein the court had drawn out a distinction between determination
by experts and that by arbitration. The Apex Court quoted with
approval the following passage from page 164 of S.K.Chawla's Law of
Arbitration and Conciliation:
“4. Arbitration agreement to be distinguished
from agreement for decision by an engineer or
expert.-Contracts may contain a clause that on
certain questions the decision of an engineer,
OMP 401/2006

Page 23 of 43

architect or another expert shall be final. The
decision given in such cases by the engineer
etc. is not an award. As pointed out by
Bernstein, such a person is under no
obligation, unless the contract otherwise
provides, to receive evidence or submissions
and is entitled to arrive at his decision solely
upon the results of his own expertise and
investigations. The procedure involved is not
arbitration, and the Arbitration Act does not
apply to it. The primary material on which such
person acts is his own knowledge and
experience, supplemented if he thinks fit by (i)
his own investigation; and/or (ii) material
(which need not conform to rules of
`evidence') put up before him by either party.
An arbitrator on the other hand, acts primarily
on material put before him by the parties. The
determination by an engineer or an expert
would involve a less thorough investigation.
Only one mind will be brought to bear on the
problem.
There will be no discovery of
documents, there will not normally be an oral
evidence' or oral submissions.”
The

above

clauses

23

and

24

were

interpreted

to

imply

a

determination by the MD and the Executive Engineer on the basis of
their own investigations and on the basis of the materials before them.
According to the court, neither of the clauses, though they spoke of
final and binding determination on the matters referred to the MD or
the Executive Engineer, were held to be containing an arbitration
agreement.
38.

In K.K. Modi (Supra) in para 21 the Court laid down

the guidelines to determine whether the reference was to an expert or
to an arbitrator and the tests, inter-alia, were:

OMP 401/2006

Page 24 of 43

(a) whether it was a case of existence of
disputes which needed to be resolved by the
Tribunal, or a case where the parties intended
to avoid future disputes.
(b) whether the Tribunal was intended to act
judicially, i.e., after taking into account
evidence and the submissions made before it
in contra distinction to a decision arrived at on
the expertise and knowledge of the Tribunal.
In para 33, the Court observed that the clause under consideration was
calculated

to

clear

any

difficulties,

which

may

arise,

in

the

implementation of the settlement already arrived at and that

the

clause did not provide for any different decision than what stood
agreed between the parties. The purport of the said clause was to
prevent any further disputes between the family groups. Thus, no
judicial determination was contemplated. The decision contemplated
was held to be that by an expert and not by an arbitrator.
39.

In M/s. Garg Builders & Engineers vs. U.P. Rajkiya

Nirman Nigam Ltd. & Others, AIR 1995 Delhi 111, this court was
concerned with the interpretation of the following clause:
“In the event of any dispute arising out of any
of the conditions of this agreement, the matter
shall be referred to the then Unit. In-charge,
whose decision shall be final and binding on
both the parties.”

40.

Even though the clause used the expression “any

dispute arising out of any of the conditions of this agreement”, the
court held that the clause was only calculated to prevent disputes from

OMP 401/2006

Page 25 of 43

arising and was akin to a ‘finality clause’ making provision for decisions
by an expert. No judicial determination of disputes was called for. The
court held that mere agreement between the parties to be bound by
the decision of a person does not constitute him as an arbitrator.

41.

I may now examine clause 9 of the MOFS in the light of

the context in which the parties inserted the said clause in the MOFS.
The MOFS provided for the mechanism whereby both the groups
agreed to hold equal shares and interest in the 14 listed companies,
which they acknowledged had equally fallen to their share.

This

mechanism, inter alia, provided for the equal participation in the
management and control of the 14 companies directly or indirectly. In
the event of either party acquiring any shares in any of the companies,
the same were to be held subject to the agreed terms as recorded in
the MOFS and for the equal benefit of the parties. Clause 3 provided
for joint management of the 14 companies and equal enjoyment of the
benefits, rights and privileges

by the parties.

Neither party could

exclude the other directly or indirectly from joint management or equal
benefits.

Under Clause 4 the parties agreed to manage the public

limited companies with the assistance of professional managers who
were to be appointed by mutual agreement between petitioner No.1
and respondent No.1. The duties and authorities of the professional
managers were also to be assigned on terms agreed to between
petitioner No.1 and respondent No.1. Further, on appointment of the
OMP 401/2006

Page 26 of 43

professional managers, an audit committee was to be constituted by
petitioner No.1 and respondent No.1 of which they were to be
members to jointly supervise and control the management of the
companies. The parties agreed to be entitled to equal representation
on the board of directors of the companies.

Even the independent

directors, if appointed, were to be with mutual consent. The parties
also agreed that neither of them, and the groups they represent, could
mortgage, assign or dispose of the shares of the said 14 companies
without the concurrence of petitioner No.1 and respondent No.1 who
had absolute right to refuse such permission. The parties agreed that
neither of them shall

do any act of omission or commission which

would result in diluting the equal control of the two groups in the
companies or otherwise pre-judicially effected

their rights in the

companies.

42.

First and foremost, clause 9 is a part of a memorandum

recording Family Settlement. This means, it is itself a culmination of
the process of resolution of family disputes. One would therefore
reasonably assume that the parties were looking to end existing
disputes, and prevent future ones, and with that objective recording
their terms of settlement in a memorandum.

43.

Under the MOFS the parties agreed on fundamental

issues i.e. their respective ownership, share and interests in the 14

OMP 401/2006

Page 27 of 43

listed companies. The mechanism drawn up under the MOFS appears
to be a modality to recognize and put in to effect the aforesaid
agreement

of

the

parties.

The

parties

provided

the

aforesaid

mechanism to provide checks and balance in the implementation of
the settlement contained in the MOFS and the DRC was constituted,
inter-alia, for the purpose of preventing disputes from arising rather
than just settling disputes which have arisen.
44.

The DRC was expected to iron out the differences in the

implementation of the MOFS to provide for a smooth run for the 14
companies and the relationship of the parties. To me it appears that
the DRC was thought of as a body which would be required to handle
and decide upon issues relating to the 14 companies insofar as they
touched upon, inter alia, the management of the companies, the
enjoyment of benefit, rights and privileges of the two groups, the
appointment of and discharge of duties by the professional managers,
joint supervision and control of the management of the companies by
the audit committee, right of equal

representation on the board of

directors of the companies etc. From the opening words of clause 9 it
would appear that such like disputes and differences were foreseen by
the parties, as arising from time to time, to be resolved by the DRC.
45.
constitute

It appears that the parties agreed to

nominate and

the DRC as a standing committee with a view to refer

disputes and differences that may arise between the parties, i.e.,
OMP 401/2006

Page 28 of 43

between the

JJ Family Group (The petitioners' group) and the KSJ

Family Group (The respondents group); The constitution of the DRC is
postulated even before any disputes or difference arise between the
parties, and the formation of this committee is not triggered upon the
arising of any disputes or differences. In so resolving these disputes
and differences, in my view the parties contemplated that the DRC
would have the discretion to choose to act either in the capacity of
“arbitrator” or in the capacity of “umpire or referee”, i.e. as an expert.
That choice was left to the discretion of the DRC, i.e., whether to act as
'arbitrator' or as 'umpire or referee', depending on the nature of the
dispute.

It cannot be said that all disputes and differences were

contemplated to be arbitrated

upon before the DRC for the simple

reason that such disputes may arise from time to time and resort to
arbitration on each and every such dispute would seriously impede and
obstruct the efficient day to day management of the 14 companies.
46.
expeditious

While it is true that arbitration is thought of as a more
forum of dispute resolution when compared to ordinary

civil litigation or other statutory quasi judicial proceedings, since its
procedure is also required to be in conformity with the principles of
natural justice requiring the Tribunal to grant a hearing to the parties,
take evidence (though the Arbitral Tribunal is not bound by the
Evidence Act and the Civil Procedure Court), and then make a
reasoned award on the basis of the submissions and evidence by

OMP 401/2006

Page 29 of 43

applying the law of the land, and its award is again open to challenge
under the Act, its decision would certainly not be available as swiftly
as that of an expert body. Delay in the availability of decisions, where
they involve the management and control of the 14 companies could
have led to serious stalemate or deadlock like situations. The parties
were conscious of this aspect. Therefore, in my opinion, the expression
`umpire or referee' is used in Clause 9 in the sense of an expert who
takes a decision based on his own expertise in the relevant field and
on the basis of his own

observation of the relevant facts and

circumstances. No doubt, while discharging its functions in either of
the two capacities, the DRC was expected to act with fairness, and
without any fear or favour to either party. However, the two
expressions mean qualitatively different kinds of decision making
processes and having different ramifications in law.
47.

A perusal of Clauses 10 and 12 of the MOFS shows that

in case there was a breakdown of relationship between representatives
of the two family groups, it was agreed that all the companies shall be
equally divided between the parties. If clause 9 of the MOFS postulated
only the process of arbitration before the DRC, there would be no
occasion for 'breakdown', since, whenever disputes and differences
would arise, the same would be quasi judicially determined by the
DRC. This is a further pointer to the fact that the DRC was not
necessarily to arbitrate upon the disputes, but had the option to

OMP 401/2006

Page 30 of 43

choose to act as experts, depending on the nature of disputes and
differences that arise from time to time between the two groups.
48.

Clause 9 of the MOFS is very widely worded, since the

scope of disputes and differences that may be taken to the DRC covers
'disputes between them relating to any matter or dealings between the
parties that have any connection to the affairs of the any of the
companies or otherwise'.

The parties were, it appears, conscious that

a large variety of disputes and differences may arise between them
from time to time, which may either be required to be arbitrated upon,
or to be resolved by a Committee of experts.

49.

In my view, both these expressions 'umpire' and

'referee' are used for experts like in relation to sporting games,
wherein

two

parties

agree

to

abide

by

the

decision

of

the

umpire/referee on each occasion the occasion arises in the course of
the game, on the basis of his own observation, skill and knowledge and
without going through the rigmarole of seeking explanation or giving
reasons to the players, or giving them a hearing. In the present case,
the rules of the games were contained in the MOFS. If a dispute arose
in the course of the game, i.e. the implementation of the MOFS in the
running of the 14 companies or otherwise, the same was agreed to be
referred to the DRC and the parties agreed to be bound by its decision.
Once referred, the DRC would decide whether to choose to act as

OMP 401/2006

Page 31 of 43

Arbitrator or as Umpire or Referee i.e. as expert. In the eventuality of
the DRC acting as an Arbitrator, its procedure and determination would
be governed by the provisions of the Act whereas in the eventuality of
the DRC acting as an expert, its determination would continue to bind
the parties but would not be enforceable as an Award of an Arbitral
Tribunal. In the eventuality of either party not honoring the decision
of the DRC given by them as experts, i.e. as 'umpire or referee', that
could lead to a 'breakdown' situation, which would trigger the
mechanism evolved in clause 10 and 12.
50.

Since, the parties are now at loggerheads about the

meaning of clause 9, it may also be worthwhile to analyse

the

communications exchanged between them on the subject to throw
some light on the manner in which the parties understood the
aforesaid Clause. The relevant extract of these communications
starting from 30.9.2000 is, therefore, reproduced hereinbelow:
On 10th October 2000, the petitioner No.1
wrote to respondent No.1:
“We have agreed to joint management so
that decisions are taken jointly. If we
disagree then there is now a well-wishers
committee of three persons above us
formed to resolve the matter and give
decisions.
There are two issues on which you say I have a
proprietory attitude.
Not at all.
I have
objected to calling people individually as that
will not only weaken the authority of the MD
but will lead to politics among the staff. Today
it is one person, tomorrow others and you can
OMP 401/2006

Page 32 of 43

well imagine
organization.

what

will

happen

to

the

You say it is your right to do so. You also
say it is our joint management, then
surely the two of us must agree. As we
do not as in this case then this matter
should be referred to the well-wishers
committee formed by Rajive for a
decision.
51.

On the same day, respondent No.1 responded to the

aforesaid communication, inter alia, stating:
“As regards `the well-wishers Committee’, this
Committee has been talked about but has not
been formally put in motion nor has held any
meetings so far. If the Committee had been
formulated and had been redressing and
resolving our differences, then all the
disputes that have arisen, would not still
be in abeyance.
Further I would like to point out that
matters that have to be put up to the
Committee, as and when it is formed,
agreed upon, and in motion, will be
matters related to policy and other major
issues.
My asking for the Head of
Accounts of Hamira to visit me is not a
matter which needs to be decided by the
so called Committee. If you choose to
object/obstruct to any routine step that I
may take in exercising my right to joint
management as you appear to be doing,
for reasons I can’t understand, then
according to your logic all these matters
will have to go to the Committee. This is
not why the Committee was conceived
and you know it.”

OMP 401/2006

Page 33 of 43

52.

On 13th October, 2000, petitioner No.1 again wrote to

respondent No.1 as follows:
“With regard to the Well-Wishers’ Committee,
this was agreed to by you in September at a
meeting you had with Rajive and Sati and after
that when Dhanu was here at a meeting with
Rajive and him. Subsequently I met Rajive
alongwith Sati and also gave my concurrence.
Therefore, as far as I am concerned it is
in operation from then.
Earlier in March when the question of setting
up a committee was discussed by Rajive and
Sati at a joint meeting with us you had said
that you were going to think about it. You
have given your decision on the matter in
September hence the delay in operations.
There is of course the problem of Dhanu living
in London which, you will appreciate, is an
inconvenience
in
setting
up
frequent
committee meetings. If you wish to consider
some one from Delhi itself it will facilitate the
matter.
The present dispute is not of a routine
nature.
It is a major policy matter
pertaining to how two of us are going to
exercise our rights of joint management
of the Company. I do not agree with both
of us exercising our rights independently
giving separate sets of instructions to the
Managing Director. I fail to understand
how the Managing Director will operate
with separate sets of instructions.
…………
I again reiterate that we can meet and resolve
our disputes, failing which the same may be
referred to the Well wishers’ Committee. This
committee meeting would have to be
scheduled at the convenience of the three
members- Sati, Dhanu and Rajive.”

OMP 401/2006

Page 34 of 43

53.

From the aforesaid correspondence, it is evident that

according to the petitioners, a “well wishers committee” was founded
in terms of Clause 9 of the MOFS consisting of three persons, though
the respondent does not

share the same view. From the letters

petitioner No.1 it appears that according to his understanding, issues
of joint management which included even differences relating to the
manner in which either petitioner No.1 or Respondent No. 1 may
interact with the staff members of the companies were liable to be
referred to the well-wishers i.e. DRC. According to him such like issues
are major policy issues. Respondent No. 1 in his reply expressed his
understanding that the Committee, as and when formed and put into
motion, would decide on policy issues, and other trivial issues relating
to management are not matters to be decided by the DRC.
54.

From the aforesaid, it appears that both the parties

understood the scope of reference to the DRC to include issues relating
to management of the 14 companies, which they considered as related
to policy and major issues. While, it may be argued that issues relating
to management policies of the companies could form subject matter of
reference to an arbitral Tribunal, at the same time it can reasonably be
said that such disputes are suited for resolution by an expert body who
understand day to day management affairs of businesses and
companies. Such disputes are more likely to require pragmatic and
business like approach rather then a quasi judicial determination.

OMP 401/2006

Page 35 of 43

Pertinently, the inter se

rights have

already been substantially

declared in the MOFS. Therefore, in my view, even the understanding
of the parties as evident from the aforesaid communications leads me
to infer that they contemplated the DRC to function either as
Arbitrators or as experts, described as 'umpire or referee'.
55.

The next issue which arises for consideration is, what is

the effect of clause 9 providing for an option to the DRC to either act
as an Arbitrator or as an expert? In Wellington Associates
Ltd(supra) the clause under consideration before the Court gave
discretion to the party to file a suit to resort to arbitration. The Court
held that since either of the forums could be approached by the parties
there was no obligation to refer matters to arbitration and thus, there
was no arbitration agreement. It was “not the intention of the parties
that arbitration is to be the sole remedy”. Thus, unless there is a clear
and unequivocal intention expressed in the written agreement, to
resort to arbitration alone, an arbitration agreement does not comes
into existence.
56.

In Jagdish Chander V. Ramesh Chander and Ors.,

C.A.No.4467/2002 decided on 26.4.2007, the Apex Court observed
that“(i) The intention of the parties to enter into an
arbitration shall have to be gathered from the
terms of the agreement. If the terms of the
agreement clearly indicate an intention on the
OMP 401/2006

Page 36 of 43

part of the parties to the agreement to refer
their disputes to a private tribunal for
adjudication and an willingness to be bound by
the decision of such tribunal on such disputes,
it is arbitration agreement. While there is no
specific form of an arbitration agreement, the
words used should disclose a determination
and obligation to go to arbitration and not
merely contemplate the possibility of going for
arbitration.
Where there Is merely a
possibility of the parties agreeing to
arbitration in future, as contrasted from
an obligation to refer disputes to
arbitration, there is no valid and binding
arbitration agreement.”(emphasis supplied)
57.

The decision in Chouthmal Jivrajjee Poddar V.

Ramchandra Jivrajjee Poddar and Others, AIR 1955 Nagpur 126
has been cited to contend that the reference is vague, inasmuch as, an
Umpire is different from an Arbitrator, and a person cannot act as an
Arbitrator or alternatively as an Umpire

of a Committee on his own

sweet will, and a reference which so permitted one to act as an
arbitrator or an umpire

was vague and invalid. The arbitration

agreement in the said decision read as follows:“An agreement to refer the dispute noted
below
to
the
arbitrators
named
(1)
Shivprakashji Poddar of Hinganghat, (2)
Balmukundji Poddar of Bombay, and (3)
Nagarmalji Poddar of Pulgaon, Seth Nagarmalji
Poddar being
appointed
as an umpire
hereafter called the Committee.”
58.

Thus the agreement in Chouthmal (supra) though

provided for three Arbitrators, the third was also appointed as Umpire.
Since under the law at the relevant time, an Umpire was distinct from
OMP 401/2006

Page 37 of 43

an Arbitrator, inasmuch as, an Umpire was to act only if there was a
difference between the Arbitrators themselves and not to sit as
Arbitrator generally, the reference was held to be invalid as it
appointed Nagarmal as Arbitrator as well as Umpire and not as a
Sarpanch(presiding arbitrator) thus, giving him the mandate to act as
both at his own sweet will.
59.

In the present case, the DRC is not necessarily to act as

an arbitral Tribunal.

It could choose to act as an expert as well.

Therefore, in my view, it is not open to the petitioner to enforce clause
9 of the MOFS as an arbitration agreement.
60.

Though the other issues raised by the parties do not

survive in view of my aforesaid finding, I am obliged to deal with them
and accordingly I proceed to do so.
61.

I will now proceed to deal with the Respondent’s

contention, based on the decision in M/s Teamco Private Ltd vs.
T.M.S. Mani AIR 1967 Calcutta 168, that since the said clause 9
comprehends that more than one person would constitute the tribunal,
the same is vague, inasmuch as, the number of arbitrators to be
appointed is not agreed to, and is void. It is pertinent to note that the
said decision is based on the old law of arbitration (the 1940 Act) which
is no longer in force. The court relied on the language employed in

OMP 401/2006

Page 38 of 43

Section 3 read with Rule 1 of the First Schedule to the Arbitration Act,
1940 which provided as:
Rule 1:- “.....unless otherwise expressly
provided the reference shall be to a sole
arbitrator.....”
62.

The arbitration agreement in that case provided for

reference to “arbitrators”. Since the term “arbitrators” appearing in the
plural form expressed a contrary intention, the court held that the
reference could not have been to a sole arbitrator and the reference
necessarily had to be made to a tribunal of more than one arbitrator
and, since, no number was agreed to, the clause was vague and
therefore void.
63.

However, the Act deviates from the above trajectory

and in contradistinction provides under Section 10 of the Act that :
“Sec.10 Number of arbitrators. (1) The parties
are free to determine the number of
arbitrators, provided that such number shall
not be an even number.”
(2) Failing the determination referred to in subsection (1), the arbitral tribunal shall consist of
a sole arbitration.”
64.

Section 7 of the Act which lays down the essentials of

an arbitration agreement does not suggest that an arbitration
agreement must specify the number of arbitrators to be appointed. On
a consideration of these provisions the Apex Court in MMTC vs.

OMP 401/2006

Page 39 of 43

Sterlite Industries (India) Ltd. (1996) 6 SCC 716 held that “the
validity of an arbitration agreements does not depend on the number
of arbitrators specified therein. The number of arbitrators is dealt with
separately in Section 10 which is a part of machinery provision for the
working of the arbitration agreement.” The words “failing the
determination”

indicate

that

this

sub-section

would

come

into

operation where the parties have not agreed on the number of
arbitrators. This contingency has been envisaged and taken care of by
the legislature. Thus, failure to agree to a number of arbitrators would
not render an arbitration agreement void and such an agreement has
to be construed as envisaging reference to a sole arbitrator. Thus, this
decision is of little assistance to the respondent.
65.

Reliance

has

been

placed

upon

Hirachand

Kothari(dead) by Lr's V. State of Rajasthan and Another,
1985(Supp.) Supreme Court Cases 17 to contend that the term referee
in Clause 9 is to be understood as used in Section 20 of the Evidence
Act. I find that the said judgment is not germane to the controversy
before me. Ramji Lal v. Ram Sanchi, AIR 1978 All 351 and Sadhu
Ram & Ors. V. Ude Ram, AIR 1967 Punjab 179 12 (supra) have held
that what is contemplated under Section 20 of Evidence Act is
“information” from the referee in the form of a “statement”.

A

determination by an expert or a judge resulting in a decision in not
contemplated. Since, the clause before me contemplates a decision,

OMP 401/2006

Page 40 of 43

Section 20 of Evidence Act and the decision cited by the respondent
have no relevance. In Sadhu Ram (supra), the word “referee” was
held to be used to imply appointment of an arbitrator since what was
contemplated

was

a

“decision”

and

not

a

“statement”

(as

contemplated by Section 20 of the Evidence Act). The reference was
held to have been made for an “adjudication” and the decision an
award by the Arbitrator. Therefore, term “referee” as used in the said
clause 9 cannot be said to be used in the context/scheme envisaged by
Section 20 of Evidence Act and in contra distinction refers to a decision
to be arrived at by an expert.
66.

The decision cited in Luxmi Chand Baijnath V.

Kishanlal Sohanlal, AIR 1955 Cal 588 Re: Arbn. Seth Kerorimal
Adwani V. Union of India, AIR 1959 Cal 430 and Delhi and Finance
Housing and Construction Ltd V. Brij Mohan Shah and another
AIR 1956 Punjab 205(at Delhi) are also not germane to the present
controversy as there is no provision in clause 9 conferring jurisdiction
on alternate tribunals for arbitration but only one DRC is contemplated
in respected of a particular dispute, though it may act in different
capacities at different times, depending on the nature of the dispute
referred to it.
67.

The decision in Hobbs Padgett & Co. vs. J.C.

Kirkland Ltd. Lloyd's Law Reporter, 1969 (2) LLR 547 and
Mangistaumunaigaz Ild Production vs. United World Trade Inc.,
OMP 401/2006

Page 41 of 43

1995 (1) LLR 617, cited by the petitioner are of no avail. In both these
cases, apart from the expression arbitrator/arbitration, no other
expression was used. In Hobbs (supra), the arbitration clause merely
stated 'suitable arbitration clause'. The court held that the said
expression was sufficient to disclose the intention of the parties to
refer

their

disputes

under

the

agreement

to

arbitration.

In

Mangistaumunaigaz Ild Production (supra) the arbitration clause
stated 'Arbitration, if any, by ICC Rules in London'. The same was
interpreted to mean that in case any dispute arose, the same were
intended to be taken to arbitration governed by ICC Rules to be held in
London. The aforesaid cases do not in any way assist me in holding
that the clause in question tantamount to only a binding arbitration
agreement between the parties.
68.

In view of my aforesaid finding that there is no binding

or enforceable arbitration agreement between the parties, the
inevitable conclusion which follows is that the present petition is itself
not

maintainable

since

the

existence

of

a

binding

arbitration

agreement is a sine qua non for the invocation of the jurisdiction of this
court under Section 9 of the Act. Accordingly, I dismissed the present
petition as not maintainable leaving the parties to bear their respective
costs.

OMP 401/2006

Page 42 of 43

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE
November 14, 2007
Anuradha/P.K. Babbar

OMP 401/2006

Page 43 of 43

