*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

Judgment reserved on: 07.08.2007
Judgment delivered on: 14.03.2008

%

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003
Smt. Banarasi
Through:

...Petitioner
Mr. U. Srivastava with Mr. M. K.
Gaur, Advocates
versus

Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors
...Respondent
Through: Ms. Pratima Gupta, Advocate for
respondent no.1.
Ms. Seema Singh, S.I. P.S.Delhi
Cantt. For the State.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

One Bhagwan Singh was a constable in Delhi Police. He

was posted in New Delhi Zone/ PCR. On 24.7.1996 he was detailed for
duty at PCR Van V-25 from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. However he did not report
for duty and was marked absent. Since then there has been no trace
of him.

Notice for absence

was sent at his residential address

directing him to resume duty, which was followed by registered notice.
It was received back undelivered with the report that the addressee
was not available at the address. Another notice sent through special
W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 1 of 12

messenger at the residence of his parents at Sikar, Rajasthan was
refused by the mother of the said Bhagwan Singh as he was not found
at his residence. Yet another notice was sent and again he was not
found and his brother received the same.
2.

On account of his continuous absence disciplinary

proceedings were initiated against Shri Bhagwan Singh. Notices issued
to Bhagwan Singh in the enquiry proceedings were either received
back, or were delivered to the family members of Shri Bhagwan Singh
and never upon him.

Since he was not found on any of those

occasions, the enquiry proceedings were undertaken ex parte and they
culminated in a report which held that he willfully and unauthorizedly
absented himself from duty.

The disciplinary authority, that is, the

Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police agreeing with the findings of
the enquiry officer dismissed him from service on 26.5.1998.
3.

The petitioner, who is the wife of Shri Bhagwan Singh,

preferred a departmental appeal against the dismissal of her husband
Bhagwan Singh. The said departmental appeal was also dismissed by
the Additional Commissioner of Police on 14.9.1999.
4.

The petitioner filed Original Application No.2471/2000

under Section 19 of the

Central Administrative Tribunal Act before

the Principal Bench of

Central Administrative Tribunal, New Delhi

(hereinafter referred to as the Tribunal) seeking pensionary benefits.
This OA was disposed of by the Tribunal

on 10.8.2001 with the

following directions:
W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 2 of 12

“4. In the result, although the applicant has
failed to make any claim for family pension in
absence of challenge to the dismissal order
which cannot be adjudicated by a Single
Bench. The applicant is accorded liberty to
challenge the same before the appropriate
Bench in accordance with rules. However, the
respondents are directed, in case applicant
makes a representation under Rule 41 of the
Pension Rules, to consider the same within a
period of four weeks from the date of receipt of
a copy of this order. The respondents shall
dispose of the same keeping in view of the
indigent conditions of the family and the
circumstances
of
the
family
and
the
circumstances within 8 weeks thereafter. The
OA is disposed of accordingly.”
5.

Thereafter the petitioner filed OA No.2194/2002 to

challenge the orders passed by the disciplinary authority and the
appellate authority whereby Shri Bhagwan Singh was dismissed from
service.

The

Tribunal

has

dismissed

the

aforesaid

OA

and

consequently the petitioner has filed the present petition to challenge
the order passed by the Tribunal in OA No.2194/2002 dated 29.4.2003.
6.

The challenge to the departmental proceedings and

penalty was primarily based on the argument that Shri Bhagwan Singh
has not been served in the enquiry proceedings, and consequently the
proceedings were bad. The Tribunal, however, did not agree with this
contention. The Tribunal held that since the delinquent Shri Bhagwan
Singh had been dismissed on account of his unauthorized absence,
which fact is not in dispute, the question of grant of pensionary
benefits does not arise.
7.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted before us

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 3 of 12

that the admitted position is that Shri Bhagwan Singh went missing
with effect from 24.7.1996 and since then he has neither been seen
nor heard

of by anyone, even though more than seven years have

gone by. Even the elder brother of the petitioner Shri Amar Singh had
lodged a missing person report on 10.4.1997 in P.S. Mandir Marg, New
Delhi vide DD No.9A. He gave the address in Ajmer where the family
of Shri Bhagwan Singh was residing and also stated that Shri Bhagwan
Singh had neither visited his family nor sent any money since
24.7.1996.

Another missing persons report was lodged with the

missing persons squad, P.S. Kotwali, Darya Ganj, New Delhi along with
a photograph vide report No.1820/A/MPS/96
was telecast on Doordarshan.

dated 14.4.1997 which

An application was also made on

12.7.1997 to lodge a complaint regarding Shri Bhagwan Singh going
missing and seeking an enquiry into the matter, with the Police Station
Mandir Marg, New Delhi.
8.

The husband of the petitioner was living in police

barracks of Delhi Cant. Police Station while his family was in Ajmer.
The status report dated 22.12.2006 filed by the respondents in this
Court also confirms that as per the report of the D.C.P., New Delhi
District vide office memo dated 31.7.1997, Shri Bhagwan Singh was
residing in Police Barracks as aforesaid. This is also stated in the DD
No.9A.This means that the husband of the petitioner was under the
care of the respondents, when he went missing.
9.

Even though the said Shri Bhagwan Singh was a member

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 4 of 12

of respondent police force, no effort appears to have been made by the
respondents to ascertain whether Shri Bhagwan Singh was in fact alive
at the relevant time.

Even though the address of the family of Shri

Bhagwan Singh at Ajmer was furnished by Shri Amar Singh on
10.4.1997, and by the petitioner in her statutory appeal, no efforts
seem to have been made to make any enquiry to trace out Shri
Bhagwan Singh. No doubt the service record of Shri Bhagwan Singh
shows that he was in the habit of remaining absent, inasmuch as, there
were 20 occasions cited in the enquiry report between the year 1990
to January, 1996 when he had remained unauthorizedly absent.
However, a perusal of the enquiry report shows that even in the said
enquiry proceedings none of the witnesses stated that they had seen
Shri Bhagwan Singh alive.
10.

Merely because the officer who had visited the address

at Sikar to serve notice upon Shri Bhagwan Singh had stated that he
was informed by the mother of Shri Bhagwan Singh that he had gone
to Ajmer to attend to his ailing children, it cannot lead to a reasonable
inference that he was alive at that point of time. Even though the rules
of evidence do not apply to departmental enquiries, and it is not for
this Court to assess the weight of the evidence produced in a
departmental enquiry, it is open to us in judicial review to appreciate,
whether there was any evidence or material at all before the enquiry
officer to come to his findings or not.
11.

The

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

scope

of

enquiry

in

judicial

review

Page 5 of 12

of

a

departmental enquiry is well established, and we may only quote a
short passage from Bank of India V. Degala Suryanarayana, 1999
SCC (L & S) 1036 to refresh ourselves. The Supreme Court held:
“Strict rules of evidence are not applicable to
departmental enquiry proceedings. The only
requirement of law
is that the allegation
against the delinquent officer must be
established by such evidence acting upon
which a reasonable person acting reasonably
and with objectivity may arrive at a finding
upholding the gravamen of the charge against
the delinquent officer.
Mere conjecture or
surmises cannot sustain the finding of guilt
even in departmental enquiry proceedings.
The court exercising the jurisdiction of judicial
review would not interfere with the findings of
fact arrived at in the departmental enquiry
proceedings excepting in a case of mala fides
or perversity i.e where there is no evidence to
support a finding or where a finding is such
that no man acting reasonably and with
objectivity could have arrived at that finding.
The court cannot embark upon reappreciating
the evidence or weighing the same like an
appellate authority. So long as there is some
evidence to support the conclusion arrived at
by the departmental authority, the same has to
be sustained. In Union of India V. H.C.Goel the
Constitution Bench has held:
“[T]he High Court can and must enquire
whether there is any evidence at all in
support of the impugned conclusion. In
other words, if the whole of the evidence
led in the enquiry is accepted as true,
does the conclusion follow that the
charge in question if proved against the
respondent? This approach will avoid
weighing the evidence. It will take the
evidence as it stands and only examine
whether on that evidence legally the
impugned conclusion follows or not.”
12.

Such far fetched statements, which are in themselves

hearsay, attributed to the mother of Shri Bhagwan Singh, which are
W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 6 of 12

also hearsay and are also not based on any other corroborative
material, could not, in our opinion, be used to conclude about the
existence of Shri Bhagwan Singh on the relevant date. No man acting
reasonably and with objectivity could have arrived at a finding that
Shri Bhagwan Singh was in existence at the relevant time. We may
also state that at the time when the enquiry was held, as not much
time had passed since the disappearance of Shri Bhagwan Singh,
presumably it did not even cross the mind of the Enquiry Officer or the
Disciplinary Authority that he may not be alive. No enquiry into this
possibility was held.

Consequently,

while his absence cannot

be

disputed and it is a matter of fact, it remains a mystery whether the
same was willful or not.

It could be said to be willful only if Shri

Bhagwan Singh was shown to have been alive at the relevant time.
then, possibly it could be assumed that he was in a position to attend
to his duties and he knowingly and deliberately did not report for duty.
However, in case he was already dead, there is no

question of his

absence being willful.
13.

Section 107 read with Section 108 of the Indian

Evidence Act, 1872 states that when a question arises whether a
person is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has not been heard of
for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he
had been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive shifts upon the
person who affirms it. Consequently on the expiry of the seven years
period from the date Shri Bhagwan Singh went missing on 24.7.1996,

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 7 of 12

the burden of proving that he was alive rested on the respondent,
while prior to the expiry of seven years, the burden would have been
on the persons who may have wanted to assert his death.
14.

In LIC of India vs. Anuradha, (2004) 10 SCC 131, the

Supreme Court held that the presumption under Section 108 of the
Indian Evidence Act cannot be extended to a presumption as to the
time of death by presuming that the time of death coincide with the
time when the said person went missing. The Supreme Court held that
there is neither a presumption as to the date or the time of death nor
as to facts and circumstances of death of a person under Section 107
and 108 of the Evidence Act. The only inference that is permissible to
be drawn on the presumption is that such person was dead at the time
when the question arose, subject to the

said period of seven years

having elapsed. Question of time of death is a question of evidence,
factual or circumstantial and is not a matter of presumption. The onus
of proving the time of death rests on the person who stakes the claim,
establishment of which will depend on proof of date or time of death.
However, the Supreme Court also observed that rarely it would be
permissible to proceed on the premise that death had occurred on any
given date before the expiry of the said period of 7 years.
15.

Considering the fact that Shri Bhagwan Singh was not

living with his family and was living in police barracks from he went
missing and is unheard of since then, we are of the view that the facts
of this case are exceptional and rare and, therefore, circumstantially, it

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 8 of 12

can fairly be inferred that Shri Bhagwan Singh was dead when he went
missing or within a reasonable time thereafter.
16.

If an employee, who is residing in accommodation

provided by the employer, away from his family suddenly goes missing
and is thereafter neither seen or heard of, either by his employers,
colleagues or his family members, the responsibility of answering the
question about his whereabouts lies, at least in the first instance, with
the employer and not the family members of the missing person. In
this case, the situation is even more grave, inasmuch as the employer
happens to be the Police Force which is even otherwise responsible to
trace out the missing persons once it is reported to it that a person is
missing.
17.

The Respondents have also relied upon Union of India

vs. Geetha Devi, (2002) 10 SCC 166 wherein the Supreme Court held
that where the services of a employee had been terminated under rule
5 of the CCS(Temporary Services) Rule, 1965 after

unauthorized

absence for about 2 years, his wife could not claim relief of
compassionate appointment, arrears of salary, family pension, etc. on
the ground of presumption of her husband's death

during his

employment as he had remained missing after more than 7 years. This
decision does not apply in the peculiar facts of this case, since, as
aforesaid, in the present case the husband of the Petitioner was living
in the police barracks and not with his family, when he suddenly went
missing.

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 9 of 12

18.

Our attention has also been drawn to another decision

of Patna High Court in Arti Devi @ Arti Pandey Vs. Union of India
and others, 2003 (3) Administrative Total Judgments 126. In that
case, the husband of the Petitioner was an employee of the Central
Reserve Police Force who proceeded on leave and was not traceable
thereafter. He was declared as deserter and dismissed after inquiry
and on that basis the claim for family pension and other retiral benefits
were denied to the Petitioner. The High Court in the facts of that case
directed that the Petitioner may produce evidence and satisfy the
authority to discharge the onus upon her under Section 108 of the
Evidence Act, whereupon the authorities were required to discharge
their onus and to proceed and conclude the matter.
19.

We

have

considered

the

respective

submissions

thoughtfully. It is not in dispute that the husband of the petitioner went
missing, which was treated as absent from duty. On this basis,
disciplinary proceedings were initiated against Sh.Bhagwan Singh,
husband of the petitioner. As his whereabouts could not be found, ex
parte inquiry was held and he was dismissed from service. Normally,
on the charge of absence from duty, such an action could be taken by
the respondents. To that extent there may not be any quarrel.
However, in the present case, what is to be borne in mind is that it is
not a case where Sh.Bhagwan Singh started absenting from duty,
though he was very much available. It is a case where whereabouts of
Sh.Bhagwan Singh right from the date of his absence could not be

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 10 of 12

known to any person in this world, including his family members. In the
process, more than seven years passed and therefore, presumption
under Section 108 of the Indian Evidence Act to the effect that
Sh.Bhagwan Singh is not alive came into effect. In such a scenario, it
cannot be said that absence of Sh.Bhagwan Singh from service was
willful. When he is presumed dead, maybe such a presumption arises
after the expiry of seven years from the date he was not seen, it can
reasonably be presumed that absence from service by Sh.Bhagwan
Singh was not intentional.
20.

We are, therefore, of the view that the claim of the

petitioner made in the original application could not have been
rejected while placing the entire responsibility of proving the demise of
her husband, at the time when he was accused of remaining willfully
and unauthorizedly absent, upon her shoulders. In view of the fact
that Shri Bhagwan Singh was not residing with his family and was living
away from his family in police barracks, when he went missing from
the place of duty under the control of the respondents and did not go
back to h is own house and his whereabouts could not even be traced,
the charge of absence from duty, coupled with the fact that
Sh.Bhagwan Singh has not been seen for all these years, cannot be
treated as sustained in the facts and circumstances of this case. In
fact, it was for the respondents to trace out the whereabouts of
Sh.Bhagwan Singh if he was alive at the relevant time. The petitioner
being a lay person cannot

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

be fasten with this responsibility, who

Page 11 of 12

claims not to have seen her husband from the time when he went
missing while on duty in Delhi.
21.

In case the husband of the petitioner was dead when

he went missing in 1996, it would be highly inequitable and unjust to
the petitioner to deny her family pension.

She would be doubly

condemned. Firstly because of the death of her husband, and secondly
because of the denial of family pension.
22.

Accordingly, we set aside the judgment of the Tribunal

and allow this writ petition. The punishment of dismissal passed by the
respondent against Sh.Bhagwan Singh is also set aside on the
premises that Sh.Bhagwan Singh was dead and punishment of
dismissal would not be appropriate. As a consequence, the petitioner
shall be entitled to family pension and such other benefits as may be
admissible to her under the rules. The arrears of pension and terminal
benefits be paid to the petitioner within two months from today. The
petitioner shall also continue to get the family pension regularly in
future as per law.
VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

A.K. SIKRI
JUDGE
March 14, 2008
aj/P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 8013/2003

Page 12 of 12

