*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P. (C) No. 8496/2006
DATE OF DECISION : 14th August 2007
Sh. M.L.Dhussa
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. K.C. Mittal, Advocate.

versus
Union of India & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Sameer Bajaj for Mr. Rajeeve
Mehra, Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
ORDER
14.08.2007
A.K. SIKRI, J. (Oral)
*
1.
Petitioner is facing criminal prosecution for the alleged
offense punishable under Section 7 read with section 13(1)(b) and
section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act. At the relevant

W.P(C)8496-06

Page 1 of 13

time, the Petitioner was functioning as Commissioner of Income Tax
(Appeals), Ludhiana. Allegations against the Petitioner is that he
demanded a bribe of Rs. 5 lakhs, later reduced to Rs.3 lakhs from
one Shri Mohinder Singh for favourably deciding his four appeals
and with the help of his brother in law Shri Deepak Chugh accepted
part payment of Rs.2.5 lakhs through a close friend P.S. Makkar. The
Petitioner has been suspended from service. On the basis of
investigation, charge sheet under Section 173 of the Cr.P.C. was
filed sometime back and charge has already been framed. Matter is
at the stage of trial and the prosecution witnesses are being
examined.
2.

The Petitioner is also departmentally charge sheeted on

the aforesaid allegations and in the charge-sheet it is alleged that
he failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty and
displayed conduct unbecoming of a government servant and
thereby he has contravened Rule 3(i), 3(ii) and 3(iii) of the CCS
Conduct Rules, 1965.

After the service of this charge-sheet the

petitioner filed OA No. 1277/2004 with the prayer that the
disciplinary proceedings be kept in abeyance till the completion and
finalization of the criminal trial. This petition was resisted by the
respondents on the ground that two proceedings were of different
W.P(C)8496-06

Page 2 of 13

nature and should go on independently. Matter was heard at length
and vide judgment dated 15.12.2004 the OA was disposed of by the
learned Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi.
Going through the said judgment would reveal that the Tribunal had
taken note of various judgments of the Supreme Court, including
the following judgments:1. Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. v. Kushal
Bhan, AIR 1960 SC 806.
2. Kusheshwar Dubey v. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd.,
(1988) 4 SCC 319.
3. State of Rajasthan v. B.K. Meena & Ors., (1996)
6 SCC 417.

3.

4. Capt. M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd.
& Anr., (1999) 3 SCC 679.
The learned Tribunal observed that in the aforesaid

judgments, the Supreme Court has held that the two proceedings,
namely, departmental inquiry and criminal proceedings are of
different nature; the standard of proof in the two proceedings is also
different and both can go on simultaneously. It is also held in these
judgments

that

the

objective

in

criminal

proceedings

and

departmental proceedings is altogether different and distinct.

In

the disciplinary proceedings the question is whether the delinquent
employee is guilty of such conduct as warrants his dismissal or

W.P(C)8496-06

Page 3 of 13

removal from service or lesser punishment, as the case may be,
whereas in the criminal proceedings, the question is whether the
offenses registered against him for which he is charged under the
(Prevention of Corruption Act in the instant case) are established
and if established, what sentence should be imposed upon him.
4.

The Supreme Court has also repeatedly held that

staying of disciplinary proceedings pending criminal proceedings
should not be a matter of course but should be considered in the
facts of each case. Even the stay of departmental proceedings may
call for re-consideration if criminal case gets unduly delayed. After
taking note of the aforesaid principles laid down in the said
judgments, the learned Tribunal thought it proper to stay the
departmental proceedings for a period of six months.
5.

The Tribunal has specifically mentioned that this course

of action is taken in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in
Capt. M. Paul Anthony (supra).

The Tribunal also extracted the

relevant portion from that judgment and we consider it necessary to
reproduce the same in order to understand the controversy with
which we are now concerned:“22. The conclusion which are deducible from
various decisions of this Court referred to
above are:W.P(C)8496-06

Page 4 of 13

(i) Departmental proceedings and proceedings
in
a
criminal
case
can
proceed
simultaneously as there is no bar in their
being conducted simultaneously, though
separately.
(ii)If the departmental proceedings and the
criminal case are based on identical and
similar set of facts and the charge in the
criminal case
against the delinquent
employee is of a grave nature which involves
complicated question of law and fact, it
would be desirable to stay the departmental
proceeding till the conclusion of the criminal
case.
(iii)Whether the nature of a charge in a criminal
case is grave and whether complicated
questions of fact and law are involved in that
case, will depend upon the nature of offense,
the nature of the case launched against the
employee on the basis of evidence and
material collected against him during
investigation or as reflected in the chargesheet.
(iv)The factors mentioned at (ii) and (iii) above
cannot be considered in isolation to stay the
departmental proceedings but due regard
has to be given to the fact that the
departmental proceedings cannot be unduly
delayed.
(v)If the criminal case does not proceed or its
disposal is being unduly delayed, the
departmental proceedings, even if they were
stayed on account of the pendency of the
criminal case, can be resumed and
proceeded with so as to conclude them at an
early date, so that if the employee is found
W.P(C)8496-06

Page 5 of 13

6.

not guilty his honour may be vindicated and
in case he is found guilty, administration may
get rid of him at the earliest.”
The operative part of the directions, which were given

by the Tribunal in the said judgment is also reproduced herein
below:

7.

“As already pointed above, it was held that the
question about gravity of the offence and
whether complicated questions are involved
goes with the facts and circumstances of each
case. Thus, we are not expressing ourselves as
to if the departmental proceedings would
prejudice the applicant or not. In these
circumstances, it would be in the fitness of
things to stay the departmental proceedings for
a period of six months only and still in terms of
the decision of the Supreme Court in the case
of Capt. M. Paul Anthony's case (supra), if
the trial is not concluded in that time, the
proceedings can be revived.”
However, even after expiry of six months, the criminal

trial did not conclude and some of the prosecution witnesses were
yet to be examined.
8.

As the period of six months had expired, apprehending

that the respondent may initiate the departmental proceedings, the
petitioner filed another OA being OA No.2624/2005 before the
learned Tribunal seeking relief, inter alia, to direct the respondent to
keep the disciplinary proceedings in abeyance till the decision in the
criminal case is over. Vide judgment and order dated 13.12.2005

W.P(C)8496-06

Page 6 of 13

the Tribunal, however, rejected this prayer on the ground that it was
barred by the principles of res judicata and, therefore, OA seeking
this relief was not maintainable. The Tribunal observed as under:“We have heard both the counsel and perused
the pleadings as well. It is seen that when
applicant had approached this Tribunal earlier,
he had sought direction to the respondents to
keep the disciplinary proceedings in abeyance
till the completion and finalisation of the trial
proceedings pending before the learned Special
Judge. Tribunal passed a detailed judgment,
wherein all the contentions raised by the
applicant as well as counsel for respondents
were looked into, apart from various judgments
given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, yet in
their wisdom, the Tribunal stayed the
departmental proceedings for a period of six
months only and further observed in terms of
the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the
case of Capt. M. Paul Anthony, that if the trial is
not concluded in that time, the proceedings can
be revived. It is thus clear that liberty was
given by the Tribunal itself to the respondents
to revive the departmental proceedings after a
period of six months.
This judgment has
already attained finality. Since this judgment
was passed by co-ordinate Bench, we can
neither sit in appeal over the orders passed by
co-ordinate Bench nor can modify the same.
Applicant as well as respondents are also bound
by the judgment given by this Tribunal. Since it
is in compliance with the directions given by
this Tribunal, that respondents have revived
the disciplinary proceedings after a period of
six months, in these circumstances, it is neither
open to the applicant to come to this court with
the same request all over again nor we can
give any directions contrary to the directions
W.P(C)8496-06

Page 7 of 13

already given.
Therefore, the main relief
sought by the applicant in the present OA
having been already decided by the Tribunal, is
definitely
barred
by
the
principles
of
Respondent judicata, therefore, the OA is not
maintainable.”
Though with the dismissal of this OA decks were cleared

9.

for the respondent to proceed with the inquiry. the petitioner filed
miscellaneous applications in O.A.No.1277/2004 seeking some
further time for keeping the departmental inquiry into abeyance.
These applications have also been dismissed by the learned
Tribunal vide order dated 25.4.2006 taking note of the judgments of
the Supreme Court, which have already been referred to above as
well

as

another

judgment,

namely,

Hindustan

Petroleum

Corporation Ltd. And others v. Sarvesh Berry, 2005(1) SC SLJ 188,
wherein it is held that stay of departmental proceedings pending
conclusion of criminal trial was not appropriate.

Dismissing the

applications, the Tribunal also observed that the Bench having coordinate jurisdiction had granted specific period of six months time
for which proceedings were to remain stayed and, therefore,
another Bench could not enhance the said period of stay.
Challenging this order, present writ petition is filed.
10.

It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner

that the main reason for keeping the departmental inquiry in
W.P(C)8496-06

Page 8 of 13

abeyance for a period of six months by the Tribunal in its order
dated 15.12.2004, was that prosecution evidence in the criminal
case was underway and the intention was that the prosecution
evidence is over before the departmental proceedings commence
so that the petitioner is not prejudiced thereby. He submitted that
there was no allegation against the petitioner that criminal
proceedings had been delayed because of the non-cooperation of
the petitioner and rather the delay was attributable to the
prosecution. He also pointed out that out of 30, 20 prosecution
witnesses had already been examined, 2

had been dropped and

only 8 witnesses remained to be examined and if the inquiry is kept
in abeyance for some more period, the purpose and spirit behind
the order dated 15.12.2004, by which the proceedings were stayed
for six months, would be fulfilled.
11.

Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand,

submitted that the Tribunal in its order dated 15.12.2004 stayed the
proceedings for a period of six months only specifically stating that
it was in terms of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
Capt.

M.

Paul

Anthony

(supra)

and

also

made

categorical

observation that if the trial is not concluded in time, the
proceedings can be revived.
W.P(C)8496-06

Therefore, submitted the learned
Page 9 of 13

counsel, the period of six months was not given for the purpose of
concluding the criminal trial, inasmuch as, there is no indication of
this kind of reason in the impugned order, as contended by the
counsel for the petitioner now. He further submitted that in Capt.
M. Paul Anthony (supra), it is specifically provided by the Supreme
Court that in case criminal proceedings are unduly delayed,
departmental proceedings can be resumed. He also argued that the
facts of this case are para materia with the case of Sarvesh Berry
(supra), which was specifically taken note of while rejecting the
prayer of the petitioner that keeping the inquiry in abeyance and
dismissing the OA and, therefore, following that predence the writ
petition be dismissed.
12.

We have given our due consideration to the respective

submissions and have also gone through the record. The proposition
of law and the principles laid down in various judgments of the
Supreme Court on this subject have been discussed by the Tribunal
in its judgment dated 15.12.2004, as already noted above and,
therefore, it does not need any repetition. We have also pointed
out above that the Tribunal thought it proper to keep the
departmental proceedings in abeyance for a period of six months
keeping in view the terms of decision of the Supreme Court in Capt.
W.P(C)8496-06

Page 10 of 13

M. Paul Anthony (supra).

We have reproduced the relevant

observations in the said decision above. However, we would like to
extract the conclusion Nos.4 and 5 of para 22 again, which touch
this aspect specifically:“22.
The
conclusions
which
are
deducible from various decisions of this Court
referred to above are:
(i)

xxxxx

(ii)

xxxxx

(iii)

xxxxx

(iv)
The factors mentioned at (ii) and
(iii) above cannot be considered in isolation to
stay the departmental proceedings but due
regard has to be given to the fact that the
departmental proceedings cannot be unduly
delayed.
(v)
If the criminal case does not
proceed or its disposal is being unduly delayed,
the departmental proceedings, even if they
were stayed on account of the pendency of the
criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded
with so as to conclude them at an early date, so
that if the employee is found not guilty his
honour may be vindicated and in case he is
found guilty, administration may get rid of him
at the earliest.”
13.

It can, therefore, be safely inferred that it was because

of the aforesaid consideration the Tribunal though it proper that
departmental proceedings be kept in abeyance for a period of six
W.P(C)8496-06

Page 11 of 13

months and it was in the mind of the Tribunal that even if the
criminal proceedings are not concluded within the aforesaid period,
the departmental proceedings can still be resumed. Because of this
reason while staying the proceedings for six months, the emphasis
for this period was given using the expression “only” and also
making it abundantly clear that “If the trial is not concluded in that
time, the proceedings can be revived.”

Not only this, when the

petitioner filed second OA, this prayer in OA was rejected on the
ground that it is barred by principles of res judicata and the OA was
not maintainable. Thus, the Tribunal refused to entertain the plea
of the petitioner to the effect that the disciplinary proceedings be
kept in abeyance till the offence in criminal case is over. This order
was not challenged by the petitioner and instead he filed
miscellaneous application whereby he sought extension of time to
keep the departmental proceedings in abeyance.
14.

We are, therefore, of the opinion that miscellaneous

application filed by the petitioner before the Tribunal have rightly
been rejected and there is no scope of interference with the orders
of the Tribunal. It would be relevant to point out here that on
15.12.2004 departmental proceedings were stayed for a period of
six months.
W.P(C)8496-06

The period of almost 20 months have expired since
Page 12 of 13

then and the proceedings have not commenced since this Court had
also granted a stay of the enquiry proceedings in these proceedings
on 16.5.2006, which has been continuing ever since. Therefore, we
do not find it to be a fit case for exercise of extraordinary
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India as we do
not find any irrationality, illegality and impropriety in the impugned
order. This petition is dismissed and interim orders are vacated.
Petition stands disposed of.

A.K.SIKRI, J.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
August 14, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P(C)8496-06

Page 13 of 13

