*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

Dated : 14.12.2007

%

W.P. (C) No. 2057/1999
Shri Darshan Kumar Sahni
Through:

...Petitioner
Mr. R.K. Relan, Advocate

versus
Union of India

...Respondent
Through: Mr. Jitendra K. Singh, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI,J. (ORAL)
1.This writ petition, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India had
earlier been disposed off by this Court on 19th of January 2001,
whereby this Court had allowed the writ petition by directing that for
the purpose of calculating his pensionary and other settlement dues,
the last drawn pay of the petitioner be taken as Rs 2450, which was
the pay he was actually drawing while on deputation with CRIS
(Centre for Railways Information System), and wherefrom he took
voluntary retirement from the Railways on 30.11.1993 and got

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 1 of 16

permanently absorbed in CRIS on 1.12.1993. The Court had further
observed that the relief was being granted in the facts and
circumstances of the present case and that it would not constitute a
precedent. The respondent, Union of India challenged the aforesaid
decision before the Supreme Court of India. Civil Appeal No. 7201 of
2002 preferred by the Union of India was allowed by the Supreme
Court by the following order:
“The appellant is before us in appeal against the
judgment and order dated 19th July, 2001 passed by
the division Bench of the Delhi High Court in CWP
No.2057 of 1999.
The question which arose for
consideration before the High Court was as to whether
the respondent, on his submission of application for
voluntary retirement was entitled to retirement
benefits on the basis of his last pay drawn at
Rs.2450/- on 30.11.93 or not. The contention of the
appellant was that the retirement benefits of the
respondent herein should have been reckoned on the
basis of the last pay which he would have drawn had
he remained in his parent cadre. The contention of
the appellant herein found favour with the Tribunal.
The High Court in the writ petition filed by the
respondent herein, without going into the merits of
the matter granted relief to him only on the premise
that the same should not be treated to be a
precedent. The High Court has not assigned any
reason in support of its decision. The contention of
the appellant which had found favour with the
Tribunal had not been met in the High Court. We are
of the opinion that the impugned judgment cannot be
sustained. It is set aside accordingly.
This appeal is allowed and the matter is remitted to
the High Court for consideration of the matter afresh.
We request the High Court to lean out and dispose of
the matter as expeditiously as possible, preferable
within a period of two months from the
communication of this order.

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 2 of 16

No order as to costs.”
2.In view of the aforesaid the matter stands remitted back to this
Court for reconsideration afresh.
3.While serving as Enquiry and Reservation Clerk [E&RC/Delhi (R)] in
the pay scale of Rs.425-640 the petitioner was transferred in the
same

capacity

and

manager(CPM)/OIS

in

grade

to

connection

the
with

office
the

of

chief

projects

computerization

of

seat/berths reservation vide notice dated 10th of October 1985. Vide
order dated 28th of November 1985 the petitioner, who was working
as senior console operator in the grade Rs 455 -- 700 was promoted
to officiate as senior console operator in the grade Rs. 550 -- 750.
This order was issued by the office of CPM/OIS, Northern Railway.
Vide notice dated 12th of December 1985 the

CPM /OIS, Northern

Railway fixed the pay of the petitioner- senior console operator at Rs.
550 with effect from the 28th November 1985 in the grade of Rs. 550
-- 750. The petitioner was promoted from the grade of Rs. 550 -- 750
to the grade of Rs. 650 -- 960 while working as senior console
operator with effect from the 1 September 1986 by the order dated
the 1 September 1986, also

issued by the CPM/PRS, Northern

Railway.
4.On 13th February 1989, the Centre for Railways information system
(CRIS) requested The Systems Manager, Chief Commercial Officer
(Computers Reservation) to depute console operators to CRIS since
WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 3 of 16

the

development

and

simulation

centre

inaugurated on 29th of March 1989.

of

CRIS

was

being

The terms on which the

deputation was offered were also communicated by CRIS. On 16th
February 1989, while retaining his lien on his substantive post, the
petitioner came over to CRIS on deputation. The petitioner continued
to work on deputation in CRIS.

Eventually, he sought voluntary

retirement from Northern Railway with effect from the 30th November
1993 and permanent absorption with CRIS.
petitioner was earlier declined, but finally

This request of the

acceded to by Northern

Railway vide a communication dated 20th of January 1995.

The

respondent Northern Railway communicated the decision of the
Railway Board contained in their letter dated 22 September 1994
whereby the Board accorded approval to the extension of the
deputation term of the petitioner for the period up to 30th November
1993.

It was further stated that the competent authority has

accepted the request of the petitioner, now working with CRIS on
deputation, for acceptance of his resignation from railway service
with effect from 30th November 1993.

Consequent upon the

aforesaid development CRIS issued an office order on 17 April 1995
permanently absorbing the petitioner in CRIS with effect from 1
December 1993 in the grade of Rs. 2000-3500 as a console operator.
5.The petitioner requested the respondent

for settlement of his

pensionary and other dues on the basis of his last drawn pay of Rs.

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 4 of 16

2450 in the scale of Rs. 2000 – 3200 while on deputation.

The

respondent however took the view that the pensionary and other
dues of the petitioner were liable to be calculated on the basis of the
last pay that the petitioner would have been entitled to draw, had he
continued to serve in his parent Carder in Northern Railways in the
scale of Rs. 1600 -- 2660 at the time of his seeking voluntary
retirement, that is, on 30th November 1993.

Accordingly to the

respondent, the petitioner would have been entitled to draw
Rs.1950/- per month in the scale of Rs.1600-2660, and on that basis
the petitioners pensionary and other settlement dues ought to have
been calculated.
6.Being dissatisfied by the rejection of his request for settlement of
his pensionary dues on the basis of his last drawn pay of Rs. 2450,
the petitioner preferred Original Application bearing No. 2109 of 1997
before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi
(the Tribunal). By the impugned order dated 24th of December 1998
the tribunal dismissed the original application filed by the petitioner.
It is this order of the Tribunal which has been impugned before us in
the present writ petition by the petitioner.
7.The Tribunal relied on the definition of “pay” as contained in Rule
1303(1) IREC Vol II, which is, inter alia, defined as “pay other than
Special Pay or pay granted in view of his personal qualifications,
which has been sanctioned for a post held by him substantively or in

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 5 of 16

an officiating capacity or to which he is entitled by reason of his
position in a cadre.” The Tribunal emphasized the last part of this
definition i.e. “by reason of his position in a cadre”, and held that
since the petitioner substantively was an Enquiry-cum-Reservation
Supervisor in the scale of Rs.1600-2660 in his parent Cadre, where he
continued to hold his lien, and his basic pay as Enquiry-cumReservation Supervisor in the grade of Rs.1600-2660 had been fixed
at Rs.1950/- p.m., therefore, he was entitled to calculation and
settlement of his pensionary and other dues on the basis of the
notional last drawn pay of Rs.1950/- and not Rs.2450/-. The Tribunal
also distinguished the case of Ajmer Singh v. UOI & Railway
Board, in O.A. No.1868/1995 decided by it on 14.11.1996, and relied
upon by the petitioner, on the ground that in Ajmer Singh (supra) he
had received promotion and had thereafter retired on superannuation
from the post to which he had been transferred on ad hoc basis, while
in the present case, the petitioner, who was on deputation with CRIS
went on to be absorbed in CRIS, after seeking voluntary retirement
from the Railways. On the same basis, the case of Shri R.L. Arora, exofficiating AEN/MTP, New Delhi, also relied upon by the petitioner was
also distinguished.
8.Para 1303 of the Railway Establishment Code defines 'Pay' and
“Average Pay” as:
“Pay- Pay means the amount drawn monthly
by a Government servant as: -

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 6 of 16

(i) The pay other than special pay or pay
granted
in
view
of
his
personal
qualifications, which has been sanctioned
for a post held by him substantively or in
an officiating capacity or to which he is
entitled by reason of his position in a cadre;
and
(ii) Overseas pay, special pay and personal
pay; and
(iii)Any other emoluments which he may be
specifically as pay by the president.
Average Pay – Average pay means the average
monthly pay earned during the 12 complete
months immediately proceeding the month
in
which
the
event
occurs
which
necessitates the calculation of average pay:
Provided that in respect of any period spent on
foreign service out of India the pay which the
railway servant would have drawn if on duty in
India but for foreign service out of India shall be
substituted for the pay actually drawn:
Provided further that in the case of railway
servant entitled to running allowance, average
pay for the purpose of leave salary shall include a
fixed component representing pay element in the
running allowances as notified by government
through administrative instructions from time to
time.” (emphasis added).

9.Rule 49 of the Railway Services (Pension) Rules, 1993 defines
Emoluments as “(a) emolument:, of for the purpose of calculating
various retirement and death benefits, means the basic pay as
defined in clause (i) of rule 1303 of the code which a railway servant
was receiving immediately before his retirement or on the date
of his death: Provided that the stagnation increment shall be treated

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 7 of 16

as emoluments for calculation of retirement benefits;”(emphasis
added).
10.Notes 2, 6 and 8 to Rule 49 is also relevant and read as follows:
“Note 2:
where
a
railway
servant
immediately before his retirement or death
while in service had proceeded on leave for
which leave salary is payable after having
held a higher appointment, whether in an
officiating or temporary capacity, the
benefit of emoluments drawn in such higher
appointment shall be given only if it is
certified that the railway servant would
continued to hold the higher appointment but
for his proceedings on leave.”
“Note 6: Pay drawn by a railway servant
on foreign service shall not be treated as
emoluments, but the pay which he would
have drawn under the railways, had he not
been on foreign service shall alone be treated
as emoluments.
Note 8: Where a railway servant has been
transferred to an autonomous body
consequent
on
the
conversion
of
Department of railways into such a body
and the railway servant so transferred
opts to retain the pensionary benefits
under the rules of the railways, the
emoluments
drawn
under
the
autonomous body shall be treated as
emoluments for the purpose of this
rule.”(emphasis added).
11.On a co-joint reading

of para 1303 of the Railway

Establishment Code(for short, the `Code’) and Rule 49 of the
Railway Services (Pension) Rules, 1993, (for short ‘Pension
Rules’), it is clear that what is relevant is the amount of pay
actually drawn by a Government Railway servant. The opening
WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 8 of 16

words of Pension Rule 1303 clearly sates that “pay means the
amount drawn monthly by a Government servant.”That
amount

can,

obviously,be

only

be

one

figure.Various

alternatives are provided for in the Pension Rules and the Code
for the determination of the “pay” that has to be taken into
account for arriving at the last drawn pay of a railway servant,
which in turn is the basis for fixation of his pensionary and other
terminal dues. These alternatives are provided to cover various
situations

that may arise,

in which the

superannuate or seek voluntary retirement.

employee

may

Therefore, “pay”

could mean, inter alia, (i) Pay which has been sanctioned for the
post held by the railway servant substantively; (2) Pay which
has been sanctioned for the post held by the railway servant in
an officiating capacity: (3) Pay to which the railway servant is
entitled by reason of his position in cadre. The pay that is to
be taken into consideration for fixation of the pensionary and
other settlement dues means the basic pay as defined in clause
(i) of Rule 1303 of the Code, which the railway servant “was
receiving immediately before his retirement or on the
date of his death”(see Rule 49 of the Pension Rules).

It is

clear, inter alia, from the definition of Average Pay in the Code
and notes 2, 6 & 8 to Rule 49 of the Pension Rules, that merely
because the pay which has been sanctioned for the post held by

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 9 of 16

the railway servant substantively is lower than the pay which he
has in fact been drawing

while serving in an officiating

capacity, for purposes of fixation of his pensionary and other
dues, it is not the lower of the two amounts which would be
taken into account. The spirit behind the aforesaid rules is
clearly to fix the pensionary and other settlement dues of the
railway servant on the basis of the actual pay drawn by him.
The only exception to this general rule appears to be where the
railway servant is sent on “foreign service”. In that case, the
emoluments drawn by him while on “foreign service”, shall not
be treated as emoluments for the purpose of fixation of his
pensionary and other dues (See the 1st Proviso to the Definition
of “Average Pay” in the Code and Note 6 to Rule 49) of the
Pension Rules. Therefore, the issue that needs determination is
whether the service rendered by the petitioner on deputation
with CRIS could be said to be “foreign service” for the purpose
of the aforesaid Code and the Pension Rules. If it amounts to a
“foreign service”, the stand of the respondent would stand
vindicated.

However, in case the service rendered on

deputation with CRIS is not considered to be a “foreign service”,
the petitioner would be entitled to the calculation of his
pensionary and other settlement dues on the basis of the last
pay drawn while serving with CRIS on deputation at Rs.2450/-

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 10 of 16

per month.
12.From Note 8 to Rule 49 of the Pension Rules, it appears that
a railway servant

when transferred/deputed to a body which

has been created as a consequence of the conversion of a
department of railways, the emoluments drawn by the railway
servant under the autonomous body are treated as emoluments
for the purpose of Rule 49. This clearly shows that the “foreign
service” talked about in Note 6 of Rule 49 does not envisage
the transfer or deputation to an autonomous body which is
formed by the conversion of a department of the railways.
“Foreign Service”, it appears would mean a service outside the
railways or any of its extended arms. CRIS, undoubtedly is an
organisation created from within the railways.

In fact, the

correspondence placed on record and referred to hereinabove
shows that the mother organization of CRIS is none other than
the Ministry of Railways. The letter head used by CRIS also
described it as “An organisation of the Ministry of Railways,
Government of India”.

From the first priviso to the definition of

“Average Pay” also, it appears that “foreign service” is
considered to be the service rendered out of India. Looked at
from either point of view, the service rendered by the petitioner
with CRIS on deputation cannot be said to be “foreign service”.

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 11 of 16

13.We may also refer to the communication dated 3.1.1985
issued by the Chief Project Manager/OIS, addressed to the
Senior Electronic Data Processing Manager of the Indian
Railways inviting experienced staff for repairing the computers
as well as for maintaining the software to achieve the project of
computerization of passenger seats/berth reservations in Delhi
area. The communication stated that Console Operators, Senior
Console

Operators,

Assistant

Programmers

and

Assistant

Operation Managers would be accommodated. Reference may
also be made to the communication dated 19.6.1985 issued by
Chief Project Manage(OIS) to the Area Superintendent, Delhi,
Northern Railways requesting the later that the petitioner and
one, Uday Shankar Ghosh may be asked to work in the office of
the

Chief

Project

Manager(OIS)

to

give

experience

and

knowledge of working on the application software of the
reservation project. The Chief Project Manager(OIS) requested
the transfer of the petitioner on administrative grounds from
Delhi

Main

to

New

Delhi

Reservation

Office.

This

communication further stated that “in due course of time we
will be able to find some suitable posts for these persons to
absorb them in this organization”.
14.

From the aforesaid, it is seen that CRIS started of as a

project of the Railways for computerization of passenger

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 12 of 16

seats/berth reservations and eventually the same was carved
out as an autonomous organization of the Railways.

The

transfer of the petitioner to the office of the Chief Project
Manager(OIS) was also on administrative grounds.
15.In our view, therefore, the service rendered by the petitioner with
CRIS on deputation cannot be considered to be foreign service for the
purpose of the pension rules.
16.We are also not impressed by the argument that merely because
the petitioner continued to hold a lien in his parent cadre, it
disentitled him from seeking the computation of his pensionary and
other settlement dues on the basis of the last pay actually drawn by
him while on deputation with CRIS, immediately prior to his voluntary
retirement from the Railways and absorption with CRIS. As aforesaid,
there is no basis to support this submission in the Code or the Pension
Rules, which, in fact emphasis the relevance of the last drawn pay,
irrespective of it being on a substantive post or on an ad hoc post.
17.We also find force in the submission of the petitioner that the
stand of the respondents in this case is contrary to the decision taken
by the respondent itself in the case of Sh. R. L. Arora. It appears that
Sh. R.L.Arora, officiated in the construction wing of the MTP where he
was drawing a higher pay than the pay to which he was entitled in his
substantive post.

The Railway Board vide communication dated

1.8.1986 and 18.9.1986 consistently took the view that there is no

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 13 of 16

indication available in the Rules to debar the reckoning of the pay
drawn by the employee against a work charged post before
retirement for pensionary benefits. The Board also took the view that
the pay drawn in an officiating capacity, even on ad hoc basis has to
be taken into account for counting retirement benefits. The Board, in
its letter dated 18.9.1986, reiterated its decision regarding counting
of the last pay drawn by Shri Arora in the construction wing of the
MTP, as conveyed in its letter dated 1.8.1986. Similar is the case of
the petitioner. He cannot be treated discriminately.
18.The distinction sought to be drawn by the Tribunal between the
petitioner’s case and that of Ajmer Singh, decided by the Tribunal in
OA No.1868/95 on 14.11.1996 also appears to be misplaced.

In

Ajmer Singh(supra), the Tribunal observed as follows:“The respondents have not been able to show any provision
which lays down that the pension will be determined with
the reference to pay in substantive post and not the actual
pay drawn by the retiring official.
The pension is
determined on the basis of “emoluments” which means
basic pay which a government servant was receiving
immediately before his retirement or on the date of his
death. Admittedly, the applicant was receiving the pay of
Rs.2525/- as Superintendent at the time of his retirement.
Rule 2000(21) R-II also defines the pay as the amount which
the employee draws monthly in substantive or officiating
capacity. It is an admitted fact that the applicant was
working as a Superintendent and his pay was therefore
fixed at Rs.2525/-. Therefore, it was this pay which had to
be taken into account for fixing his pension and other
terminal benefits.”
19.The reasoning adopted by the Tribunal squarely applies in the
facts of the present case, as disclosed hereinabove. Merely because
WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 14 of 16

the petitioner sought voluntary retirement from the Railways and
immediately got absorbed with CRIS where he was earlier serving on
deputation, does not create any meaningful distinction between the
case of the petitioner and that decided by the Tribunal in Ajmer
Singh(supra).
20.For the reasons aforesaid, we are of the view that the decision of
the Tribunal is laconic and liable to be set aside and the petitioner is
entitled to the relief as prayed for by him in the Original Application.
Accordingly, we set aside and quash the decision of the Tribunal in OA
No.2109/97

dated

24.12.1998

and

direct

the

respondent

recalculate the retirement and other settlement dues

to

of the

petitioner on the basis of his basic salary of Rs.2,450/- in the scale of
Rs.2000-3200 on the date of his voluntary retirement i.e.30.11.1993.
The computation of the arrears of pension and other settlement dues
to which the petitioner is entitled be made within three months and
the arrears be paid to him within one month thereafter. In case, the
arrears are not calculated and paid as aforesaid the petitioner shall
be entitled to interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of
filing of the Original Application before the Tribunal till realization.
The respondents are further directed to start paying the petitioner his
pension dues in future on the basis of his last drawn basic pay of
Rs.2,450/- and to pay to him his pension and other dues calculated on

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 15 of 16

that basis henceforth.

The petitioner shall be entitled to costs

quantified at Rs.10,000/-.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

A.K.SIKRI, J
December 14, 2007
RSK/as

WP(C) No.2057/1999

Page 16 of 16

