*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

I.A.4680/01, 638/01, 4586/02
in
C.S. (OS) No. 140/2001

%

Judgment reserved on: May 2, 2007.
Judgment delivered on: January 14, 2008
Sanjay Gupta
Through:

.....Plaintiff
Mr. Manish Vashisht, Advocate

versus
M/s Cottage Industries Exposition Ltd.
.....Defendant
Through: Mr. Rajiv Sawhney, Senior
Advocate with Ms. Malvika
Rajkotia, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

1.

By this order I propose to dispose of I.A. No.4680/2001

along with IA Nos.638/2002 and 4586/2002 all filed by plaintiff under
Order 39 Rule 10 CPC.
2.

The plaintiff filed the present suit for ejectment of the

defendant who was a tenant of the plaintiff in an immovable property
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 1 of 31

apart from making a claim for damages and mesne profits for the
continued use and occupation of the premises by the defendant after
the termination of the lease of the defendant.
3.

The admitted position is that the plaintiff was the

landlord of the defendant in respect of property bearing No.14, Anand
Lok, New Delhi. The parties entered into a registered lease deed
dated 18th December 1998 whereby the said property was let out on a
monthly rent of Rs.3,50,000/- for a period of 3 years commencing
from 5th November 1998 and ending on 31st October 2001. However,
the rent was to be paid with effect from 15th November 1998. The
parties also entered into a maintenance agreement on 5th November
1998.

The maintenance charges were fixed at Rs.1,36,000/- per

month, which were to be paid for the period commencing from 1 st
November 1998 upto 31st October 2001. The lease agreement and
the maintenance agreement were to run concurrently and the
maintenance agreement was to

automatically stand terminated,

once the lease agreement between the parties was terminated and
vacant possession of the premises delivered back to the Plaintiff. At
the same time, the defendant did not have the right to terminate the
maintenance agreement till the defendant delivered the actual
physical possession of the tenanted premises to the Plaintiff. As per
the lease deed the property consisted of 8 residential flats, each
comprising of 3 bed rooms with attached bath rooms, drawing room,

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 2 of 31

dining room, kitchen and one family lounge, together with

drive

ways, front lawn, backyard etc.
4.

According to the Plaintiff the defendant, in breach of the

aforesaid lease, started to use the same for non-residential/office
purpose. This lead to the issuance of a notice dated 6 th September,
1999 by

the

Delhi Development Authority (DDA), which is the

paramount lessor of the plot underneath the property in question,
requiring the plaintiff to stop misuse and to show cause as to why the
perpetual lease of the property be not determined.

Upon receipt of

the said notice, the plaintiff requested the defendant to stop the nonresidential user.
5.

The Plaintiff avers that the defendant assured the

plaintiff that there is no misuse, as a part of the premises was being
used for residential purposes and a part of it was being used for office
purposes. The plaintiff avers that in any case, the defendant assured
the Plaintiff that in case the DDA objected to mixed use of the
premises, such misuse would be stopped. However, allegedly this
assurance was not fulfilled. The DDA issued a final show cause notice
on 17th December 1999 to the plaintiff stating that the explanation
furnished by the plaintiff was not satisfactory and granted 15 days
time to the plaintiff to stop the misuser of the premises and further
stated that if the misuse is not stopped, it would be presumed that
the plaintiff has failed to comply with the terms of the perpetual subCS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 3 of 31

lease and that his lease would consequently stand determined.
Resultantly, the plaintiff served notice by registered AD post on 29 th
March, 2000 upon the defendant, calling upon the defendant to stop
the misuse and to remove the additions and alterations and restore
the demised premises in the same condition in which the same was
let out to the defendant within a period of 15 days of the receipt of
the notice, failing which tenancy of the premises was to

stand

terminated with the expiry of the tenancy month.
6.

Since the notice was not complied with, the plaintiff

sent another registered notice dated 11th April 2000 requiring the
defendant to vacate the premises upon the expiry of the tenancy
month, i.e. 30th April 2000. The plaintiff also lodged a claim of
damages @ Rs.80,000/- per day till the actual and physical possession
of the premises was handed over and further stated that the plaintiff
would be entitled to deduct the damages from the interest free
security deposit of Rs.15 lakhs, created by the defendant with the
plaintiff. The defendant sent a reply dated 24 th April, 2000 taking the
stand that the premises was let out for office purposes and not for
residential purpose and that the defendant was not liable to stop the
said user.
7.

Another notice dated 10th June 2000 was sent by the

Plaintiff to the defendant requiring the defendant to vacate the
premises on or before 30th June, 2000 failing which it was stated that
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 4 of 31

action

would

be

taken

for

ejectment

and

for

recovery

of

damages/mesne profits for unauthorized use and occupation of the
premises. The defendant, however, did not vacate the suit property.
8.

The DDA threatened to re-enter the lease of the plot if

the misuser of the premises was not stopped. The Defendant filed a
writ petition in this Court being CWP No.6550/2000 to stay sealing of
the tenanted premises by the DDA. The Court stayed the sealing on
1.11.2000.

The defendant also stopped payment of the

maintenance charges of Rs.1,36,000/- since November, 2000. Since
the defendant did not stop the user of the premises as an office, and
did not vacate the premises, the present suit was filed by the Plaintiff
for the relief of ejectment, injunction, recovery of mesne profits and
damages and mandatory injunction. Along with the suit, the Plaintiff
filed the aforesaid application being IA No.4680/2001 under Order
XXXIX Rule 10 CPC wherein

the plaintiff sought directions to the

defendants to:
(i) pay arrears of maintenance charges of
Rs.8,16,000/(ii) make continuous payment of Rs.3.5 lakhs
as part payment towards damages and
Rs.1,36,000/- per month as maintenance
charges per month,
subject to final
determination of damages/mesne profits till
the defendant vacates the demised premises.
9.

IA No.638/2002 dated 11.1.2002 was filed, inter alia,

claiming damages @ Rs.80,000/- per day from 1.12.2000 onwards till
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 5 of 31

date, or in the alternative @ Rs.5,58,750/- per month, along with
maintenance charges @ Rs.1,70,000/- per month w.e.f. 1.11.2001
besides arrears of maintenance charges as claimed in the earlier
application. The Plaintiff also filed I.A. No. 4586/2002 dated 9.5.2002
primarily reiterating the reliefs sought in the aforesaid IAs.
10.

The admitted position is that during the pendency of

the suit, the defendants tendered two cheques for the sum of
Rs.2,94,875/- each, to the plaintiff claiming the same towards rent for
the month of April and May 2002. The plaintiff accepted these
cheques without prejudice to his rights and contentions and towards
part payment of mesne profits. After May 2002, admittedly, no further
amounts have been paid by the defendants to the plaintiff. The
defendant vacated the suit premises on 5th April 2003. Consequently,
the claim in these application is for a direction to the defendants to
pay maintenance charges from 1st November 2000 to 31st March 2003
and for payment of partial damages for use and occupation of the
suit property with effect from 1st June 2002 to 31st March 2003.
11.

At the outset, Counsel for the plaintiff states that the

prayer in the present applications is being limited to the extent of
payment of maintenance charges as also the damages for use and
occupation, at the same rate at which the last rent/ maintenance
charges have been paid by the defendants i.e. @ Rs.3,50,000/- as
monthly rent and Rs.1,36,000/- per month as maintenance charges. It
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 6 of 31

is stated that the claim for damages is, in fact, much larger, inasmuch
as,

the

agreement

itself

provided

for

liquidated

damages

of

Rs.80,000/- per day and for revision of the maintenance charges as
well. However, for the present and for the purpose of these
applications, the plaintiff is not entering into the said controversy and
would be satisfied if at this stage damages and occupation charges
are paid at the same rate at which rent and maintenance charges
were earlier being paid.

It is argued that the maintenance charge

was nothing but a part of the rent and it cannot be delinked from the
rent.
12.

In its defence, the defendant’s primary contention is

that the purpose of the lease was for commercial and office purpose.
The plaintiff sought to obstruct and prohibit the defendant from using
the premises for the purpose for which it was let. Consequently, the
plaintiff is not entitled to claim any amount from the defendant as the
defendant was entitled to invoke the doctrine of suspension of rent.
The Defendant also claims that the Plaintiff made oral assurances that
he would get the user of the premises changed from residential into
commercial, and this was the basis of entering into the lease deed
dated 18th December, 1998. The Defendant states that the use of the
premises for commercial purpose has been known to the Plaintiff
since the commencement of the lease. Furthermore, it is alleged that
the

Plaintiff

executed

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

14

affidavits

relating

to

14

electricity

Page 7 of 31

connection installed at the premises for seeking permission of Delhi
Vidyut Board to permit the change in the user of the said electrical
connections from residential to commercial, which establishes that
the plaintiff was aware of, and had consented to, and was obliged to
get the user changed from residential to commercial.
13.

It is also contended by the Defendant that no

maintenance charge are liable to be paid under the maintenance
agreement as no maintenance services were provided by the Plaintiff.
It is also argued that the relief claimed in the application do not fall
within the parameter of Order XXXIX Rule 10 CPC, since that provision
can be invoked only when there is an admission of liability. The suit
has been filed to claim damages. Damages are not a debt. They
have to be ascertained.

Only thereafter they may assume the

character of a debt. That determination has not yet taken place and
would take place only upon a trial of the suit. It is also contended that
the grant of the reliefs prayed for would tantamount to decreeing the
suit of the plaintiff partially, which cannot be done in view of the fact
that there are no admissions made by the defendant.

In fact the

defendant had not only denied the claim of the plaintiff but has
instituted its own suit being CS(OS) No.2840/2000, wherein the
defendant has claimed the relief of recovery of over Rs.1.05 crores
which includes, apart from damages, the refund of maintenance
charges that have wrongfully been realised by the plaintiff. Another

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 8 of 31

contention of the defendant is that the relief prayed for in the
application is beyond the scope of the suit, since what has been
claimed in the suit are damages, but now the plaintiff is seeking the
payment of rent. It is argued that the claim for damages in the suit
is only for Rs.24,52,000/- whereas the claim in these applications is
much higher.
14.

The plaintiff has, in his rejoinder met the contentions

raised by the defendant.

The further submission of the Plaintiff in

rebuttal is that even though the lease deed does not expressly state
the purpose for which the premises had been let out, certain recitals
in the lease deed sufficiently describe the nature of the property as
residential. Moreover, since the property is situated in a residential
area it cannot be said that the lease was for a commercial purpose.
The terms of the lease deed clearly state that the Lessee shall abide
with the local laws in force, and the permitted user of the said
premises is residential.
15.

Both parties have referred to and relied upon various

decisions, which shall be dealt with presently by me.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION:
16.

Since the suit is still to go to trial, and I have to

determine the claims made in these applications at an interlocutary
stage, the first question that arises for consideration is whether the
defence that the property was let out to the defendant for commercial
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 9 of 31

purposes can be dealt with at this stage without going through the
motion of a regular trial and merely on the basis of the admitted facts
and document, namely, the registered lease deed executed between
the parties.
17.

Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act debar a party

to a written agreement from raising a construction contradictory to
the terms of the document.
registered

lease

Therefore, if on a reading of the

deed the only interpretation that reasonably

emerges is that the purpose of letting was only residential, the
defence of the defendant that the premises was let for office
purposes and that the defendant was not liable to pay the rent or
maintenance charges since that purpose was obstructed by the
plaintiff would have to fail.

Section 91

in terms states “when the

terms of a contract or of a grant, or of any other disposition of
property, have been reduced to the form of a document, and in all
cases in which any matter is required by law to be reduced to the
form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof of the terms
of such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or of such
matter, except the

document itself, or secondary evidence of its

contents in cases in which secondary evidence is admissible under
the provisions hereinbefore contained”. First part of Section 92 states
“when the terms of any such contract, grant or other disposition of
property, or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 10 of 31

a document, have been proved according to the last section, no
evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted, as
between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives
in interest, for the purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to, or
subtracting from, its terms.”
18.

The defence set up by the defendant is that on a

reading of the registered lease deed itself it is clear that the lease
was for office purposes. For this purpose the defendant

relies upon

the clause 10 of the lease which enlists 13 associates/sister
concerns/lessee who were

also permitted to use the premises,

besides any other new associates or subsidiary or firm in which the
directors of the lessee are interested as directors or shareholders or
partners. It is argued that from the aforesaid it is clear that all these
companies were permitted to have their offices within the suit
property. According to the defendant the purpose of lease is silent
and it is therefore to be inferred. It is further contended that it was
the understanding between the parties at the relevant time when the
lease was entered into that the defendant would be permitted to use
the premises for office/commercial purpose and plaintiff would obtain
the necessary permissions for change the user.
19.

I have difficulty in accepting the aforesaid submissions

of the defendant. A perusal of the lease deed itself shows that the
purpose of letting could not be in anything other than as residential.
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 11 of 31

The second recital itself states that the demised premises consists of
eight

residential

flats

comprising

bedrooms

with

attached

bathrooms, drawing room, dining room, kitchen and family lounge.
Parties were, therefore, conscious of the fact that the property that
was being let was designed as, and equipped with eight residential
flats and not with structure designed to house an office. Admittedly
the premises is situated in a residential colony. Clauses 1 and 8 of
the Lease Deed dated 18.12.1998 reads as follows:
Clause 1: That the Lessor agrees to let out
and the Lessee hereby agrees to take on
lease the aforesaid Demised Premises
consisting of 8 residential flats (each flat
comprises of 3 bed rooms with attached
bath rooms, drawing room, dining room,
kitchen, and one family lounge) together
with the drive ways, front lawn, back yard,
ground floor, garage with attached bath, one
room with attached bath on the first floor,
second floor and third floor above the garage
and ten servant quarters and three bath
rooms built upon the third/rear terrace floor of
the main building and other appurtenances
thereto (hereinafter referred to as the
“DEMISED PREMISES”)
(Emphasis supplied)
Clause 8: That the Lessee shall comply with
the conditions and observe all bye-laws, rules
and regulation issued by the Government and
the local authorities in force from time to
time.
Clause 8 of the lease as reproduced herein above also leaves no
manner of doubt that the purpose of letting

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

was only residential,

Page 12 of 31

since the defendant lessee was obliged to comply with the conditions
and observe all bye-laws, rules and regulations issued by the
Government and local authorities in force from time to time. As per
the terms of lease deed between the plaintiff and the primary lessor
the permitted user, admittedly, was residential only.

This is also

clear from the notice issued to the plaintiff by the DDA,

dated

6.9.1999 and 17.5.1999, the issuance whereof is not in dispute. It is
pertinent

to

note

that

the

defendant

itself

had

filed

WP(C)

No.6550/2000 seeking stay of the action of sealing initiated by the
DDA on account of use of the premises for office purpose wherein the
counsel for the defendant made a statement on its behalf on
1.11.2000 to the effect that “the property shall be used only for the
purpose of residence as per the terms and conditions of the superior
lessor in terms of clauses of lease deed.”
20.

The defence set up by the defendant that the plaintiff

had agreed to get the user of the premises changed to commercial
is in the teeth of Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence Act since the
defendant is seeking

to contradict, vary, add to the

terms of the

registered lease deed. The Bombay High Court in Dinkarrai Lalit
Kumar & Ors. v. Sukhdayal Rambilas & Ors. AIR 1947 Bombay
293 held that the terms of a contract reduced to writing cannot be
ascertained by allowing parole

evidence as to what transpired

antecedent to the contract or what the parties did subsequent to the

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 13 of 31

contract. Once the contract between the parties is reduced to writing,
the court can only look at the writing alone in order to construe what
the terms of the contract were.
21.

In M/s. Mehra and Mehra a Partnership Concern

v. Dr. (Mrs.) Sant Kaur Grewal 1982 (1) Rent Law Reported 460,
this court was confronted with a

similar issue.

The Court

dealing with it held as follows:
“5. Before me also the first contention which
has been raised is that the premises were let
for residential-cum-commercial purposes and
that the leave to contest should have been
granted. Admittedly the premises were let by
lease deed dated 7th March, 1974. What was
let by the said lease deed was a house
situated in a residential colony. The landlady
has placed on record the deed of conveyance
whereby the land was sold to her by the
colonizer. In the said document it is clearly
stipulated that the land is situated in a
residential colony. In the lease deed it has
been specifically stated that the premises will
be used only for residential purpose. The
lease deed, however, has to be read as whole.
Reading the lease as a whole there can be no
manner of doubt that the premises were let
for residential purpose alone. Three of the
clauses of the lease deed which are relevant
are clauses 8, 10 and 11 which are extracted
below:Clause 8:- That the lessee shall use the
premises for his own use.
Clause 10:- That the lessee shall comply with
all the rules and regulations of the local
authorities whatsoever with relation to the
demised premises.

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 14 of 31

while

Clause 11:- That the lessee shall not carry on
any constructional additions or alterations to
the
building, layout fittings without the
written consent of the lessor, but have the
right to install the domestic appliances
wherever and whenever necessary at their
own cost and also have the right to remove
the
same at the before the time of
termination of the lease.”
6. Admittedly one of the partners of the firm
is residing in the premises. The contention,
however, is that portions of the premises are
being used for expert purposes. Clause (10)
referred to above clearly postulate that the
lessee will comply with all the rules and
regulations of the local authorities. It is well
known that in residential colonies commercial
establishments cannot be opened. The fact
that some of the residential houses are being
used for commercial purposes cannot detract
from the full meaning and import of the
aforesaid clause (10).
The purpose of
insertion of clause 10 was that the tenant was
required to comply with all the rules and
regulations of the local authorities which
obviously included that the premises will not
be
used
for
commercial
purposes.
Furthermore the use or the words 'domestic
appliance' in clause (11) also clearly indicates
that the premises were let only for domestic
purposes.
If the premises were let for
residential-cum-commercial purposes then
the word `domestic' would not have been
inserted in clause (11). Furthermore, I am in
agreement with the reasoning of the trial
court that the very nature of the premises
namely a residential house would indicate
that the same was let for residential purpose
though in clause (8) it was specifically
provided that the tenant will use the premise
for his own use. The purpose of letting is
thus clearly spelt out from the lease deed
itself and, therefore, there was no merit in
this ground which was raised by the tenant.”

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 15 of 31

22.

In

S. Saktivel (dead) by LRs vs. M. Venugopal

Pillai & Ors. (2000) 7 SCC 104 the Supreme Court held that where
under the law a contract or disposition is required by law to be in
writing, its terms cannot be modified, altered or substituted by an
oral contract, or disposition. Under Section 92(4) of the Evidence Act
no parol evidence is admissible to substantiate such oral contract or
disposition.

Where a document for its validity

or effectiveness is

required by law to be given in writing, no modification or alteration or
substitution

of such written document is permissible by parol

evidence and it is only by another written document that the terms of
the earlier document can be altered, rescinded or substituted. The
Supreme Court also held that parol evidence cannot be permitted to
substantiate

the subsequent oral agreement where the original

agreement is contained in a registered document. This is not
permitted by Section 92(4) of the Evidence Act.

The terms of a

registered document can be altered, rescinded or varied only by
subsequent registered document and not otherwise.

If the

oral

arrangement is allowed to be substantiated by parol evidence it
would

mean re-writing

of the registered document which is not

permissible.
23.

The Defendants contention

that the landlord was

aware of the change of user of the premises and consented to it and
that he gave oral assurances to the Plaintiff for the conversion of the

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 16 of 31

user and filed a number of affidavits relating to the electricity
connections installed at the premises for seeking permission of DVB
to permit the change in the user of the said electrical connections
from residential to commercial also cannot be accepted. Assuming for
the sake of argument that the affidavits were in fact given by the
plaintiff to permit change of user of the electrical connections from
residential to commercial, that by itself in the first place cannot be set
up as a defence in the light of Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence
Act, and even if it were to be accepted that the defendant can be
permitted to raise this defence, the said affidavits cannot alter the
purpose of letting which is clearly discernable from the registered
lease deed.
24.

The reliance placed by the plaintiff on Section 1 of the

Evidence Act, to contend that affidavits cannot be taken in evidence
under any provision of the Evidence Act,

and copies of such

documents cannot be taken in as evidence, however, appear to be
misplaced. He has relied on Parkash Rai vs. J.N. Dhar AIR 1977
Delhi 73 in support of this submission. I am not impressed by this
argument of the plaintiff, since reliance placed by the defendant on
the copies of the affidavits is not for the purpose of proving the
contents of the affidavits, but to rely on the conduct of the plaintiff in
furnishing such affidavits.

In fact, reading of Section 1 of the

Evidence Act shows that affidavits which are presented to any court

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 17 of 31

or officer are not subject to the rigors of the Evidence Act for them to
be proved. However, this has no bearing on the outcome of the case,
in view of the effect of Sections 91 & 92 of the Evidence Act.
25.

Reliance placed by the defendant on Clause 10 of the

lease deed to contend that under the said clause not

only the

defendant company but 13 other associates/sister concerns of the
defendant were permitted to use the suit property, which also shows
that the purpose of letting is for office/commercial purpose is also
misplaced.

Merely because the sister/associate concerns were

entitled to use the premises along with the defendant it does not
lead to the inference that the user permitted by the defendant or
those concerns was office/commercial. It makes no difference to my
mind, whether the defendant alone (which is also a corporate entity)
or the defendant along with its sister concerns/associates were
permitted

to use the demised premises, to the question of the

permitted user under the lease deed dated 18.12.1998. A corporate
entity could also use a residential house for the residence of its
officers & guests. I, therefore, reject this argument of the defendant.
Moreover, this is not a question that the defendant can put to the
plaintiff. So long as the purpose of letting is expressly stated in the
lease deed, or the same is expressly stated in the lease deed, or the
same is clearly discernable from the said deed, it is not the concern of
the landlord, and it is not for him to explain why the tenant has taken

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 18 of 31

the premises on lease for that purpose of how it proposes to use it for
the stated purpose.
26.

My attention has also been drawn to the averments

made by the defendants in SLP(C) No.3238/2006 filed by the
defendant wherein the defendant has repeatedly stated in respect of
the lease deed in question that as per the said lease deed the suit
property shall be used for residential purpose only. The defendant at
one place states “Though the suit premises was taken specifically for
commercial purpose, since the father of the landlord was a senior
advocate regularly participating in the Delhi High Court, it was
represented to the petitioner that in order to protect the
interest of the lessor, in the lease deed it will be mentioned
that suit premises shall be used for residential purposes
alone.

Since the petitioner was not well versed with the

technicalities of law, he agreed to the proposal.”

It is further

stated “The understanding between the parties herein was
that notwithstanding residential use of the premises having
been mentioned in the lease deed due to technical reasons, the
premises would be used for commercial purposes.” This also leaves
no manner of doubt

that even according to the defendant, the

purpose of letting as per the lease was only residential. The defence
set up by the defendant does not fall within any of the provisos to
Section 92 of the Evidence Act, and I do not accept the contention of

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 19 of 31

the defendant that the lease deed is silent about the purpose of
letting. The purpose of letting as office or commercial as contended
by the defendant is clearly inconsistent with the terms of lease deed.
I therefore hold that the suit property was let out only for residential
purpose and the mere use of the same by the defendant for any other
purpose does not impinge on the rights of the Plaintiff, or vest any
rights in the defendant beyond those vested by the registered lease
deed dated 18.12.1998.
27.

The Defendant next contends that following the

sealing of the terrace on 02.11.2000 he could not enjoy the demised
premises

in

rent/damages.

its

entirety

and

therefore

is

not

liable

to

He invokes the doctrine of suspension of rent.

pay
In

support of his argument the Defendant has placed reliance on the
case of Surendra Nath Bibra v. Stephen Court (AIR 1966
Supreme Court 1361 at para 7), wherein the Supreme Court held that
on the one hand it does not seem equitable that when a tenant enjoys
a substantial portion of the property of the landlord, leased to him,
without much inconvenience, he should not pay any compensation for
the use of the property; in other words, to borrow the language of Sir
George Rankin, that he should enjoy a windfall. On the other hand it is
unfair that if a tenant is not given possession of a substantial portion
of the property, he should be asked to pay any compensation for the
use of the property while he is taking appropriate measures for

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 20 of 31

specific

performance

of

the

contract.

It

will

depend

on

the

circumstances of each case whether a tenant would be entitled to
suspend payment of the rent or whether he should be liable to pay
proportionate part of the rent.
28.

In my view, this judgment does not advance the case

of the Defendant, since the facts of this case do not show that the
defendant was deprived of the use of any portion of the tenanted
premises, much less a substantial portion thereof for any length of
time or for any act/conduct of the Plaintiff.
29.

The contention of the defendant that part of the

premises had been sealed is in fact contrary to the record. This is so
evident from the order passed by this Court in the aforesaid suit on
29.5.2002 wherein the statement of the defendant was recorded that
the property had not been sealed till passing of the said order and
stay against the sealing of the property had been obtained from the
court on 2.11.2000 in WP(C) No.6550/2000 filed by the defendant. It
was the defendant's own statement that the property was not sealed.
To now contend otherwise is of no avail. In any event, in view of my
finding that the purpose of letting agreed to between the parties was
only residential, even if any portion of the suit property were to be
sealed by the DDA on account of its being put to use as an office/for
commercial purpose, that would not entitle the defendant to suspend
the payment of rent/damages since the sealing would have been a
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 21 of 31

result of the defendants own misuser of the property for which the
defendant could not penalise the plaintiff or take advantage of.
Consequently, I reject the defence of the defendant that the
defendant was entitled to suspend the payment of rent/damages
either on account of the stoppage of the user of property as a
commercial/office premises or on account of the so called sealing of
portion thereof by the DDA.
30.

I now proceed to consider whether in the facts of the

present case at this stage even without a trial, the claim towards
maintenance @ Rs.1,36,000/- per month made by the plaintiff can be
entertained.

Ld. counsel for plaintiff referred to the terms of the

maintenance agreement dated 05.11.1998, particularly to clauses 3 &
5 thereof, which read as follows: “3. That it is expressly agreed between the
parties hereto that this Maintenance
Agreement shall not be open to the
parties to terminate before the expiry of
the Lease Deed deed 5th November,
1998. This Maintenance Agreement and
Lease Agreement shall run concurrently
and this Maintenance Agreement shall
automatically stand terminated once the
lease agreement entered into the parties
is terminated and the vacant possession
of the Demised Premises is delivered
back to the First Party. The Second Party
shall not have any right to terminate its
Maintenance Agreement till the Second
Party delivers the actual physical
possession of the aforesaid Demised
Premises to the First Party.
5. This Agreement shall run concurrently
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 22 of 31

and terminate simultaneously with the
lease agreement dated 5th November,
1998 of the premises bearing No.14,
Anand Lok, New Delhi-110049.”
31.

On the basis of the aforesaid clauses it is argued that

both the lease deed and the maintenance agreements were to run
concurrently

and

the

maintenance

agreement

could

not

be

terminated till so long as the defendant continued to remain in the
actual physical possession of the suit premises. Learned counsel for
the plaintiff also challenged the stand of the defendant that the
plaintiff had not been rendering the services expected of the plaintiff
under the maintenance agreement and referred to the reply dated
04.04.2000, sent by the defendant to the plaintiff's notices of
25.03.2000 and 11.04.2000. In the said reply no such allegation was
ever raised by the defendant, as has subsequently been raised by the
defendant to the effect that maintenance services were not being
provided by the plaintiff. It was submitted that this defence raised by
the defendant is an afterthought. In the said reply the defendant had,
inter alia, stated “You were also able to fetch the following gain from
the said premises:
S.No.
Document
01.
Lease Deed
02.
Lease Deed
03.
Maintenance
Agreement”
32.

On account
Rent/Charges (Rs.)
Rent
03,50,000/- p.m.
Interest free Security 15,00,000/Service Charges
1,36,000/-

It is argued that both parties understood that even the

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 23 of 31

maintenance charges were in fact being charged for the use and
occupation of the demised premises by the defendant and not on
account of any maintenance services.

He also argued that the

defendant became wise only subsequently, when it started making
false assertions to the effect that the plaintiff had not provided any
maintenance services under the maintenance agreement and on that
account the plaintiff was not entitled to payment thereof. He submits
that defendant raised the said issue for the first time only on
30.11.2000.

Learned counsel for plaintiff argued that in case

maintenance services were not in fact being rendered there would
have been no occasion for the defendant to have paid the said
charges continuously on its own till October, 2000.
33.

The Plaintiff has relied on a judgment of this Court in

Surjit Singh v. H.N. Pahilaj 65 (1997 Delhi Law Times 22 wherein
at para 16 the Court held:
“The premises let out includes fittings and
fixtures therein. Fittings and fixtures form part
of the premises let out and are not meant to
be used separately and the rent of the
premises and that for the fittings and fixtures
will be the rent for use and occupation of the
premises as part of the letting.”
34.

It

is

contended

that

in

the

case

of

Sewa

International Fashions v. Suman Kathpalia and Others (AIR
2000 Delhi 69), the lease deed contained a recital that the rate of
rent stipulated was inclusive of all taxes, rates and charges but
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 24 of 31

exclusive

of

maintenance

charges,

yet

the

court

held

that

maintenance charges formed part of the rent. The court relied on the
decision of the Supreme Court in Karnani Properties Ltd. v. Miss
Augustine & Ors. AIR 1957 SC 309 and held at para 8:
“It is an established proposition of law that
rent includes not only what is originally
described as rent in agreement between a
landlord and tenant but also those payment
which is made for the amenities provided by
the landlord under the agreement between
him and the tenant. The payment made
towards the maintenance charges of the
premises rented out and also for providing
amenities to the tenant would also come
within the expression ‘rent’ as rent includes
all payments agreed to be paid by the tenant
to his landlord for the use and occupation not
only of the building but also of furnishing,
electric installations and other amenities.”
35.

On the other hand learned counsel for defendant

argued that merely because the defendant had made payment of
amounts towards maintenance charges in the past, it cannot be
assumed that maintenance services were in fact rendered either in
the past or, in any event, they were continued to be provided after
October, 2000.

He argued that the defendant upon realising its

mistake had already filed a suit for recovery of, inter alia, the
payments made by the defendant towards maintenance charges
which were in fact not due and payable.
36.

In my view the issue is not whether the component of

maintenance charges can be clubbed with the rent for the premises
CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 25 of 31

for certain purposes or not. They may be so considered as a part of
the rent for certain purposes.

However, maintenance charges are

payable under a separate agreement, which required the plaintiff to
render

certain

services

mentioned

therein.

A

perusal

of

the

maintenance agreement would show that the plaintiff had undertaken
to provide the following maintenance services to the defendant.
“a) Maintenance of fixtures and fittings in the demised
premises.
b) Maintenance of potted plants.
c) Employment of security guards/chowkidars.
d) Providing plants and flowers at the cost of the Second
Party and ensure the maintenance of the same by employing
the services of the Horticulturists and gardeners.
e) External colour-wash of the entire house and removal of
seepage by proper treatment/cure.
f) Setting up and repairing electrically operated booster
pump and maintenance of underground and overhead water
tanks. “

It cannot be said that the maintenance charges were payable for the
use and occupation of the tenanted premises. They were payable for
the aforesaid maintenance services, while the defendant remained in
use and occupation of the demised premises. Whether those services
were in fact rendered by the plaintiff or not would have to be
adjudicated upon after a trial and I cannot conclude one way or

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 26 of 31

another on this issue.

Consequently, at this stage it would not be

correct for me to pass any orders requiring the defendant to pay or
deposit

in

Court

the

claim

towards

maintenance

charges

@

Rs.1,36,000/- per month from November, 1998 onwards till the
vacation of the property in question by the defendant.
37.

Now I come to the defendant's argument that no relief

can be granted under Order 39 Rule 10 CPC since there is no
admission by the defendant that he holds any money as a trustee for
the plaintiff, or that it belongs to the plaintiff.
38.

Order 39 Rule 10 of the CPC reads as follows:
10. Deposit of money etc. in Court. –
Where the subject-matter of a suit is money
or some other thing capable of delivery and
any party thereto admits that he holds such
money or other thing as a trustee for another
party, or that it belongs or is due to another
party, the Court may order the same to be
deposited in Court or delivered to such lastnamed party, with or without security, subject
to further direction of the Court.

39.

In a landlord tenant dispute where their relationship is

admitted, the obligation of the tenant to pay rent for the tenanted
premises during the period

that the tenant is in occupation of the

premises cannot be disputed. Inherent in this admission is embedded
an obligation to pay the rent/occupation charges, because the
admission of the said relationship excludes a claim based on any
other title to the property. The relationship between a landlord and a

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 27 of 31

tenant is one where the tenant agrees to pay the rent/occupation
charges in consideration for the right granted to him by the landlord
to use and occupy the premises. Therefore, he cannot, while being in
use or occupancy of the premises, not pay the rent/occupation
charges therefor. However, the tenant may set up defences to justify
suspension of his obligation to make payment of rent, of the kind
raised in the present case.

Once those defences have been been

considered and rejected by the court, it necessarily follows that the
obligation of the tenant to pay the rent is established and the tenant
holds the money due on account of rent on behalf of landlord.

In

Sangeeta Prints v. Hemal Prints and Others AIR 1986 Bombay
423 the Bombay High Court relied upon its earlier Division Bench
Judgment in the case of Chandrakant Shankarrao Deshmukh V.
Haribhau Tukaramji Kathane 1983 Mah. LJ 88 to hold that in case
of a landlord and a tenant, the tenant cannot dispute his liability to
pay rent to the landlord although the quantum of such rent may be in
dispute. The tenant, in fact, is deemed to admit some money is due to
the plaintiff. In such situation the court can direct the tenant to
deposit such amount as the court may deem fit under Order XXXIX
Rule 10 CPC.
40.

Also, in Surjit Singh V. H.N. Pahilaj 65 (1997) DLT

22 this Court while considering the object of Order 12 Rule 6 CPC,
held that relief under the said provision was also available where

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 28 of 31

liability to pay is not denied but being avoided on untenable pleas.
The power in such cases could also be exercised under Order XXXIX
Rule 10 CPC. The court held that under Section 151 every court is
constituted for the purpose of doing justice according to law and must
be deemed to possess, as a necessary corollary and as inherent in its
very constitution, all such powers as may be necessary to do the right
and to undo a wrong in the course of the administration of justice. In
appropriate cases the Court can exercise powers under Section 151
CPC where Order 12 Rule 6 or Order 39 Rule 10 CPC may not be
applicable for the purpose of doing justice or to prevent abuse of the
process of the court.
41.

There is no dispute and the admitted position is that

there existed a landlord-tenant relationship between the Plaintiff and
the Defendant. Admittedly, rent/damages/occupation charge has not
been paid by the Defendant after May 2002 till the premises were
vacated by the Defendant after March 2003. This liability cannot be
avoided, since it is to be met by the defendant irrespective of
whether the status of the defendant during the period in question was
that of a tenant or of a trespasser holding over after the
determination of the lease. The last paid rent would be the minimum
charges that would be payable either on account of rent or on
account of damages. If it is ultimately found that the tenancy of the
suit premises subsisted throughout till the vacation of the property, it

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 29 of 31

would be adjusted towards rent, and if it is found that the lease was
validly terminated, it would be adjusted towards partial damages.
The defendant is wrong in contending that the plaintiff by way of the
applications under considerations is claiming “rent” while the claim in
the suit is for damages.

The claim even in the applications is for

damages, though, to avoid a controversy at this stage the plaintiff has
limited the prayer for grant of partial damages computed at the rate
at which admittedly the rent was last paid. After a trial, it may be
found that the lease of the defendant stood validly terminated and in
that eventuality the damages could be still higher, but to the extent
of the last paid rent it is the minimum.

Therefore, so far as the

amount of last paid rent is concerned @ Rs.3.50 lakhs per month, the
defendant is liable to pay the same to the plaintiff for the period June
2002 to March 2003. The defendant is hereby directed to pay the
same to the plaintiff within two months of the passing of this order for
the period 1.6.2002 till 31.3.2003 i.e. for a period of ten months,
which translates to Rs.35 lakhs. The plaintiff had taken a security
deposit of Rs.15 lakhs from the defendant under the lease deed.
After adjustment of the same, the defendant would be liable to pay to
the plaintiff at this stage, a sum of Rs.20 lakhs. Since the amount
now being directed to be paid to the plaintiff is not in excess of the
amount for which the suit is valued, no further court fee is payable at
this stage.

Consequently, no issue of payment of court fee would

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 30 of 31

arise for the time being. The question of payment of interest, if any,
on the said amount would be considered at the final stage. So far as
the maintenance charge are concerned, in view of the law discussed
hereinabove, since the said liability is conditional upon the rendering
of the agreed services by the landlord and it cannot be treated as
payment for use and occupation of the tenanted premises and there
is a dispute about the said services having been rendered or not, at
this stage, I am not inclined to pass any order to direct the defendant
to either pay the same to the plaintiff or even to deposit the same in
the court.

The payments directed by me by this order are without

prejudice to the rights and contentions of the plaintiff in relation to its
claim for damages and so far as the claim for arrears of maintenance
charges are concerned. The said claims, and the claim for interest
shall be considered only after the parties have led their evidence in
respect thereof.
42.

With these observations the present applications are

disposed of as partly allowed with costs quantified at Rs.20,000/-.

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
January 14, 2008
P.K. BABBAR

CS(OS) Nos. 140/2001 & 2840/00

Page 31 of 31

