*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

CS(OS) No.912/2002
Judgment reserved on: January 15, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: February 15, 2007
A.Rajagopalan
Through:

.....
Petitioner
Mr. Raman Kapur, Advocate

versus
Canara Bank
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. A.K.Sharma, Advocate

CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

Yes

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this order, I am proceeding to decide the issue with

regard to the maintainability of the present suit in the light of the
provision contained in Section 18 of The Recovery of Debts Due to
Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (The Act). This Court on 19 th

CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 1 of 16

October, 2006 had directed the matter to be listed for hearing on this
issue on 15th January, 2007, and I have heard the parties on the same.
2.

The admitted facts are that M/s. Vidya International were

sanctioned various loans and limits by the defendant bank in the year
1981. Since the said loan along with the outstanding interest was not
repaid, the defendant Bank instituted Civil Suit No. 545/1984 in this
Court for recovery of its dues. In that suit, the plaintiff, herein, was
impleaded as defendant no.2 in the capacity of an authorised signatory
of the firm M/s. Vidya International and also as a guarantor who had
undertaken to personally repay all the dues of the firm, M/s. Vidya
International upto the tune of Rs. 20 Lacs. In relation to the plaintiff,
herein, in the suit filed by the defendant bank, the following averments
were made in paragraph 18 :-

3.

“That the second defendant is also liable for the
sums due to the plaintiff against the packing credit
Bill Discount facility and temporary overdraft facility
in her current account granted to the first defendant
by the plaintiff and amounting to Rs.12,32,333.19 as
aforesaid with uptodate interest, in his capacity as
guarantor of the first defendant.”
A common written statement was filed in the said suit by

both the defendants, that is, M/s Vidya International and Sh. A.
Rajagopalan. In relation to Sh. A. Rajagopalan (defendant no. 2 in the
suit), it was stated in para 5 of the preliminary objections as follows:“That the defendant no.2 is not a guarantor of
defendant no. 1. The blank papers sent by plaintiff
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 2 of 16

4.

for the guarantee to be executed by the defendant
no. 2 are still with the defendant no.1 and the same
were not filled and executed by the defendant no.2.
The alleged guarantee filed by the plaintiff is a false
and fabricated one. The plaintiff is thus liable for
perjury for fabricating false documents in a judicial
proceedings. Even other wise, it does not sound to
reason the that defendant no.2, without any
immovable or movable assets could stand guarantee
for Rs.20 Lakhs and how the plaintiff bank had
accepted his guarantee for such a big sum. Thus the
defendant no.2 not being the guarantor of defendant
no.1 he has been falsely and unnecessarily
impleaded in this case. The suit is thus liable to be
dismissed for mis-joinder of an unnecessary party.
The plaintiff should have made E.C.G.C. as party
instead of falsely implicating of defendant no.2.”
On the pleadings of the parties, this Court framed issues in

the said suit on 30th October, 1986. Issue Nos. 6 & 7 as framed read as
follows:
“6. Whether the defendant no.2 stood guarantee for
defendant no.1 as alleged by the plaintiff?

5.

7. Whether the cash credit agreement and other
documents allegedly executed by the defendant
nos.1 and 2 were signed in blank by them and these
documents were later fabricated by the plaintiff as
alleged by the defendants in their written
statement?”
Upon the enactment of The Act the said suit was

transferred before the Debt Recovery Tribunal, Delhi (The Tribunal)
and registered as OA No. 589/1995. The Original Application came up
before the Tribunal on 10th May, 1999, when the plaintiff herein
appeared on his own behalf as also on behalf of the firm, M/s. Vidya
International. The Tribunal heard the parties and allowed the Original
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 3 of 16

Application. In relation to the defence set up by Sh. A. Rajagopalan
(defendant No.2 in the suit/Original Application), the Tribunal observed
that his defence was that his signatures were obtained on the blank
paper. The Tribunal held that this is not a tenable defence in view of
the judgment of this Court in the matter of Punjab & Sindh Bank Vs.
Ram Prakash, Jagdish Chander (ii) 1992 BC 471, and Another
decision of this Court in Indian Bank Vs. M/s. Cheese Wafers
(India) Private Limited 76 (1998) DLT 892.
6.

The firm M/s. Vidya International and Mr. A. Rajagopalan

(plaintiff herein) preferred an appeal before the Debts Recovery
Appellate Tribunal (The Appellate Tribunal) bearing No. 188/2000. In
this appeal, the Appellate Tribunal vide order dated 17.1.2001 directed
the appellants before it to deposit an amount of Rs. 7 Lacs with the
Bank within four weeks failing which it was directed that the appeal
would not be entertained.

That order was challenged by the

appellants, namely, M/s. Vidya International and Mr. A. Rajagopalan,
firstly, before this Court, and upon not succeeding in getting any relief,
before Hon'ble Supreme Court.

The Supreme Court rejected the

Special Leave Petition filed by M/s. Vidya International and Mr. A.
Rajagopalan on 8.10.2001 by passing the following order :“ We are not inclined to interfere with the order
under challenge. The S.L.P. is dismissed. However,
in the circumstances of the case, a week's time from
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 4 of 16

7.

today is granted to the petitioners to comply with the
order of the appellate authority.”
However, the appellants did not comply with the direction to

deposit Rs. 7 Lacs and the Appellate Tribunal vide order dated
4.1.2002 dismissed the appeal on the ground that the appellants have
not complied with the provisions of Section 21 of The Act.
8.

Thereafter, the plaintiff has filed the present suit seeking a

declaration that he is not bound by the guarantee agreement dated
21.8.1981 and the covering letter of the same day and that these
documents do not relate to the plaintiff in suit No. 545/1984 and O.A.
No. 589/95.
9.

The defendant, Canara Bank had filed their written

statement raising a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the
present suit by relying upon Section 18 of The Act which reads as
follows :“18.
Bar of Jurisdiction. - On and from the
appointed day, no court or other authority shall have,
or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or
authority (except the Supreme Court, and a High
Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution) in relation to the matters
specified in Section 17.”
10.

Section 17 of the said Act states that the Tribunal shall

exercise on and from the appointed day, jurisdiction, power and
authority to entertain and decide applications from the Banks and
Financial Institutions for Recovery of Debts Due to such Banks and
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 5 of 16

Financial Institutions.
11.

Learned

counsel

for

the

plaintiff

contends

that

the

jurisdiction of a Civil Court to entertain a suit like the present is not
barred in a case where the Tribunal while deciding to the Original
Application has not complied with the provisions of the Act and the
Tribunal has not acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of
Judicial Procedure. He submits that the Tribunal has failed to even
consider the defence set up by the plaintiff herein in the proceedings
before it that the agreements and documents executed by him were
signed by him in blank and that they were subsequently fabricated by
the bank. He submits that specific issues were framed as aforesaid on
the basis of the averments made in the written statement.
12.

He places reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in

Dhula Bhai etc. vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and Another AIR
1969 SC 78 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court laid down, inter alia,
following principle regarding exclusion of jurisdiction of a Civil Court.
“Where the statue gives a finality to the orders of
the special tribunals the civil courts' jurisdiction
must be held to be excluded if there is adequate
remedy to do what the civil court would normally
do in a suit. Such provision, however, does not
exclude those cases where the provisions of the
particular Act have not been complied with or the
statutory tribunal has not acted in conformity with
the fundamental principles of judicial procedure.”

CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 6 of 16

13.

On the other hand, the submission of learned counsel for

the defendant is that the Act is a special law, enacted by the
Parliament

for

the

establishment

of

Tribunals

for

expeditious

adjudication and Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial
Institutions. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act, inter
alia, states that Banks and Financial Institutions at present experience,
considerable, difficulties in recovery of loans and enforcement of
securities charged with them. The existing procedure for Recovery of
Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions had locked a significant
portion of their funds in unproductive assets, the value of which
deteriorates with the passage of time.
14.

The Act provides for the establishment of the Tribunal

under Section 3. The Appellate Tribunal is constituted under Section 8
of the same Act.
15.

Learned counsel for the defendant further submits that

Section 18 of the said Act clearly bars jurisdiction of any other Court in
relation to matters specified under Section 17 of the Act. Section 17 of
the Act states that on and from the appointed day the jurisdiction,
powers and authority to entertain and decide applications from the
Banks and Financial Institutions for Recovery of Debts Due to such
Banks and Financial Institutions shall vest and be exercised by the
Tribunal, and that the Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction,
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 7 of 16

powers and authority to entertain appeals against any order may or
deemed to have been made by the Tribunal under the Act.
16.

Defendant submits that the Act provides a complete

machinery for adjudication of the claims of a Bank or Financial
Institutions and there is a complete bar to entertain of any matter in
respect of such matters by a Civil Court.
17.

The issue with regard to the bar of jurisdiction of a Civil

Court under Section 18 of the Act is no longer an open question. The
same has been ruled upon by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Allahabad
Bank v. Canara Bank, AIR 2000 SC 1535.
18.

I may, for the present only refer to the decision of the

Calcutta High Court in State Bank of India vs Madhumita
Construction (Pvt.) Ltd. and Others, AIR 2003 Calcutta 7 wherein
paras 16.5 & 16.6 the Court held as follows:“16.5.......When the legislature incorporates an
overriding effect, it intends that the provisions of
such special statute shall be effective even though it
might be in conflict with any other statute. Virtually,
by reason of Section 34 DRT Act, the curtailment of
jurisdiction provided under Section 9 of CPC and
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent has been taken care
of. The legislature did not stop in enacting Section
17 and 18 DRT Act respectively, creating exclusive
jurisdiction and barring jurisdiction, but had
proceeded to incorporate Section 31 for transferring
all cases pending and Section 34 giving overriding
effect to all these provisions under the DRT Act.
Thus, the intention is clear and unambiguous.
Therefore, it has to be respected and given its due
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 8 of 16

weight tat it deserves. If we read Section 17 and 18
in the light of Section 2(g) along with Section 31 and
34 together, then the position becomes absolutely
clear. The legislature had not only once but had
repeatedly, in a guarded manner, expressed its
intention in clear and unequivocal language
providing a protective umbrella to make its intention
explicit, that such matters are to be adjudicated
upon by the Tribunal and not by Courts and that
such intention of the legislature would be supreme
and that the DRT Act would govern the field in
relation to the subject-matter with which DRT Act
deals and all other law has to yield to it.
16.6 In Allahabad Bank v. Canara Bank, AIR 2000 SC
1535, the Apex Court had held that the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal in regard to adjudication is exclusive,
the Act requires the Tribunal alone to decide
applications for recovery of debts due to banks or
financial institutions. The provisions of Section 17
and 18 of DRT Act are exclusive so far as the
question of adjudication of the liability within the
scope of the Act. It had held that while the liabilities
adjudicated under Section 17, the banks and
financial institutions are not supposed to go to the
Civil Court or the Company Court or some other
authority outside the Act for the same relief, which
could be had under Section 17. It had further held
that the overriding provision provided in section 34
is to the extent of consistent with other laws. But
the prescription of an exclusive Tribunal both for
adjudication and execution is a procedure clearly
inconsistent with realization of the debt in any other
manner. The adjudication of liability is within the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Tribunal. No other Court
or authority much less the Civil Court or the
Company Court can go into the said question
relating to such liability except as provided in DRT
Act.”
It is, therefore, clear that the Tribunal has exclusive
jurisdiction to determine issues relating to the liability owed to a bank
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 9 of 16

or financial institution.
19.

The

issue

that

now

arises

is,

what

is

meant

by

“Fundamental Principles of Judicial Procedure” and whether in
the facts of this case, can it be said that the Tribunal while passing the
order dated 10.5.1999 has not complied with the “Fundamental
Principles of Judicial Procedure”?
20.

In Secretary of State v. Mask and Co., (1940) 67 Ind

App 222, 236, the Privy Council used the aforesaid expression while
dealing with the issue of exclusion of jurisdiction of Civil Courts as
follows :
“it is also well-settled that that even if
jurisdiction is so excluded, the civil courts have
jurisdiction to examine into cases where the
provisions of the Act have not been complied
with, or the statutory tribunal has not acted in
conformity with the fundamental principles of
judicial procedure.”(emphasis supplied).
21.

The Supreme Court, in Firm and Illari Subbayya Chetty

and Sons vs. The State of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1964 SC 322, dealt
with the aforesaid observation of the Privy Council in the following
words:
“It is necessary to add that these
observations, though made in somewhat wide
terms, do not justify the assumption that if a
decision has been made by a taxing authority
under the provisions of the relevant taxing statute,
its validity can be challenged by a suit on the
ground that it is incorrect on the merits and as
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 10 of 16

such, it can be claimed that the provisions of the
said statute have not been complied with. Noncompliance with the provisions of the statute to
which reference is made by the Privy Council must,
we
think,
be
non-compliance
with
such
fundamental provisions of the statute as would
make
the
entire
proceedings
before
the
appropriate
authority
illegal
and
without
jurisdiction. Similarly, if an appropriate authority
has acted in violation of the fundamental principles
or judicial procedure, that may also tend to make
the proceedings illegal and void and this infirmity
may affect the validity of the order passed by the
authority in question. It is cases of this character
where the defect or the infirmity in the order goes
to the root of the order and makes it in law invalid
and void that these observations may perhaps be
invoked in support of the plea that the civil court
can exercise its jurisdiction notwithstanding a
provision to the contrary contained in the relevant
statute. In what cases such a plea would succeed it
is unnecessary for us to decide in the present
appeal because we have no doubt that the
contention of the appellant that on the merits, the
decision of the assessing authority was wrong,
cannot be the subject matter of a suit because
Section 18-A clearly bars such a claim in the civil
courts.” (emphasis supplied)
22.

From the aforesaid it is seen that it is the non compliance

of a fundamental provision of the statute, which would make the entire
proceedings before the Tribunal illegal or without jurisdiction, that can
be challenged before a Civil Court. An instance of this could be the
entertainment of an application for recovery of debts by the Tribunal,
made by an entity which is neither a Bank nor a Financial Institution
under the Act. Independent of the aforesaid, the violation of the

CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 11 of 16

fundamental principles of judicial procedure, which tend to make the
proceedings illegal and void in contradistinction with a decision on the
merits of the dispute, would also be open to challenge in a Civil Court.
An instance of a violation of this kind could be a case, where the
Tribunal decides a case without notice to, or hearing an adversely
affected party. Even in such cases, what can be impugned before the
Civil Court would be the decision of the Tribunal.
23.

In the present case, the Tribunal while passing the final

order in OA No. 589/1995 on 10.5.1999 dealt with the specific plea of
the plaintiff herein that his signatures were obtained on blank papers
which have been subsequently been fabricated and utilised by the
bank for fastening liability upon him as a guarantor. The Tribunal took
the view that the said plea did not raise a triable issue. The relevant
extract from the order of the DRT dated 10.5.1999 reads as follows:“Relying on the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High
Court, I am of the opinion that there appears no
triable issue with respect to main borrowers. So far
as guarantor is concerned, his defence is that their
signatures were obtained on blank paper. This is
also not a tenable defence in view of judgment of
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter of Punjab
and Sind Bank vs. Ram Prakash Jagdish Chander (II)
1992 BC 471 and latest judgment of Hon'ble High
Court of Delhi in the matter of Indian Bank vs.
Cheese Wafers (India) Pvt. Ltd. 76 (1998) DLT 892.”
24.

I have also perused the two decisions cited by the Tribunal

in the case of Ram Prakash Jagdish Chander (Supra) and Cheese
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 12 of 16

Wafer India Pvt. Ltd. (Supra). Both these cases relate to summary
suits filed under the provisions of Order 37 CPC. In both these cases
the defence raised by the defendant in suits filed by the banks were
that their signatures had been obtained on blank papers, which had
subsequently been forged and fabricated and utilised by the bank to
fasten liability upon them. These pleas were taken in the applications
seeking leave to defend the suits by the respective defendants. This
Court in both cases held that such a plea was a sham, devoid of any
force and it could not be said that they raised a triable issue.
25.

In the present case, the transactions whereby various

facilities and loans were granted by the bank to the firm M/s Vidya
International were undertaken in the year 1981. In the suit filed by the
defendant bank, the plaintiff herein did not even claim that the letter
of guarantee was executed for the loan to be granted to another entity
M/s Pooja International. There is nothing on record to show, and no
averment had been made by the plaintiff herein in his written
statement in the banks suit to claim that he took any steps whatsoever
to repudiate his signatures on the so called blank documents
contemporaneously. The plaintiff herein merely took the defence in his
written statement, filed after nearly 6 years of the signing of the
documents, that the signatures were taken on blank documents. Such
defence was held by the Tribunal not to raise a triable issue. When one
CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 13 of 16

views the decision of Tribunal in the light of the averments made
before it, it cannot be said that the order or decision of the Tribunal
had defects or infirmities which go to the root of the order and makes it
in law invalid and void. It was an order passed in the exercise of its
jurisdiction by the Tribunal on appreciation of the facts and by applying
the law as aforesaid.
26.

Pertinently it was only before the tribunal that the plaintiff

herein for the first time raised the plea that the documents had been
signed by him to guarantee a loan to be granted to M/s Pooja
International.
27.

It is also to be noticed that what is being challenged before

this court is not the decision of the tribunal, but the guarantee
agreement and the cover letter, by seeking a declaration that the
guarantee agreement dated 21st August 1981 and the cover letter of
the same day do not relate to the plaintiff in the suit bearing number
545 of 1984 and O.A. No. 589 of 1995 file by the defendant bank. The
present plaintiff is in fact seeking an adjudication of his defence that
he ought to have taken (but did not take) before this court and
thereafter before the tribunal in the proceedings initiated by the
defendant bank. That cannot be permitted in the light of section 18
read with section 17 of the Act.
28.

In my view when the Act bars the adjudication of a claim by

CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 14 of 16

a bank or a financial institution by any court or authority except the
tribunal, it also bars the adjudication of a defence that may be raised
to a claim of a bank or a financial institution by a civil court. Under
section 19 (5) of the Act, the defendant is required to file a written
statement of his defence. The defendant is also entitled to claim a set
off and to make a counterclaim if he has any.

The tribunal has to

decide the claim made before it after consideration of the defence, and
if a set off or a counterclaim has been made, after consideration
thereof as well.
29.

Reliance placed by the plaintiff here on the case of

Dhulabhai(supra) is of no avail since the present case does not fall
within the realm of non-compliance of the fundamental principles of
judicial procedure by the tribunal. At the cost of repetition I may again
point out that it is not the decision of the tribunal which is under
challenge before this court on the ground that the tribunal has not
acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial
procedure.
30.

The order passed by the Tribunal on the merits of the

dispute before it has been affirmed by the Appellate Tribunal with the
dismissal of the appeal bearing number 188/2000 and that order of the
Appellate Tribunal has become final.
31.

In the light of the aforesaid discussion, I have come to the

CS(OS) No. 912/2002

Page 15 of 16

conclusion that the present suit is clearly barred under section 18 of
the Act and is not maintainable. I therefore dismiss the suit with costs
quantified at rupees 25,000/-.

February 15, 2007
aruna/mw

CS(OS) No. 912/2002

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

Page 16 of 16

