*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P. (C) No. 5047/2003
DATE OF DECISION : 16th August 2007
Kamal Nayan & Anr.
Through:

.....

Petitioners

Mr. Jasbir Singh Malik with
Ms. Rafat Ara, Advocate.

versus
Union of India & Others
Through:

.....

Respondents

Mr. Barkha Babbar, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
ORDER
16.08.2007
A.K. SIKRI, J. (Oral)
1.

The

Petitioners

were

registered

with

Employment

Exchange (Technical), Pusa, New Delhi. CPWD initiated process of
selection and appointments in a post of Khalasi (Electrical) for which

W.P. (C) No. 5047/2003

Page

1

of 7

requisition was sent to the Employment Exchange. On 20th October
1994, a selection committee was constituted which interviewed all
those candidates, who were sponsered by the Employment Exchange.
On the basis of the said interviews, a select list of 84 candidates in the
general category was prepared. In the requisition sent to the
Employment Exchange, the number of vacancies invited in the general
category were 84. Both these Petitioners found their name for the said
select list at S.No. 56 and 73 respectively. On the basis of the said
select list CPWD started giving appointments in the year 1994 itself.
2.

However, thereafter, no further appointments were

given. In these circumstances, the Petitioners filed O.A. 333/1997
before the Tribunal. In this O.A. the Respondent informed the Tribunal
that no further appointments were made as some discrepancies in the
selection process were noticed and matter was referred to Vigilance
and the said vigilance inquiry was under way to find out the actual
position. It was also stated before the Tribunal that Respondent would
not have objection to offer appointment to the remaining candidates in
the select list, in case some vacancies become available as a result of
the decision of the vigilance inquiry. On the basis of this statement,
O.A. was disposed of vide orders dated 13.11.1997 directing that
Respondent shall pass an appropriate order as and when the next
W.P. (C) No. 5047/2003

Page

2

of 7

vacancy becomes available, and as and when the vigilance inquiry is
finalized. It was further directed that in case subsequent vacancies
become available to accommodate the applicants or the other similarly
placed candidates on the same panel, appointment would be from the
date when vacancy arose and the remaining benefits will be in
accordance with the Rules.
3.

The Petitioners filed Civil Writ Petition against this order in

this court in which order dated 7.5.2001 were passed granting leave
and liberty to the Petitioner to take recourse and remedy in
appropriate proceedings in accordance with law. As the Petitioners
were still not offered any appointment, in the year 2002 in O.A.
No.48/2002 was filed seeking directions to the Respondents to appoint
the Petitioners to the aforesaid post giving the benefit of seniority and
consequential benefits as well. This petition has been dismissed by the
Tribunal vide impugned order dated 15.11.2002. Operative portion of
the order reads as under:
“4. It is not in dispute that the select list came
under the gaze of vigilance. The inquiry has since
been finalised and the respondents have decided to
cancel the select list. Under such a situation, there
can be no occasion to consider the applicants or any
other persons on the select list for any further
appointment. In fact, the appointments already
made will also be subject to the consequences of
the vigilance inquiry.
W.P. (C) No. 5047/2003

Page

3

of 7

4.

5.
Since the select list itself is being cancelled,
there is no ground made out for allowing this O.A.
The same is dismissed but with no order as to
costs.”
Feeling aggrieved, present petition has been filed.

5.

The contention of the learned Counsel for the Petitioner is

that if as a result of vigilance inquiry, it was decided by the
Respondents to scrap the select list, it was not open to the Respondent
not to distribute the 53 appointments already made. The submission
thus was that in such an eventualities, these 53 appointments should
also have been cancelled. Else, the respondents could not discriminate
and deny appointment to the petitioners. It was also submitted that on
the one hand stand taken is that the Respondent decided not to give
appointment to remaining persons within the said select list but still
one candidate belonging to ST category was given appointment even
subsequently thereto. He referred to order dated December 6, 2005,
passed in this Writ Petition wherein the aforesaid submissions of the
learned Counsel for the Petitioner were recorded and the Respondents
were directed to produce the entire record connected with the
aforesaid selection and appointments.
6.

After that order was passed, the Respondents filed

additional affidavit dated 23.1.2006. In this affidavit, it is explained
that some irregularities came to the notice of the Respondents in the
W.P. (C) No. 5047/2003

Page

4

of 7

selection process and which led to vigilance inquiry. In these
circumstances an office memorandum dated 30.12.1994 was issued
directing the S.E. (Coordination) not to issue appointment letters to any
one for the post of Khalasi till clearance from the Directorate. It is also
explained that the Deputy Director (Admn) vide office memorandum
dated 5.5.1990 has asked the S.E. (Coordination) Electrical to provide
certain information and also directed him to ensure that henceforth no
regularisation of workers engaged after the ban on 9.1.1985 either in
the work charged establishment or on regular classified category is
done, without prior permission from the Directorate.
7.

In order to understand as to why the appointment already

made were not disturbed even when certain irregularities were found
in the vigilance inquiry, we will have to take note of the nature of these
irregularities. In fact, what came to the notice of the Respondent from
the enquiry was that S.E. (Electrical) had under-reported the vacancies
of Khalasi against direct recruit quota, regularized 35 daily rated
workers against direct recruit quota without obtaining necessary
exemption from Employment Exchange and without seeking required
clearance from the directorate General Work CPWD, even when there
was ban on the appointments. It is the last irregularity with which we
are concerned in the present case.
W.P. (C) No. 5047/2003

Page

5

of 7

8.

Vide office order dated 19.1.1985, Government had placed

ban on further recruitments. It was found that in spite of this ban being
in operation, the S.E. (Coordination) Electrical in CPWD had initiated
the process of selection and it is pursuant to this that the select list
was prepared in which the names of the Petitioners were included.
When it came to the notice of the Respondent, and as there was a ban
on the recruitment, the Respondent decided not to make any further
appointments from the said select list and to scrap the same. In so far
as the selection process is concerned, there was no complaint
otherwise regarding the said selection process or the preparation of
penal in the year 1994. It is for this reason, the Respondents decided
not to cancel the appointments of 53 persons who had already been
appointed in the year 1994 and who were working. If the Petitioners
are not given appointments for this reason and the Respondents
decided not to undo the appointments already made, we see rationale
behind such a decision of the Respondents.
9.

When there was a ban against further recruitments,

petitioner cannot as a matter of right claim appointment on the basis
of the said select list. It is settled law that mere selection does not give
the right to a candidate for appointment. When the selection process is
scrapped for valid reasons and there is no unfairness of the action of
W.P. (C) No. 5047/2003

Page

6

of 7

the Respondent, we would not like to interfere with this decision in
exercise of our powers of judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
10.

One person who has been given appointment even

thereafter belongs to SC/ST category and the ban does not extend to
the persons who belong to SC/ST category. Moreover, his appointment
was in the wake of the orders dated 31.10.1997 passed by the National
Commission of SC & ST of India.
11.

We may also note that the select list was prepared in 1994.

13 years have passed since then. It would not be even otherwise
desirable or proper to issue a mandamus at this stage to give
appointment to the Petitioners after a lapse of 13 years.
12.

Consequently, we do not find any infirmity in the order of

the Tribunal. This petition stands dismissed.

A.K.SIKRI, J.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
August 16, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 5047/2003

Page

7

of 7

