*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision: 16th August, 2006
W.P ( C) No. 4730/2007

Commissioner,
.....Petitioner

Kendriya

Vidyalaya

Sangathan

Through: Mr. S. Rajappa, Advocate.
versus

Pramod Saxena
Respondent

.....
Through:

Mr. Gautam Anil Kumar,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

A.K.SIKRI, J (Oral)
*

Rule D.B.
The respondent herein was earlier working as Post
Graduate Teacher in Chemistry with Kendriya Vidyalaya Sanghthan,
the petitioner herein. With effect from 22nd June, 2000, she joined

Page 1 of 6
duties as Principal at Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bharatpur.

However, on

19.12.2000 she was reverted to the feeder post, i.e., PGT Chemistry,
allegedly on the ground that her performance as a Principal in
Kendriya Vidyalaya, Bharatpur was not found to be satisfactory. This
action of the petitioner was challenged by the respondent before the
Tribunal by filing OA No. 2704/2000. This OA was initially dismissed
by the Tribunal on the ground that she did not approach the Tribunal
with clean hands.

However, in the Writ Petition filed by the

respondent against the order of the Tribunal, the said order was set
aside and the Tribunal was directed to consider the same on merit.
Tribunal has, thereafter, rendered its judgment dated 1.9.2006
allowing the application of the respondent and quashing the reversion
orders dated 19.12.2000 with direction that respondent be reinstated
as Principal. The operative portion of the judgment of the Tribunal is
as under :“12. On perusal of judgments cited particularly
of V.P. Verma (supra), we are of the considered
view that in view of law noticed therein, we
have no hesitation to conclude that impugned
order has been passed arbitrarily and
punitively without complying the principles of
natural justice. Order on the face of it, is
stigmatic and invocation of para – 4 of 'offer of
appointment' in the given circumstances,
cannot be upheld. We do not find justification
in contention raised by respondents that since

one-year period, for which applicant had been
Page 2 of 6
appointed on 06.06.2000, has already expired,
matter has become academic in nature. As
said impugned order has been held to be
illegal, arbitrary, unjust and violative of
principles of natural justice besides being
punitive, we are of the view that applicant has
to be reinstated forthwith and she be allowed
to serve for remaining tenure.
If her
performance is found to be satisfactory, her
continuation etc. would have to be regulated in
terms of directions issued by Hon'ble Calcutta
High Court in Ram Singh & Narender Prakash
Saxena (supra).
13. In view of the discussion made
hereinabvoe, O.A. is allowed and order dated
19.12.2000 is quashed & set aside. Applicant
should be re-instated forthwith. No cost”.
Petitioner has challenged the aforesaid order in the said
petition.
On the very first date, i.e., 3rd July, 2007 when this Writ
Petition came up for hearing following order was passed :“03.07.2007.
Present:

Mr.S.Rajappa for the petitioner.
Mr.Anil Gautam for respondent.
CM 8846/2007
Exemption allowed
exceptions.

subject

to

all

just

WP(C) No.4730/2007 & CM 8845/2007
Issue notice to the respondent to show cause
as to why rule nisi be not issued.
We have heard learned counsel for the

Page 3 of 6
petitioner who has very fairly submitted that
reports of the Education Officer dated 19th
September, 2000 and 27th September, 2000
which were made the basis of reversion and
curtailment of deputation of the respondent as
Principal while passing the impugned order,
were based on inspections carried out on 18th
and 19th September, 2000. The case has had
a checkered history inasmuch as the Tribunal
had initially dismissed the OA filed by
respondent inter alia on the ground of
suppression of material facts etc.
The order
of the Tribunal was set aside by the High Court
in WP(C) 6789/2001 and the case was
remanded to the Tribunal for hearing on
merits.
The Tribunal heard the matter on
merits and passed the impugned order by
which the order of reversion was set aside.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that even if
the two reports were to be considered
together, there would be material to justify the
impugned order of reversion.
Mr.Anil
Gautam, counsel for respondent happens to be
present in court. He submits that respondent
has already suffered a lot as her peers had got
promotion and confirmed as Principals for long.
He submits that
reports of the Education
Officer were inconsistent and self contradictory
besides the respondent had hardly assumed
charge for three months and the deficiencies
sought to be pointed out in the reports are
such that could not be attributed
to the
Principal or remedied by the Principal.
We have considered the above aspect and
during the course of submissions, a suggestion
has been mooted to resolve this issue where
the counsel for respondent submits that
respondent would not claim any back wages,
subject to respondent being given the
requisite seniority from the date the junior
Page 4 of 6

next below to her, was confirmed as Principal.
Mr.Rajappa states that respondent case would
also have to be cleared for selection by the
Selection Committee and he would like to
obtain instructions in the matter.
Renotify on 17th July, 2007.
Respondent to be present in person on the
next date of hearing.
Copy of the order be given Dasti to counsel for
petitioner."
Respondent appeared on the next date and made a
statement to the effect that she does not insist for payment of backwages, in case the suggestion mooted on the previous date of hearing
is accepted by the petitioner.
However, Mr. S. Rajappa, Advocate states that he has not
been able to take instructions from the petitioner as was required
vide order dated 3rd July, 2007.
We have accordingly heard the matter on merits with the
consent of counsel for the parties.
The Tribunal has held that the order of reversion dated
19.12.2000 was punitive and stigmatic. The said finding is justified in
view of the language used by the petitioner in the said order. The
said order has rightly been held to have been issued in violation of
principles of natural justice, and therefore could not have been
Page 5 of 6
sustained.

In view therefore, it is clarified that while posting the
respondent as Principal, respondent shall not be given back-wages.
However, her seniority shall be maintained on the basis that she was
promoted as Principal w.e.f. 22nd June, 2000.
In the facts and circumstances of this case and after
going through the judgment passed by the learned Tribunal, we do
not find any illegality or impropriety in the impugned judgment to
warrant interference. The petitioner shall, accordingly, comply with
the directions of the Tribunal by posting the respondent as Principal
within 3 weeks from today. The respondent shall, accordingly, not be
entitled to any back-wages for the post of Principal.

However, she

shall be deemed to have been promoted to the post of Principal for all
other purposes including her seniority etc. from the date her
immediate junior was promoted to that post.
With these directions, the petition stands disposed of.

A.K.SIKRI, J.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
August 16, 2007
aruna
Page 6 of 6

