*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P. (C) No. 9018-19/2006

Date of decision: 17th August, 2007
%

M/s. Fibro Plast & Others
.....Petitioners
Through: Mr.Riju Raj Jamwal, Advocate.
versus
Union of India & Others
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Meet Malhotra with
Mr. Ravi. S. Chauhan and
Mr. Ramnish Khanna, Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A. K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J (Oral)
*
1.

Rule D.B.

2.

With the consent of parties, we proceed to finally hear and

dispose of this Writ Petition.
3.

The petitioner in this petition under Article 226 of the

Constitution of India seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash

W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 1 of 11

the letter of rejection dated 5th May 2006, issued by the respondent
authorities whereby it was communicated that the petitioner's bid for
category

III-A vessels

has

been

technically

rejected

and the

petitioner's earnest money deposit of Rs.30 lakhs was returned. The
petitioner has further sought a writ in the nature of mandamus to
direct the respondent authorities to consider and accept the technical
offer made by the petitioner. Other consequential reliefs have also
been prayed for by the petitioner.
4.

The respondents issued a Global Notice Inviting Tender

(GNIT) No.01/2005 dated 6th June 2005 for “Design, Construction and
Supply of 109 numbers Newly Built Custom Vessels under Four
Categories:-(1) Category I; (2)Category II; Category III(A), and
Category III (B).”
5.

Category III(A), with which we are concerned, were Boats

with the specifications: “9 meters Loa, 30 knots, Rigid Inflatable
Vessels, (RIBs) FRP hulls.”

30 such category III(A) Boats were

required by the respondent.
6.

The petitioner, who is engaged in the business of

designing, constructing and supplying Boats for the last about 3
decades, submitted its bid for supplying category III(A) Boats.
Respondents have, by the impugned communication dated 5th May
2006, rejected the bid of the petitioner on technical grounds.
7.

The petitioner submits that the bids received by the

W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 2 of 11

respondents were opened on 15th September 2005, and at that stage
it transpired that there were a total of 3 tenderers apart from the
petitioner. Respondent No. 3 sought certain clarifications on 28th
November 2005 from the petitioner, which pertained to the prequalification technical specifications of Category III(A) vessels. These
clarifications were furnished by the petitioner on 5th December 2005.
According to the petitioner it made full compliance of the prequalification technical and commercial specifications while rendering
its clarifications. Thereafter, no further clarification was sought by the
Respondent, except the extension of the bank draft submitted by the
petitioners as earnest money deposit.
8.

The grievance of the petitioner is that the rejection of the

petitioner's bid is completely devoid of any reasons. Efforts made by
the petitioner even after the rejection to learn about the reasons for
rejection of their bid have also proved futile. It is further submitted
that one of the other bidders M/s. Goa Shipyard Ltd.

has been

technically approved for commercial bid opening. This, according to
the petitioner, is strange considering that M/s. Goa Shipyard Ltd. had
in fact sought the help of the petitioner to supply them with the
necessary technology to create boat building facilities, train their
manpower, provide knowhow and to technically supervise the boat
construction and offer other related services. It is therefore evident,
the petitioner claims, that M/s. Goa Shipyard Ltd. had no expertise in

W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 3 of 11

manufacture of Boats of the kind required to be supplied under the
tender. It is stated that M/s. Goa Shipyard Ltd. is engaged in building
Steel Ships and have no experience or capabilities to supply FRP
Boats i.e. Boats made of Fiber Plastic whereas the petitioner is in the
business of building FRP Boats for the last over 26 years. The
petitioner states that it has been supplying similar size FRP Boats to
the defense organisations.
9.

In response to the show cause notice issued to the

respondents, they have filed their affidavit through the Commissioner,
Directorate of Logistic, dated 5th October 2006. The respondents
defence is that the tender of the petitioner was examined in detail by
a Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) under the Chairmanship of
Shri A.P. Kala, Director General of Revenue Inteligence (DGRI) having
a total of six members, who are experts in their fields from different
organisations. The members of the Technical Evaluation Committee
(TEC) were:
i) Cdr. C.S. Baburaj, Joint Director (Marine Engineering);
ii) Lt. Cdr. A. Vinith, Deputy Director (Naval Architecture)
Indian Navy;
iii)Comdt. A.K. Biswas, Joint Director – Post Guard;
iv)Shri R.K. Kalra, Principal Surveyor - Indian Register of
Shipping;
v) Shri S.K. Sinha, Commissioner, (Logistic), and;

W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 4 of 11

vi)Capt. (IN) A.R.C. Varma, Additional Director (Marine),
Directorate of Logistic, customs and Central Excise.
10.
bid

It is stated that the TEC on the technical evaluation of the
of

the

petitioner

unanimously

rejected

the

same.

The

recommendations of the Technical Evaluation Committee were
accepted after due analysis by the Department of Revenue, Ministry
of Finance.
11.

The Respondents have produced the original records

pertaining to the tender in question. We have perused the report of
the Technical Evaluation Committee.
12.

From the record it appears that some of the members of

the Technical Evaluation Committee visited the facility of the
petitioner on 7th December 2005 to evaluate their capabilities to
manufacture and supply the Boats in question. The aim of the visit
was stated to be to confirm various aspects which are essential for
quality and timely delivery of the vessels and to ensure that the
conditions laid down in the GNIT are being met by the petitioner. The
endeavour of the members who visited the facility of the petitioner
was to seek answers to the following queries:
a)
Is the yard having FRP/GRP building
facility?
b)
Is the yard
conduct of sea
built?
c)
W.P(C)No.9018-06

got seawater front for
trials of the vessels

Is the yard currently in business?
Page 5 of 11

d)
Has the builder built similar type and
size of vessels
in the past?
e)
Can the builder meet and delivery
schedule
considering the present
order, their performance and
available
manpower?

13.

f)
Any other aspect concerning the supply
of Vessels?
The conclusions drawn from the said visit on the aforesaid

queries were as follows:
“a)
M/s. Fibroplast is having FRP/GRP laying
facility using hand method only. This is
considered to be laborious and the lowest
standard in quality control. World over
methods have developed where spray
methods are used for spraying Resin and
accelerator; or spraying the same alongwith
Fibreglass.
Further
enhancements
in
technology has infusion methods used either
by Vacuum infusion or Impregnated infusion.
The technology required for the quality
production and excellent finish is the Infusion
Technique. This is not available with M/s.
Fibroplast. Also a lot remains to be desired in
the moulding shop, where the laying of
FRP.GRP taking place, especially for controls of
temperature, dust or humidity etc. There was
only one window type air conditioner in the
entire big hall. The curing of FRP/GRP in a
controlled condition is absolutely necessary for
its strength and long life. The bay space
indicated limited hull space.
b)
There is no water front or suitable tank
whatsoever. On completion of a hull, various
prototype tests are required to be carried out
like -Swamp test, inclining test, drop test etc.
It was further informed that the initial trials are
carried out in the river Jamuna water and
subsequently the vessel is taken to the place
of delivery and then the sea trials are
W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 6 of 11

conducted. This is not acceptable because
firstly the water stretch available for trials in
the river Jamuna is hardly one kilometer in
length, secondly it's very dirty and thirdly the
depth of water is not sufficient. Taking a
vessel to the place of delivery without
conducting adequate and proper trials may
lead to unavoidable delays. The custom
marine dept. may not be able to account for
these delays leading to penalties/liquidity
damages and ultimately delays in the delivery
of each vessel.
c)
The building is currently in business, but
there are no orders similar to the vessel
needed by Customs.
d)
The builder has so far not built
similar type and size of vessels as
required by Customs. The maximum
length of the RIB (Rigid Inflatable Boat)
built by them is 6.5 m. only. They don't
even have the mould for 9 m vessels. The
CEO of the firm explained that they
would
make
a
fresh
mould
by
interpolating from 6.5 m hull mould, and
extending it to 9m. However, this
explanation was hypothetical.
e)
So far the builder has been executing
orders for simpler boats like Whaler for NCC,
fishing boats and other smaller vessels for
Army/Navy where delay in delivery has been
generally accepted without any serious
consequences. It appeared that the builder is
making vessels at their own pace without
much urgency.
4. Conclusion:
Considering the various aspects brought out
above, it can be concluded that the builder is
not totally geared up to produce the quality
vessels with excellent finish as specified in the
Global Tender Document. Also the builder is
not having any experience of building similar
W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 7 of 11

14.

type and size vessels. There is no seawater
front available for conduct of trials and this
will definitely add to the delays in the
inspection of vessels and certification. The sea
conditions are absolutely different and there
can be no comparison with that of river
Jamuna. The delivery of vessels as per the
contract at the rate of one vessel every
fortnight after initial period of four months
from the date of ordering does not seems to
be possible.” (emphasis supplied).
The respondents have drawn our attention to paras 2.19.

and 2.20 of the GNIT which read as follows:
“2.19 The tenderer should have their own
Building Yard with manufacturing facilities and
water front suitable to build the types of
Vessels being offered by the builders under
four different categories i.e. Categories I, II,
II(A) and III(B). The applicant should be
presently an active Builder engaged in
construction of similar Ocean going Vessels.”

15.

“2.20 The tenderer should have a proven track
record of having built similar type of FRP
vessels and delivered at last 5 (Five) vessels
of the size for which offer is being made or
larger Vessels of similar type. Firms, that have
supplied, in India or abroad in the past and
have capacity and capability for supplying
similar Vessels are eligible to participate in the
tender.”
Respondents submit that the petitioner did not satisfy

either of the aforesaid tender conditions, inasmuch as, the petitioner
was not found to be an active builder engaged in the business of
similar type of FRP vessels presently. Moreover, the petitioner did not
have the proven track record, required under para 2.20, of having
built and delivered similar type of FRP vessel, atleast 5 in numbers of
the size for which the offer was made or larger vessels of similar type.
W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 8 of 11

Respondents submit that the Technical Evaluation Committee gave
the detailed findings in their report on the basis of the evaluation of
the bids of each of the bidders. From the report it appears that the
Technical Evaluation Committee did not find the petitioner geared up
to design and produce quality boats as specified in the GNIT
No.01.2005 for category III(A) vessel. They did not have the facility to
try their vessel in sea conditions in their ship building yard and their
crafts would have to be carried to Mumbai or Chennai after
construction for Sea trials from Noida, UP. If the vessels are found
with some defects they would have to be brought back to Noida for
rectification which would delay the supplies. Further and even more
importantly, the Technical Evaluation Committee found that the
petitioner does not have past experience of building 09 meter Rigid
Inflatable Boat (RIBs) type category III(A) Boats as per the technical
specifications.
16.

On the other hand, the Technical Evaluation Committee

found M/s. Goa Shipyard Ltd. is capable of building and delivering
quality vessel of all the four categories as per the schedule under the
collaboration with M/s. V.T. Helmatic, UK.
17.

The respondent's further contention is that the petitioner

had failed to specify that it had, in the past, manufactured and
supplied vessels of similar capability. In particular, the Respondent
highlighted

that

W.P(C)No.9018-06

the

petitioner

had

not

established

to

have

Page 9 of 11

manufactured any Sea going Vessel so far:
i)
which can attain the speed of 30 nautical
miles per hour. It is evident that the petitioner
have not manufactured such high speed
vessels.
ii)
having a total power requirement of 400
Horse Power (Two outboard motor engines of
200 HP each). The maximum power achieved
by the petitioner is only 75 HP.

18.

iii)
having a Self Righting property, which
means that the vessel will return to upright
position without the assistance of the
occupants after turning turtle even by 180
degrees. The petitioner has never built a self
righting vessel of 09 meter.
List of the major orders executed since 1995 submitted by

the petitioner with its Technical offer indicates that they have not
built any Sea going vessel of Type Rigid Inflatable Boat of 9 mtr.
length which is the length specified for Cat III(A).
19.

From a perusal of the rejoinder filed by the petitioner, and

also from the arguments advanced by the learned Counsel for the
Petitioner at the time of hearing, it appears that there is merit in the
submission of the respondents that the petitioner had failed to
establish its credentials by meeting the requisite qualifications
contained in paragraphs 2.19 and 2.20 of the GNIT. In their rejoinder
affidavit, the petitioner vaguely states that they have manufactured
vessels of the size, and with the capabilities as set out herein above.
However, no specific instances, details, or supporting documents
have been produced by the petitioners with their rejoinder. More

W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 10 of 11

importantly, it is not even their submission that they had produced
the relevant information before the respondents and their Technical
Evaluation Committee at the time of technical evaluation of their bid.
20.

Even otherwise, in matters requiring technical expertise,

courts would leave the matters for decision of those who are qualified
to address the issues. Unless the action is inconsistent with the
Constitution and the laws or arbitrary or irrational or abuse of the
power,

the

court

will

not

interfere

with

such

matters.

(See

Federation of Railways Officers Association vs . UOI, AIR 2003
SC 1344, para 12).
2.

In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are satisfy that

there is no illegality or arbitrariness in the rejection of the petitioner's
technical bid by the respondents. We find no merit in the petition and
consequently the writ petition stands dismissed.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

August 17, 2007

A.K.SIKRI, J.

P.K. BABBAR

W.P(C)No.9018-06

Page 11 of 11

