*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P. (C) NO.13768/2006

%

Judgment reserved on: August 29, 2007
Judgment delivered on: September

17,2007
%

Smt. Kiran Bala.

Through:

...Petitioner
Mr. Mobin Akhtar, Advocates

versus
Union of India

Through:

...Respondent
Mr. Ashwani Bhardwaj,
Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J
1.

The Petitioner has filed its petition under Article 226 of

the Constitution of India to challenge the order dated 7th January
2005 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal
Bench, New Delhi (The Tribunal) in O.A. No. 2743/2003 whereby the
aforesaid O.A. filed by the Petitioner was dismissed by the Tribunal.

W.P. (C) NO.13768

Page 1 of 6

The Petitioner had approached the Tribunal seeking directions to
the Respondents for the release of family pension to her from the
date of expiry of her husband i.e. 17.9.2000 onwards. She also
sought

immediate

compassionate

appointment

from

the

Respondents.
2.

The Petitioner’s late husband was initially appointed as

a driver in the Implementation Committee, Cabinet Secretariat,
Government of India, on 1.7.1989. Thereafter, he was appointed to
the post of Staff Car Driver in the Ministry of Welfare on 15.1.1990,
where he continued to work till the time of his death, i.e., on
17.9.2000. However, the engagement of the Petitioner were not on
regular basis, but was only on temporary and adhoc basis.
3.

After the demise of the husband of the Petitioner, she

demanded family pension and appointment on compassionate
ground from the Respondents. Since, there was no response from
the Respondents, she initially preferred O.A. No. 2103/2003, which
was disposed of on 7th August 2003 by the Tribunal with a directions
to the Respondent to dispose of the representation of the Petitioner
by a reasoned and speaking order.
4.

The Respondents thereafter issued a communication

dated 26.9.2003 stating that the late husband of the Petitioner Shri
Kalu

Singh

was

Implementation

W.P. (C) NO.13768

appointed

Committee

as
for

a
the

Staff

Car

Driver

Commemoration

in

the

of

40th

Page 2 of 6

Anniversary of India's Independence and the Jawahar Lal Nehru
Centenary, Cabinet Secretariat, with effect from 1.7.1989 on
contract basis for the period up to 31.12.1989. With the winding up
of said office, his service was dispensed with from the after noon of
31.12.89.

He was thereafter appointed in the Ministry of Social

Justice and Empowerment to the post of Staff Car Driver on purely
temporary and ad-hoc basis for a period of six months with effect
from 15.1.1990. This ad-hoc appointment was further extended for
one year i.e. up to 14.7.1991. After this, there was no extension
granted to him, as there was no vacancy and his appointment was
not made after following the proper recruitment procedure. It was
also stated that since the appointment of late Shri Kalu Singh was
purely temporary and ad hoc and he was not holding a substantive
post under rules, neither family pension nor compassionate
appointment can be granted to the Petitioner. Even the Department
of Personal & Training had taken the same view upon the reference
made by Respondents to seek the advise in the matter.
5.

The Petitioner was not satisfied with the said response

and again approached the Tribunal by filing O.A. No. 2743/2003,
which has been dismissed by the impugned order. Before the
Tribunal, the submission of the Petitioner was that the Respondent
had released various amounts towards Earned leaves, Central
Government Employees Group Insurance Scheme, reimbursement

W.P. (C) NO.13768

Page 3 of 6

of medical expenses and GPF amount due to the Petitioner's
husband. The Respondent had even initially entertained the
application of the Petitioner for appointment to the post of ‘Wash
Boy’ in Maduri Department Canteen with the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment. However, no appointment order was
issued and she was also not given the family pension. It was,
however, submitted that the husband of Petitioner was also given
festival advance like regular employees. From the aforesaid, it was
claimed that the late husband of the Petitioner was treated as
regular employee for all purposes.
6.

The Respondents stuck to their stand as communicated

by them to the Petitioner on 26.9.2003, that the late husband of the
Petitioner was not a regular and permanent employee but was
appointed only on a temporary and ad hoc post. Merely because the
husband of the Petitioner was granted certain privileges and
benefits which are normally available to regular employees, and
merely because certain deductions were made from his salary, that
by itself did not make him a regular employee. Even though the
Petitioner was not entitled to compassionate appointment, the case
was sympathetically considered, when she applied for the post of
‘Wash Boy’ as aforesaid, and the same was not rejected at the
threshold.
7.

The Tribunal after considering the matter, rejected the

W.P. (C) NO.13768

Page 4 of 6

plea of the Petitioner and dismissed the application. The Tribunal
held that since the late husband of the Petitioner was not appointed
on regular post but was working merely on ad hoc post, simply
because it was claimed that he had worked for a period of 10 years
in that capacity, he cold not be treated as a regular employee.
Regular appointment has to conform to the recruitment rules and
appointments

made

regularly

can

only

be

made

against

a

sanctioned post. The Petitioner’s husband was not appointed by a
process of selection for the post of Staff Car Driver in response to
any advertisement. Merely because certain deductions were made
from his salary that could not make the late husband of the
Petitioner a regular employee of the Respondent.
8.
admissible

Family pensions and compassionate appointment, is
only

to

the

dependents

of

regularly

appointed

permanent employee of the Government. Neither family pension
nor compassionate appointment could have been granted to a
person appointed on ad hoc or casual basis without following any
selection procedure against a sanctioned post.
9.

The Hon’ble Supreme Court in

a Constitution Bench

decision in Secretary, State of Karnataka and Others vs. Uma
Devi and Others, (2006) 4 SCC 1, has held that ad hoc appointees,
who are recruited without complying with the selection process
cannot be regularized.

W.P. (C) NO.13768

Page 5 of 6

10.

In view of the aforesaid, we are of the view that the

decision of the Tribunal impugned before us is correct and that it
does not

call for any interference in exercising our powers of

judicial review.
11.

We, accordingly, dismiss the petition leaving the parties

to bearing their own respective costs.

VIPIN SANGHI, J

A.K. SIKRI, J
September 17, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) NO.13768

Page 6 of 6

