*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No. 3999/2003
Judgment reserved on:

August 30, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: September 17, 2007

1.

Pintoo Kumar & Ors.
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Arun Dhiman for
Mr. S.K. Sinha, Advocate

versus
Union of India & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondent
Ms. Maneesha Dhir,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*
1.
The petitioners have filed this petition under Articles 226
and 227 of the Constitution of India to impugn the judgment of the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (Tribunal)
passed in OA No.3203/2002 dated 21.2.2003 and in RA No.63/2003
on 3.4.2003 whereby the Tribunal has dismissed the aforesaid OA and
RA filed by the petitioners.
2.

The petitioners had approached the Tribunal since they

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 1 of 12

apprehended discontinuation of their services on the expiry of the
contractual period of their engagement by the respondents, and
therefore sought the quashing of the order dated 27.11.2002 whereby
it was decided not to give extension to them after expiry of the
contractual period on 10.12.2002. The petitioners had also staked a
claim for regularisation of their services.
3.

A commission of enquiry known as Liberhan Ayodhya

Commission of Enquiry was set up on 16.12.92 to enquire into the
demolition of the Ram Janam Bhoomi Babri Masjid at Ayodhya. The
initial tenure of the Commission was three years, but due to various
complications the assignment of the Commission was not completed
and its term has been extended from time to time. The petitioners
were engaged temporarily on ad hoc basis by the Commission by
entering into contracts in the year 1994. The ad hoc appointments of
the petitioners were extended from time to time with the extension of
the Commission's tenure after giving a break of few days.

The

petitioners were informed that their services were liable to be
terminated without assigning any reasons, and it was also made clear
to them that they would not stake any claim for regular absorption.
The petitioners were working as Peons/LDCs.
4.

It appears that a ban was imposed by the Government on

engagement of persons on ad hoc basis from the open market.
Consequently, a proposal was made to replace the petitioners with ad

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 2 of 12

hoc

deputationists

from

Governments/Undertakings

offices

after

the

of
expiry

the
of

Central/State
their

extended

contractual tenure i.e from 10.12.2002 onwards. Apprehending
discontinuation, the petitioners approached the Tribunal and by an
order dated 9.12.2002, status quo was ordered to be maintained by
the Tribunal.
5.

The respondents opposed the claim of the petitioners on

the ground that the said commission was handling a time-bound
assignment and the commission did not exist as a department of
Government for an indefinite period.

There were no permanently

sanctioned posts against which the petitioners could have been
recruited. However, since the assignment could not be completed
within the initial tenure of three years, the Commission was being
given extension, from time to time.

The petitioners had been

engaged by the commission temporarily on contractual basis for
limited durations and it was made clear to them that their
appointments were ad hoc and for a limited period and that they
would not claim the right of regularisation.
6.

The respondents also stated that the appointment of the

petitioners was not made in a regular way through the employment
exchange, and that they had been picked up randomly from the open
market without laying any stress on registration with the employment
exchange. The respondents also relied upon various decisions of the

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 3 of 12

Supreme Court to contend that even where there are sanctioned
posts and recruitment rules, regularisation of casual employees can
not be claimed as a matter of right

by such employees, who have

been granted back door entry, without properly advertising the ports
to which they are recruited and without subjecting them to the
prescribed selection process. Merely because such persons have been
serving for long years, they are not entitled to claim regularisation as
a matter of right.
7.

The Tribunal by the impugned order rejected the aforesaid

OA primarily by relying on the decision of the Supreme Court in Delhi
Development

Horticulture

Employees'

Union

vs.

Delhi

Administration, Delhi and Ors., (1992) 4 SCC 99 wherein the
Hon'ble Supreme Court had held that regularisation of ad hoc
appointees in temporary or time-bound schemes could not be
considered. The appointment of such ad hoc employees was coterminus with the life of the scheme.

Regularisation cannot be a

mode of recruitment where the ad-hoc employees have been picked
up from the open market without following any rules of appointment.
8.

The petitioners thereafter filed the aforesaid review

application being RA 63/2003 on the ground that they had the right to
continue in service up to the life of the Commission and the Liberhan
Commission had been granted extension up to 30th June, 2003 and
that the said term was likely to be extended further. As aforesaid, the

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 4 of 12

Tribunal has rejected the review application as well.
9.

Before us, the submission of the petitioners is that

petitioners were ad hoc and temporary appointees and not merely
contractual appointees. They stake their claim for regularisation on
the strength of their past service of about 10 years with the Liberhan
Commission.
10.

It is also argued by the petitioners that the reason given

by the respondents for dis-continuing the services of the petitioners
was that the term of the Liberhan Commission had come to an end.
This reason was per se incorrect.

By placing reliance upon the

decision of the Supreme Court in Mohinder Singh Gill and another
vs. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others AIR
1978 Supreme Supreme Court 851 it is argued that the grounds for
termination or discontinuation of the engagement of the petitioners
cannot be other than those disclosed by the respondents on record,
which were that the term of Liberhan Commission had come to an
end.

The petitioners also sought to place reliance on Avas Vikas

Sansthan and Anr. vs. Avas Vikas Sansthan Engineers Assn.
and others 2006 (4) SCC 132, Central Welfare Board and others
vs. Anjali Bepari (Ms.) and others

1996(10) SCC 133 and Ajit

Singh and others vs. State of Punjab and Anr. 1983(2) SCC 217.
11.

On the other hand, the Respondent has filed its counter

affidavit wherein it is stated that the work of the commission is at an

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 5 of 12

advance stage. The commission is not replacing or engaging any
person on ad-hoc basis nor is the commission making any fresh
appointment. The strength of the commission has been reduced from
58 to 27 in view of the reduced work load. This was also the stand of
the Respondent before the Tribunal as recorded in the order in the
Review application.
12.

Learned counsel for the Respondent has also relied upon

the decision of the Supreme Court in the following cases:
1. U.P. Land Development & Another vs.
Amar Singh (Drect law on project
employees), (2003) 5 SCC 388.
2. Jawaharlal
Nehru
Krishi
Vishwa
Vidyalaya v. Bal Kishan Snoi, 1997 5 SCC
86
3. State of H.P. v. Nodha Ram, AIR 1997 SC
1445
4. State of U.P. & Ors v. Ajay Kumar, 1997
4 SCC 88
5. Committee of Management v.
Kumar Tiwaree, 1997 4 SCC 388

13.

Sree

6. Union of India v. J.S. Arora, CWP
No.3149/2001
In all these cases, Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that

where the casual appointment were granted in respect of a particular
scheme or project, the ad-hoc employees working in such scheme
have no right to claim regularisation of their services with regular pay
scales.
14.

Having considered the matter, we find no merit in the

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 6 of 12

submission of the petitioners and the orders passed by the Tribunal
does not call for any interference in the present case. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court in its recent constitution bench decision in the case of
Secretary, State of Karnataka and others vs. Umadevi and
others (2006) 4 SCC 1 clearly held that persons appointed on ad hoc
and casual basis without following a due process of selection have no
right to claim regularisation. The Supreme Court in this decision has,
inter alia, held:“43. Thus, it is clear that adherence to the rule
of equality in public employment is a basic
feature of our Constitution and since the rule of
law is the core of our Constitution, a Court
would certainly be disabled from passing an
order upholding a violation of Article 14 or in
ordering the overlooking of the need to comply
with the requirements of Article 14 read with
Article 16 of the Constitution. Therefore,
consistent with the scheme for public
employment, this Court while laying down the
law, has necessarily to hold that unless the
appointment is in terms of the relevant rules
and after a proper competition among qualified
persons, the same would not confer any right
on the appointee. If it is a contractual
appointment, the appointment comes to an end
at the end of the contract, if it were an
engagement or appointment on daily wages or
casual basis, the same would come to an end
when it is discontinued. Similarly, a temporary
employee could not claim to be made
permanent on the expiry of his term of
appointment. It has also to be clarified that
merely because a temporary employee or a
casual wage worker is continued for a time
beyond the term of his appointment, he would
not be entitled to be absorbed in regular service
or made permanent, merely on the strength of
such continuance, if the original appointment
WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 7 of 12

was not made by following a due process of
selection as envisaged by the relevant rules. It
is not open to the court to prevent regular
recruitment at the instance of temporary
employees whose period of employment has
come to an end or of ad hoc employees who by
the very nature of their appointment, do not
acquire any right. High Courts acting under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India, should
not ordinarily issue directions for absorption,
regularization, or permanent continuance
unless the recruitment itself was made
regularly and in terms of the constitutional
scheme. Merely because, an employee had
continued under cover of an order of Court,
which we have described as 'litigious
employment' in the earlier part of the
judgment, he would not be entitled to any right
to be absorbed or made permanent in the
service.
45.
While
directing
that
appointments,
temporary or casual, be regularized or made
permanent, courts are swayed by the fact that
the concerned person has worked for some
time and in some cases for a considerable
length of time. It is not as if the person who
accepts an engagement either temporary or
casual in nature, is not aware of the nature of
his employment. He accepts the employment
with eyes open. It may be true that he is not in
a position to bargain -- not at arms length -since he might have been searching for some
employment so as to eke out his livelihood and
accepts whatever he gets. But on that ground
alone, it would not be appropriate to jettison
the Page 1946 constitutional scheme of
appointment and to take the view that a person
who has temporarily or casually got employed
should
be
directed
to
be
continued
permanently. By doing so, it will be creating
another mode of public appointment which is
not permissible. If the court were to void a
contractual employment of this nature on the
ground that the parties were not having equal
bargaining power, that too would not enable the
WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 8 of 12

court to grant any relief to that employee. A
total embargo on such casual or temporary
employment is not possible, given the
exigencies of administration and if imposed,
would only mean that some people who at least
get employment temporarily, contractually or
casually, would not be getting even that
employment
when
securing
of
such
employment brings at least some succor to
them. ...The argument that since one has been
working for some time in the post, it will not be
just to discontinue him, even though he was
aware of the nature of the employment when
he first took it up, is not one that would enable
the jettisoning of the procedure established by
law for public employment and would have to
fail when tested on the touchstone of
constitutionality and equality of opportunity
enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
47. When a person enters a temporary
employment or gets engagement as a
contractual or casual worker and the
engagement is not based on a proper selection
as recognized by the relevant rules or
procedure, he is aware of the consequences of
the appointment being temporary, casual or
contractual in nature. Such a person cannot
invoke the theory of legitimate expectation for
being confirmed in the post when an
appointment to the post could be made only by
following a proper procedure for selection and
in concerned cases, in consultation with the
Public Service Commission. Therefore, the
theory of legitimate expectation cannot be
successfully
advanced
by
temporary,
contractual or casual employees. It cannot also
be held that the State has held out any promise
while engaging these persons either to continue
them where they are or to make them
permanent. The State cannot constitutionally
make such a promise. It is also obvious that the
theory cannot be invoked to seek a positive
relief of being made permanent in the post.”
15.

Following the decision in Uma Devi (supra), the Apex

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 9 of 12

Court in Mahadeo Bhau Khilare (Mane) & Ors. V. State of
Maharashtra & Ors., JT 2007(6) SCC 562 observed with respect to
appointments made by Talathis to assist them in their work that
before a person could claim regularisation in the services of the State,
he must be in the services of the State. Since, these persons were
appointed by Talathis (employees themselves) and no post was in
existence against which they could have been recruited nor any
recruitment rules thereof were framed, the appointments were not
under the State and illegal. Therefore, regularisation could not have
been granted to them. In Surinder Prasad Tiwari v. U.P. Rajya
Krishi Utpadan Mandi Parishad, 2006 (7) SCC 684, it was
observed that our constitutional framework does not provide room for
back door entry in the matter of public employment. Daily wages, adhoc employees, probationers, temporary or contractual employees
not appointed following the procedure laid down under Article 14, 16
and 309 cannot lay a claim to regular appointment in Government
services.
16.

Admittedly the appointment of the petitioners was purely

ad hoc in nature, their appointments were not in accordance with any
recruitment rules and they were picked up at random from the
market by the commission, their employment cannot be under the
State.

The petitioners therefore acquired no right to claim for

regularisation. Moreover, the appointment of the petitioners was in

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 10 of 12

respect of a time-bound assignment/project and, in any case, they
could not have claimed regularisation. Merely because the tenure of
the Liberhan Commission has been extended further, that could not
give a right to the petitioners to claim that their services should be
continued till so long as the tenure of the Commission is extended. As
aforesaid, the work of the commission is nearly over, and the need to
make contractual appointments is also shrinking with passage of
time.
17.

Reliance placed by the petitioner upon the decision of the

Apex Court in Ajit Singh (supra) is of no avail as the said decision
pertains to

temporary employees appointed as per Recruitment

Rules to existing posts whose services were attempted to be
dispensed with after expiry of the probationary period of one year,
and they had been given an increment in pursuance thereof,though
not yet regularised. The decision in Anjali Bepari (supra) is also not
germane to the present controversy, inasmuch as, in that case the
Apex Court was concerned with retrenchment of an employee
appointed against a casual vacancy and the Court only passed
directions under Article 142 of the Constitution which do not form a
precedent, and any case cannot now be followed in view of the
decision in Uma Devi (supra).
18.

So far as the argument based on the decision in

Mohinder Singh Gill (supra) is concerned, the same is also

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 11 of 12

misplaced inasmuch as the reason stated in the order dated
27.11.2002 are based on the order dated 23.7.2001 whereby a ban
on ad hoc appointment on ad hoc basis has been imposed, and, it has
nothing to do with the tenure of the commission.

The decision in

Avas Vikas (supra) also does not extend any help to the petitioners
claims. On the contrary the said decision recognises the sovereign
right of the State to abolish a post under the state without conferring
any right of re-appointment on those holding the abolished post. The
petitioners before us were not even holding any permanently
sanctioned post, so the question of any impediment to their discontinuation as ad hoc workers does not arise.
19.

Consequently, we find no merit in this petition and

dismissed the same, leaving the parties to bear their respective costs.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

September 17, 2007

A.K.SIKRI, J.

nk/P.K. BABBAR

WP(C) No. 3999/03

Page 12 of 12

