*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006
Judgment Reserved on : January 29, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on : May 18, 2007

M/s. Kanhai Engineering (Towers)
Pvt. Ltd.
..... Decree Holder
Through: Mr.Ratan K. Singh &
Mr. Nikhilesh Krishan,
Advocates
versus
M/s. Telecommunications
Consultants India Ltd.
..... Judgment
Debtor
Through: Mr. Shivram, Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J
1.

The present Execution Petition arisen from an Arbitration Award

dated 06.07.2001 passed by the Sole Arbitrator Shri A. K. Duggal in
Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 1 of 9

Arbitration between M/s Kanhai Engineering (Towers) Pvt. Ltd.
(hereinafter

referred

to

as

the

Decree

Holder)

and

M/s.

Telecommunication Consultants India Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to
as the Judgment Debtor). The learned arbitrator, inter alia, awarded
the Decree Holder interest as per Clause 5.1.1. of the Agreement
between the parties. The objections filed under Section 34 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 in O.M.P. No. 302/2001 came to
be dismissed and the award was upheld vide order dated 09.03.2006
by this Court. The Award was modified to the extent that interest was
granted under the provisions of “The Interest on Delayed Payments to
Small

Scale

Industrial

and

Ancillary

Undertakings

Act,

1993”

(hereinafter referred to as the Act).
2.

The Decree Holder while computing the amount due, calculated

the same by adding compound interest with monthly rest at a fixed
rate of 23% and arrived at a sum of Rs.45,67,163.00 (Forty five lakhs
sixty seven thousands one hundred sixty three only). After deducting
the amount tendered by the Judgment Debtor, the claim of the Decree
Holder is Rs.30,90,571.00 (Thirty lakhs ninety thousands five hundred
seventy one only) calculated as mentioned herein above.
3.

On the other hand, the Judgment Debtor calculated its liability

under the decree by assuming the same principal liability, the same
time frame for the computation of interest, and computed its liability
with compound interest compounded monthly, but the rate of interest

Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 2 of 9

has been arrived on the basis of the floating rate of interest based on
the lending rates of the banks from time to time. The Judgment Debtor
has also added 5 per cent points to the floor rate of interest under
Section 4 of the Act.
4.

The only question that arises for determination is with regard to

the correct manner of arriving at the rate at which interest is to be
applied in computing the overdue interest. The Decree Holder claims
that interest is to be paid at a fixed compounded rate, with monthly
rests, while the Judgment Debtor seeks to pay interest at a floating
rate, with monthly rests.
5.

Having heard arguments of the both the counsels for the parties,

I am of the view that the rate of interest adopted by the Judgment
Debtor is correct, for the reasons to follow.
6.

The Act is a legislation intended for the benefit of Small Scale

Industries and Ancillary Undertakings. It seeks to prevent delay in flow
of institutional credit due to such Small Scale Industries and Ancillary
Undertakings. The main purpose of the Act as stated in the Objects
and Reasons is to provide for and regulate the payment of interest on
delayed

payments

to

Small

Scale

Industries

and

Ancillary

Undertakings. Sections 4 and 5 of the Act being relevant are
reproduced herein below:
“4. Date from which and rate at which
interest is payable.- Where any buyer fails to
make payment of the amount to the supplier,
as required under section 3, the buyer shall,
Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 3 of 9

notwithstanding anything contained in any
agreement between the buyer and the supplier
or in any law for the time being in force, be
liable to pay interest to the supplier on that
amount from the appointed day or, as the case
may be, from the date immediately following
the date agreed upon, at such rate which is five
per cent points above the floor rate for
comparable lending.
Explanation. – For the purposes of this
section, “floor rate for comparable lending”
means the highest of the minimum lending
rates charged by scheduled banks (not being
co-operative banks) on credit limits in
accordance with the directions given or issued
to banking companies generally by the Reserve
Bank of India under the Banking Regulation Act,
1949.”
“5. Liability of buyer to pay compound
interest.
–
Notwithstanding
anything
contained in any agreement between a supplier
and a buyer or in any law for the time being in
force, the buyer shall be liable to pay
compound interest (with monthly rests) at the
rate mentioned in section 4 on the amount due
to the supplier.”
7.

Small Scale Industries and ancillary undertakings, by the very

nature, are those industries which work on smaller capital and
infrastructure. Invariably such industries would be more sensitive to
any blockade of their working capital. It is also not uncommon that
such industries and undertakings are dependent upon interest bearing
loans and facilities that are provided by banks and financial
institutions. The Act, firstly seeks to create a disincentive for a debtor
or lender of/and to such industries and undertakings to withhold their
dues by prescribing a higher rate of interest on the dues of the small

Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 4 of 9

scale industries and ancillary undertaking, than would normally be
payable to other creditors. Secondly, it seeks to insulate the small
scale industries and ancillary undertakings against the erosion of their
capital on account of the said industries/undertakings having to pay a
higher rate of interest on the loans and facilities taken by them from
banks and financial institutions, than they may be entitled to recover
under the law from their debtors.
7.

It is settled

law that whenever

there

are two possible

interpretations of a statute, the one that subserves the objective of an
enactment and leads to the advancement of the object and purpose of
the legislation is to be accepted. In the instant case, the adoption of
the fluctuating rate of interest would provide the desired cover to the
Small Scale Industry/Ancillary Undertaking, and not the fixed rate of
interest as claimed by the Decree Holder. In case the fluctuating rate
of interest is adopted, the Small Scale Industries would remain
protected if there is an upward revision in the highest minimum
lending rate charged by scheduled banks on credit limits. In the event
of the rates of lending by banks being lowered, they would still
continue to remain protected since they would continue to earn
interest at a rate that is 5% above the highest minimum lending rate
charged by scheduled banks on credit limits. On the other hand, if a
fixed rate of interest is adopted, relatable to the highest of the
minimum lending rates charged by scheduled banks on credit limits

Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 5 of 9

that has been fixed by Reserve Bank of India at the time when the
amount becomes due and payable to the Small Scale Industry, an
upward revision in the rates of lending would adversely affect the
Small Scale Industry, since the rate of interest to which it would be
entitled would get pegged down, while it may have to pay interest at a
higher rate on its own borrowings from banks and financial institutions,
who normally charge interest on their lending at fluctuating rates on
directions issued by Reserve Bank of India.
8.

I also find support from the use of the words ‘rates charged by

scheduled banks’ and the words ‘in accordance with the
directions given or issued to banking companies generally by
Reserve Bank of India’, used in the Explanation to section 4 of the
Act, which defines ‘floor rate for comparable lending’. There
expressions show that what is contemplated by the legislature is not
just and single highest minimum lending rate, but different highest
minimum lending rates, which could only be at different times, i.e.,
from time to time. Directions are issued by the Reserve Bank of India,
under the Banking Regulations Act, 1949, from time to time under
Section 21 thereof. Section 21(2)(e) specifically empowers the
Reserve Bank of India to issue binding directions to banking
companies, thereby prescribing the rate of interest and other terms
and conditions on which advances or other financial accommodation
may be made on guarantees may be given. The rates fixed by the

Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 6 of 9

Reserve Bank of India are dependent on factors such as money supply,
inflation, price index, etc. etc., and it keeps fluctuating from time to
time.
9.

The judgment reported in 2005 (13) SCC 19, Assam Small Scale

Industries Development Corporation Ltd. Vs. J.D. Pharmaceuticals
relied upon by the Decree Holder is of little assistance, since the issue
raised in the present case was neither raised before, nor considered
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in that case. A perusal of the said
judgment, particularly paragraph 14, thereof would show that the
Hon’ble Supreme Court granted compound interest @ 23.5% per
annum, however, without going into the issue that has now arisen
before me. Similar is the position with regard to the decision of the
Patna High Court in First Appeal No.461/2000.
10.

The decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Central Bank of

India Vs. Ravindra, 2002 (1) SCC 367, in my view, supports the
reasoning adopted by me. Interest once capitalized sheds its colour of
interest and becomes a part of the principal liability. Consequently,
when interest is compounded every month, interest would be added
for one month to the amount which was the principal at the beginning
in the month, and for the next month, the whole amount would be
treated as the principal, which would then earn interest at the
applicable rate. Consequently, at the beginning of every month, the
principal amount would be determined, on which the rate of interest,

Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 7 of 9

which is arrived at by adding 5% to the floating rate for comparable
lending, would be applied for one month. This exercise would be
repeated every month. When the principal amount is not a constant,
and changes each month, and each month the exercise of calculation
of interest has to be undertaken afresh, there is no difficulty in
applying the rate of interest computed with reference to the floor rate
for comparable lending.
11.

There could be no quarrel with the proposition that the

amendments to the Act, which came in the year 1998, would not apply
to the present case. This is so held in 2000 (7) SCC 756, Krishi
Utpadan Mandi Samiti Vs. Kanhiya Lal and others, as has been rightly
pointed out by the counsel for the Decree Holder. However, it appears
that the Judgment Debtor has not sought to reduce the 5% additional
interest as contemplated by section 4 of the Act, on the basis of the
amendment while making their computation of payment due to the
Decree Holder. The Judgment Debtor has also proceeded to compute
and pay its liability on the basis of the unamended law.
12.

For the aforesaid reasons, I hold that the computation of interest

as resorted to by the Judgment Debtor is correct and I accept the
same. Since the Judgment Debtor has already paid to the Decree
Holder the amount computed by it as per its calculation amounting to
Rs.18,69,812/-, the decree stands satisfied and the execution petition
is therefore disposed of as satisfied.

Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 8 of 9

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
May 18, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

Ex. P. No. 131 of 2006

Page 9 of 9

