*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

%

Date of Decision :

19th February 2008

Atul Glass Industries (Pvt.) Ltd.
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Sunil Malhotra,
Advocate

versus
Smt. Prem Bhargava.
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr.R.S. Endlaw with
Mr.Mahfooz Nazni,
Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J. (Oral)
1.

The petitioner impugns the order dated 30th November

2006 passed by the learned Additional Rent Control Tribunal, Delhi in
R.C.A. No.416/2005 whereby the appeal filed by the petitioner under
Section 38 of the Delhi Rent Control Act (the Act) against the eviction
order dated 29th July 2005 passed by the learned Additional Rent
Controller, Delhi under Section 14(1)(b) of the Act has been
dismissed.
2.

The petitioner Atul Glass Industries (P) Ltd. is admittedly

the tenant of the respondent in respect of suit premises bearing
Showroom No.G-4, Ground Floor, Mansarover, 90, Nehru Place, New
C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 1 of 10

Delhi. The respondent landlord filed the eviction petition, inter-alia, on
the ground contained in section 14(1)(b) of the Act with the plea that
the suit premises has been sub-let and/or parted with possession of
by the petitioner to three different entities, namely, M/s. Image Glass
House, M/s. Galhotra Express Commercial Art and M/s. T.S. Bedi. The
eviction petition was contested by the petitioner. After the trial by a
detailed judgment, the learned Additional Rent Controller Delhi
returned the finding that the petitioner tenant has sub-let the
premises to the aforesaid three entities. The Additional Rent Control
Tribunal, as aforesaid, has dismissed the first appeal and that is how
the matter is before this court.
3.

The

first

submission

of

learned

counsel

for

the

petitioner is that M/s. Image Glass House was merely a trading name
of the petitioner and the petitioner was, in fact, carrying on the
business under that name from the suit premises. The petitioner is in
exclusive possession of the tenanted premises.

So far as M/s.

Galhotra Express Commercial Art and M/s. T.S. Bedi are concerned,
the stand of the petitioner was that they were not operating from
within the suit premises and were direct tenants of the landlords. It
was secondly contended that while deciding the appeal, the learned
Additional Rent Control Tribunal has merely reproduced passages
from the findings of the learned ARC and has not applied its own mind
to appreciate the evidence and to arrive at a finding of sub-tenancy or
parting with possession of the suit premises by the tenant to third

C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 2 of 10

parties. Learned counsel also argues that a perusal of the eviction
petition would show that there was a contradiction in the eviction
petition itself, inasmuch as, in response to the column “whether there
are any sub-tenants etc.,”, the landlord has answered in the negative
whereas in response to column (9) i.e. “whether the premises are
occupied by single tenant or more than one tenant”, the landlord had
stated “Leased to single tenanted respondent has sublet assigned
and parted with the possession of the whole of the suit premises to
three persons of the tenanted premises without obtaining the consent
in writing of the owner/landlord/ petitioner”. Similar averments were
made in paragraph 18(a) of the eviction petition. The counsel also
drew my attention to written statement filed by the petitioner to the
eviction petition and particularly to paragraph 18(a)(ii).
4.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner has also relied on the

following decisions:
“(i) AIR 1984 SC 1447, Jagdish Prasad
vs. Smt. Angoori Devi, wherein the
Supreme Court held that merely from the
presence of a person other than the tenant in
the shop, sub-letting cannot be presumed, as
long as control over the premises is kept by
the tenant and the business run in the
premises is of the tenant.
(ii)
AIR 1987 SC 2055, Dipak Banerjee
vs. Smt. Lilabati Chakraborty, wherein the
Supreme Court has held that in order to prove
tenancy or sub-tenancy two ingredients have
to be established, firstly the tenant must have
exclusive right of possession or interest in the
premises or part of the premises in question
and secondly that right must be in lieu of
payment of some compensation or rent.
C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 3 of 10

(iii) AIR 1988 SC 162, Jagan Nath
(Deceased) through LRs vs. Chander
Bhan & Others, wherein the Supreme Court
held that the parting with possession means
giving possession to persons other than those
to whom possession had been given by the
lease and the parting with possession must
have been by the tenant; user by other
person is not parting with possession so long
as the tenant retains the legal possession
himself, or in other words there must be
vesting of possession by the tenant in other
person by divesting himself not only of
physical possession but also of the right to
possession. So long as the tenant retains the
right to possession there is no parting with
possession in terms of clause (b) of Section
14(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
(iv) (1990) 2 SCC 331, Delhi Stationers
and Printers vs. Rajendra Kumar, wherein
the Supreme Court held that subletting means
transfer of an exclusive right to enjoy the
property in favour of a third party and the
said right must be in lieu of payment of some
compensation or rent. Parting of the legal
possession means possession with the right to
include and also a right to exclude others.
Mere occupation is not sufficient to infer
either
sub-tenancy
or
parting
with
possession.”
5.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the Respondent

urged that in these proceedings under Article 227 of the Constitution
of India, the court is not required to review or weigh the evidence on
which the determination of the inferior court or Tribunal purports to
be based.

In support of this submission, reliance is placed on the

decision of this Court in Dr. (Mrs.) Sushil Puri & Ors. vs. Jai Gopal
& Ors., 135 (2006) DLT 90. On the same lines is the decision of this
court in Goverdhan Lal Soni vs. Indian Sulphacid Industries
Ltd. & Ors., 2004 III AD (Delhi) 439. To counter the argument of the
C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 4 of 10

petitioner, that the learned Additional Rent Control Tribunal had
merely reproduced the extracts from the order passed by the learned
ARC, without itself appreciating the evidence, learned counsel for the
respondent argued that it is not necessary for the first appellate court
to undertake the complete exercise of reappreciating the evidence on
its own, particularly where it agrees with the view of the trial court. In
support of this argument he relied on Girijanandini Devi & others
vs. Bijendra Narain Choudhary, AIR 1967 SC 1124, wherein the
Supreme Court held as follows:
“... It is true that the High Court did not enter
upon a reappraisal of the evidence, but it
generally approved of the reasons adduced by
the Trial Court in support of its conclusion. We
are unable to hold that the learned Judges of
the High Court did not, as is contended before
us, consider the evidence. It is not the duty of
the appellate court when it agrees with the
view of the trial court on the evidence either
to restate the effect of the evidence or to
reiterate the reasons given by the Trial Court.
Expression of general agreement with reasons
given by the Court decision of which is under
appeal would ordinarily suffice.”
6.

Having considered the rival contentions of the parties, I

am inclined to agree with the submissions of the respondent. The
submission of the petitioner based on the averments made in the
eviction petition merely needs to be stated to be rejected. The entire
eviction petition has to be read and understood as a whole. In answer
to the query as to whether there are any sub-tenants etc., the
respondent landlord had answered in the negative while it was clearly
stated that the premises has been sublet/possession parted with by
C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 5 of 10

the tenant and names of the sub-tenants/occupants were also
disclosed. It is obvious that the landlord while answering the query at
S. No.16, understood it to mean: whether there are any legal and
recognised sub tenants in the premises ?
7.

The submissions of the petitioner that M/s. Image Glass

House was merely a trading style of the petitioner and that the other
two entities, M/s. Galhotra Express Commercial Art and M/s. T.S. Bedi
were either encroacher or direct tenants of the landlord have been
considered and rejected by the two courts below and it is not for this
court to reappraise the evidence to come to a different conclusion.
Moreover, for succeeding in the eviction petition, it was sufficient for
the respondent landlord to establish the subletting or parting with the
possession of the premises or a part thereof to even a single entity.
So far as M/s. Image Glass House is concerned, the finding recorded
by the learned Additional Rent Controller is very clear and categorical
and the same reads as follows:
“Moreover, here in the present case, the
petitioner has alleged that in fact the
premises has been sub-let by the respondent
to M/s. Image Glass House, while it is the
respondent who has taken plea that Image
Glass House is the trade name of the
respondent by which it has been carrying its
business. But the respondent failed to
produce any documents on record stating that
respondent was carrying out their business in
the name and style of M/s. Image Glass which
in a retain show room, nor the respondent has
produced any list of retail showroom by which
he has been carrying the business as
partnership firm. He has deposited the
documents of partnership in the sales tax
C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 6 of 10

department and sales tax registration of
Image Glass House. The respondent company
has not produced any document to the effect
that the sales proceed of Image Glass House
has been reflected in the accounts of the
respondent. Nor any account of rent paid has
been produced on record. Even the power of
attorney has been executed by RW2 in favour
of RW1 in his personal capacity and no other
record has been placed on record by which it
has been proved that Atul Gulati, Managing
Director is authorized to appoint Shri S.C.
Bhutani. The counsel for the respondent has
challenged the reliability of PW1 when in his
cross-examination he has denied the identity
by Shri S.C. Bhutani, while she has written
several letters to him. But that does not have
any merit, particularly when such evidence
are on record that in fact it is the respondent
who has sublet, assigned or parted with the
possession of the suit premises to three
persons, i.e, Image Glass House, T.S. Bedi and
Galhotra Express Commercial Art. The
respondent Company has not produced on
record anything where it has been carrying
the business in the name of Image Glass
House. Ex. PW1/18 were the bills book also do
not reflects that it is the Company show room
where the business has been carried out by
M/s. Atul Glass Company tenant in the suit
premises.
Here the presence of three persons has been
established on record. It is only the
respondent who can tell how they come into
existence
in the suit premises.
The
respondent has no answer nor they produced
any document to prove the fact except verbal
deposition that they are direct tenants of the
petitioner or they are encroacher which does
not have any meaning.
In view of the above discussions in hand, I am
of the view that the petitioner has proved her
case that the respondent has sublet, assigned
or otherwise parted with the possession of the
suit premises to M/s. Image Glass House
without obtaining the consent in writing of the
petitioner. Therefore, I pass an eviction order
under Section 14(1)(b) of the Act in favour of
C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 7 of 10

the petitioner and against the Respondents
with respect to the suit premises i.e. Show
Room No.G-4, Ground Floor, Mansarovar, 90,
Nehru Place, New Delhi-110019, as shown red
in the site plan Ex. AW1/1.”
8.

The argument of the petitioner that the landlord had

been dealing with Mr. Bhutani of Image Glass House over the years is
neither here nor there. It is not the petitioners case that the premises
was let out to Mr. Bhutani or Image Glass House. It is the petitioners
case that it was and is the tenant in the premises. Merely because
Mr. Bhutani might have interacted with the landlord, holding himself
out as a representative of the petitioner-tenant, that does not lead to
the inference that Image Glass House is an outfit of the tenant. On a
closer scrutiny, the cat has come out of the bag and it is clearly
established that Image Glass House has no nexus with the petitionertenant. I also find that in the facts of this case, the reliance placed on
the aforesaid decisions of the Supreme Court is of no avail. It is not
the case of the petitioner that M/s. Image Glass House was not in the
exclusive possession of the suit premises.

In fact, the case of the

petitioner is that M/s. Image Glass House is a trade name of the
petitioner M/s. Atul Glass Industries Pvt. Ltd. and that business is
being done in the premises in the name of Image Glass House. The
exclusive possession of Image Glass House is not even disputed.
Therefore, once it is found as a matter of fact that Image Glass House
is not an outfit of the petitioner tenant, the only conclusion that
follows is that the tenant has parted with the possession of the suit
premises to Image Glass House.
C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 8 of 10

9.

The later decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court do not

support the case of the petitioner. Reference be made to: M/s
Bharat Sales Ltd. v/s Life Insurance Corporation Of India , AIR
1998 SC 1240, wherein it was held that:
“Sub-tenancy or subletting comes into
existence when the tenant gives up
possession of the tenanted accommodation,
wholly or in part, and puts another person in
exclusive
possession
thereof.
This
arrangement comes about obviously under a
mutual agreement of understanding between
the tenant and the person to whom the
possession is so delivered. In this process, the
landlord is kept out of the scene. Rather, the
scene is enacted behind the back of the
landlord, concealing the overacts and
transferring possession clandestinely to a
person who is an utter stranger to the
landlord, in the sense that the landlord had
not let out the premises to that person nor
had he allowed or consented to his entering
into possession over the demised property. It
is the actual, physical and exclusive
possession of that person, instead of the
tenant, which ultimately reveals to the
landlord that the tenant to whom the property
was let out has put some other person into
possession of that property. In such a
situation, it would be difficult for the landlord
to prove, by direct evidence, the contract or
agreement or understanding between the
tenant and the sub-tenant. It would also be
difficult for the landlord to prove, by direct
evidence, that the person to whom the
property had been sublet had paid monetary
consideration to the tenant. Payment of rent,
undoubtedly, is an essential element of lease
or sub-lease. It may be paid in cash or in kind
or may have been paid or promised to be
paid. It may have been paid in lump-sum in
advance covering the period for which the
premises is let out or sublet or it may have
been paid or promised to be paid periodically.
Since payment of rent or monetary
C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 9 of 10

consideration may have been made secretly,
the law does not require such payment to be
proved by affirmative evidence and the court
is permitted to draw its own inference upon
the facts of the case proved at the trial,
including the delivery of exclusive possession
to infer that the premises were sublet.”
10.

I find that the learned Tribunal has generally agreed

that the findings of the learned Additional Rent Controller and it was
not necessary for the Tribunal to have gone into the complete
analysis and re-appraisal of the evidence on its own. It is sufficient if
the order

of the Tribunal discloses

application

of mind and

consideration of the arguments raised before it by the parties.
11.

For the aforesaid reasons, I dismiss this petition

leaving the parties to bear their own respective costs.
12.

Lower court record be sent back to the Trial Court.

February 19, 2008

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

P.K. BABBAR

C.M. (M) No.115 of 2007

Page 10 of 10

