HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
W.P(C) 6898 OF 2001
Judgment reserved on: October 11, 2007
Judgment delivered on:
#
!

December 19 , 2007

Ashok Kumar
Through:

.....Petitioner
Mr. Naresh Kaushik, Mr. Satish
Dayanandon and Mr. G.S. Pandey,
Advocates.
versus

$
^

Commissioner of Police & Ors.
Through:

Ms.

.....Respondents
Anusuya
Advocate.

Salwan,

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
No
VIPIN SANGHI, J.
:
1.
The petitioner was a Constable in Delhi Police and at
the material time he was posted as personal orderly to one
Assistant Commissioner of Police at IGI Airport. The petitioner was
wp 6898.01

page 1 of 11

charge-sheeted and the summary of allegation reads as follows:“It is alleged against Const. Ashok Kumar
No.481-A that on 7.7.97 while driving bus
No.DL-1P-8227 under DTC,has jumped Red
Light of W Point on way from ITO side and
continued driving the bus rashly and
dangerously causing danger to the life of
the public in the presence of C.P Delhi. The
bus was stopped at Sikandara Ropad Bus
Stop. On receiving W.T message in Tilak
Marg Circle from SI Karan Singh No.2376-D
WT Operator of C.P.Delhi, ASI Parmanand
Z.O. reached the spot and challaned Ashok
Kumar s/o Shri Harbhajan Singh r/o F-19,
Mandawali, Fazalpur, Delhi-92 the bus
driver, and arrested him U/S 184 M.V.Act
and later on released him on personal
Bond. It was found that Ashok Kumar, bus
driver is a Constable of Delhi Police and
posted as personal orderly to Shri Sita Ram
Mamgain, ACP/IGI Airport.
It is further alleged against Const. Ashok
Kumar No.481-A that being a Govt. servant
he engaged himself in other trade and
undertaking employment in violation of
Rule 15 of CCS(Conduct) Rules, 1964.”
2.

A

departmental

enquiry

followed

wherein

two

prosecution witnesses and five defence witnesses were examined.
The Enquiry Officer on the basis of the evidence adduced before
him concluded in his report dated 2.11.1997 that the charges
stood proved against the petitioner.

The Disciplinary authority

concurred with the findings of the Enquiry Officer and proceeded to
impose the penalty of dismissal from service against the petitioner

wp 6898.01

page 2 of 11

on 22.12.1997. The departmental appeal was also dismissed by
the appellate authority while agreeing with the findings and the
order passed by the Disciplinary Authority vide his order
19.3.1998.

dated

Even the Revisional Authority did not interfere and

rather affirmed the orders of the Disciplinary Authority and the
Appellate Authority vide his order dated 4.1.1999. That led to the
filing of

O.A. No.618/99 by the petitioner before the Central

Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (for short `the
Tribunal') which too has been dismissed by the Tribunal by its
impugned judgment dated 10.7.2001. Challenging the same, the
present petition has been filed.
3.

The main thrust of the argument of the petitioner is

that based on the same incident, namely that on 07.07.1997 the
petitioner was found driving a bus being run under Delhi Transport
Corporation which had jumped red light at W Point on way from
ITO and was being driven rashly and dangerously causing danger
to the lives of the public, the petitioner had been acquitted by the
Criminal Court and consequently the petitioner could not be held
guilty in the departmental proceedings.

It is argued that the

acquittal of the petitioner in the criminal court vide judgment
dated 12.7.2000 is based on no evidence and consequently the
petitioner could not be penalised on the basis of the departmental
wp 6898.01

page 3 of 11

enquiry.

It is also argued that the extreme punishment of

dismissal was not warranted in the facts of the present case since
the petitioner had a clean service record prior to the incident in
question. It is submitted that the petitioner has been subjected to
the penalty of dismissal only on account of the fact that the
enquiry was initiated at the behest of the Commissioner of Police
since the incident is stated to have taken place in the presence of
the Commissioner.
4.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent

has opposed the petition and defended the order of the Tribunal. It
is argued that the Tribunal has extensively dealt with all the
submissions of the petitioner and there is no infirmity in the said
order calling for interference by this Court in judicial review.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the denial of
the incident by the petitioner is patently false, inasmuch, as, he
had also furnished personal bond when he was caught at the site
of the incident and that there would have been no occasion for him
to furnish his personal bond if he was not so involved in driving the
bus and that too dangerously.
5.

Having considered the submissions of both parties, we

are of the view that there is no merit in this petition and the same

wp 6898.01

page 4 of 11

deserves to be dismissed.

The enquiry report of the Enquiry

Officer is of 2.11.1997. By the time the petitioner was acquitted in
the criminal case on 12.07.2000 the departmental proceedings had
attained finality inasmuch as not only the order of penalty had
been passed by the Disciplinary Authority but the departmental
appeal and revisional proceedings had also been finalised. These
proceedings were founded upon evidence led during the course of
the departmental enquiry.

A perusal of the findings of the

departmental enquiry placed on record reveals that the same is
based on cogent evidence. Four Pws were examined during the
departmental proceedings.

PW-1, Inspector Sanjeev Kumar TI,

Delhi Cantt Traffic Police Delhi stated that on 7.7.1997 he was
posted as TI, Tilak Marg Circle. On receiving WT message from CP,
Delhi he had detailed ASI Parmanand Z.O to go to the spot who
challaned Constable Ashok Kumar under Sections 184 & 119/177 of
the Motor Vehicles Act. Enquiries had revealed that the petitioner,
Ashok Kumar was a constable of Delhi Police and posted as
personnel orderly to Sh. Sita Ram Mamgain, ACP/Palam. Constable
Ashok Kumar was arrested

under Section 184 of the Motor

Vehicles Act and later released on personal bond. PW-2 SI Karan
Singh

stated

that

he

was

Commissioner of Police, Delhi.

wp 6898.01

the

wireless

operator

to

the

On 7.7.1997 at 6.30 a.m the

page 5 of 11

Commissioner of Police was proceeding to his residence while the
car of the Commissioner halted at W Point on Mathura Road on
account of traffic red light. A bus came from Bahadur Shah Zafar
Marg, Tilak Bridge Side at high speed and crossed the red light to
proceed towards Sikandra Road.

The Commissioner of Police

ordered to intercept the bus which was intercepted on Sikandra
Road.

The driver was asked to come down and to be produced

before the Commissioner.

After some conversation between the

Commissioner and the driver, the Commissioner ordered PW-2 to
give a wireless message to the traffic control room to send the TI
or Z.O to Sikandra Road and that PW-2 complied with the orders of
the Commissioner. The Commissioner left the PSO on the spot and
proceeded to his residence. The Commissioner informed PW-2 that
the driver was a Constable of Delhi Police and also directed PW-2
to give full details in writing. After dropping the Commissioner at
his residence, PW-2 went to Tilak Marg Circle where the Z.O
informed that the driver, Constable Ashok Kumar, who was posted
as orderly to Sh. Mamgain ACP was a police Constable. During the
enquiry, PW-2, identified Constable Ashok Kumar as the person
who was driving the bus. SI Shyamlal appeared as PW-3 who was
posted as PSO with the Commissioner of Police and was a witness
to the incident. ASI Parmanand Z.O Traffic Police appeared as PW-

wp 6898.01

page 6 of 11

4 who responded to the wireless message and reached the place of
incident.

He challaned the petitioner, Ashok Kumar who was

produced before him by the staff under Sections 199 & 184 of the
Motor Vehicles Act. The petitioner was arrested and released on
personal bond. On enquiries, he learnt that Ashok Kumar was a
constable in Delhi Police. The petitioner produced the owner of the
bus, Shri Rajpal Singh as DW-1, who stated that he had engaged
two drivers, namely Gurcharan Singh and Shammi and that
Gurcharan Singh was on duty in the morning shift from 5.10 a.m to
1.40 p.m. He further stated that he had learnt of the incident and
that he had never engaged any driver in the name of Ashok
Kumar. He further stated that the driver Gurcharan had told him
that two policemen in plain clothes were beating him when one
Constable Ashok Kumar had intervened and Ashok Kumar was
challaned instead of the driver Gurcharan.
6.

Pertinently this witness was not present at the site nor

did he make any complaint about the alleged police action against
the driver Gurcharan. It is not even explained as to why Gurcharan
was allegedly being beaten by two police men in civil clothes. Sh.
Gurcharan appeared as DW-2 and made a statement on the lines
of DW-1.

Three other witnesses were also produced by the

petitioner in the enquiry.
wp 6898.01

The Enquiry Officer analysed the
page 7 of 11

statements made by the various witnesses as follows:“The
defaulter Constable through his
defence witnesses has tried in vain to prove
that
at the time of incident driver
Gurcharan Singh @ Gurdyal Singh was
driving the bus. The bus was intercepted by
the police on Sikandra Road. When the
police was beating driver Gurcharan Singh
@ Gurdyal Singh he intervened. The police
left Gurcharan Singh and challaned him
whereas he was not driving the bus. DWI Sh.
Rajpal Singh has stated that he had
employed Gurucharan Singh @ Gurudyal
Singh as his driver on bus no. DLIP 8227 in
the morning shift. During cross examination
by the E.O. this DW stated that he was not
present on the spot and could not say who
was driving the bus at the time of incident.
DW 2 Gurucharan Singh @ Gurudyal Singh
stated that when he was being beaten by
the police const. Ashok Kumar intervened
and that the police took away const. Ashok
Kumar after leaving him. He has not stated
at any time that Const. Ashok Kukmar as
beaten by the police whereas DW3 Mohd.
Yaseen has stated that when the police
officer stopped driver of the bus one
passenger who
was sitting in the bus
intervened and the police officer left the
driver and started beating that passenger.
This contradiction in the statements of these
DW's show that none of them was present
on the spot. Moreover PW3 Mohd. Yasin
during cross examination by the EO has
stated that he was brought in the DE
proceedings by the Constable Ashok Kumar.
DW4 Sh. Johri Mal has stated that as per
duty proforma of bus No. DLIP 8227 the
name of driver Gurucharan Singh has been
entered. He did not fill in the proforma. He
was not present on the spot and could not
state as to who was driving the bus. He
wp 6898.01

page 8 of 11

only received the proforma in his office.
DW-5 Ramesh Chand the conductor of the
bus has stated that on 7.7.97 he came on
bus No.DL1P 8227 as conductor for the first
time and the driver gave his name as
Gurucharan Singh, which he mentioned in
the proforma. He could not confirm the
identity of the driver. He did not know what
happened who took the bus etc. From my
above discussions it is clear that the
defaulter constable has failed to prove his
version.
From the statements of PW1 Inspector
Sanjeev Kumar, PW-2 SI Karan Singh, PW-3
SI Shyam Lal, PW-4 ASI Parma Nand, Ex.PW
1/A and Ex.PW 4/A it has been established
that defaulter constable Ashok Kumar
No.481/A was driving private bus no.DL1P
8227 under DTC operation at 6.30 AM on
7.7.97 and that he being a government
servant had engaged himself in the trade
and undertaken employment other than his
assigned duties in contravention of rule 15
of CCS (Conduct) Rules, 1964. The charge
against const. Ashok Kumar no.481/a stands
substantiated.”
7.

Therefore, it is evident that in the departmental enquiry

proceedings, the findings were arrived at on the basis of evidence
led by the petitioner and the department, whereas the acquittal in
the criminal trial was on account of failure of the prosecution to
lead any evidence whatsoever. Mere failure of the prosecution to
lead evidence in the criminal trial which results in the acquittal of
the accused does not lead to the conclusion that there is no
evidence to proceed with the departmental enquiry when, as a

wp 6898.01

page 9 of 11

matter of fact, in the departmental enquiry evidence has in fact
been led and it is on the basis of such evidence that the enquiry
officer has given his findings.
8.

From the aforesaid, it cannot be said that in the

departmental enquiry, no germane or relevant evidence was
produced in support of the charge or that the findings of the
enquiry officer are perverse i.e. no reasonable person could have
arrived at such findings on the basis of the evidence led in the
enquiry proceedings.

It is well settled that in the departmental

enquiries, the rigour of proof is not the same as that in a criminal
trial and in such enquiries the findings are arrived at on the
preponderance of probabilities. It is equally well settled that the
court, in judicial review cannot reappriciate the evidence and come
to its own findings different from those of the Disciplinary
Authority. It cannot therefore, be said that there was no evidence
in the present case and that on account of the subsequent
acquittal of the petitioner by the criminal court due to the failure of
the prosecution to lead any evidence, it would vitiate the
departmental enquiry and the consequent punishment.
9.

Coming to the question of the quantum of punishment,

we agree with the findings of the Tribunal that the charge against

wp 6898.01

page 10 of 11

the petitioner was grave enough to merit the punishment of
dismissal.

The petitioner was a police Constable and was

unauthorisedly driving a private bus under DTC operation thereby
engaging himself in a trade and undertaking employment other
than his usual duties. He was driving the vehicle dangerously and
had jumped the red light which had alerted the authorities leading
to his being booked under the Motor Vehicles Act.

It cannot be

said that the punishment inflicted upon the petitioner, in the facts
of the case is such as to shock the conscience of the Court. The
petitioner belonged to a disciplined force created to enforce the
law. However, it is seen that the petitioner had himself breached
the law with immunity, putting the lives of the public at large in
danger.
10.

No other argument was raised by the petitioner. In view

our aforesaid discussion, we find no merit in this petition and
dismiss the same, leaving the parties to bear their respective
costs.
VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

A.K.SIKRI
JUDGE
December 19, 2007
as
wp 6898.01

page 11 of 11

