HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision: 20th September, 2007
W.P (C) No.2832/2007 & CMs No.5292-93/2007
# Union of India & Anr.
!

Through:

.....Petitioner
Mr.A.K. Bhardwaj, Advocate

versus
$
^

Shri A.K. Chohdda & Ors.

..... Respondent
Through: Mr.Sandeep Sethi, Sr.Adv. with
Mr. A.K. Behera & Lakshay
Sawhney,Advs. for Respondent
No.1.
Mr. Arun Bharwaj & Mr. B.S.
Mathur, Advs. for respondent
No.2

*CORAM:
HON”BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
A.K.SIKRI, J (Oral)
:
1.
The first question that arises for consideration is as to
whether DPC was right in following the procedure contained in Office
Memorandum dated 8.2.2002. For this purpose we will have to take

wpc2832.07

page 1 of 10

into consideration as to what was the rule of promotion prescribed as
per Notification dated 9.9.2004, namely, Indian Supply Service (GroupA) Rules 1990.

There is an amendment to these Rules in the year

2004 vide Notification dated 21.6.2004.

However the period with

which we are concerned relates prior to 21.6.2004 and, therefore, it
cannot be disputed that the
Administrative

Grade

was

promotion to the post of Senior

regulated

by

the

unamended

rules

(hereinafter referred to as 1994 Rules) which prevailed prior to the
notification dated 21.6.2004. Rule 7 of the 1994 Rules is relevant for
our purpose. Omitting that portion of this Rule with which we are not
concerned, this Rule 7 reads as under:
“7. Future maintenance of the Service:
..........
(4)
All selection of officers for promotion
shall be made by selection on merit except in
the following cases, namely:
(a) Promotion of officers from the posts in the
Junior Time Scale to the posts in the Senior
Time Scale of the Service shall be in the order
of seniority subject to the reaction of the unfit;
and
(b) Grant of Selection Grade (Non Functional)
in the Junior Administrative Grade of the
Service shall be made in the order of their
seniority based on their suitability taking into
account the overall performance, experience
and other related matters in accordance with
the guidelines issued by the Government from
time to time.
(5) Selection of officer in each case under
item (b) of sub-rule (2) and sub-rule(3) shall be
on the recommendations of the Departmental
Promotion
Committee
constituted
in
accordance with the Schedule III.
(6) If any officer appointed to any grade in the
wpc2832.07

page 2 of 10

Service is considered for the purpose of
promotion to the higher grade, all persons
senior to him in the grade shall also be
considered notwithstanding that they do not
fulfill the prescribed eligibility service if the
shortfall is not more than one year and
provided they have successfully completed
their probation period, if prescribed.”
Subrule (4) of Rule 7, as is clear from its reading,

provides for

promotion by “selection on merit”.
2.

The OM dated 8.2.2002 was issued by the Ministry of

Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension, Department of Personnel
and Training, in supersession of earlier OM dated 8.3.1989. As per
this OM the DPC is to determine merits of the candidates, who are
assessed for promotion with reference to the prescribed bench mark
and accordingly Grade the officers 'fit' or 'unfit' only.

However, the

circumstances in which such an exercise is to be undertaken is
prescribed in para-3.1 which deals with mode of promotion, and is
followed by the

prescription of aforesaid bench mark which is

contained in para-32.

For our benefit we reproduce both these

subparas of paragraph 3:
“3.1 Mode of Promotion
In the case of 'selection' (merit) promotion, the
hitherto existing distinction in the nomenclature
('selection by merit' and 'selection-cum-seniority') is
dispensed with and the mode of promotion in all such
cases is rechristened as 'selection' only. The element
of selectivity (higher or lower) shall be determined
with reference to the relevant bench-mark (“Very
Good” or “Good”) prescribed for promotion.
3.2“Bench-mark for promotion
The DPC shall determine the merit of those
wpc2832.07

page 3 of 10

being assessed for promotion with reference to the
prescribed bench-mark and accordingly grade the
officers as 'fit' or 'unfit' only. Only those who are
graded 'fit' (i.e. who meet the prescribed bench-mark
by the DPC shall be included and arranged in the
select panel in order to their inter se seniority in the
feeder grade. Those officers who are graded 'unfit' (in
terms of the prescribed bench-mark) by the DPC shall
not be included in the select panel. Thus, there shall
be no supersession in promotion among those who
are graded 'fit' (in terms of the prescribed benchmark) by the DPC.”
3.

The reading of the entire OM along with aforementioned

portion of this OM would make it clear that such a procedure was to be
followed in case of “selection (merit) promotion”. The OM itself makes
distinction between the cases where the promotion is by “selection”
and where the promotion is on the basis of “selection by merit”. It is
thus obvious that this OM was issued giving instructions to the
departmental promotion committees to adopt the procedure of
determining the merit of candidates on the basis of bench mark and
grading them as `fit' or `unfit' in those cases where the promotion is
by `selection' and not where it is on the basis of `selection by merit'.
Para 6 of this OM in fact is a clincher, inasmuch
Ministries/departments

are

advised

to

as, per that para

amend

the

service

rules/recruitment rules so as to appropriately incorporate the mode
of promotion as 'selection' in place of 'selection by merit'.
4.

In our view, in the present case this OM was not

applicable, inasmuch as, subrule 4 of Rule 7 prescribed the mode of
promotion to be 'selection on merit' and not `selection'. The Rule was
wpc2832.07

page 4 of 10

amended only in June, 2004 as aforesaid and naturally such a Rule
would be prospective in nature.

It is obvious that in these

circumstances OM dated 8.2.2002

was not to be applied while

considering the cases of promotion to the senior administrative grade
in view of rule position prevailing during the the relevant period.
5.

In fact, even the department understood the implication of

these Rules in the aforesaid manner.

This is clear from the

department's own stand contained in the counter affidavit, and

as

noticed by the Tribunal also in the impugned order, namely, when the
proposal was sent by the department to the UPSC,

the department

had very categorically stated in its letter forwarding the said proposal
that selection of officers for

promotion to the grade of senior

administrative grade (Deputy Director General) was required to be
made on merit which means those officers who were found to be
`outstanding' were required to be placed above `very good'.
6.

There is an important distinction between the phrases

`selection' and `selection by merit'. When the selection is by merit,
merit is to play a pre-determination role.

In such a case a junior can

steal a march over the senior if in comparative merit he is assessed
superior than his senior. Thus, for example, in such a case if a junior is
graded as `outstanding' as against a senior which is graded as 'very
good ', junior would rank above senior in the merit list which is to be
prepared after assessing candidates in the aforesaid manner.

wpc2832.07

page 5 of 10

7.

Having regard to this nature of the Rule,

the procedure

which was laid down in the earlier OM of 10.3.1989 and 10.4.1989
etc. would be relevant.

On the other hand if the promotion is by

`selection' alone, then all those who are able to achieve the bench
mark which is `very good' in the instant case, would be treated as fit
for promotion and promotion to the post of next higher grade would
be given on the basis of inter se seniority of those assessed `fit' for
promotion.

Such a difference has been explained by the Supreme

Court in a catena of judgments and is now well a established principle.
The Tribunal has referred to one such judgment in the case of B.V.
Sivaiah & Ors. v. K. Addanki Baku & Ors. JT 1988(5) SC 96. Since
in the present case, notwithstanding the unamended Rule 7(4) which
was to be applied for the purposes of promotion, procedure laid down
in OM dated 8.2.2002 could not have been applied which related to
the cases where promotion is to be made by `selection', the Tribunal
rightly held that the DPC did not follow the correct procedure and set
aside selection process. On this issue, therefore, we are in complete
agreement with the approach of the Tribunal and there is no reason to
interfere with the same.
8.

There is yet

another issue which was dealt with by the

Tribunal in its impugned judgment dated 15.9.2007, namely, clubbing
up of vacancies.

In para 10 of the judgment, vacancy position for

each year was discussed and the Tribunal found no infirmity in the

wpc2832.07

page 6 of 10

exercise done by the DPC. Clubbing up of the vacancies, according to
the Tribunal could not have been done. The directions, which were
ultimately given in the impugned judgment are to the following effect:
“26. In view of above discussion, O.A. is allowed with the
following directions:
(a) Respondents shall hold review DPC for all the vacancies
from the year 2000 till May, 2004 by following the criteria of
selection by merit:
(b) Calculate the vacancies yearwise and consider only such
of the officers who were eligible for those vacancies and fell
within the zone of consideration;
(c) Prepare a panel yearwise;
(d) To decide the seniority of such officers according to the
new panel issue corrected seniority list of Dy.D.G. within a
reasonable period:
(e) (i) It is, however, clarified that in case applicant/other
officers become entitled to be promoted from an earlier date
in view of recommendations to be made by review DPC, they
would be entitled to only notional pay fixation from that date
in view of 2006(5) SCC 673 State of UP & Ors. Vs. Raj
Kishore Yadav and Anr.

9.

(ii) No recovery shall be made from those officers, who
were already promoted but have to be adjusted in view of
review DPC.”
The review DPC was accordingly ordered to be held for

vacancies till May, 2004 going by the consideration that amendment
to the Rules was made in June, 2004. The period for which review DPC
was directed was 2000 to May, 2004.

As per direction (b), the

petitioner was asked to calculate the vacancies yearwise and consider
only such of the officers who are eligible for those vacancies and fell
within the zone of consideration. Direction (c) was also to the same
wpc2832.07

page 7 of 10

effect, namely, preparation of yearwise panel.
10.

The department, i.e.,

the petitioner herein,

preferred a

review application pointing out that the two vacancies which occurred
in the year 2000-2001 had since been abolished and, therefore,
directions to hold review DPC for that year should be modified.

The

petitioner also pointed out that in para 16 of the order where the
Tribunal had mentioned that even for vacancies of 2001-2002 and
2002-2003 the DPC which met on 28.2.2002 has recommended the
combined panel of five officers was not correct,

inasmuch as,

petitioners have never used the said word 'combined' anywhere in the
reply and on this basis

observations made that clubbing up of

vacancies had taken place against the record, whereas, factually there
was no such clubbing at all.
11.

In this review application though no notice was issued, at

the time of hearing counsel for the applicants (respondent No.1
herein) appeared and

after hearing the department/petitioner and

respondent No.1 herein the Tribunal disposed of the said RA vide
orders dated 22.1.2007.

Insofar as

abolition of two posts which

occurred during 2000-2001 is concerned, taking note thereof direction
–(a) in its original order was amended and the Tribunal directed
holding of review DPC for the vacancies starting from year 2001-2002
till May, 2004.

In view of other submission, namely, the department

had never clubbed the vacancies, the same was noted and direction

wpc2832.07

page 8 of 10

(b) contained in the original order was deleted. Amended directions
that have been given in the order passed in RA read as under:
“(a) Respondents shall hold Review DPC for all the
vacancies starting from the year 2001-2002 till May, 2004
by the following the criteria of selection by merit;
(b) Prepare a panel year-wise and
(c) to decide seniority of all such officers according to new
panel and issue corrected seniority list of Dy. D.G. within
a reasonable period;
(d)(i) It is, however, clarified that in case applicant/other
officers become entitled to be promoted from an earlier
date in view of recommendations to be made by review
DPC, they would be entitled to only notional pay fixation
from that date in view of 2006(5) SCC 673 State of UP
and Ors. Vs. Raj Kishore Yadav and Anr.
(ii) No recovery shall be made from those officers, who
were already promoted but have to be adjusted in view of
DPC.”
12.
We find that review was filed primarily for seeking
correction of factual error which crept in the order and the revised
directions which have now been given do not affect any of the
respondents. Admittedly there was no DPC held for any vacancies
for the year 2000-2001. DPC which was held was for one vacancy for
the year 2001-2002 and four vacancies for the year 2002-2003 and
the selection made on the basis of these DPCs was under challenge
before

the Tribunal.

Though learned counsel for Respondent No.2

disputes that there was no abolition of vacancies in the year 20002001, that will not have any bearing in any case inasmuch as, as
pointed out above, no DPC was even originally held for these

wpc2832.07

page 9 of 10

vacancies and was not

the subject matter of challenge also in the

original OA filed by respondent No.1. If there were vacancies for the
year 2000-2001 and if they are not abolished, as contended by
learned counsel for respondent No.2 he may have a separate remedy
in this behalf.
13.

Thus, though there may be some substance in the

grievance of

respondent No.2 that when the order in review was

passed, he was not heard, we have heard learned counsel for
respondent No.2 while examining the validity, or otherwise, of order
passed in review application and are of the view that the said order
does not prejudicially affect respondent No.2 in any manner than the
impugned order passed in the OA.
14.

We uphold the order passed in review application as well

subject to aforesaid observations.

The upshot of the aforesaid

discussion would be to hold that present petition is devoid of any merit
and is accordingly dismissed.

A.K. SIKRI, J.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
September 20, 2007
aj

wpc2832.07

page 10 of 10

