*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision: August 20, 2007

+
%

W.P. (C) No. 6102/1998
Ram Phal

Through: None

...Petitioner

versus
Union of India

...Respondents
Through: Mr.R.V. Sinha, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J
Nobody appears on behalf of the petitioner. We have gone
through the impugned judgment of the learned Tribunal. In this case,
the petitioner was given charge-sheet, which was withdrawn on
24.3.1979 and immediately thereafter another inquiry was held
pursuant whereto he was removed from service.

The petitioner had

challenged the punishment imposed, after exhausting departmental
remedies, by filing OA, inter alia, on the ground that after the
withdrawal of the first charge-sheet, fresh charge-sheet could not have
W.P. (C) No. 6102/1998

Page 1 of 7

been issued. It may be noted that the impugned order is passed in the
second OA. The petitioner had even earlier approached the Tribunal in
which he could not get the relief and in these circumstances, the
second OA, against which the present petition is filed, is dismissed on
the ground that it is barred by constructive res judicata. Other ground
raised was that the order passed by the appellate authority was not a
speaking order. The Tribunal has reproduced the entire order on the
basis of which it is concluded that it was a speaking order.

We,

therefore, do not find any merit in this petition, which is accordingly
dismissed.
Thereafter, The respondent proceeded with the inquiry
after providing petitioner with a copy of the inquiry report. On 2 nd July
1992, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner granting the
petitioner an opportunity to submit his representation on the basis of
the inquiry report. After considering the representation submitted by
the petitioner Disciplinary Authority passed the order imposing penalty
on 23rd November 1992 removing the Petitioner from service. After
exhausting the departmental

channel

of appeal,

the Petitioner

preferred O.A. No.218/1994, which has been dismissed by the Tribunal
on 28.4.1997. It is this order of the Tribunal, which is impugned under
the present petition.
Before the Tribunal the first submission urged by the
Petitioner was that the order imposing penalty dated 23.11.1992 was a
W.P. (C) No. 6102/1998

Page 2 of 7

non-speaking order.
The Petitioner had been charge sheeted in this case on the
ground that while functioning as Tele-clerk and deputed to the
procurement Center, Delhi Milk Scheme, he had issued false vouchers
and caused a loss to the Respondent. It was also alleged that he, in
conspiracy

with

unauthorizedly

other

thereby

co-workers
causing

loss

supplied
due

Milk
to

to

pilferage

others
and

misappropriation of Government stores.
The Tribunal while considering the aforesaid submission of
the Petitioner set out the order of removal dated 23.11.1992 and
concluded that it could not be said that the said order was nonspeaking one. A perusal of the order dated 23.11.1992 itself shows
that there is application of mind by the Disciplinary Authority and that
he has recorded his reasons for punishing the Petitioner with removal
from service. In the order of removal the Disciplinary Authority, interalia, records as under:

“On careful consideration in the light of the case
and taking into consideration the submissions
made by Shri Ram Phal, Tally Clerk the
undersigned has come to the conclusion that no
cogent or convincing reasons have been
advanced to disapprove the charges. The
contentions put forth by the said Shri Ram Phal,
Tally Clerk viz issue of charge sheet dated
6.5.80 is itself illegal much less holding inquiry
on the basis of the same, abnormal delay in
finalising of the proceedings, Enquiry Officer was
W.P. (C) No. 6102/1998

Page 3 of 7

not conversant with the procedure and an officer
of CBI cannot act as presenting officer are not
tenable as principles of natural justice have
been observed and no violation of rules or any
provision of constitution has been made an
inquiry has been conducted in accordance with
the rules. Further on analysing the charge wise
contradiction the undersigned has come to the
conclusion that:
CHARGE I
The contention of the charged official that this
charge is not established against him is not
tenable. The enquiry officer taking into
consideration the totality of the evidence and
documents adduced has come to its conclusion
that there is no doubt that the charged official
has raised the vouchers without getting any
requisition from the Dadri Centre and thus
proved this charge against Shri Ram Phal.
CHARGE II
The contention of the charged official that this
charge is erroneous as he performed only the
clerical duty and had not admitted any offence
at all is not tenable. As taking into consideration
all the evidence and the conclusion of the
Enquiry Officer that there is ample evidence to
prove that the charged official did accompany
the Van No.79 to Dadri Centre for delivery of
stores and he did not deliver 5 barrels of diesel
oil etc. are clear to establish this charge.
CHARGE III
The contention of Shri Ram Phal that this is no
evidence that he took the van at Uttam Nagar
and had kept 5 barrels of diesel oil in the house
of Shri Kanwal Singh is not acceptable. The
Enquiry Officer on the basis of evidence
adduced before him had conclusively proved
this charge against the charged official.
CHARGE IV
W.P. (C) No. 6102/1998

Page 4 of 7

The charged official has tried to prove that he
did not manage the spare copy and fictitiously
converted into Return Voucher giving No.R/7,
dated 9.10.78 but it was done by Shri Ranawat
as he was involved in misappropriation of stores.
This point has not basis. The observations of the
Enquiry Officer are clear that on the basis of
totality of the facts it is proved beyond that this
charge stands fully proved.
In view of the above the undersigned is inclined
to agree with the findings of the Enquiry Officer
that the charges stand proved.”

We are in agreement with the finding of the Tribunal that
the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority is speaking order which
sufficiently discloses the reasons for imposing of the penalty of
removal upon the Petitioner.
The next submission of the Petitioner before the Tribunal
was that the Respondent had withdrawn the earlier charge sheet and
thereafter issued a fresh charge sheet while withdrawing the earlier
charge sheet, the Respondent had not reserved its right to issue a
fresh charge sheet and no reasons were given by them for withdrawal
of the first charge sheet. Firstly, we find that the earlier charge sheet
of 24th March 1979 was withdrawn on 5.5.1980 and the subsequent
charge sheet was issued more or less simultaneously on the very next
date i.e. 6.5.1980. It therefore appears that it cannot be said that the
Respondents while withdrawing the first charge sheet had taken a
decision not to pursue the charges against the Petitioner altogether.

W.P. (C) No. 6102/1998

Page 5 of 7

The Petitioner also contended that by holding a Joint Inquiry the
Respondent had violated Article 311 of the Constitution of India to the
extent that the officer inquiring into the charges had to be superior of
the

two respective

Disciplinary Authority of the

two accused.

Consequently, the Petitioner was challenging the competence of the
Inquiring Officer appointed to inquire into the charges leveled against
him. He also contended that documents had not been supplied to him
and this has resulted in miscarriage of justice. He also argued that the
impugned order of penalty was vitiated by bias and the presenting
officer was not competent to present the case.
While dealing with all the aforesaid submissions of the
Petitioner, the Respondent took the view that the Petitioner was barred
by rule of constructive res-judicatory from raising the said submissions
since all these submissions ought to have been raised and urged by
the Petitioner in the first original application filed by him. Since all
these submissions come to the road of the matter and could have
completely knocked out the inquiry and the consequent disciplinary
action, the Petitioner ought to have pressed the same. However, it
appears that the Petitioner either did not raise the said issue or did not
press the same, since they have not at all been discussed by the
Tribunal in its earlier order. The very fact that the Tribunal permitted
the Respondent to proceed with the inquiry from the stage of providing
the inquiry report to the Petitioner shows that the Tribunal did not find

W.P. (C) No. 6102/1998

Page 6 of 7

any other infirmity with the inquiry proceedings. In our view, the
Tribunal was right in concluding with all the grounds available against
the inquiry proceedings in the first order of removal got buried along
with first order of penalty was quashed by the Tribunal. The Tribunal
also rightly rejected the submission of the Petitioner that the order of
penalty has not been passed by the Disciplinary Authority by placing
reliance on the order authorizing the Deputy General Manager
(Administration) to pass the said order. In view of the aforesaid, we
find no illegality, irregularity or irrationality in the order passed by the
Tribunal. Accordingly, the present petition is dismissed.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.
August 20, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 6102/1998

Page 7 of 7

