*
+
%

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

C.M. (M) No. 188/2007 & C.M. Appl. No. 1794/2007
Dated :

February 20, 2008

Shri Bhagwan Singh & Ors.
Through:

..... Petitioners
Mr. Charanjit, Advocate

versus
Shri Rakesh Kumar

..... Respondent
Through: None

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.(ORAL)
*
1.

This Petition has been preferred to impugn the order

passed by the Additional Rent Control Tribunal (ARCT) Delhi in
R.C.A. No.497/2005 dated 3.10.2006. By the impugned order, learned

Rent Control Tribunal has dismissed the appeal filed by the
petitioners against the order passed by the learned Additional Rent

Controller (ARC) dated 30th September 2005. The ARC had by the
aforesaid order dismissed the application under Order 7 Rule 11
CPC and another application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC filed by

C.M. (M) No.188 of 2007

Page 1 of 6

the petitioner No.3 Shri Bhagirath Singh.
2.

Petitioner No.3 Shri Bhagirath Singh is father of

petitioner No.1 and 2. The Respondent filed an Eviction Petition
impleading the petitioner Nos.1 and 2 herein as the Respondent
tenants under Section 14(1)(a) of the Delhi Rent Control Act. The
petition was founded upon a rent agreement dated 8 th January 2004
claimed to have been executed between the Respondent and
petitioner No.1 and 2. The Respondent landlord claimed title to the
property on the basis of registered General Power of Attorney and
registered Will stated to have been executed by petitioner No.3 (the
applicant under Order 1 rule 10 CPC) in favour of the Respondent in
respect of the suit premises. In his applications under Order 1 rule 10
CPC and under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC, the case set up by petitioner
No.3 was that the documents on the basis of which the respondent
landlord was claiming title to the suit property had been obtained by
fraud. He further stated that he has already filed a suit to seek a
decree of declaration and cancellation in respect of the said
documents including the agreement to sell and the rent deed.

By

order dated 30th September 2005, the learned Additional Rent
Controller dismissed both the applications and as aforesaid, the
appeal has also been dismissed by the Additional Rent Control
Tribunal by the impugned order dated 3.10.2006.
3.

The submission of the petitioner is that petitioner No.3

ought to have been impleaded as a party respondent in the eviction
C.M. (M) No.188 of 2007

Page 2 of 6

petition and the eviction petition itself ought to have been dismissed
since the dispute with regard to the title of the respondent, his claim
of ownership and as landlord of the petitioner No.1 and 2 in respect of
the suit premises is pending adjudication before the Civil Court. His
argument is that unless and until the title of the respondent as the
owner and landlord is established before the Civil Court, he cannot
maintain or proceed with the eviction petition.
4.

Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance

upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Rajendra Tiwary vs.
Basudeo Prasad & Anr., 2002 (1) RCJ 47 (SC). He has also relied
on the decision of this Court in M.C.D. Vs Harish Chander & Ors.,
115 (2004) DLT 481.
5.

In my view, there is no error in the order passed by the

learned ARC or by the learned Tribunal. Both the Courts below have
acted within the bounds of their respective jurisdiction. Prima facie,
the title of the respondent in respect of the suit premises, and the
relationship of the landlord and tenant between the respondent on
the one hand and petitioner No.1 and 2 herein, on the other hand,
stood established. Until the title of the respondent and tenancy
agreement claimed by the respondent are set aside on the ground of
fraud as alleged by the petitioners, by a competent Court of law, the
Rent Controller and the Tribunal are entitled to rely upon the same,
particularly, when the case of the petitioners is not that the said
documents do not bear their thumb impressions, but only that the
C.M. (M) No.188 of 2007

Page 3 of 6

documents have been obtained fraudulently by the respondent.
Therefore, the onus clearly lies on them to make good their plea of
fraud against the respondent.
6.

I do not agree with the submission of the petitioner that

until the title of the respondent as the owner-landlord is not
established, he could not maintain or proceed with the eviction
petition. Prima facie, both the title and the relationship of landlord
and tenant stands established by the documents placed on record
and relied upon by the respondent. What is not yet established is the
plea of fraud set up by the petitioners.

If the argument of the

petitioners were to be accepted, then in every case, it will be very
easy for any tenant to defeat and delay the eviction petition filed by
the landlord by merely setting up an independent

title to the

property and by initiating a civil proceedings in that respect. This will
completely defeat the object of the Act, which is, inter-alia, to enable
the Controller to expeditiously decide an eviction petition filed by a
landlord. Since it is the petitioners who are challenging the title of
the respondent, both as the owner and landlord, it is for them to
prosecute their suit and seek a declaration from the Civil Court.
Unless and until a declaration as sought by them is made in favour of
the

petitioners, there is no reason for the Rent Controller not to

proceed with the eviction petition, when, prima facie the landlord has
established his title to the property and also his relationship of
landlord and tenant with petitioner Nos.1 & 2, on the basis of the

C.M. (M) No.188 of 2007

Page 4 of 6

documents placed before him by the landlord.
7.

Rajendra Tiwary (supra) has no application in the

facts of the present case. In that case the trial court as well as the
first appellate court had returned a finding of fact that there was no
landlord-tenant relationship between the plaintiff and the defendants.
In spite of that, the High Court in Second Appeal on equitable
considerations, passed a decree for eviction. It was on account of the
fact that there were concurrent findings of the fact to the effect that
there was no relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties,
that the Supreme Court upset the decision of the High Court passed in
second appeal.
8.

In Harish Chander (supra), there was a dispute inter-

se between different persons claiming title to the property which had
been let out to the tenant. The tenant had no concern with that inter
se dispute. In these circumstances, this court was of the view that an
order under Section 14(2) of the Act should not have been passed by
the Rent Controller or the Tribunal since the title of the petitioner in
the eviction petition was in dispute inter-se between the different
claimants. This judgment is also not applicable in the facts of the
present case, since, as aforesaid, prima-facie the title of the
respondent landlord stands established

with the

execution

of

registered documents, which are sought to be disputed by the
petitioners on the ground of fraud. For the same reasons, the decision
relied on by the petitioner in Mani Ram vs. Ratan Lal Saini, 2003
C.M. (M) No.188 of 2007

Page 5 of 6

IV AD (Delhi) 46 has no application to the facts of this case.
9.

In view of my aforesaid discussion, I find no merit in this

petition. However, it is made clear that no observation in this Order
shall have any bearing on the determination of the issues of title and
relationship, or of the alleged fraud, by the Courts below.
10.

Dismissed.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
February 20, 2008
P.K. BABBAR

C.M. (M) No.188 of 2007

Page 6 of 6

