*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M(M) No.1482 of 2007

%

Date of decision: 21.01.2008
Smt. Chameli Devi & Ors.
.....Petitioners
Through: Mr. Shyam Kishore, Advocate
versus
Chander Singh & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Sunil Malhotra & Ms. Sonali,
Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J
CM No. 15748/2007 in CM(M) No.1482/2007
1.

Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.

CM(M) No.1482/2007 & CM 15747/2007
2.

This petition has been preferred against an order dated

CM(M) No.1482/2007

page 1 of 6

5.9.2007 passed by the learned Additional Rent Controller, Delhi in E4/07/05 whereby the petitioner's application under Section 10 CPC for
stay of the eviction proceedings was rejected by the learned Additional
Rent Controller. The respondent has preferred the aforesaid petition
under Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act on the ground of
subletting of the tenanted premises by the tenant stated to be one
Shri Krishan Hari, to Shri Bansi Lal, since deceased. The petitioners
herein are the legal representatives of late Shri Bansi Lal.
3.

Shri Bansi Lal had preferred a civil suit claiming that he

was the tenant in the suit premises.

This suit was decreed by the

learned sub-judge on 13.5.1996. However, the said decree was set
aside by the

Additional District Judge, Delhi in first appeal on

3.11.2000. RSA No.2/2001 has thereafter been filed by the petitioner
which is stated to be pending in this Court. The admitted position is
that there is an order of stay of dispossession by the Court in the said
second appeal and consequently till the disposal of the said appeal the
possession of the petitioner is in any case protected.
4.

The aforesaid application was filed by the petitioners on

the ground that since the issue with regard to the status of late Shri
Bansi Lal and thereafter the petitioners qua the suit property is
pending adjudication in this Court,
CM(M) No.1482/2007

which is also the issue to be
page 2 of 6

determined by the Rent Controller, the eviction proceedings should be
stayed.

Mr. Shyam Kishore, learned counsel appearing for the

petitioners submits that the said Shri Krishan Hari has in fact been set
up by the

respondent-landlord.

Shri Krishan Hari filed a written

statement admitting the creation of sub-tenancy by him in favour of
Shri Bansi Lal and thereafter he has not been appearing in the eviction
proceedings. He submits that the learned Additional Rent Controller
was wrong in concluding that Section 10 of the CPC would not be
applicable to proceedings before the Rent Controller. For this he relies
on the Rules framed under the DRC Act, particularly Rule 23 of the
Delhi Rent Control

Rules, 1959 which states that the Code of Civil

Procedure is generally to be followed. Rule 23 reads as under:
“23. Code of Civil Procedure to be generally followed.- In
deciding any question relating to procedure not specifically
provided by the Act and these rules the Controller and the
Rent Control Tribunal shall, as far as possible, be guided by
the provisions contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908.”
5.

He also relies on the decision of the Supreme Court in

Mohan Singh v. Late Amar Singh (through LR's),

AIR 1999 SC

482. In paragraph 41 of this judgment the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
held that the Rule 23 of the Rules framed under the Act provides that
the Controller and the Rent Control Tribunal should as far as possible

CM(M) No.1482/2007

page 3 of 6

be guided by the provisions contained in Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
and that it is absolutely necessary for the Controller and the Rent
Control Tribunal to see that the provisions of Statute, rules and Code
of Civil Procedure are strictly complied with in all proceedings

before

them. He submits that the Court of the Rent Controller being a court of
limited jurisdiction, the question of title has to be determined by civil
court. For this proposition he relies on Smt. Vidyawanit vs. Tokan
Dass, 1974 Rajdhani Law Reporter 23.
6.

Section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure

reads as

follows:
“10. Stay of suit.- No Court shall proceed with the trial of
any suit in which the matter in issue is also directly and
substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between
the same parties, or between parties under whom they or
any of them claim litigating under the same title where
such suit is pending in the same or any other Court in
[India] having jurisdiction to grant the relief claimed, or in
any Court beyond the limits of [India] established or
continued by [the Central Government] and having like
jurisdiction, or before [the Supreme Court].
Explanation.- The pendency of a suit in a foreign Court does
not preclude the Courts in [India] from trying a suit founded
on the same cause of action.”
7.
the grant of

A perusal of the aforesaid provision would show that for
stay of the suit under the said provision by the court,

amongst other things, the other suit should also be one for the grant
of the relief claimed in the suit of which stay is sought. The suit filed
CM(M) No.1482/2007

page 4 of 6

by the petitioner which is

now in second appeal, was not a suit

seeking the relief of eviction. In fact,

that was the suit filed by the

petitioner who claims himself to be the tenant and was not one filed
by the landlord at all.

Consequently, in my view the said provision

does not apply in the facts of the present case.
8.

Even otherwise , I see no reason to interfere with the

impugned order since no serious prejudice would be caused to the
petitioner in case the eviction proceedings are proceeded with.
Admittedly, the possession of the petitioner is protected in the second
appeal pending in this Court.

In the meantime, on account of the

said pendency of the second appeal, the eviction proceedings

are

stayed and eventually the said second appeal is dismissed, the
respondent/landlord would suffer undue hardship, inasmuch as,

the

proceeding in the eviction petition would got unduly delayed. On the
other hand even if an eviction order is passed in the eviction
proceeding against the petitioner, the petitioner would not suffer any
prejudice since his possession has been protected till the disposal of
the second appeal and in case he succeeds in the second appeal and
finding of the civil court that late Shri Bansi Lal was the tenant of the
respondent is restored, the effect of the said finding would be that the
eviction order that may be passed in the eviction petition filed by the
CM(M) No.1482/2007

page 5 of 6

respondent would get nullified.

Consequently, in my view the

impugned order does not call for any interference.
Dismissed.

January 21, 2008
aj

CM(M) No.1482/2007

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

page 6 of 6

