*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

R.C. Revision No.41 of 2007

%

Date of decision: 21.01.2008
Narender Kumar Jain & Another
...Petitioners
Through: Mr. J.K. Jain, Advocate
versus
Raj Kumar Kapoor & Another
.....Respondent
Through: Mr. Ajay Kumar, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J
1.

This

petition

is

directed

against

the

order

dated

05.05.2007 passed by the learned ARC, whereby an eviction order
was passed against the petitioners, who are two brothers occupying
different floors of property bearing No.1275, Ward No.4, Gali
Wakilpuram, Dariba Kalan, Delhi.
2.

The respondent filed the eviction petition under Section

14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act (DRC Act) read with Section
25B of the said Act. The summons were sent to the petitioners under
Schedule III.

Petitioner No.1 Narender Kumar Jain was personally

RC(Rev) No.41/2007

page 1 of 8

served by ordinary process as well as by registered covers on
13.03.2007, whereas petitioner No.2 Surender Kumar Jain was served
on 10.01.2007.

Both the petitioners failed to file their respective

leave to defend applications within the prescribed statutory period of
15 days.

On 03.05.2007 when the matter was fixed before the

Additional Rent Controller, the petitioners appeared and moved an
application under Section 151 CPC.

It was contended in the

applications that the summons served upon the two petitioners made
a reference to Subsection (5) of Section 25(3) of the DRC Act and that
there is no such provision in the said Act. It was also submitted that
one of the site plan annexed to the petition did not have the colour
markings and, therefore, it was not the true copy of the plan as filed
in the Court.

One of the plans was also stated to have not been

supplied along with the copy of the petition. It was also submitted
that the summons had not been served personally upon petitioner
No.2 Sh. Surender Kumar Jain and had been served on his wife Smt.
Rajrani Jain. The same could not be considered as proper service. By
the impugned order, the learned ARC had rejected the aforesaid
submissions of the petitioner, and in my view rightly so.
3.

A perusal of the summons as served upon the petitioners,

no doubt shows that it makes a reference to sub-Section (5) of
Section 25(3) and that there is no such provision of law. It appears
that in place of Section 25B, the same has been wrongly printed as
25(3).

However, that to my mind is not very material since the

RC(Rev) No.41/2007

page 2 of 8

requirement of the law that the noticee is required to appear before
the Additional Rent Controller within 15 days of the service and to
obtain the leave of the Controller to contest the application for
eviction and in default thereof, the applicant will be entitled at any
time after the expiry of the period of 15 days to obtain and order for
the noticees eviction from the premises in question has been clearly
set out. Consequently, printing of the relevant provision cannot be
considered to be fatal to the summons as issued by the Court.

In

support of the submission with regard to the service of the summons
on the wife of petitioner No.2 is concerned, learned counsel for the
petitioners relied on Punjab Oil Expillars Co. Vs. M/s Madan Lal
Nanda & Sons, 1967 DLT 56. In the said judgment this Court had
held that service in any of the ways enumerated in Order V, Rules 12
to 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure, should be insisted upon and
service by affixation as provided in Order V, Rule 17, should not be
allowed till after the date fixed for scrutiny. In my view this judgment
has no bearing on the facts of the present case. Admittedly, the wife
of the petitioner No.2 i.e. an adult family member, was served with
the summons and it is not even his case that he did not become
aware of the said summons, which were served on his wife.

This

service was in compliance with Order V Rule 15 CPC.
4.

He also relies on Clause 5 in part D, which deals with

service of process, in Chapter 1 “Practice for the Trial of civil suits” of
the Delhi High Court Rules. The said clause requires that the form of

RC(Rev) No.41/2007

page 3 of 8

summons for the final disposal of a suit should be printed in
vernacular on coloured page, as this will tend to impress the
distinction between the said form and that for settlement of issue
both upon the mind of the people and upon the officers of the court.
He submits that in the present case the summons were not in
coloured form.

In my view, the aforesaid guidelines firstly do not

apply to proceedings under the Act, which is a Special Code and not a
civil suit, and, in any event, they cannot he held to be imperative so
as to render the summons issued to the petitioner defective and nonest. No doubt the guidelines issued by this Court ought to be taken
seriously and adhered to by the Courts below. However, in the said
clause, I cannot read a mandatory provision, the non-compliance
whereof will render the summons void.
5.

Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the

respondent/landlord had earlier preferred a similar eviction petition
under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act and the same has been dismissed
as withdrawn and consequently the present petition was not
maintainable.

He submits that while withdrawing the said petition

though the respondent/landlord had sought the liberty from the Court
to file a fresh petition no such liberty was in fact granted by the Court
while dismissing the petition.

He has filed on record the certified

copy of the order dated 04.11.1999 alongwith the statement of the
petitioner in that proceedings and the same reads as follows: “Cross-examination of AW2 Raj Kr.

RC(Rev) No.41/2007

page 4 of 8

4-11-99
Present:

Petr. in person alongwith
counsel.
Respondent in person.

Statement of Sh. Raj Kumar Kapur, Petr. on
S.A.
I want to withdraw my case with permission to
file fresh.

The same may be dismissed as

withdrawn.
RO&AC

ARC/Delhi
4-11-99

Statement of Sh. Ajay Gupta, Adv. counsel for
petr.
Without oath.
As per instructions of Petrs. suit may be
dismissed

as

withdrawn

as

petr

is

not

interested in continuation of the same.
RO&AC

ARC/Delhi
4-11-99

ORDER
In view of the above petition is dismissed as
withdrawn.

Parties to bear their own costs.

File be consigned to RR.
(N.K. Sharma)
ARC/Delhi
Announced
4-11-99”
6.

Learned counsel for the respondent/landlord submits that

RC(Rev) No.41/2007

page 5 of 8

firstly the aforesaid objections ought to have been taken by filing an
application for seeking leave to defend, and that not having been
done it is not open to the petitioners to raise any such plea at this
stage.

Secondly, he submits that a perusal of the order dated

04.11.1999 and the statement made by the landlord cannot be taken
to mean that no liberty was granted to him to file a fresh petition.
Thirdly, he submits that, in any case, there is no bar to filing of a
subsequent petition, even after the dismissal of an earlier petition
under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act. To support the maintainability of
the second petition under Section 14(1)(e) he relies on AIR 1988 SC
1345 “Surajmal Vs. Radhey Shyam”.

He has also relied on

17(1980) DLT 172 and 87(1) RCJ 556 to submit that it is imperative
for the tenant to file the leave to defend within the period of 15 days
and upon the tenants failure to do so, the eviction decree is bound to
follow.
7.

Having considered all the submissions, I am of the view

that a perusal of the order dated 04.11.1999 passed by the learned
Rent Controller, whereby the earlier petition was dismissed as
withdrawn, shows that the liberty as sought by the landlord though
expressly not set out, is embedded therein. The opening words by
the order “in view of the above” show that the petitioner was
permitted to file a fresh petition, since what was referred to as
“above”, was the statement of the landlord that he wishes to
withdraw the petition with liberty to file a fresh one. In any event, a

RC(Rev) No.41/2007

page 6 of 8

petition under Section 14(1)(e) could be preferred, even if the petition
had been dismissed on merits, as already held by the Supreme Court
in Surajmal (Supra). The respondent is also justified in submitting
that this objection ought to have been taken alongwith all others
(including about non-supply of the copies of the plans etc.) by filing
an application to seek the leave to the Court to defend the eviction
petition.
8.

In view of the aforesaid, I find no merit in the petition and

the same is dismissed.
9.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the said

defective form with the aforesaid printing error are being used by all
the Additional Rent Controllers.

Though, i have held that the said

printing error is not fatal to the legality of the summons, to obviate
such objections and to set right the error that has been brought to the
notice of the Court, I direct that henceforth summons in the correctly
printed forms in accordance with the Third Schedule to the Act be
issued by the courts of Rent Controllers. To utilise the existing
stationery, either necessary corrections be made in the summons by
hand or an additional stamp be affixed containing the correct section
number as '25B' which has been incorrectly printed as 25(3).

This

direction be circulated to the District Judge and to all the Courts of the
Rent Controllers in Delhi by the Registrar (Gazette) of this Court and
be implemented forthwith. Copy of the incorrectly printed form of
summons (placed on the record at page 36) be also sent along with a

RC(Rev) No.41/2007

page 7 of 8

copy of this order for needful action.
10.

Parties are left to bear their own costs.

January 21, 2008

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

RSK

RC(Rev) No.41/2007

page 8 of 8

