*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No. 1385 OF 2007
Judgment reserved on: September 13, 2007
Judgment delivered on: October 12, 2007

Commissioner of Police
Through:
Advocates.

..... Petitioner
Ms.
Geeta
Luthra,

versus
Rajender Singh

..... Respondent
Through: Ms. Raman Oberoi, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*
1.

The respondent Rajender Singh was enrolled as a Sub-

Inspector in Delhi Police on 19.11.1981. He was confirmed in the
said rank with effect from 1.3.1985 along with his other
counterparts. His case was considered for bringing his name on

W.P(C)1385-07

Page 1 of 14

promotion

list

`F'

(Exe)

with

effect

from

12.8.1994.

A

Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) meeting for the said
purpose was held in August, 1994 which found him `unfit' for
promotion on account of one major penalty of forfeiture of
approved service and six minor penalties of `censor'.

The

respondent challenged the imposition of the said major penalty in
OA No.1019/1993 before the Central Administrative Tribunal,
Principal Bench, New Delhi (the Tribunal) which was set aside with
all consequential benefits, on 11.12.1998. Review DPC was held
on 18.11.1999 on account of effacement of the major penalty and
for consideration of the case of the respondent. However for
bringing his name on promotion list `F' (Exe), on account of the
aforesaid six minor penalties of censure, he was again declared
'unfit' for promotion vide order dated 29.11.1999.

In the

interregnum, the respondent was also implicated under Section 7
of the Prevention of Corruption Act in case FIR No.54/1999, which
is pending.
2.

The respondent preferred a representation against the

declaration of his being 'unfit' for promotion by the Review DPC
by placing reliance

on a decision of this in Court WP(C)

No.1354/2001 dated 15.7.2002 in the case of
Madan Vs. Union of India & Ors.
W.P(C)1385-07

Vishnu Dev

That representation was
Page 2 of 14

considered after a direction was issued by the Tribunal in OA
No.297/2004, by a speaking order the same was rejected by the
Special Commissioner of Police on 9/17.5.2005. Thereafter the
respondent preferred OA No.1328/2005 under Section 19 of the
Administrative Tribunal Act which has been allowed by the
Tribunal by the impugned judgment dated 17.6.2006.

The

Tribunal by the impugned order set aside the order dated
9.5.2005

and

directed

the

petitioner

herein

to

hold

the

appropriate proceedings to consider promoting the respondent to
the rank of Inspector (Exe.) with effect from 12.8.1994, and in the
event of his promotion to grant him all the consequential benefits.
It is against the aforesaid order dated 17.6.2006 that the present
petition has been preferred by the petitioner.
3.

The Tribunal relied on Vishnu Dev Madan (Supra) and

concluded that only 5 years record has to be considered by the
DPC while considering the case of a candidate for promotion. It
held that any minor punishment of censure, that is inflicted not
on corruption or moral turpitude or negligence in protecting
government property, but on administrative lapse, cannot be an
impediment in the empanelment for promotion of Delhi Police
Officer. The Tribunal observed that of the 6 punishments of
censure 1 was not beyond the period of 5 years reckoned for
W.P(C)1385-07

Page 3 of 14

promotion in 1994, while others are on account of absence,
negligence and dis-obeying the orders of senior officers. It
observed that none of the censure awarded to the Respondent
was founded on corruption or moral turpitude or negligence in
protecting Government property. It concluded that, therefore, the
said punishment of censure were not an impediment to his being
promoted and that the DPC had acted illegally while refusing to
empanel the Respondent in the promotion list 'F' on the basis of
the said six punishments of censure.
4.

The contention of the petitioner before us is that the DPC is

required to consider the entire service record of the candidate
while considering his suitability at the time of considering his case
for promotion. Consequently, the various penalties inflicted upon
a candidate during his entire service tenure have to be considered
by the DPC to arrive at its conclusion as to

whether a candidate

is 'fit' or 'unfit' for promotion. The suitability of the candidate for
promotion is to be adjudged on the basis of his entire service
record and is not confined merely to the last five years service
record on the date of consideration of his case by the DPC.
5.

On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent

supported the impugned judgment by placing reliance upon the
decision of this Court in Vishnu
W.P(C)1385-07

Dev Madan (supra). She
Page 4 of 14

contends that the penalty of Censure is a minor penalty, which
impacts the date on which the promotion takes effect only for a
limited period of six months from the date of imposition of the
penalty, and since it does not debar the consideration of the
employee for promotion by the DPC, even during the currency of
the said penalty, it certainly cannot be a ground to deny
promotion to the employee.
6.

At the relevant time, i.e. in the year 1994, when the case of

the respondent became ripe for consideration for promotion,
circular order dated 3922-325/CB-I dated 23.9.1992 was in vogue.
The said circular laid down the principle to be observed while
holding

a

departmental

promotion

committee

admission of names to the promotion lists.

meeting

for

This circular being

relevant, is reproduced herein below:
The following principal should be
observed while holding departmental
promotion committee for admission of
names to the promotion lists :i) Officers having at least 3 'Good' or
'above' reports and without any below
average or adverse report during the last
5 years may be considered.
ii) The total record of the officer in that
particular rank shall be taken into view
with particular reference to the gravity
and continuity of punishments till date.
Punishments on counts of corruption and
W.P(C)1385-07

Page 5 of 14

moral turpitude
seriously.

are

to

be

viewed

iii)Officers who have been awarded any
major/minor
punishment
in
the
proceeding 5 years on charge of
corruption, moral turpitude and gross
dereliction of duty to protect government
property, or major punishment within 2
years on charge of administrative lapses,
from the date of consideration may not
be empanelled.
iv)Officers whose names stand on Secret
List shall not be considered fit as per S.O.
No. 265/89.
v) Officers who have been awarded
censures during the last 6 months with
no other punishment may also be
allowed to be brought on promotion list
provided they do not have any other
major punishment. However, the effect
of Censure by debarring the official for
promotion by six months shall continue.
vi)Result of Officers, who are under
suspension or facing D.E. or involved in
criminal cases, shall be kept in sealed
covers.
vii) In cases where vigilance enquiries are
pending against an officer and the
allegations are specific and serious in
nature, results may be with-held the
finalisation of the enquiry.

7.

From a reading of the aforesaid circular it is also clear that

officers who have been awarded censures are not barred from
being brought on the promotion list, provided they do not have
W.P(C)1385-07

Page 6 of 14

any other major punishment.

The effect of the

penalty of

Censure on the promotion of the concerned officer is that the
orders of promotion would not be given effect to, even if he is
found suitable for promotion by the DPC for a period of six months
from the date of imposition of the said penalty.

Consequently

while Censure by itself would not have the effect of preventing
the officer from being considered for promotion, it would impact
the date from which he would be granted promotion, inasmuch
as, the promotion would not take effect for a period of six months
from the date of imposition of the said penalty.
8.

Clause (ii) of the aforesaid circular states that the total

record of the officer in that particular rank shall be taken into
account with particular reference to the gravity and continuity of
punishments till date. Punishments on account of corruption and
moral turpitude are to be viewed seriously.
9.

The DPC would, therefore, not only assess the comparative

merit of the candidates, on the basis of the ACRs of the last five
years, it would also assess the suitability of the candidates for
promotion on the basis of their total record. The DPC has been
provided

sufficient

guideline

for

assessing

the

aspect

of

suitability, inasmuch as, it is provided that 'gravity and
continuity of punishments till date' are to be seen and
W.P(C)1385-07

Page 7 of 14

'punishments on counts of corruption and moral turpitude
are to be viewed seriously'.

10.

The

'total

record'

of

an

officer

would

include

all

commendations and penalties in the service record of the officer.
It would also include the major and minor penalties.

Merely

because the minor penalties may have a direct impact only for a
limited period, such as Censure or reduction in pay for a limited
period, which does not have an effect of postponing future
increments, it does not mean that such penalties would cease to
be a part of the 'total record of the officer'.
been appreciated by the Tribunal.

This aspect has not

Therefore, mere meritorious

record, as reflected in the ACRs is not sufficient, and the
candidate also has to be one, who is not unsuitable for promotion
to the higher rank.
11.

While allowing the OA filed by the respondent the Tribunal

has heavily relied upon a decision

of this Court in the case of

Vishnu Dev Madan (supra). Relevant extract from the decision
in Vishnu Dev Madan (supra) reads as follows:
“It is not in dispute that in terms of the
aforesaid
Circular
letter
dated
23rd
September, 1992 the principles which were
required to be observed by the DPC for
admission of the promotion lists had been
laid down which, inter alia, are as under:W.P(C)1385-07

Page 8 of 14

“(ii) Officers who have been awarded
any major/minor punishment in
the preceding 5 years on charge
of corruption, moral turpitude and
gross dereliction of duty to
protect government property, or
major punishment within 2 years
on charge of administrative
lapses,
from
the
date
of
consideration
may
not
be
empanelled.”
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever
that the respondents are bound by the
aforementioned Circular letter. In that
view of the matter, the minor
punishments of Censure awarded
against the petitioner, in our opinion,
could not be taken into consideration.
In terms of aforementioned clause(iii)
the DPC was required to confine its
consideration for denying promotion to
the petitioner only in the event he had
undergone a major/minor punishment
in the preceding 5 years on charge of
corruption, moral turpitude and gross
dereliction
of
duty
to
protect
government
property,
or
major
punishment within 2 years on charge
of administrative lapses from the date
of consideration. Such is not the case
here.
As indicated hereinbefore,
despite the fact that the DPC was
required to consider the ACRs of the
petitioner only for the last five years i.e
since 1989-1994, the learned Tribunal
had taken into consideration the ACRs
of the petitioner since 1983. In that
view of the matter, the order impugned
before the Tribunal as also the
impugned order of the Tribunal cannot
be sustained. We are fortified in our
view by a recent Division Bench
decision of this court dated 18th
W.P(C)1385-07

Page 9 of 14

December, 2001 in CWP No.2189/98
wherein it has categorically been held
that so far as punishment of Censure
is concerned, the same is wiped off
within six months. The Division Bench
in no uncertain terms observed:
“We have examined the impugned
order from all angles and found it
wholly innocuous in terms.
It is a
matter of record that respondent had
secured “good” remarks in 1989-90,
“outstanding” in 1991-92 and “very
good” in 1992-93 and had satisfied the
terms of petitioners circular dated
23.9.92 qualifying for promotion but for
the four censures awarded to him from
1988094. It is also not in dispute that
clause (v) of this permitted officers
awarded Censure during the last six
months to be brought on the promotion
list, although actual promotion was to
be deferred for six months. That being
so, if petitioners adjudged respondent
unfit for promotion on the basis of his
overall service record they should have
held so by assigning a reason or two
and if the impugned Tribunal order
wanted them to do so, it could not be
faulted.
L/c for petitioner Ms. Geeta Luthra's
sole grievance was that Tribunal had
declared a Censure to be invalid after
expiry of six months by interpreting
clause (v) of petitioner's circular dated
23.9.92. the issue seems academic to
us in the light of the impugned
Tribunal direction.
Nor does the
Tribunal pronounce so conclusively to
invalidate petitioners action.”
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the
impugned order cannot be sustained which
W.P(C)1385-07

Page 10 of 14

is set aside accordingly and the matter is
remitted to the Departmental promotion
Committee to consider the matter relating to
grant of promotion to the petitioner afresh
with effect from the due date upon taking
into consideration the aforesaid Circular
order as expeditiously as possible and not
later than two months from the date of
communication of this order.
The writ
petition is allowed.
in the event the
petitioner is found fit for promotion, we have
no doubt in our mind that all consequential
benefits shall be granted to him.”
12.

From the above extract from Vishnu Dev Madan (supra) ,

it appears that the facts of that case were materially different. It
appears that rather than confining its consideration to ACRs of
last five years, that is, from 1989 to 1994, the DPC took into
consideration the ACRs of the petitioner in that case since 1983.
13.

The details of the six punishments of censures awarded to

the respondent are as follow:
1. Censure on 14.3.86 for misbehaving with the
VIP with whom the S.I. Was detailed as P.S.O.
2. Censure on 3.1.90, he managed medical rest
deliberately to avoid his training course at
N.S.G. Centre, Manesar (Haryana)
3. Censure on 2.12.92 for manipulating the
challan to court in case FIR No.223/92 u/s
307/34 PA Pahar Ganj in order to help the
accused.
4. Censure on 5.5.93 for his misconduct that
being the I.O. Of case FIR No.394/92 u/s 376
IPC PS Pahar Ganj, he failed to file a challan in
W.P(C)1385-07

Page 11 of 14

the court within the stipulated period which
resulted in grant of bail to the accused.
5. Censure on 20.5.93 for his misconduct that in
case FIR No.223/91 u/s 307/34 PS Pahar Ganj,
he filed the challan in the court without the
knowledge of SHO and discussing the same
with Assured Career Promotion.
6. Censure on 8.11.93 for giving false report to
the senior officers in connection with the illegal
detention on nine family members.”
14.

In the present case the petitioner has stated that the

Review DPC found that the punishments awarded were of a
serious nature. The Censure dated 5.5.1993 was awarded on
account of misconduct of the respondent that led to the release of
an accused in a rape case on bail. The traumatic effect of the
misconduct of the defaulter on the victim of crime could, in no
circumstance, be taken lightly.

The punishment of Censure

inflicted on 20.5.1993 was on account of the respondent leaving
lacunae in the investigation of a particular case. Despite the ACP,
Pahar Ganj directing the respondent to discuss the case with him,
the respondent did not do the needful and took the challan to the
public prosecutor directly even though the case was
attempt to murder.

one of

In respect of the punishment of Censure

inflicted on 8.11.1993 the respondent was found to have
furnished wrong information to senior officers about a case
pending in the High Court.
W.P(C)1385-07

While

he mentioned that the writ
Page 12 of 14

petition filed by the complainant had been dismissed by this
Court, later on it was confirmed that the petition was still pending
in the Court.
15.

In the light of the aforesaid facts, we do not agree that it

could be said that the aforesaid punishments did not carry any
element of moral turpitude or that they were inflicted merely on
account of a minor or casual lapse in the performance of his
duties by the respondent.

Moreover, 5 out of 6 penalties of

Censure have been inflicted within the period of five years of the
date on which the promotion of the respondent was to be
considered in the year 1994.
16.

For the aforesaid

reasons in our view the decision in

Vishnu Dev Madan does not apply to the facts of the present
case. Our attention has also been drawn by the petitioner to two
other decisions of the Tribunal in the case of SI Sajjan Kumar V.
Union of India, OA No.7/1996 dated 28.6.1996 and Harish
Shankar

Yati

v.

Commissioner

of

Police,

Delhi

OA

No.1912/1996 dated 18.7.1996 wherein the Tribunal had taken
the view on the basis of paragraph 2 of the circular order dated
23.9.1992 that Censure awarded to an officer remains a part of
his service record which has to be taken into account in the over
all assessment by the DPC and therefore, the same could not
W.P(C)1385-07

Page 13 of 14

overlooked by the DPC.

Both these decisions were assailed by

the respective petitioners therein before the Supreme Court and
were affirmed by the Supreme Court as the Special Leave
Petitions were dismissed.
17.

In view of the aforesaid position, we are of the view that the

judgment of the Tribunal is lacunaic and cannot be sustained.
Accordingly we set aside the impugned judgment of the Tribunal
and dismiss the OA filed by the respondent.
18.

Parties are left to bear their respective costs.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

A.K.SIKRI, J.
October 12, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P(C)1385-07

Page 14 of 14

