*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

RC REV No. 46/2007

%

Date of decision: 22.01.2008
M/s Satish Raheja
Through:

...Petitioner
Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Senior Advocate
with Mr. Mohit Gupta, Advocate.

versus
Prakashwati Gupta
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. Sunil Malhaotra with Ms. Sonali
Malhotra, Advocates.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J
1.

This Revision Petition has been preferred under Section

25B of the Delhi Rent Control Act (for short the `Act') to impugn the
order dated 25.8.2007 passed by the learned Additional Rent
Controller, Delhi in case No.E-429/06, a petition under Section 14 D of
the Act filed by the Respondent.
2.

The admitted position is that the respondent is a widowed

landlady in respect of the tenanted premises comprising of one room
in the ground floor wherein the petitioner is a tenant on a monthly rent
RCR 46.07

Page 1 of 9

of Rs.1,600/- exclusive of all other charges.

The only question

on

which there was a dispute between the parties was whether the suit
premise was required by the respondent for her residence. The suit
premise is situated in a commercial area and it was let out to the
petitioner for commercial purposes. However, for purposes of Section
14 D of the Act, the purpose of letting is not relevant unlike Section
14(1)(e) of the Act, so long as the widowed landlady is able to establish
that the premises are required by her for her residence. To establish
that the premises are required by her for her own residence she also
needs to establish that the premises are capable of being used as a
residence. The submission of the petitioner before the Rent Controller
was, and the same is reiterated before me is that the tenanted
premises consists of only one room admeasuring “16.80 X25”. The
said premises is admittedly situated in a commercial area. There is no
bathroom or kitchen available on the ground floor along with the said
room. The requirement set up by the respondent landlady was on the
basis that she is an old widow about 74 years of age at the time of
filing of the petition and that she was suffering from heart ailments
and arthritis in her knees.

Consequently, in the absence of even a

bathroom on the ground floor, it could not be said that the said
premise was required by her for her own residence since it cannot
reasonably be expected that she would live on the ground floor without
any facility of kitchen or bathroom, particularly when she is suffering

RCR 46.07

Page 2 of 9

from heart ailments and arthritis in her knees
3.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in fact the

respondent has sufficient accommodation available with her on the
first and second floors where she is residing with her only married
daughter, son-in-law and her two grand children. The petitioner also
relies on Niranjan Lal Sharma (deceased) through his Lrs V. Ved
Kumari & Another, 2002(64) DRJ 17 and particularly paragraph 6 of
the judgment which reads as follows:“It is true that the landlords classified under
Sections 14-A to 14-D of the Act are a class
apart and the Act envisages expeditious and
immediate
availability
of
residential
premises to them, but the Courts cannot
lose sight of the fact that these provisions
are based on the need of landlord which
must be genuine. In certain cases where
landlords are found wanting in bonafides and
are merely making a pretence of bonafide
need, the tenant cannot be thrown out as
the underlying object of the Act is to protect
the
tenants
against
arbitrary
and
unwarranted evictions. The grounds for
eviction of the tenants envisages under the
Act are in the nature of exceptions to the
protection provided to the tenants and as
such, have to be established strictly in terms
of the letter and spirit of law. Therefore, the
Courts dealing with eviction petitions are
under an onerous obligation to ensure that
neither a landlord legally entitled to recovery
of possession of his property in the hands of
a tenant is harassed by undue delay in
making the premises available to him nor a
tenant is victimised through eviction on
grounds which are not made out as per the
provisions of the Act and are a mere
pretence to evict a tenant. While dealing
with a petition under Section 14-C or 14-D of
RCR 46.07

Page 3 of 9

the Act, particularly in regard to the
premises being used for commercial
purpose, the Courts have to be more
cautions and circumspect to obviate the
possibility of eviction of a tenant from his
business premises inasmuch as the rents as
well as the value of such properties has gone
high which sometimes induces a landlord to
seek eviction of his tenant on made up
grounds. Therefore, in petitions under
Sections 14-C as well 14-D, the Courts have
to ensure that the landlord/landlady
approaching the Court for eviction of a
tenant is in bonafide and genuine need of
the premises for residential use only.
Eviction on these grounds cannot be ordered
if there is something to show that the need
is not bonafide. In Surjit Singh Kalra v.
Union of India and Others, (1991) 2 SCC
87 (para-20), the Apex Court clearly held
that every claim for eviction of a tenant
must be a bona fide one.“
4.

The petitioner also argued that the requirement projected

by the petitioner was an eyewash and since the premises is being used
and is fit for use as commercial purposes, the endeavour of the
respondent-landlady is to evict the petitioner and to relet the same to
realise higher rent.
5.

On the other hand, the submission of learned counsel for

the respondent is that the requirement of the landlady is bona fide and
genuine. He relies on paragraphs 20 and 21 of the judgment of the
learned

Additional

Rent

Controller

wherein

the

aspect

requirement of the respondent-landlady is discussed.

of

the

The said

paragraphs read as follows:“20. The petitioner has also testified in her
RCR 46.07

Page 4 of 9

statement that she requires one room for
herself, one room for her daughter and sonin-law, one room for her grand daughter
Astha Jain and one room for master Sparsh
Jain besides one Pooja room, one room for
visiting guests and one room to be used as
drawing-cum-dining room.
In all, the
petitioner is in requirement of seven rooms
whereas the accommodation available with
her is three rooms on the first floor and two
rooms on the second floor. The respondent
in his testimony has stated that requirement
of the petitioner is not bona fide and that
she
is
in
possession
of
sufficient
accommodation. The respondent has also
testified that petitioner is in occupation of
two bedrooms and one drawing-cum-dining
room on the second floor. However, perusal
of the site plan Ex.PW1/5 shows that second
floor accommodation comprises of one
living-cum-dining room measuring 15 feet x
13 feet and one bedroom measuring 15 feet
9 inches x 8 feet 6 inches and one store
measuring 6 feet x 11 feet. The respondent
has not filed any other site plan to
controvert the site plan Ex.PW 1/5 filed by
the petitioner and the same has to be
accepted as correct. Perusal of the second
floor accommodation would show that store
measuring 6 feet x 11 feet cannot be
considered to be a living room. Hon'ble High
Court of Delhi in Brij Mohan Vs. Sri Pal
Jain, 1993 Rajdhani Law Reporter 190
has held that “tenant cannot claim that a
room of a size of less than 100 sq.feet is a
living room. For a room of 200 sq.feet, he
cannot contend that it is equal to two rooms.
Similarly, in Uttam Chand Suri Vs. Smt.
Ram Murti 1980(2) RCJ 410 that “a room
or a Kotha, area of which is less than 100
sq.ft will not fall within the definition of a
living room.”
The Delhi Municipal
Corporation (Building) Bye-laws 1959 as
amended from time to time prescribe the
requirements regarding minimum size of a
habitable room. By-law 20 prescribes that
RCR 46.07

Page 5 of 9

no habitable room shall have a floor area of
less than 100 square feet. Hence, from the
above discussion, it is apparent that
petitioner is in possession of five rooms only
and is short of two rooms for her
accommodation. The requirement stated by
the
petitioner
cannot
be
called
as
exaggerated or fanciful. In 2001 (2) RCR
(Rent) 519 Delhi titled Pratap Rai Kalra
V. Om Prakash Sharma Hon'ble High
Court of Delhi had observed that need of
the landlord for one room, one room for her
son and daughter in law, one room for grand
children and one room as Pooja room, one
room for guests and one room for married
daughter were considered to be bona fide.
21. The respondent has also tried to show
that tenanted premises being a shop and
surrounded by other shops is not suitable for
the purposes of residence as the entire area
is commercial in nature and hence premises
is not suitable for the residence of the
petitioner or her family members. Counsel
for the respondent has also relied on the
judgment
of
Niranjan
Lal
Sharma
(deceased) Vs. Ved Kumari & Anr
2003(1) RCJ 1 to substantiate his defence.
The respondent has examined RW1 and has
testified that premises in question were let
out for commercial purposes for running of
the shop and there are five spare parts
shops and 36 footwear shops as per list
Ex.RW1/C. He has also testified that entire
area of Naiwalan, Karol Bagh is commercial
area and gali no 68 consists of more than 40
shops, which are adjacent to each other and
hence the premises is not habitable for
residential purposes. RW2 Sunil Oberoi has
also testified in his affidavit that respondent
has been doing his business in the tenanted
premises which is a shop surrounded by
other shops from all sides and there is not
ventilation and this shop is unfit for human
dwelling. He has further testified that to his
knowledge, the entire area is commercial.
RCR 46.07

Page 6 of 9

This defence raised by the respondent is not
at all tenable. At the outset, it may be
stated here that tenant cannot dictate to the
landlord as to how he should reside and
where he should reside.
It is also not
necessary that premises which is not
habitable in its present form, also cannot
become habitable in future. The landlord
may make alterations in the same after it is
vacated to make suitable for his residence.”
6.

Learned counsel for the respondent submits that the

landlady is an old and ailing widow who needs to be looked after, and
is being taken care of by her only married daughter, son-in-law and her
two grand children. It is not necessary for the landlady to have her
own separate kitchen on the ground floor and a common toilet is
available on the ground floor.

Learned counsel for the respondent

further submits that Section 19 of the Act prohibits the landlord, who
seeks eviction, inter alia, only under Section 14D of the Act to relet the
whole or any part of the said premise within three years from the date
of obtaining possession thereof.

He submits that the need of the

respondent-landlady is genuine and bona fide and she is willing to
even give an undertaking to this Court that she would not relet the
premises in compliance of Section 19 of the Act.
7.

For purposes of Section 14D it is immaterial whether the

premises have been let out for residential, commercial or for any other
purpose. What is of relevance is that the widowed landlady bona fide
requires the premises for her own residence.

Therefore, if the

premises is capable of being used as a residence, or a part of a
RCR 46.07

Page 7 of 9

residence, and she is otherwise not in occupation of sufficient
accommodation to meet her needs, the widowed landlady would be
entitled to seek eviction of the tenant under Section 14D of the Act. In
the present case it is has come on record that the petitioner-landlady
who is now 78 years of age and is suffering from various ailments is
being looked after by her only married daughter, son-in-law and two
grand children.
8.

The learned Additional Rent Controller has applied the

principles evolved from time to time and on that basis assessed the
requirement of the respondent as seven rooms while the respondent is
in possession of five rooms. Therefore it cannot be said that she has in
her possession sufficient accommodation on the first and the second
floor of the same building where the suit premises are situated.
9.

Even if one were to ignore the claim of the respondent that

there is a common toilet on the ground floor which could be used by
the landlady (because the existence of the same has not been
established before the learned Additional Rent Controller), the suit
premises on the ground floor which consists of one large room is
undoubtedly capable of being used by the landlady for her residence
as there is no prohibition against the landlady making necessary
alterations in accordance with law to make the same convenient for
her use as a part of her residence. The requirement of Section 14D is
not that at the time of filing of the eviction petition, the tenanted

RCR 46.07

Page 8 of 9

premises should, in its existing form necessarily be not in a completely
habitable state. So long as the premises can be made habitable, in my
view it would be permissible for the widowed landlady to seek eviction
of the tenant under Section 14 D, if the other requirements of law are
satisfied.

It is not the petitioner's case that it is illegal to use the

tenanted premises for residential purpose.
10.

The decision cited by the petitioner, to my mind, is of no

avail in the facts of the present case.

Admittedly the petitioner is

residing on the first and second floors of the same building and
admittedly the tenanted premises

is a stand alone premises,

separated from her existing accommodation by such distance that it
cannot be used in conjunction with her existing accommodation.

In

conjunction with the premises already in her use and occupation on
the first and second floors the tenanted premises can be used by the
landlady for her own residence.
11.

Having considered the impugned judgment, I find that the

learned Additional Rent Controller has properly appreciated the facts
and the law and rightly come to the conclusion of the requirement of
the respondent being bona fide. I find no error in the said judgment
which would call for interference by this Court in the exercise of its
revisionary jurisdiction. Dismissed.
VIPIN SANGHI, J.
January 22, 2008
as
RCR 46.07

Page 9 of 9

