*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

OMP No. 361/2001

%

Judgment reserved on: March 21, 2007
Judgment delivered on: May 23, 2007
M/s. Taipack Limited & Others
Through:

.....

Petitioners

Mr. Pradeep Dewan and
Mr. Sumit Goyal, Advocates

versus
Ram Kishore Nagar Mal
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr. Tiger Singh with

Mr. Peeyosh Kalra, Advocates
CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND FACTS.
1.
This petition has been filed by M/s Taipack Ltd. under Section 34
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 (The Act) challenging the
award dated 14.8.2001 made by sole arbitrator Shri Krishan Lal Aneja
in claim No. 2000-01 titled “M/s Ram Kishor Nagar Mal vs. M/s. Taipack
Ltd.”

OMP No. 361.01

Page 1 of 16

2.

The impugned award has been challenged on two broad

grounds:

3.

1.
The arbitrator had no jurisdiction to enter
upon the reference as there was no arbitration
agreement between the parties under which
the disputes could have been arbitrated upon.
2.
The award is in violation of the public
policy of India, as it is based on incorrect
interpretation and application of laws in force
in India. It violates provisions of The Limitation
Act, 1963 and Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) Act, 1985 and The
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
Brief facts, as germane to the controversy are that the petitioner

had placed an order for supply of BOPP films upon the respondent. On
the back of the said purchase order dated 13.2.1997, were printed
some terms and conditions upon which the petitioner company made
its aforesaid offer.
4.

Clauses 10 and 11 thereof read as follows:-

5.

“10.
Any
terms
stipulated
in
seller's
confirmation or any other documents in
addition or contradiction to what mentioned in
this order will not be acceptable to us unless
specifically agreed to in writing”.
“11. Any dispute arising out of this contract
shall be subject to the jurisdiction of courts in
Delhi and the supplier expressly agrees to
submit to such jurisdiction.”
Respondent No.1 supplied the goods to the petitioner as per the

order. However, a dispute arose regarding the payment for these
goods.
6.

The invoices and delivery documents raised by the Respondent

no.1, and signed and accepted by the petitioners agents also

OMP No. 361.01

Page 2 of 16

contained on its reverse certain terms and conditions of the
respondent. Condition 4 of the said invoice as filed on record reads as
follows:-

7.

“In case of any dispute the judgment of the Tribunal
of any other authority appointed by the Paper
Merchants Asociation (Regd.) Delhi will be final &
binding.”
The Respondent, on 3.2.1999 and 27.9.1999 got issued legal

notices to the petitioner demanding as principal liability, besides
interest etc. a sum of Rs. 13,68,076.08 as balance/outstanding on
account of the goods supplied to the petitioner. Vide the said notice
the Respondent No.1 also called upon the petitioner to issue the
relevant 'C' form for the value of the goods supplied, or pay a sum of
Rs.7,05,584/- towards sales tax liability.
8.

The petitioner refuted the claim made by the Respondent vide

its replies dated 5.4.1999 and 25.10.1999. However, 'C' forms were
issued to the respondent for a total value of Rs.6,25,250.50 on
6.1.2000.
9.

Thereafter, on 20.1.2001 a notice of the claim filed by the

respondent before the Arbitrator appointed by Paper Merchants
Association was received by the Petitioner.
10.

The Petitioner entered appearance and raised its objections, as

aforesaid, before the Arbitrator. The same, however, came to be
rejected by the impugned award, and the arbitrator proceeded to
allow the Respondent’s claim to the extent of Rs.24,89,898/- along

OMP No. 361.01

Page 3 of 16

with interest at the rate of 24% per annum from the date of the award
till realisation.
11.

The Paper Merchants Association (Regd.) is stated to be a

registered association, and its “Constitution and Regulations” as
amended

upto

Respondent.

30.11.2000

Regulation

has

XXX

been

thereof

filed
is

on

relied

record

by

the

upon

by

the

respondents, and the same, in so far as it is relevant reads as follows:
“XXX. Rules for Arbitration Cases framed
by the Executive Committee under Rule
XVI (15) of the Constitution & Regulation.
1.
In regard to the Aims and Objects of the
Paper Merchants Association (Regd.) Delhi Rule
II Sub Clause (13) the disputes including
disputes of non-payment between member to
member or member to an outsider shall be
decided by the Arbitrator/Arbitrators appointed
by the Association. The Award given by the
Arbitrator/Arbitrators shall be binding on both
the parties. The disputes including disputes of
nonpayment between member to member and
member to an outsider shall be filled in the
Association as per above reference.
In case of any dispute including dispute
of nonpayment in respect to this bill the
same shall be referred to the “Paper
Merchants Association (Regd.) Delhi” for
sole arbitration and the judgment given
by the Arbitrator/Arbitrators appointed by
the Executive Committee shall be final
and binding on both the parties.
2.
For an outsider the above term of
Arbitration will be printed or stamped on
original and duplicate sale invoices and both
the parties will be bound to this term.
Even if the term of Arbitration is not printed on
the Sale invoices and both the parties appear
and participate in the Arbitration proceedings,

OMP No. 361.01

Page 4 of 16

it will be presumed that the parties have
accepted the Arbitration.”
Discussion and Decision:
Issue Regarding Existence of an Arbitration Agreement:
12.

I have gone through the award and heard learned counsel for

the Petitioner. Learned counsel for the respondent did not address oral
arguments despite opportunity, and on 21st March, 2007 sought three
days time to file written submissions. However, no written submissions
have been filed by the Respondents.
13.

In my opinion, the submission of the Petitioner that there was no

existing agreement between the parties to refer the disputes arising
out of their commercial relationship to Arbitration, is well founded.
The arbitrator has rejected the objection as to non-existence of an
arbitration agreement on the basis of the said clause 4 printed on the
reverse of the invoices etc. raised by the Respondent. The arbitrator
held that since the Petitioner herein received the goods without any
protest and prejudice, or without intimating any contrary intention
through a letter or notice, it was not open for it to resile from the
conditions printed on the bills & invoices of the Respondent herein. As
per the said clause, the matter was referable to Paper Merchants
Association, Chawri Bazaar, for arbitration.

Consequently, according

to the learned Arbitrator, an arbitration agreement existed between
the parties in relation to their commercial transactions and he had
jurisdiction to arbitrate the same.
OMP No. 361.01

Page 5 of 16

14.

The issue that arises for consideration is whether there was an

existing and enforceable arbitration agreement between the parties,
to refer their disputes in relation to the contract in question to
Arbitration by the Paper Merchants Association (Regd.).
15.

Arbitration agreement means an agreement by the parties to

submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen, or
which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal
relationship, whether contractual or not. It may be in the form of an
arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of a separate agreement.
An arbitration agreement has necessarily to be in writing. It may be
contained, inter alia, in a document signed by the parties, or in an
exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or any other means of
telecommunication, which provide a record of the agreement.
16.

In the present case, there is no arbitration agreement which

could be said to be 'contained in a document signed by the parties'.
[See section 7(4)(a) of the Act].

Therefore, one has to ascertain

whether there is an arbitration agreement which could be said to be
contained in 'exchange of letters, telex, telegram or any other means
of telecommunication, which provide a record of the agreement'. An
“arbitration

agreement”

is

a

species

of

the

genus,

that

is

“Agreement”. There has to be, first and foremost an agreement. For
the existence of an agreement there has to be “consensus ad idem”

OMP No. 361.01

Page 6 of 16

between the parties, i.e., they should agree to the same thing in the
same sense.
17.

In the present case, the Petitioner herein made his offer when it

placed the purchase order dated 13.2.1997 upon the Respondent
which, inter-alia, contained clauses 10 and 11 as aforesaid. Clause 10,
specifically made any other terms or conditions, contained in any
document of the respondents that were in addition to, or in
contradiction to those contained therein, inapplicable to the contract
unless they were specifically agreed to by the petitioner in writing.
Clause 11 subjected all disputes to jurisdiction of Delhi Courts. The
respondent acted on this offer by effecting supplies of the goods, and
at the same time raised an invoice dated 6.3.1997 for Rs.1,49,866.17
which contained condition No.4 as extracted above.
18.

What is the legal effect of the aforesaid conduct of the

Respondent? In my view, when the Respondent supplied the goods in
compliance of the Purchase Order, it accepted the terms and
conditions stipulated therein. The mere printing of condition No. 4 on
the reverse of the invoice was, at the highest, an offer made by the
Respondent to the Petitioner. Unless the said offer was accepted by
the Petitioner, it could not result in a binding and enforceable contract.
The inclusion of terms and conditions at the back of the invoice,
unilaterally issued by the Respondent while effecting delivery of the
goods in terms of the Petitioner's purchase order, would not bind the

OMP No. 361.01

Page 7 of 16

Petitioner. The purchase order itself made it clear that the Petitioner
did not intend to refer its disputes to arbitration in respect of the
resulting transaction arising out of the said purchase order. Arbitration
was clearly contra indicated when the Petitioner's purchase order itself
stated that “Any dispute arising out of this contract shall be subject to
the jurisdiction of Courts in Delhi” The Respondent was well aware that
the Petitioner had shunned arbitration, yet the Respondent acted in
furtherance of the said purchase order by effecting supplies.
19.

On the other hand, there were hardly any further steps required

to be taken by the Petitioner when the Respondent effected supplies
and sent its invoice. The supplies having been effected, there was no
other step required to be taken by the Petitioner, by which it could be
inferred that the Petitioner consented to the conditions contained on
the reverse of the Respondents invoice. The making of the payment by
the Petitioner for the supplies effected by the Respondent cannot be
considered to be a step taken by the Petitioner to indicate its
acceptance of the conditions mentioned by the Respondents on the
reverse of the invoice. This is so, because the Petitioner was, in any
case, obliged to make payments for the supplies received by it in
accordance with its purchase order.
20.

The signature by the petitioners agent on the respondents copy

of the invoice cannot tantamount to acceptance of the respondents so
called offer for arbitration.

OMP No. 361.01

The signatures in such a situation were

Page 8 of 16

evidently an acknowledgment of receipt of the goods and nothing
more. There is another aspect of the so- called Arbitration Agreement
contained in condition No.4 of the Respondents invoice. The said
condition in the invoice firstly does not use the expression 'arbitration'
or 'arbitrator'. Secondly, the Respondent does not even make a
reference

to the

“Constitution and Regulations” of the

Paper

Merchants Association (Regd.), Delhi. Consequently, it is difficult to
accept that the Petitioner ever became aware of, or agreed to refer its
dispute with the Respondent and relation to the contract in question to
arbitration by the Paper Merchants Association (Regd.), Delhi.

The

condition No. 4 appears to be incomplete and rather vague.
Pertinently, Regulation XXX of the Paper Merchants Association states
that the clause, above clause No. 2 in bold words, has to be printed by
the Merchant on its invoice, for it to bind the outsider. However, what
is printed by the Respondent on its invoice as condition No. 4 is
nowhere close to the boldly printed text in Regulation XXX. It also
appears that the arbitration contemplated in Regulation XXX is in
respect of disputes of non-payment “between member to member or
member to outsider”. It is not in respect of disputes of non-payment
from an outsider and a member, which is the case in hand. In response
to the invoice sent by the Respondent, with the condition No.4 as
aforesaid, there was no exchange of letters, telegrams or any other
means of telecommunication in writing from the side of the Petitioner

OMP No. 361.01

Page 9 of 16

to the Respondent, where from the consent of the Petitioner to the
conditions contained on the reverse of the invoice could be inferred.
21.

For the aforesaid reasons I find that there was in fact no

arbitration agreement between the parties and that the arbitrator
appointed by the Paper Merchants Association (Regd.), Delhi had no
jurisdiction to adjudicate the disputes between the parties in relation
to the contract in question. The arbitrator has completely misdirected
himself in dealing with the aforesaid specific objection as to his
jurisdiction.
Issue of Limitation:
22.

The other contention of the petitioner is that the claim of the

Respondent was time barred and the award is thus, contrary to the
provisions of the Limitation Act. The Arbitrator, as it appears from para
10 of the award, proceeded on the assumption that Limitation would
have to be calculated from the date the transaction was completed,
i.e., when the Central Sales Tax, ‘C' Form, was delivered to the
Respondent by the Petitioner i.e. on 16.1.2000. In the alternative, the
Arbitrator also treated the 'C' Form as an acknowledgment and held
the claim as within limitation.
23.

The Petitioner assails the aforesaid conclusion on the ground

that suits for recovery of price of goods sold under a contract are
governed by Articles 14 & 15 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act
which prescribes the starting point of limitation as date on which the

OMP No. 361.01

Page 10 of 16

goods are delivered where no fixed period of credit is agreed upon, or
where it is so fixed, on expiry of the said term respectively. The
Purchase Order dated 13.2.1997 clearly stipulates that the payment
was to be made in 90 days of the date of dispatch of goods. There is
no averment in the claim petition that any goods were supplied
beyond 31.7.1997 (the principal amount claimed before the Arbitrator
was the total claimed to be outstanding as on the said date).
24.

Thus, time began to run in this case not later than 31-7-97 (or

90 days thereafter at the latest) which date was not denied by the
Respondent

No.1

in

his

rejoinder

filed

before

the

Arbitrator.

Proceedings, if any, ought to have been initiated before the expiry of
three years from that date. However, the Arbitration commenced in
January, 2001. The giving of `C’ Form by the petitioner on 16-1-2000
does not have the effect of postponing the due date of payment under
the contract. Therefore, unless the Respondent makes out a case of
extension of limitation under the provisions of the Limitation Act, the
proceedings were clearly barred by time.
25.

The question is, can the said form 'C' given by the Petitioner to

the

Respondent

on

16.1.2000

be

considered

to

be

an

acknowledgment? The Respondent contended that the submission of
‘C’ form amounts to an admission of the jural relation, and would in
law amount to an acknowledgment of liability within the meaning of
Section 18 of the Limitation Act. Counsel for the Petitioner refuted this

OMP No. 361.01

Page 11 of 16

claim by contending that the ‘C’ form is, at best an admission of a
transaction that took place in the past, but not of any present
subsisting liability to pay. He contends that it cannot even be treated
as an acknowledgment of a jural relation of a debtor and creditor.
26.

In order to buttress this argument Petitioner placed reliance

upon Shapoor Freeloom

Mazda v. Durga Prasad Chamania &

Others, AIR 1961 SC 1236; State of Haryana v. Bharat Steel
Tubes Ltd. AIR 1996 Delhi 198; K. Ganpathy v. Vaidyalingam AIR
1971 Madras 425; and Union of India owning Southern Railway
represented by General Manager, Madras, vs. Sayadev Beedi
Co. & Another, AIR 1970 Mad 108.
27.

In Shapoor Freedom (supra), the Apex Court while sounding a

word of caution in the manner in which the words used in a document
ought to be construed in such cases,

held that words contained in

each document must be construed in the context in which they were
used and reference to judicial precedents may not be of much help.
28.

However, the Court laid down the basic requirements that need

be fulfilled for a document to constitute a valid acknowledgment
within the meaning of S. 19 of the 1908, Act which is in pari materia
with Section 18 of the Limitation Act, 1963. The Court held:
“(6) It is thus clear that acknowledgement as
prescribed by S. 19 merely renews debt; it
does not create a new right of action. It is a
mere acknowledgement of the liability in
respect of the right in question; it need not be
accompanied by a promise to pay either
OMP No. 361.01

Page 12 of 16

expressly or even by implication. The
statement
on
which
a
plea
of
acknowledge is based must relate to a
present subsisting liability though the
exact nature or the specific character of
the said liability may not be indicated in
words. Words used in the acknowledgment
must, however, indicate the existence of jural
relationship between the parties such as that
of debtor and creditor, and it must appear that
the statement is made with the intention to
admit such jural relationship. Such intention
can be inferred by implication from the nature
of the admission, and need not be expressed in
words. If the statement is fairly clear then the
intention to admit jural relationship may be
implied from it. The admission in question
need not be express but must be made in
circumstances and in words from which the
court can reasonably infer that the person
making the admission intended to refer
to a subsisting liability as at the date of
the statement. In construing words used in
the statements made in writing on which a
plea of acknowledgement rests oral evidence
has been expressly excluded but surrounding
circumstances can always be considered.
Stated generally courts lean in favour of
a liberal construction of such statements
though it does not mean that where no
admission is made one should be
inferred, or where a statement was made
clearly without intending to admit the
existence of jural relationship such
intention could be fastened on the maker
of the statement by an involved or farfetched process of reasoning. Broadly
stated that is the effect of the relevant
provisions contained in S.19, and there is really
no substantial difference between the parties
as to the true legal position in this matter.
(emphasis supplied)
29.

In Valliamma Champaka Pillai v. Sivathanu Pillai & Others

(1979) SCC 429 it was held that
OMP No. 361.01

Page 13 of 16

30.

“Under Section 18 of Limitation Act, 1908, one
of the essential requirements for a valid
‘acknowledgement’
is
that
the
writing
concerned must contain an admission of a
‘subsisting liability’. A mere admission of the
past liability is not sufficient to constitute such
an ‘acknowledgement’. Hence a mere recital in
a document as to the existence of a past
liability, coupled with a statement of its
discharge,
does
not
constitute
an
‘acknowledgement’ within this Section.”
This Court in R.K.Chemical (M/s) vs. M/s. Kohinoor Paints

Faridabad Pvt. Ltd. (P) Ltd. & Anr., 2005 II AD (Delhi) 133, held
that an auditors report signed on 27th November 1996 which reflected
a debt existing in the accounting period 1995-96 (1.4.1995 to
31.3.1996) did not constitute acknowledgment of the debt as the said
report merely affirmed the state of affairs prevailing as on 31.3.2006
and cannot be treated as acknowledging the position existing on the
date of the report as well, i.e., 27th November 1996. For even if the
position of debtors or creditors had undergone a change between April
to November 1996, the same would not have found place in the said
report.
31.

Now can it be said that the ‘C’ Form supplied by the Petitioner

herein constitutes acknowledgment of debt owed to the Respondent
No.1 so as to give a fresh lease to the commencement of Limitation?
The answer is plainly in the negative for the following reasons:
32.

Firstly, there is no acknowledgement of a present and subsisting

liability.

The

OMP No. 361.01

said

form

can

at

the

most

be

treated

as

an

Page 14 of 16

acknowledgement of the goods received under the contract of supply
of goods and the price fixed to be paid for them. Whether or not
payments were effected thereafter, or any amount remains due or
outstanding cannot be inferred from the said ‘C’ form in the facts and
circumstances of this case. Secondly, no intention to acknowledge a
liability can be inferred from the contents of the said ‘C’ form. Thirdly,
one cannot establish a jural relation of debtor and creditor from the
contents of the said ‘C’ form. Thus, the essential requirements for a
writing to constitute acknowledgment are missing from this document.
(also see Hansa Industries (P) Limited Vs. M/s. MMTC Ltd., 2004
VI AD (Delhi) 222).
33.

Thus, the Arbitrator clearly erred in treating 16.1.2000 as the

date of commencement of limitation. In view of the provisions
contained in The Limitation Act, and the authorities cited, I find no
force in the contention of the Respondent that the claim before the
Arbitrator was within the period of Limitation. The said ‘C’ Form does
not constitute an acknowledgment within the meaning of Section 18 of
the Limitation Act and the Arbitrator misapplied the law on this aspect
as well.
34.

I, therefore, set aside the impugned award as being contrary to

Public Policy of India.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE
OMP No. 361.01

Page 15 of 16

May 23, 2007
Babbar

OMP No. 361.01

Page 16 of 16

