*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision: 23rd August, 2007

+

W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

%

M/s. Swiss Parenterals Pvt. Ltd. & anr. ...Petitioner
Through: Mr. Mrinal Madhav with
Kumar
Saurabh, Advocate

Mr.

versus
RITES Ltd. & Others
...Respondents
Through: Mr. P.P. Malhotra, A.S.G., for UOI.
Mr. Gaurav duggal for
Respondent No. 2, 3.
Mr. Maninder Singh, Ms. Pratibha
M Singh, Mr.Kirtiman Singh, Mr.
Ayush Agarwal, Mr. T. Singh,
Advocate for the respondent
No.4.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI,J. (Oral)
1.

The Petitioners in this Writ Petition are challenging the

action of Respondents in ignoring the bid of the Petitioner for
supply of artheeter injection under International Competitive or
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 1 of 14

Bidding

(ICB) and National Competitive Bidding (NCB) and

accepting the bid of Respondent No. 4 even though the Petitioner
had quoted the price of Rs.39.50 per unit ampule as against, the
rate quoted by Respondent No. 4 of Rs.72 per unit, ampule under
the ICB. Similarly, for supply of artheeter injection under the
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) the bid of petitioner at the
rate of Rs.35.36 per ampule was rejected while accepting the
higher bid of Rs.73.84 and Rs.74.88 of IPCA Labs Ltd. and of
Respondent No.4 respectively. The petitioner claims that the
Respondent authorities have wrongly rejected their bids on the
ground that the Petitioner did not have the requisite experience of
2 years of manufacturing and marketing the said injections.
2.

The Petitioner company claims to be a WHO GMP certified

company, and to be engaged in the business of manufacturing
and marketing various medicine and drugs.

Respondent No. 1

RITES Ltd. invited tenders on behalf of National Vector Borne
Disease Control Program and Ministry of Family and Health
Welfare, Government of India vide notice inviting tender dated
1.2.2007 and 9.3.2007 published in National Dailies bearing
Tender Nos. IFB No. RITES/MSM/MCP/02/2006/DOM and Tender
No. RITES/MSM/ MCP/02/2006 respectively for procurement of
artheeter injection under (ICB) and (NCB) amongst other drugs
and medicines under the National Vector Borne Disease Control
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 2 of 14

Program. It is further stated that the bids were invited in 8
schedules for artheeter injection under ICB. The total requirement
of these injections were stated to be Rs.7,69,450/- ampules of
injections at an estimated cost of Rs.55.40 millions. The
requirement of artheeter injection under NCB was Rs.6,75,000
ampules at an estimated cost of Rs.48.60 millions.
Petitioner's Contentions
A Pre-bid Conference was held on 20th March 2007
wherein the post qualification criteria was explained to the
bidders and they were informed that bids complete in all respect
will only be further considered. On 23rd March 2007, the Petitioner
was asked to submit documents with regard to supplies made by
the Petitioner to one M/s Intas Pharmaceuticals Ltd. These
documents

were

sent

by

the

Petitioner.

However,

the

Respondents were not satisfied with the same and rejected the
bid of the Petitioner on the ground that it did not possess two
years of experience in manufacturing and marketing the product
in accordance with the qualification criteria (b) Qualifications
criteria in the Tender Conditions.
3.

The Petitioner made a representation and also sent a notice

to the Respondent calling upon it to look into the matter. The
grievance of the Petitioner is that he has been ousted from the
tender process deliberately and malafidely, arbitrarily, without
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 3 of 14

any justifiable cause and reason since it was eligible and fulfilled
all the terms and conditions and requirements of the NIT. The
Respondent ignored the fact that it had been manufacturing
artheeter injection for M/s. Themis Medicare Ltd. on loan licence
basis, and these facts were repeatedly brought to the notice of
the Respondents. The artheeter injection so manufactured, had
been supplied under the brand name of E-MAL injection and the
carton of the said injection shows M/s. Swiss Parenterals P. Ltd. as
the manufacturer of the injection for Respondent No.4 M/s.
Themis Medicare Limited. The inspection of the injection had been
carried out at the premises of the Petitioner and, therefore, the
Respondent were well aware that the Petitioner had been
manufacturing the said injection. To substantiate its claim various
documents have been filed including the invoice dated 5.4.2004
to show that the Petitioners have been manufacturing and
marketing the specified product for considerable period and
therefore has the requisite qualification.
Respondent's Contentions
The Respondents have refuted the claim of the
Petitioner in their counter affidavit. The stand taken by the
Respondent is that E-MAL artheeter injection which is claimed to
have been manufactured by the Petitioner is the proprietary
product of Respondent No. 4 and was manufactured by the
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 4 of 14

petitioner for the said Respondent under a loan licence and the
Petitioner

cannot

therefore

claim

any

experience

in

manufacturing and marketing the said product. The Petitioner's
product is manufactured under the brand name S-MAL injection
under a licence from the Food and Drug Control Administrator,
Gandhi

Nagar,

which

was

manufactured and marketed

not

established

to

have

been

for a period of two years, as

prescribed by the qualification condition. Under the bid document,
Petitioner has offered its product under the brand S. MAL injection
and therefore, it was required to give documentary evidence
alongwith its bid of having manufactured and marketed the said
offer product for at least 2 years as required under clause 6(i)(c)
of the Inspections to Bidders which are the terms and conditions
governing the tender.

As per clause 6.1(2), the Petitioner was

required to produce the evidence to establish that it had
manufactured and marketed the specified goods covered by the
bidding document for at least two years and no evidence to show
requisite experience in manufacturing and marketing the said
product was submitted by the Petitioner. Thus, the Petitioner
failed to establish that it had been manufacturing and marketing
its product S-MAL for the last 2 years.
4.

The

Petitioner

deliberately

concealed

its

letter

dated

17.5.2007 wherein it had denied to furnish the details of user and
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 5 of 14

satisfaction report for the bid product i.e. S-MAL injection. Since
the Petitioner failed to supply the documentary evidence as
required the Respondent was within its right in rejecting the bid of
the Petitioner.
5.

Further, the Petitioner had initially in its bid indicated that S-

MAL injection 1200 in number worth Rs.18,564/- were supplied to
one M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd. in August 2004, which information
was subsequently modified vide letter dated 12.4.2007 to be read
as 1980 in number worth Rs.39,600/- supplied

in March 2004.

The said M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd. shares the address,
telephone, fax and email with the Petitioner herein, which
establishes that M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd. is only a sister
concern of the Petitioner and the transaction relied upon was not
one at arms length and therefore could not be verified and relied
upon. Moreover, the invoice issued to M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd.
also indicates that the goods were supplied to them for the
purpose of export. However, the said goods were not exported by
M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd. but were supplied to one M/s. SMS
Formulations Pvt Ltd. on cash payment for use in India. The said
SMS Formulation Pvt. Ltd., as it appears from the invoice,
operates from a Floor in a Group Housing Society and does not
appears to be a genuine entity. Further, this also reveals that the
goods manufactured by the Petitioner were not supplied to the
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 6 of 14

end user but were supplied to an intermediary M/s. Swiss Exports
Pvt. Ltd., which in turn supplied the same to SMS Formulations
Pvt. Ltd. Thus, the Petitioner miserably failed to satisfy the
Respondent that it was in fact marketing the said product.
6.

The Petitioner had submitted two copies of licence dated

5.9.2002 and 5.9.2003 whereas the FDA stated that the drug
licence had been issued on 5.3.2003, thus there was a
misrepresentation of facts by the Petitioner. Since, the past
record of the bidder, with regard to the quality of the goods is
essential to establish from the persons who had bought those
goods in the past, the absence of past marketing experience
played an important role in deciding the acceptability of the bid
and the price quoted by the participants is not the sole criteria
for awarding the contract. Therefore, even if the price quoted by
the Petitioner was lower than that quoted by Respondent No. 4, in
the absence of satisfactory past record, the contract could not
have been granted to the Petitioner.
7.

What

was

presented

alongwith

the

Writ

Petition

as

documents indicating the production schedule of the bid product
is the schedule of the product manufactured under the loan
licence of Respondent No. 4 and cannot any way be used by the
Petitioner as indicating his own production plans for the good
manufactured by it for its own marketing.
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 7 of 14

8.

Having failed to satisfy the authority of its experience in

marketing the said product for a period of 2 years, the petitioner
cannot lay a claim to the contract and this petition is therefore
liable to be dismissed.
9.

DISCUSSION & DECISION
Since the bid has been rejected on the ground that the

petitioner does not possess the requisite experience, the main
question which is arising for consideration is as to whether the
Petitioner fulfilled the condition of having 5 years experience as
manufacturer and 2 years experience in marketing the product in
question, i.e., artheeter injections.
10.

It cannot be disputed that the Petitioner has the requisite

experience as a manufacturer. From the facts stated above, it is
clear that the Petitioner acts as the manufacturer for other loan
licensees. Respondent No.4 is one of them. We may also state at
this stage, that in so far as eligibility of Respondent No. 4 is
concerned, (i.e. Of Manufacturing experience of 5 years and
marketing of the product for the period of 2 years), the same is
not in dispute. It is the case of Respondent No.4 that bulk drug is
supplied by the Respondent No. 4 to the Petitioner, which is then
manufactured into a specific formulation. It is also stated that
even supervision is that of Respondent No. 4. It also appears from
the record that in addition to undertaking the manufacturing
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 8 of 14

activity on behalf of Respondent No. 4, the Petitioner is
manufacturing its product for other manufacturers also under loan
licence. The Petitioner has the license of manufacturing S MAL
artheeter injections. Merely because he was manufacturing this
product for others having a loan licence, it cannot be said that the
Petitioner did not have the capability or the requisite experience
in manufacturing the product in question.

He was, however,

rendered ineligibility on the ground that the Petitioner does not
have the requisite experience in marketing the product.
11.

In these circumstances, when the Petitioner submitted its

bid though he was given the benefit being a manufacturer, the
Respondent No. 1 wanted to find out as to whether Petitioner has
got the requisite experience in marketing as well. Most of the
documents, which were initially supplied by the Petitioner
alongwith its bid related to the manufacturing undertaken by it on
behalf of other loan licensees.
12

Manufacturing the product for other entities under loan

licence cannot be treated as marketing. The activity of marketing
would entail selling the goods in the market. The Respondent No.
1 in these circumstances sent a letter dated 16.5.2007 asking the
Petitioner to supply the information in respect of the marketing of
the product carried out by it. In response, vide letter dated
17.5.2007, the Petitioner submitted certain documents. Though
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 9 of 14

copy of this letter dated 17.5.2007 and the documents submitted
alongwith it

have not been filed by the Petitioner, Respondent

No. 1 has, alongwith its counter affidavit, placed these documents
on record. There is a certificate issued by M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt.
Ltd. dated 15.4.2004, as per which Petitioner had supplied
artheeter injections to M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd. vide invoice
No.0087 dated 31.3.2004. A perusal of this certificate reveals that
the same does not mention the nature of goods supplied. That
apart, this letter bears the stamp of the Petitioner company
though it is purportedly issued by M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd.
During the arguments, learned counsel for the Petitioner tried to
explain away this fact by stating that M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd.
is its subsidiary company. However, the same does not inspires
confidence, inasmuch, as even the second certificate, which has
been

produced,

though

issued

by

one

M/s.

Emcure

Pharmaceuticals Ltd., the same also bears the stamp of the
Petitioner where the signatures of authorised signatory are
appended. Therefore, these two certificates, which were produced
in response to letter dated 16.5.2007 of the Respondent No. 1
cannot be relied upon as they are the documents made by the
Petitioner itself. In its second letter, no mention of the particular
product, i.e., artheeter injections has been made. The matter
however, does not rests here.
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 10 of 14

13

After receiving these certificates when the Respondent No. 1

wanted to find out as to whether M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt. Ltd. are
making further sales etc. or not, a query was made to that effect.
It appears that this query was raised primarily to find out as to
whether the certificates were genuine or not. In response the
Petitioner submitted one invoice issued by M/s. Swiss Exports Pvt.
Ltd. in which the name of consignee is shown as SMS
Formulations Pvt. Ltd., and it shows only cash sale to the said
company to the tune of Rs.38,000/-. In our view, only on the basis
of these documents, it cannot be said that the Petitioner has been
marketing the goods in question.
14.

We may point out here that it was for the Respondent No. 1

to evaluate the tender and come to conclusion as to whether the
Petitioner satisfies the condition of experience of two years in
marketing the product as well. The conclusion of the Respondent
No. 1 on the basis of the documents, which the Petitioner has
submitted, that the petitioner does not has sufficient experience
was a possible conclusion. It is not proper for the court to
interfere with the conclusion to which the Respondent has arrived
on examining the material before it, in exercise of the powers
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and to try and
substitute its own judgment for that of Expert Committee
constituted for this purpose.
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 11 of 14

15.

Since the Petitioner's bid was rejected on the ground that it

was not eligible to make a bid, arguments that its rates were
among the lowest would be of no avail. We note from the
averments made by the Petitioner that pursuant to the notice
inviting tender, 7 bids were received by Respondent No. 1. This
included Petitioner, Respondent No. 4 and one M/s. IPCA Labs
Ltd., New Delhi. After the scrutiny of the tenders, 5 bids were
rejected as not conforming to

the eligibility condition and only

Respondent No. 1 and M/s. IPCA Labs Ltd., New Delhi were found
to be eligible. Rates quoted by these two bidders were Rs.74.88p
and Rs.73.84p respectively. M/s. IPCA Labs Ltd., New Delhi has
been awarded the contract for 5 regions whereas Respondent No.
4 for three regions in the tender in question. The learned counsel
for Respondent No. 4 has relied upon the judgment of Andra
Pradesh High Court in the case of Swapna Constructions,
Hyderabad vs. Superintending Engineer, Srisailam and
another, 2001 (1) ALT 324, and has drawn our attention to
paragraph 28 thereof, which reads as under:
“28. The learned counsel for the Petitioner
contended that the price quoted by the
Petitioner is the least one when compared to
the other bidders and if the contract is
awarded to the Petitioner, the exchequer of
the Government will be benefited by twenty
lakh rupees. This contention cannot be
accepted because when once the Petitioner
is found disqualified and ineligible for
W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 12 of 14

awarding the contract, as per the tender
conditions, even if the price bid of the
Petitioner is the lowest, it is not proper for
this court to direct the authorities to award
the contract in favour of the Petitioner.
There are no grounds to order re-notification
of the tender notice afresh.”
To the similar effect of the judgment of Gauhati High
Court in the case of S.K. Rai and Anr. vs. Union of India (UOI)
and Ors., reported as 2003 (1) ARBLR 250 (Gau), the same
principal is re-stated in this judgment in para 58 thereof, which
makes the following reason:
“What crystalises from the above discussion
is that the fact that tenderers bid is lowest
cannot, itself, be a ground for awarding him
the contract by ignoring and/or waiving the
essential conditions embodied in the NIT. In
other words, the authority entrusted with the
responsibility of awarding the contract cannot
start processing the tender documents from
the standpoint of lowest bid. For being
considered, a bidder must be eligible for
consideration and for becoming eligible,
bidder must satisfy the essential conditions
of the NIT. In the case at hand, it is crystal
clear that the Respondent No. 6 did not
satisfy essential conditions of the NIT and
was, therefore, not eligible for consideration
unless the conditions were relaxed. In this
regard, consistent stand of the official
Respondent is that the conditions of the NIT,
essential as well as general, were not
relaxed. Viewed from this angle, the
Respondent No. 6 was not even eligible for
consideration, far less entitled to receive the
contract, but even then, they have been
awarded the contract on the ground of their
bid being the lowest.”

W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 13 of 14

16.

The said principle has been confirmed by the Hon'ble

Supreme Court in Makhija Construction and Engineer Pvt.
Ltd. vs. Indore Development Authority and others, AIR
(2005) SC 2499.
17.

Thus, we do not find any infirmity in the decision making

process or the decision arrived at by Respondent No. 1. There is
no irrationality, irregularity and infirmity which will warrant
interference in exercise of our powers under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. This Writ Petition is accordingly dismissed.
Stay order vacated.
Dasti.

A.K. SIKRI, J.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

August 23, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 5781/2007

Page No. 14 of 14

